VIRTUE
D(...) Ignorance.



HISTORY OF WOMEN, FROM THE EARLIEST ANTIQUITY, TO THE PRESENT TIME; GIVING AN
ACCOUNT OF ALMOST EVERY INTERESTING PARTICULAR CONCERNING THAT SEX, AMONG ALL
NATIONS, ANCIENT AND MODERN.

WITH A COMPLETE INDEX.

By William Alexander, M. D.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOLUME FIRST.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY J. H. DOBELBOWER. 1796.

CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
INTRODUCTION Page 9 CHAPTER I. A short sketch of the Antediluvian History of
Women 27 CHAPTER II. Of Female Education 32 CHAPTER III. Of the Employments and
Amus^ments of Women 67 CHAPTER IV. The same Subject continued 84 CHAPTER V. Of
the Treatment and Condition of Women, and the various Advantages and
Disadvantages of their Sex, in savage and civil Life 120 CHAPTER VI. The same
Subject continued 136 CHAPTER VII. The same Subject continued 155 CHAPTER VIII.
The same Subject continued 277 CHAPTER IX. The same Subject continued 206
CHAPTER X. Of the Character and Conduct of Women 226 CHAPTER XI. The same
Subject continued 245 CHAPTER XII. The same Subject continued 267 CHAPTER XIII.
The same Subject continued 301 CHAPTER XIV. Of the Influence of Female Society
323 CHAPTER XV. Sketches of Ceremonies and Customs, for the most part observed
only by Women 347
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE compilation of a work intended for the amusement, as well as instruction,
of the Fair Sex, will, no doubt, be considered a task not to be effected,
unless attended to with the greatest assiduity: presuming, therefore, that no
attention has been wanting for the accomplishment of these ends, we anticipate
a favorable reception of this work from the most sanguine reader.

As we persuade ourselves, that nothing could be more perplexing to the sex, or
to which they would pay less attention, than a long list of authors on the
margin, to show from whence we have derived our information, and as a great
part of such list would refer to books in other languages, we have entirely
omitted it, and contented ourselves with sometimes interweaving into our text,
the names and sentiments of such authors as have more peculiarly elucidated the
subjects we were investigating.

We have not vanity enough to recommend our Work to the learned, they may have
met with every anecdote related in it; but as the generality of the Fair Sex,
whose reading is more confined, now spend many of their idle hours in poring
over novels and romances, which greatly tend to mislead the understanding and
corrupt the heart, we cannot help expressing a wish, that they would spare a
part of this time to look into the history of their own Sex; a history, which
we flatter ourselves will afford them no irrational amusement, and which will
more gratify the curiosity of the female mind in whatever relates to
themselves, than any thing that has hitherto been published.

We do not mean by this to praise ourselves; we submit with the utmost
dissidence to the judgment of the Public. If we have any merit, it is only in
coll^cting together, and presenting in one view, a variety of anecdotes
concerning the sex, which lay scattered in a great number of authors ancient
and modern, and not within the reading of the Sex themselves; recourse to
larger libraries might have made these anecdotes more numerous, and better
judgments would have selected them more judiciously; on th^se accoun^s, none
can be more sensible of the imperfections of the Work than we are, but we hope
our candid read^rs will make some allowances for our having (...) a path which
has never been attempted before; and ^he Ladies, we flatter ourselves, will
treat us with some indulgence, when we ass^^e them, that we have ^^^rted our
(...) abilities to put their (...) ^he most engaging dre^s* and to (...) with
instruction.

INTRODUCTION.
ALTHOUGH there is nothing in nature that so much engages our attention, so
forcibly draws our inclinations, or with which our interests are so intimately
blended, as with the other sex, yet so strong is our partiality to ourselves,
that we have never in any period, nor in any country, sufficiently attended to
the happiness and interest of those beings, whom, in every period and in every
country, we have professed to love and to adore: and while the charms which
they possess, have every where extorted from us the tribute of love, they have
only in a few places extorted from us good usage.

Almost every man is full of complaints against the sex, but hardly do we meet
with any one who seriously endeavors to rectify the evils against which he
exclaims so bitterly. He who considers women only as objects of his love, and
of his pleasure; complains, that in his connections with them, he finds them
inconstant, unfaithful, and ever open to flattery and seduction. The
philosopher, who would wish to mingle the joys of friendship and of
conversation with those of love, complains that they are destitute of every
idea, but those that flow from gallantry and self-admiration; and consequently
incapable of giving or receiving any of the more refined and intellectual
pleasures. The man of business complains, that they are giddy and thoughtless,
and want the plodding head, and the saving hand, so necessary toward thriving
in the world. And almost every man complains, of their idleness, extravagance,
disregard to every kind of admonition, and neglect of the duties of domestic
and social life.

Without examining how far these general complaints are well or ill founded, we
shall only observe, that in cases where they are well founded, when we trace
them to their source, we find the blame ultimately fall on ourselves. Does not
the man of love and gallantry commonly set the example of infidelity and
inconstancy to the females with whom he is connected? And do not men in
general, but too obviously, chalk out to the other sex, the way that leads to
every levity and folly? What made the philosopher so susceptible of the
rational and intellectual pleasures? doubtless, the education bestowed upon
him; and the same education might have given his wife or his daughter, an
equal, or even a superior relish for them; it is folly in him therefore to
expect the fruit without the culture necessary to bring it to perfection. The
plodding and steadiness of the man of business, he has acquired in his early
years; and they are augmented by his being sole master of what he can amass,
and having a power to spend or dispose of it as he thinks proper. But his wife
was brought up in no such school, and has no such motives to industry; for
should she even toil with the utmost assiduity, she cannot appropriate to
herself what she acquires; nor lay out any part (...) it without leave of her
husband. Nor is the idleness, extravagance, and neglect of dome^^^c duties,
which we so commonly charge upon the sex, so much the fault of nature as of
education. Can we expect that the girl whom we train up in every fashionable
levity and folly, whom we use our utmost efforts to flatter and to amuse,
shall, the moment of her marriage, totally change her plan, and become the
sober and oeconomical house-wife? as well might we sow weeds and expect to reap
corn.

If this be, as we persuade ourselves it is, a candid and impartial state of
the source of female folly and of female weakness; if the whole may be traced
either to the total want of, or to an improper education; and if the power of
neglecting this education altogether, or bestowing it improperly, be lodged in
our hands, as having the sole management and direction of the sex; then it will
follow, that we should act a much better and more becoming part, in trying to
amend their faults by a more judicious instruction, than to leave them
ignorant, and complain that they are so; to teach them folly, and rail at them
for having learned what we taught them. But instead of doing this, in every
age, and in every country, while the men have been partial to the persons of
the fair, they have either left their minds altogether without culture, or
biassed them by a culture of a spurious and improper nature; suspicious,
perhaps, that a more rational one would have opened their eyes, shown them
their real condition, and prompted them to assert the rights of nature; rights,
of which the men have perpetually, more or less, deprived them.

But we do not only neglect the sex, or mislead them in point of education;
while youth and beauty is on their side, the scene which we open to them is all
delusion, flattery and falsehood; for while we take every opportunity of
telling them when present, that their persons are all beauty, and their
sentiments and actions all perfection* when absent, we laugh at the credulity
of their (...), and splenetically satarise and exhibit to view every fault and
every folly. Nor is it till they have become wives, or till the wrinkles have
furrowed their brows, that the other sex hear the voice of truth from ours.

Nor are the follies and foibles of the sex, only the subject of verbal sneer,
and of verbal criticism; such of our sex as have been soured by disappointments
of any kind, and more particularly those who have been unfortunate in the
pursuit of lawful, and still more so, in that of unlawful, love; like cowards
who attack every one who, they are assured, will make no resistance, have in
all ages dipped their pens in gall, and for the supposed faults of a few,
illiberally vomited out spleen and ill nature against the whole sex. Among the
earliest of these kind of writers we may justly reckon Solomon, who sated with
licentious love, cloyed with venal charms, and perhaps shattered in
constitution, took almost every opportunity to exclaim against the slaves of
his seraglio, and the whole sex; because they could afford him no new pleasure,
and because they were not equal in mental qualifications to the men; a thing
which Solomon might easily have found to be impossible, had he attended to the
method in which they were educated, and in which they were confined. Some also
of the Apocryphal writers are nothing behind Solomon in spleen, and greatly
exceed him in ill nature and coarseness of expression. But it seems to have
been the genius of the East to praise all women for their personal graces, and
at the same time to suppose them entirely divested of every good quality of the
mind; for we find the same ideas which were entertained by Solomon, diffused
among the Hindoos even in an earlier period of the world, and venting
themselves also in their sacred writings even with an additional degree of
acrimony. The lust of a woman (says the Pundits) is never satisfied, no more
than fire is satisfied with fuel, or the main ocean with receiving the rivers,
or the empire of death with the dying of men and animals. And again, Women have
six qualities: the first, an inordinate desire for jewels and fine furniture,
handsome clothes, and nice victuals; the second, immoderate lust; the third,
violent anger; the fourth, deep resentment, no person knowing the sentiments
concealed in their heart; the fifth, another person's good appears evil in
their eyes; the sixth, they commit bad actions. With such invectives of the
easterns we could fill a wh^le volume; but we have only selected these, to show
that their opinions were not supported by any argument, nor tinctured with any
wit; and that, on these accounts, we may suppose them only mere effusions of
the spleen. Nor were the Greek and Roman writers more refined in their
sentiments, or delicate in their expressions. The language used by some of the
Greek writers, as well as by Juvenal, Martial, and Horace, is too coarse and
unpolished for a people just emerged from barbarity, and conveys to us a mean
idea of Greek and Roman politeness.

After women had been the subject of satirical wit and of splenetic temper for
upwards of three thousand years, an institution at last, arose in Europe, known
by the name of chivalry, which for some time totally changed the sentiments and
writings of mankind, and placing the sex hardly beneath celestial beings, made
it something more than treason to maltreat, and scarcely less than blasphemy to
speak evil of them. The times, however, in which chivalry flourished in its
greatest perfection, were not those of writing; but when it began to decline,
and letters to mix with gallantry, the effusions of wit took another direction,
and the men, instead of striving against each other who would most villify the
sex, entered the lists with another intention, that of showing their superior
merit, and even of persuading the world, that of all the joys we can experience
in the present, or hope for in the life to come, love is the only one worth our
care and solicitude.

Anciently the bards had only been employed to sing the exploits of heroes, or
of the rich who entertained them in their train. In the decline of chivalry,
they began also to sing the praises of beauty, and the sweets of love. In the
praise of beauty, they were to the last degree extravagant and hyperbolical:
not satisfied with comparing their mistresses, as in modern times, to angels
and other inferior celestial beings; they were not ashamed to compare them to,
and even exalt them above, the Supreme Being himself. In celebrating the
enjoyments of love, they were not less wild and romantic, and imagined that
even paradise without it would be joyless and insipid. Boccace, in the most
serious manner, classed together God and the ladies, and thanked them for their
mutual assistance in defending him against his enemies; and Petrarch no less
seriously compares Laura, his mistress, to Jesus Christ. Deudes de Prade, a
priest and poet, who used to sing the praises of women, says, that he would not
wish to enter heaven, but on condition of making love to her whom he adored.

We are not much surprised to find the poets, or troubadours, who were trained
by the rich and the beautiful, and paid for their songs, flattering greatness
and extolling beauty. But they were not the only set of men, who thus employed
themselves: the humor became general; poets, priests, gentlemen, all dedicated
their literary talents to the praise of women; and it became at last
unnecessary for them to hire poets* when all ranks of people voluntarily
inlisted themselves in their service.

Boccace seems to have been the first, who started the idea of writing any
thing larger than a song or sonnet in praise of the sex. He published a Latin
treatise, entitled "Of illustrious Women;" and in search of them he ransacked
the whole circuit of fable, of the sacred, and of the Greek and Roman
histories. The idea was too happily adapted to the taste of the times, to be
allowed to sink into oblivion; it was soon, therefore, taken up by a numerous
herd of imitators. Francis Sordonati improving upon it, collected from every
polished and from every barbarous nation, to the number of one hundred and
twenty, the names of such as had escaped Boccace. This mode of writing now
became fashionable; in a few years, not less than twenty authors had published
in praise of women. The heroine, the religiosa, and the learned stood foremost
in the catalogue. But the inferior virtues did not pass unnoticed; and at last,
even the making of an excellent pudding, and every species of culinary merit,
came to be the subject of panegyric: and in spite of all their natural phlegm,
even the Dutch felt the enthusiasm, and contributed their mite to the praise of
the sex.

Subjects of writing upon, like modes of dress, have their turns of being
fashionable: this was the period in which the fashionable topic was to extol
all the virtues, and to varnish over all the vices of women. Much had already
been said and wrote on the subject: but Hilario de Costa, a monk, resolving to
exceed all who had gone before him, published two quarto volumes, of eight
hundred pages each; containing, according to his account, the panegyrics of all
the women of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, who had distinguished
themselves by any remarkable talents or virtues. But as if no talent nor any
virtue could exist without the pale of the catholic church, the partial
ecclesiastic passes in silence over every woman of other principles; and while
he loudly praises the virtues of Mary queen of England, whose memory succeeding
ages have held in contempt; of her sister Elizabeth, whom her country still
remembers with gratitude, he makes no mention. The eulogies of this monk amount
to one hundred and seventy. But who can ensure to himself, in this delusory
world, the summit of greatness or of fame? The voluminous labors of our monk
were soon after surpassed by Paul de Ribera, who was delivered of a monstrous
work, which he called The Triumphs and heroic Enterprises of eight hundred
Women.

On reading these accounts, a reflection naturally arises, that either the
women of these times must have been very rem^rkable for their many virtues and
good qualit^es, or the men must have basely prostituted their talents to
adulation and flattery. The truth seems to be, that both were in some measure
the case: the subject, as we have just now remarked, was fashionable, and it
entitled the writer to the smiles and approbation of the fair; and their smiles
and approbation, besides flattering his vanity, were the road to honor and to
preferment. Nor was the spirit of chivalry as yet so far evaporated, as to
leave the men at liberty to consider the sex in a calm and dispassionate light,
or to write any thing concerning them that did not set them something above the
level of mortality. The women, too, emulous of glory and of praise, were, by
these writings, stimulated to great and to virtuous actions; they inspired the
men to ascribe to them noble deeds and sentiments, and they acted and thought
nobly, that they might not falsify the opinions entertained of them; hence
these times produced more extraordinary women, than have ever, at any other
period, appeared in Europe.

When this kind of gallantry, which taught every man to consider every woman as
a kind of superior being, had worn itself out by the most extravagant
exertions, the minds of men took an opposite direction, and began to consider
the sex, either in a diminutive, or contumelious light; looking upon them,
either as the play-things of a sportive hour, or the mere instruments of animal
pleasure; divesting them of almost all sentiment, and avoiding almost all
serious connection with them. In England, the libertinism of the court of
Charles the Second first debauched the morals of almost all the women, and then
taught the men to despise them for the want of what they themselves had robbed
them. Things having taken this turn, it soon became as fashionable to write
against the women, as it had been before to write in their favor. The earl of
Rochester set the example, and it was soon followed by Pope, Swift, Young, and
a variety of other inferior scribblers; all of whom assert, that their
intention was thereby to try to reclaim ^ sex, which in the prosecution of vice
and folly, had resisted every other effort. But if such really was their
intention, which there are some reasons to doubt; the event has shown how ill
it was adapted to the purposes intended; the praises bestowed on women in
former times, fired them with a great and a virtuous emulation; the satire
thrown out against them by the writers we have mentioned, has only incited
their indignation, instead of amending their heart.

Such have been the modes of writing concerning the sex, and such have been the
effects of these writings. Let us now take a short view of the revolutions
which happened to their character and manners in Europe, from the destruction
of the Roman empire to the present time.

When the ancient Germans fallied from their woods and caverns, to give laws
and customs to all Europe, their women, as we shall see hereafter, were in many
respects, of equal, and sometimes even of greater, consideration and
consequence than their men. When these Germans had settled themselves in almost
every country, and when, from that mixture of religion, gallantry, and war, for
which they were conspicuous, had arisen that species of romantic heroism,
called chivalry, we have the strongest reason to believe, that the value which
it stamped on their women, communicated to them a dignity and pride, which
contributed to render them as virtuous as perhaps the women of any country or
period have ever been.

But when chivalry began to degenerate, and when knighthood, the chief of its
honors, instead of being eagerly courted, and only attained by a long series
of valorous and meritorious actions, came to be annexed to the possession of a
certain quantity of land; prostituted to every one who desired, and even ^o
serve the purposes of the great; forcibly obtruded on those who sedulously
avoided it; the public honor of the men began to decline, their behavior to
the women became less respectful; the women lost much of their dignity, and
with it no small share of their virtue. The history of all the European nations
now exhibited a picture the most sadly reversed from what it was before; the
men had lost all their deference for the sex, and the women had lost all the
chastity that inspired it; the coarsest familiarity of manners, and the most
scandalous profligacy of character in both sexes ensued.

In France, instead of approaching the women with that respectful deference, to
which they had been accustomed, and which is a tribute due to modesty, it now
became fashionable for the men to intrude themselves upon them every where,
with the most indecent familiarity. The sex might easily have discouraged this,
but they rather gave it countenance; and the consequence was, that all sexual
decorum being nearly extinguished, the familiarity allowed to the men, in time,
began to be productive of contempt; and the grossest debauchery succeeded the
most sentimental love. Even the name of delicacy was almost lost. Women of all
ranks and conditions admitted their male visitors with the same indifference,
while in bed in their chamber, as to the side of their parlour fire; councils
of state were frequently held in the bed-chambers of ladies while in bed, who
often determined by their voice, but more commonly by promises of secret
favors, the resolutions that were taken.

Nor were the manners of the English ladies much more reserved, or their
characters more sacred than those of the French. The same indecent familiarity
marked their public, and the same licentiousness, their private, behavior:
during the christmas holidays, almost (...) ^obleman entertained his vassals of
both sexes, ^ neighboring clergyman was generally chosen by him, to preside
over this riotous mirth and indecen^ festivity, who from the nature of his
office, was commonly called by the name of the Abbot of Misrule. In the houses
of the great, were generally apartments destined for the women, who were
employed in embroidery, and other kinds of needle work; and the name given to
these apartments, in consequence of the use that was made of them, came in time
to be synonymous to that of a brothel. Nay, so lost to public decency were all
ranks of men, that even the clergy were not ashamed to have inscriptions over
the doors of these apartments, signifying the use to which they were
appropriated The celebrated Cardinal Wolsey, over a door of a particular part
of his palace, had these words in Latin: The house of the whores of my lord the
Cardinal.
. Nor did gentlemen of considerable property blush, to hold lands by, and bear
commissions, for being marshal of the king's whores.

Some time previous to the reign of queen Elizabeth, the delicacy and decency
of the female character had begun to revive: from her time, to that of the
Protector, their manners were still refining; but during his administration,
sanctimoniously enthusiastic, devotion struggled hard to exclude nature, and
slovenliness and superstition to substitute themselves for religion. The
Restoration turned again the channel of their manners, and gave it a direction
only to pleasure and licentious love; the distractions, during the reign of
James II. abated a little that fervor for pleasure; and the settled situation
of affairs that took place under William III. together with the disapprobation
shown by the court to unlawful gallantry, gave to the female character that
turn toward the decency and politeness of manners, in which it has now made so
considerable a progress. We cannot help taking notice here, that if we may
credit the declaimer, the satirist, and the preacher, the female virtues are at
present on the decline. For our parts, we pretend not to decide on so delicate
a point; and only express our hopes, that the conduct of our fair country-women
will in this particular contribute to give the lie to the satirist, the
declaimer, and even to the preacher himself.

While the manners and the character of the European women have been held out
in such a variety of different lights; while they have been liable to so many
mutations, from the changes of fashion, of government, and religion; the women
of the East have exhibited always the same appearance; their manners, customs,
and fashions, like their rocks, have stood unaltered the test of many revolving
ages; and though the kingdoms of which they are a part, have often changed
masters, and yielded to the victorious arms of a conqueror; yet the laws by
which they are governed and enslaved, have never been revised nor amended.

Such being the case, in taking an introductory view of the eastern women, we
are, like the man, who from an eminence surveying the surface of a placid
ocean, looks out in vain for variety or diversity. The Hindoo women, who
inhabit the greatest part of the East Indies, have been time immemorial almost
in every respect the same as at present: and even the religion of Mahomet,
which gave to the women who professed it, no less an advantage over the
disciples of Brama, than an exemption from burning on the funeral piles of
their deceased husbands, could never induce one single Hindoo to become
Mahomedan, nor ever made the smallest change in their condition, or in the
least altered their ^^stoms. This exemption, however, was the only advantage
introduced by the religion of Mahomet among the women of the East. It abated
not the rigor of their confinement, nor conferred upon them any more
consequence.

As Asia was formerly the seat of learning, and is now that of ignorance, we
are better acquainted with the ideas which the Asiatics ente^tained of their
women many years ago, than we are at present; and have already seen, that these
ideas, besides their being unfavourable, were often expressed in the most
coarse and indelicate manner. Had the (...) and customs of their women been
subject to the same changes as they are in Europe, we might have expected the
same changes in the sentiments and writings of their men: but as this is not
the case, we have reason to presume, that the same sentiments entertained by
Solomon, by some of the ap^^ryph^l wr^ter^, and by the ancient Pundits Pundits
are the Braminical expositors of the laws of the Hindoos.
, are the sentiments of this day: and in this opinion we are the more
confirmed, when we consider, that in the treatment of the sex, no alteration
for the better has ever yet taken place; which must undoubtedly have been the
case, had the sentiments of the men concerning them been more favorable.

But while such are the sentiments of the Asiatics, while such is the manner in
which they treat their women, their tongues, in the utmost dissonance to these
sentiments, constantly utter a language to which their hearts are entirely
strangers, and the whole of their actions flatly contradict their words: while
in the absence of the sex, they seem to despise and treat them with contempt;
in their presence, when instigated by animal love, they not only pay them the
greatest deference, but even accost them as something more than mortal: when
the love fit is over, though their tongues may still retain the same language,
they will, amid all this abuse and prostitution of words, chastise with
severity the slightest offense, her whom they seemed to adore; will, without
any offense whatever, keep her shut up from society, and almost from the light
of heaven, a perpetual prisoner; and, if jealousy should arise in their
breasts, consign her to expire amid the most cruel tortures, while themselves
glory and exult in her sufferings.

Such, with little alteration, has been, from the remotest antiquity, the
condition of the weaker sex, over the greater part of Asia and Africa; and such
it will probably continue, as long as the men continue the slaves of a despot,
and perhaps the still greater slaves of ignorance and barbarity.

When Vespucius discovered America, he opened a field for the ambition of the
statesman, the avarice of the trader, and the contemplation of the philosopher.
He found that vast continent peopled by a race, or rather diverse races of
mortals, scarcely less distinct in their persons, than in their manners and
customs, from those of the Old World; and when compared to them, only mere
children in all the arts which render life comfortable, and distinguish man
from the beasts of the field. Such were both sexes: the women were but little
distinguished from the men by their dress, where any dress was made use of; nor
were they much inferior to them in bodily strength, and hardly less patient of
cold, hunger, thirst, or less qualified to hunt and to fish for their
subsistence. But notwithstanding this natural equality, the men had completely
enslaved them, and thrown upon their shoulders all that ^ould be called labor,
either in the house or in the field, while they themselves were above
undertaking any thing but the sports of the chase, or the depredations of war.
Thus oppressed and disheartened, the fair sex were entire strangers to the
friendship of the men, and not much the object of their love. They passed
through life almost without tasting any of its pleasures, and could hardly be
said to enjoy one privilege beside personal liberty.

But this was not the case in every part of America. Among some tribes the
women enjoyed almost the whole, and among others a great share of the
legislative authority. The condition of the sex was not, however, properly
adjusted to any medium^ they were every where either exalted to a degree far
beyond the dictates of good policy, and vested with powers and privileges of
the most exorbitant nature, or sunk to a level with the beasts, and depressed
by the most abject slavery.

Such was the state in which they were found by the first discoverers of
America; a state from which it was natural to suppose they would soon have been
rescued by European politeness and humanity: but the case was far otherwise;
our sordid love of their gold overcame our politeness, banished humanity from
our breasts; and instead of abolishing the slavery of the women, made us, with
a more than savage barbarity, wherever our power could reach, extend it to the
men also.

In the condition we have now described had the women of America, in all
probability, been for time immemorial: but as they had not the art of writing
and consequently no historical records, we know not whether their states ever
suffered any revolution, or whether they ever altered or improved their manners
and customs. It is pretended, indeed, that the Mexicans had a kind of
historical records, composed of what they called Quipos, or Chords, so knotted
and twisted, as to be able to relate the whole series of past events, with the
same clearness and precision as our books: but the little that was ever learned
concerning the ancient state of America, seems to demonstrate the falsity of
this opinion.

THE History of Women.
CHAPTER I. A short sketch of the Antediluvian History of Women.
BY the Mosaic history of the creation it appears, that the males and females
of all the other animals, except man, were formed, not only of the same
materials, and in the same manner, but also at the same time. When the sacred
historian, however, describes the creation of the human genus; he informs us,
that the female was distinguished from the male by being formed not of the dust
of the earth, as he was, but of a part of the body of the male himself Various
and ridiculous are the fables related by oriental writers concerning the
creation of the first pair. We shall only mention a few of those propagated by
the Jewish Rabbis, whose ancient legends equal, if not surpass, in absurdity
even those of more modern ages. -- God, say they, at first created Adam with a
long tail; but afterward, on considering him attentively, he thought he would
look better without it: resolving, however, not to lose an^ thing that he had
made, he cut it off, and formed it into a woman: and hence the sex derive their
low and inferior nature. Others of them tell us, that the first human being was
created double, of both sexes, and joined side to side; that God improving on
his original plan, separated the male from the female part, where they had been
joined together, and made them into two distinct beings; and that from hence
arose the perpetual inclination of the sexes to join themselves together again.
. Such as have been fond of maintaining the superiority of women pretend, that
from this circumstance of having been made of double refined matter, they have
derived their superior beauty and excellence.

Not long after the creation, the deception of the first woman by the serpent,
and the fatal consequences arising from that deception, furnish the most
interesting story in the whole history of the sex. But as that story is already
so well known, we shall pass over it in silence, and proceed to relate those
few anecdotes which have been handed down to us concerning the antediluvian
women.

In the sacred history we are told, that when Cain and Abel, the two sons of
Adam, brought their offerings to the Lord, the offering of Cain was rejected,
and that of Abel accepted; a circumstance for which Moses does not assign any
reason. If tradition, however, deserves any credit, an oriental tradition
supplies this defect; and informs us, that Cain and Abel having each of them a
twin sister, when they were all become marriageble, Adam proposed to them, that
Cain should marry the twin sister of Abel, and Abel the twin sister of Cain;
alleging as his reason for this proposal, that as their circumstances obliged
them to marry their sisters, it was proper that they should marry those that
were seemingly the least related to them. To this proposal Cain would not
agree, and insisted on having his own twin sister, because she was fairer than
the other. Adam, displeased at this act of disobedience, referred the dispute
to the decision of the Lord; ordered his sons to bring each an offering before
him; and told them, that the offering which had the preference, would be a
declaration in favor of him who presented it. On the offerings being brought,
and that of Abel accepted, Cain, stimulated by resentment and love, began to
revolve in his mind how he could get rid of so dangerous a rival, and not being
able to fix upon any other method than his destruction, as soon as they were
come down from the Mount where they had been sacrificing, fell upon him and
slew him. And thus a woman became the cause, not only of the first quarrel, but
of the first introduction of death.

Cain and his posterity being, for this barbarous deed, separated and exiled
from the rest of the human race, began to abandon themselves to every species
of wickedness; and it is supposed were, on that account, at length denominated
Sons and Daughters of Men: while the posterity of Seth, under the care and
tuition of Adam, having as remarkably distinguished themselves for virtue, and
a regard to the divine precepts, at length also acquired the appellation of
Sons and Daughters of God. This family of Seth, according to the oriental
writers, fixed its habitation on the mountain where Adam their progenitor was
buried; and from the sacred dust deposited there, called it the Holy Mountain:
while Cain and his posterity inhabited the valley below This tradition does not
agree with the banishment of Cain, as mentioned by Moses.
, and there constantly rioted in every species of lewdness and debauchery. In
the time of Jared, when the family of Seth was much increased, one hundred and
twenty of the sons of that family, or as they were called, the Sons of God,
hearing the found of music, and the noise of festivity in the valley below,
agreed for once to descend from their mountain, and partake of the amusement.
On their arrival, they were so delighted with the novelty of the scene, and so
captivated with the beauty of the women, who appeared naked, that they yielded
to their charms, and defiled themselves with them: having gone this length, it
was not likely they should stop on the very threshold of pleasure: accordingly,
returning from time to time to visit these women, they at last ventured to
intermarry with them; and hence, probably, arose the story of the commerce
between the Sons of God, and the Daughters of Men: a story which gave birth to
an opinion, that by the Sons of God were meant Angels, who had so far deviated
from the digni^y of their incorporeal and celestial nature, as to debase
themselves by a carnal knowledge of terrestrial women. To this absurd and
ridiculous n^^ion, no little strength has been added by a forgery, called the
Prophecy of Enoch; a prophecy, which, like too many others, is long, obscure
and unintelligible The general purport of this long and ill connected prophecy,
is, That in those times, women were so exceedingly beautiful and tempting, that
the Egregarii, or guardian angels, who were set to watch over and attend them,
being constantly exposed to the whole artillery of their charms, at last fell
so violently in love with them, that they disclosed the secret to each other,
and entered into an agreement, to take to themselves, from among them, wives of
those that were fairest in their eyes. That accordingly, in the year of the
world 1170, they began the execution of their project; and in the most daring
and flagitious manner continued it to the time of the deluge. That in those
days, were born to the angels who had thus married, giants, who devoured human
flesh, of which they were so fond, that the race of man began thereby greatly
to decrease; that many complaints on this subject having been made to God, he
sent four archangels, who bound these angels, who had joined themselves to
women, and produced this monstrous progeny, th^ew them into the great abyss,
and afterward sent Gabriel, another archangel, to root out and destroy the
giants. Other oriental traditions relate, that it was the rebel angels, who had
taken arms against Omnipotence, that first began this infamous converse with
mortal women, from whence sprung a race of monsters and demons inimical to
virtue and to man; and who, by their continued crimes, at last provoked the
Almighty to sweep them from the face of the earth by an universal deluge.
; evident marks of its not having been dictated by that divine spirit, who is
light and perspicuity.

But though we cannot positively ascertain the precise meaning of Moses, when
he says, the Sons of God defiled themselves with the daughters of men, we may
venture to affirm, that the expression was made use of to characterise some
peculiar species of wickedness, which, with other debaucheries, had become so
enormous, that the Author of Nature is said to have repented that he had made
man; almost the whole race of whom he was obliged to destroy by the flood, in
order that he might raise up a new and more perfect generation; which could not
have been done, had the wicked been left to have mixed with and contaminated
the righteous.

From the flood, there is a chasm in the history of women till the time of the
patriarch Abraham, when they began to be more frequently introduced into the
sacred story, several of their actions to be recorded; the laws, customs, and
usages by which they were governed to be exhibited; all of which, joined to
some anecdotes of their public and private life, enable us to give a more
perfect account of the ancient Israelitish women, than can be given of those of
any other nation, till we come to the Greeks. In exhibiting this account, we
have, however, judged it proper, not to take the incidents in the order in
which they are related, but to reduce them under different heads, for the sake
of method and regularity.

CHAPTER II. Of Female Education.
IF we can form any idea of the general state of mankind in the infancy of the
world, from the state in which they appear in the infancy of every nation, we
may suppose that they were originally destitute of every thing which depends on
civilization and society, and of almost every species of knowledge, but that of
procuring a precarious subsistence from the rivers and forests around them.

Necessarily impelled to employ the greatest part of their time in this manner,
they would have but little leisure, and perhaps less inclination, to cultivate
their minds. The inhabitants of the woods, and of the waves, were only to be
caught by force or fraud: in either of which ways, strong exertions, or long
and painful watchings, were requisite; and to these exertions, and other
efforts, the constant calls of nature for sustenance kept up an unremitted
attention: hence it would be long before the human mind began to extend its
ideas beyond that circle which had been formed by necessity, and continued by
custom; that course of study and discipline, that application to various
languages and arts, which we now call education, was then totally unknown; and
in after ages only sprung up by degrees, according as incidents gave occasion
to thinking on new projects, and acting in new employments.

A considerable part of education is the study of languages; but as all mankind
spoke originally the same, this laborious part had then no existence. When a
diversity of tongues were introduced, what little communication and commerce
was then carried on, could not be properly managed, unless the parties
understood one another* and hence the first efforts to study languages. In some
of the milder clim^tes of Asia, the earth spontaneously yielded as much food as
simple unpampered nature required; and the inhabitants supinely enjoyed her
gifts, without troubling themselves with painful exertions of mind or of body:
but when the human race had multiplied so much, that they were obliged to
disperse themselves into climates less indulgent, exertion became necessary to
procure food, and invention to remedy the inconveniences, and provide against
the accidents of climate and situation: thus in Egypt, the annual inundation of
the Nile obliged them to raise houses on pillars, and to apply to Astronomy,
that they might know the seasons when these inundations were to come upon them.
The rigor of seasons, in places more remote from the sun, obliged them to
cover themselves with ^kins, and to build houses: and the same cause, perhaps,
at first, gave birth to the use of fire. Were we thus to trace almost every
human invention to its source, we should generally find that source to have
been necessity.

In the patriarchal ages, and some time after, even among people considerably
removed from barbarity, we have hardly the least vestige of education among the
men Schools where men were taught the arts of prophesying and of magic, were
probably, the first that were instituted* the former appear to have been
erected by the Israelites, the latter by the Egyptians or Phoenicians.
, and would therefore in vain look for it among the women. In climates where
the spontaneous productions of the earth were few, and where men were become
too numerous to be maintained by hunting and fishing, necessity would stimulate
to pasturage, and perhaps to some rude efforts in agriculture; but as these
could not be carried on without some kind of instruments, it was possibly to
furnish such, that Tubal Cain began first to work in iron and in brass. Such
rude instruments as he first constructed, might upon trial suggest to him, the
improvements necessary for making others more adapted to the purpose: and these
again, might lead on to works of fancy, which were probably the first exercises
which opened and expanded the powers of the human mind, giving birth to carving
and gilding, and several other works of taste, which the Israelites had carried
to no inconsiderable degree of perfection in the time of Solomon; and even to
chemistry, of which Moses must have had no incompetent skill, to enable him to
stamp the golden calf to powder. Into such exercises and trades, were the men,
in the times we are speaking of, initiated; but it is in vain, that we
endeavor to discover what was taught to the women: whether they were regularly
instructed in any thing, or left to learn what they could from nature, or from
chance; which last we are inclined to think was the case, as writing and
reading were not then invented; as the sciences were but few, and these few
only in their infancy; and as women were not valued for any mental
qualifications, but only for their personal charms.

Of all the nations which present themselves in the periods we are considering,
the Egyptians most deservedly claim our attention; as it was from them that we
derived the first principles of all our arts, sciences, and cultivation. It was
the Egyptians who first taught the rude and uninstructed Greeks: the Greeks
transmitted their knowledge to the Romans: and the Romans carried their
knowledge, and their chains, half over the globe. In whatever light we view the
Egyptians, they do more honor to human nature than any of the ancients, as
they excelled them all in laws, in arts, and in government; sciences in which
they believed, or pretended to believe, they had been improving themselves
during a period of no less than one hundred thousand years; though this must
undoubtedly appear fabulous, it is certain that they were allowed by most of
the ancients, to have been one of the first people who were civilized and
formed into a nation governed by laws, mostly founded on equity and wisdom; in
short, they were, even in the distant periods we are speaking of, a people not
much inferior to many of those, which in our times make no despicable figure in
the present civilized system of Europe.

It is among the Egpytians only, that, in the periods under review, we meet
with any thing resembling a system of study and education; their magicians, in
whom most of their learning centered, studied, and taught, such sciences as
were then known; the most distinguished of which was Astronomy, from which it
appears, that women were not altogether excluded; for we are told that Athyrte,
the daughter of Sesostris, encouraged her father to undertake his chimerical
scheme of conquering the world, by assuring him of success, from her
divinations, from her dreams in the temples, and from the prodigies she had
seen in the air. Almost every writer on ancient Egypt mentions, that the women
managed the greatest part of such business as was transacted without doors, and
that the commerce of the nation was peculiarly allotted to them; it is
therefore highly probable, that they were taught the use of numbers and
figures, as far as they were then known: a science without the use of which
trade must have been exceedingly imperfect and irregular. As writing also was
known at an early period in Egypt, and as it is hardly less necessary in
commerce than the use of figures, it is probable also, that the women were
taught the writing then in use. As the softness and sentimental feelings of the
female heart seem excellently well adapted to the soothing strains of music,
music has therefore been a part of the education of the sex from the remotest
ages of antiquity: Moses frequently mentions singing men and singing women, and
we shall afterward meet with singing women among a variety of the nations we
shall have occasion to mention. The Egyptians, however, were in this respect
singular; the same reason which determined other nations to teach women that
pleasing art, determined the Egyptians to debar them from it Herodotus, and
some other authors, doubt whether the Egyptians prohibted their women from
learning music.
; because, said they, it softens and relaxes the mind. But when we recollect
what we just now related of the employment of women, it will in a great measure
elucidate this singularity: it was probably the opinion of the legislature,
that too much softness and delicacy would disqualify them for managing the
affairs of trade and commerce; and that though a certain softness of the sex
was encouraged in all other countries, it would but ill have suited the
Egyptian women, who were generally occupied in such employments as were every
where else destined to the men. However this be, when we survey the accounts
given us by the ancients, of the arts, sciences, laws; and, above all, of the
culture, and wisdom of the Egyptians; when we consider the high estimation, in
which women were held, and the powers with which they were invested; when, to
these, we add the literary fame of the nation, we have the strongest reasons to
conclude, that though we are at this period unacquainted with their system of
female education, it certainly was such as suited the dignity of so wise a
people, and of a sex so loved and respected.

It is not easy to determine whether the Phoenicians at first borrowed their
learning from the Egyptians, but, however that be, they were in the times we
are considering, little behind them in knowledge. They cultivated Arithmetic
and Astronomy, and applied them to the purposes of trade and navigation.
Moschus, a Sydonian, before the Trojan war, taught the philosophical doctrine
of atoms; and Abdomeneus of Tire undertook to dispute with Solomon, king of
Israel; in those days reckoned the most redoubtable champion of learning and of
wisdom. Tire and Sydon were at this time renowned for the sciences and for
philosophy.

Man, in his rude and uncultivated state, forms his connections with woman from
a regard to the beauty of her person only; when he becomes civilized, he
regards the qualities of her mind, as well as the charms of her body. We can
hardly therefore suppose, that the Phoenicians, a people, who, in commerce and
navigation excelled all others, and were second to none in politeness and
learning, would totally neglect to instill into the minds of their women, any of
that knowledge which was in so much national esteem and veneration; but we only
offer this as conjecture, as the history of these people is entirely silent on
the subject: and indeed history in general throws but a faint gleam of light on
the ages under review; which, among many other reasons, may in part be owing to
that peace and quiet which we may suppose the world then enjoyed for many ages;
for history passes in silence over whole centuries of peace, and takes notice
only of wars, conquests, and revolutions; as if nothing were worthy of the ear
of posterity, but the crimes and follies of their ancestors.

What we have observed of the Phoenicians, may, in a great measure, be equally
applied to the Babylonians; they are acknowledged by all antiquity, to have
been the first who made use of writing in their public and judicial acts; but
though the exact period in which they began this invention is not known, we are
nevertheless certain, that they were early distinguished for their politeness
and learning. We shall have occasion afterward, to relate the care and pains
they took in adorning the persons of their women; from which we may conclude,
that they did not leave their minds without cultivation and improvement. The
nations which were contemporary with, or for several ages succeeded to those we
have now mentioned, were, when compared to them, as the rest of the world now
is, when compared to Europe; hardly just entering on the threshold of
knowledge: and Europe, which now appears with such distinguished luster, was
then involved in ignorance and barbarity; nor had its scattered and wretched
inhabitants discovered any symptoms of that genius which now eclipses all other
countries. It was by some colonies from Asia, that the sciences were first
introduced among them. And such is the fate of human affairs, that from the
time these sciences were first transplanted, they seemed to abandon their
native soil, and attach themselves entirely to Europe. The Asiatics either lost
their taste for them, or, in prosecuting them, had already exhausted their
utmost powers; the Europeans acquired that taste, and continue still to
cultivate and extend it, by stretches of genius and invention, to which no
limits can be fixed.

When, from Europe, we again return to the East, we cannot help lamenting, that
antiquity has hardly left any traces of the manner in which their women were
educated; and it is from scattered hints only, that we can discover any thing
concerning them. One of these hints informs us, that some of the nations whom
Cyrus conquered had taught their women music; for Cyrus gave two female
musicians, who were his captives, as a present to his uncle Cyaxares; and
female, as well as male musicians, were, in those times, frequently retained by
the great to amuse them in their hours of relaxation and festivity, by their
skill in playing upon such instruments as were then in use, by the melody of
their voices, and by the various gestures which they practiced in dancing. If,
in the times we are considering, the plan of female education comprehended any
thing farther, we may suppose that it took in only such other arts of
attraction as the eastern women have always been famous for, and which the men
have always regarded as their principal qualification. In a few cases, however,
it is probable, they were instructed in some of the useful learning of the
times; for the education of the children of the kings of the Medes and Persians
was for many ages committed to the women. Dejoces, their first king, began the
custom; and it was continued till some ages after the reign of Cyrus, and is at
this day practiced in many places of the East. As these young monarchs were
entirely entructed to the care of women till the age of fifteen or sixteen, one
would naturally conclude, that the women must have been capable of reaching, at
least a part of, the fashionable learning of the times: but if it was the same
among the ancient Medes and Persians, as it is now among their descendants,
they were not capable of doing so; for the education which the young eastern
princes at present receive from their women, is little else than the first
principles of effeminacy and debauchery, with hardly even a small tincture of
that learning bestowed on their subjects: and hence so many of the eastern
monarchs dedicate their lives to cruelty and debauchery. Even Cyrus himself,
though trained up in a better manner, and almost in every respect superior to
the herd of eastern monarchs, stained his memory with the foulest infamy, by
perverting the education of the Lydians, for no other crime than endeavoring
to regain their liberty, of which he had unjustly deprived them. Cyrus had
entrusted the gold which he had found in the treasury of Croesus, king of
Lydia, to Pactyas, one of his favorites; who seeing himself master of so much
wealth, thought he could not better employ it, than in instigating the Lydians
to place him at their head, and shake off the yoke of the conqueror. Cyrus, in
revenge, determined to carry off the whole o^ the people, and sell them for
slaves; a resolution which he made known to Croesus, his prisoner; who fearing
the utter destruction of his country, advised Cyrus only to take vengeance on
Pactyas; and in order to prevent any future attempt of the same nature, to
forbid the Lydians the use of arms, and oblige them to to be educated in the
most debauched and effeminate manner. Cyrus followed this advice, and the
Lydians soon became the most infamous and abandoned people in the world.
History affords but too many examples of monarchs, and of parents, having
winked at the improper education of their subjects and children: this is the
only instance where the source of every virtue was avowedly contaminated by
public authority; an instance in which we are at a loss to determine, whether
the character of Cyrus, or of Croesus, appears the most despicable and infamous.

Were we to indulge in idle speculation; were we to form conjectures without
proper authority to support them; we might relate many plausible opinions
concerning the education of women among the ancients; but as the subject, from
the time of the Egyptians and some other nations we have mentioned, to those of
Greece and Rome, is involved in the gloom of obscurity, we rather choose to pass
over it in silence, than to hazard opinions, when we are uncertain whether the
scale of probability preponderates for or against them.

We shall see afterward, when we come to treat of the rank and condition of
women, that in Greece, even in its most flourishing and cultivated state, they
were little better than slaves: nor indeed was it possible, that they could in
any place ever arrive at that importance seemingly designed them by nature,
while their genius was not cultivated, nor their latent qualities called forth
into view. Other qualities, such as beauty, and the art of showing it to
advantage, may, in those moments when the heart is softened by love, or the
spirits elevated by wine, give to the women a temporary ascendency over the
men, and enable them to bend them at pleasure; as in the case of Thais and
Alexander. Such an ascendency, however, is commonly but fleeting and transient;
cool reason soon resumes the place which passion had usurped, and the empire
which had been built on passion, tumbles like the baseless fabric of a vision;
while that which is supported by education and sense, stands the test of time,
and the various incidents of life. It is, however, to be lamented, that a
proper education has seldom fallen to the lot of women; even in the politest
countries, it is either too much neglected, or conducted on a frivolous and
mistaken plan. The education of the Greek women, during what are called the
heroic ages Several of the first ages, during the infancy of the Grecian
states, were called heroic; because then the men dedicated almost the whole of
their time to feats of heroism and of arms.
, seems to have been of this nature; for we find Peleus, in the Andromache of
Euripides, reproaching Menelaus, father of the famous Helen, for being the
occasion of the dissolute conduct of that lady, by the bad education he had
given her: nor have we reason to believe, that in those times bad education was
confined to this single instance only, but rather that it was a general evil,
and never after properly remedied; a conjecture which the subsequent history of
Greece will but too amply verify.

There is not a subject which ancient history takes less notice of, than that
of education, and particularly of the education of women. In early periods, and
among uncultivated people, the sex do not seem to have been of consequence
enough to employ the attention of the public, nor the pen of the historian: a
few sketches of the plan of education settled by Solon, the famous Athenian
lawgiver, are the most ancient that have been handed down to our times; and
they serve to corroborate an opinion, which we have always entertained, that
the education of the ancients was more directed to improve the body than the
mind. Solon ordained, that youth in general should be first taught to swim, and
to imbibe the rudiments of literature; that the poor should be instructed in
trades, mechanic arts, and agriculture; but that such as could afford a genteel
education should learn to play on musical instruments, to ride, to hunt, and be
expert in every kind of exercise; to all which they were to add the study of
philosophy. Such was his system of male education; a system more calculated to
strengthen the body to than to cultivate the mind. Such gleanings of his female
system as have reached our times, are still more extraordinary: young women
were ordered to exercise themselves in running, wrestling, throwing quoits,
darts, and other masculine amusements; which must have tended in the strongest
manner to destroy every seed of delicacy that nature had implanted in the
female mind; and which, in all probability, gave birth to that boldness and
effrontery, for which the Athenian women at last were so remarkable.

If Solon, in his scheme of legislation, instituted that any culture should be
bestowed on the female mind, such institutions have not reached our times: and
when we consider how the Greek women were treated, and that healthful and
robust bodies were reckoned their chief qualifications, as enabling them to
give strong and healthful children to the state; we have reason to believe,
that no such institutions ever existed. Lycurgus, the no less famous Spartan
legislator, seems to have thought women almost below his notice: nor need we
wonder at this, when we consider, that his whole intention, and the constant
scope of all his laws, was to divest mankind of all that was implanted in them
by nature; and, upon the principles of art, to form a race of heroes, who
should be insensible to every feeling but the love of their country. Women, he
found, were but ill calculated for this purpose: patriotism is a principle
seldom so strong in them as in men, and humanity is generally much stronger:
the acuteness of their feelings made them less able to bear all the pains and
difficulties of eradicating whatever is natural, and the weakness of their
bodies disqualified them for becoming heroines: they were therefore unfit
subjects for carrying the ideas of Lycurgus into execution; and on that
account, it seems probable, he gave himself little other trouble about them,
than to take care that their company should neither effeminate nor debauch his
men.

That the Grecian women had not the least tincture of polite education, even in
the most flourishing periods of their states, appears from the respect and
esteem which public prostitutes acquired, merely by having the advantage over
them in this accomplishment. We shall have occasion to mention this subject
afterward; and therefore at present shall only observe, that many of the
greatest of their philosophers publicly visited these prostitutes, and even
sometimes carried their wives to be instructed by their lessons. Besides what
we have already mentioned, we find that a few of the Greek women were
instructed in music; and that such only were admitted to some of their public
feasts; their mothers, or other female relations, also taught them the common
female employments and customs of their country, and instilled into the minds
of such as would receive it, a tincture of that Stoical pride and heroism for
which their men were so much renowned: in every thing else, they were miserably
deficient, and their constant confinement, to their want of education, added
want of knowledge of the world; so that, on the whole, never were women found
so ignorant, in a nation so much famed for knowledge.

If we except the Egyptians, the whole history of antiquity exhibits to us a
scene in which we find women groaning under the hard hand of oppression,
deprived of many rights of nature; and, till we arrive at the Romans, never
attaining to any natural or political consequence. In Rome, however, we find
them not only emerging from slavery, but starting up at once into real
importance. In the earlier periods of this great republic the Romans had but
few laws, and no intercourse but with rude and ferocious neighbors like
themselves: hence the only education of men was that of war, rigid economy,
and inflexible patriotism; which are all virtues of necessity in the infancy of
almost every state. The education of women consisted in learning the duties and
employments of domestic life; such as cookery, spinning, weaving, and sewing;
which were taught them by their mothers or relations. In those days, children
were not suckled in the hut of a mercenary nurse, but by the chaste mother who
bore them; their education, during nonage, was in her hands; and it was her
chief care to instill into them every virtuous principle: in her presence, every
loose word, or improper action, were strictly prohibited; she superintended not
only their serious studies, but even their amusements, which were always
conducted with decency and moderation. But by degrees, as the Romans became
rich with the plunder of their neighbors, as the taste for the arts and
sciences became more general, the education of the women began to be extended
on a larger scale; and to the domestic duties taught them by their mothers,
were added such parts of polite education, as were thought necessary for
cultivating their minds: this education we know, from the story of Virginia,
they received at public schools; where sciences and literature, no longer
confined to rigid philosophers only, began to assume a softer form, and to suit
themselves to female talents and genius.

It has long been alleged by the men, that the women, when learned, are
generally pedants; how far this opinion is just, we shall not pretend to
determine; but should it really be so, we may naturally enough account for it:
the knowledge of women, in general, is much less extensive than that of the
me^; on this account, when any individual among them finds that she is
possessed of a considerable share of knowledge, she considers herself as
thereby so much elevated above the rest of her sex, that she cannot help taking
every opportunity of showing this elevation.

Juvenal exhibits some of the Roman ladies of his time in this light: They
fall, says he, on the praises of Virgil; they weigh in the same balance the
merit of that poet and of Homer; they find excuses for Dido's having stabbed
herself, and determine of the beautiful, and of the sovereign good. Whether the
satire her^ exhibited be true or false, it affords a proof, that* (...) the
days of this poet, learning was not neglecte^ by the women of Rome: but this is
not the o^^y ^roo^ we can bring to support this fact; others are frequently to
be met with in the Roman history. Cicero mentions, with encomiums, several
ladies, whose taste in eloquence and philosophy did honor to their sex; and
Quintilian, with no small applause, has quoted some of the letters of Co^^eli^;
besides which, we h^ve fortunately a speech of Hortensia preserved by App^an;
which for elegance of l^nguage, and justness of thought, would have ^on^ honor
to a Cicero, o^ a Demosthene^ The unhappy women you see here imploring your
justice and bounty, would never have presumed to appear in this plac^ had they
not first made use of all other means, which (...) natur^^ modesty could
suggest to them. Though our appearing (...) may may seem contrary to the rules
of decency prescribe^ ^o our (...) which w^ have hitherto observed with all
strictness; yet the loss of our fathers, children, brothers, and husbands,
(...) ^^fficien^ly excuse us, especially when their unhappy deaths are (...) a
pre^ence for our further misfortunes* you pre^^nd tha^ they had o^fended and
pro^oked ^ou, but that inju^^ have we women done* (...) why do you not
proscribe us too? have we declared you enemies to your country? have we
suborned your soldiers? raised troops against you, or opposed you in the
pursuits of those honors and offices which you claim? We pretend not to govern
the re^ublic, nor is it our ambition which has drawn the present misfortune on
our heads; empire, dignities, and honors are not for us; why then should we
contribute to a war in which we have no manner of interest? It is true, indeed,
that in the Carthaginian war, our mothers assisted the republic, which was, at
that time, reduced to the utmost distress; but neither their houses, their
lands nor their m^^^ables, were sold for that service; some rings and a few
jewels furnished the supply; nor was it constraint nor violence* that forced
these from them* what they contributed was the voluntary offering of
generosity. What danger at pre^ent ^^reatens Rome? If the Gauls, or Parthians,
were enc^^ped on the banks of the Tibe^, or the A^io, you should find us not
less (...) in the defense of our country than our mothers wore before us; (...)
it becomes not us, and we are resolved that we will not be any way concerned in
civil war. Neither Marius, (...) Caesar, nor Pompey, ever thought of obliging
us to take part in the dom^stic troubles which their ambition had raised; nay,
nor did e^e^ Sylla himself, who first set up Tyranny in Rome; and yet you
assume the glorious title of Reform^^s of the State! (...) which will ^urn to
your eternal infamy; if, without the ^east regard to the laws of equity, you
persist in y^^r ^icked r^solution of plundering those of their lives and
fortune^, (...) have given you no just cause of offense
What gave occasion to the speech was, the Triumvirs of Rome wanting a large
sum of money for carrying on a war, and having met with great difficulties in
raising it, they drew up a list of fourteen hundred of the richest of the
ladies, whom they intended to tax. These ladies, after having in vain tried
every method to evade so great an innovation, at last having chosen Hortensia
for their speaker, went along with her to the marketplace, where she addressed
the Triumvirs while they were administering justice. The Triumvirs being
offended at the boldne^^ of the women, ordered them to be driven away; but the
populace growing tumultuous, they were afraid of an insurrection; and reduced
the list of women to be taxed to four hundred.

As we do not propose to write the history of learned women, but only to give a
general detail of the care bestowed on the education of that sex; we return to
observe, that the Romans were at great pains in teaching their young men. Those
who could afford it, commonly kept in their own houses preceptors to instruct
them; and those who could not, sent them to public schools, where they were
generally instructed by Grecian masters: besides these methods, such fathers as
were capable, taught their own children, not only the literature of the times,
but also morality, and their duty to their country. Cato instructed his son in
such a variety of arts and exercises, as seem almost improbable; and Augustus,
though sovereign of the world, taught his grandchildren to write. When such
were the teachers, when such the love of learning, we may assure ourselves that
women, who had now attained no small importance, were not neglected: and it is
probable, from the greatness of mind, which many of them in a variety of
instances displayed, that their education had always a tendency, not only to
inspire them with sentiments of morality, but likewise with that inflexible
constancy and firmness of mind, so exceedingly necessary in a state, whose
agitations and convulsions were so frequent, that every member stood in need of
the utmost fortitude to sustain the shock.

Such a mode of education, however, we imagine was counteracting nature, and
robbing the sex of that softness, and timidity, in which consists half their
charms; and such, though in a few instances it succeeded, never had any general
influence; for the Roman women, though they boasted while in security of all
the heroism of their husbands, were in such a consternation when Hannibal
approached ^he gates of Rome, that they were forbid to appear in the streets,
lest their cries should dispirit the soldiers, aad spread a general panic
through the city.

As we are able only to give so imperfect an account of the female education of
the Romans, a people whose history we are almost as well acquainted with, as
with that of our own times; it is not to be expected that we can throw much
light upon that subject, among the nations that were contemporary with them, as
they were in a state of too much ignorance to have any historical records; and
as we have no complete detail of their manners and customs, but only some
sketches in Tacitus, and a few of the other Roman writers.

If by education we mean the culture of letters, of arts, and of sciences; in
vain will we look for it among the ancient inhabitants of the North. The
Scandinavians, and other tribes, who, in those times, possessed the greatest
part of Europe, were hardly acquainted with the slightest rudiments of
literature, or of science Such is the case at this time with the Druses; they
reckon learning one of those low and contemp^ible acquisition^ only ^it for
women.
. In the savage state in which they were, no ideas are entertained of the
necessity, or utility of any thing, but what immediately contributes to the
sustenance or clothing of the body; no honor to procuring these, by any other
methods, than rapine and plunder; hence their men were trained to gaining their
subsistence by feats of arms, and wasting it in thoughtless festivity. Their
women, who frequently accompanied the men in their plundering expeditions, and
who besides had every labor and drudgery to perform, could not have much time
for attaining knowledge; as they were not, however, always of these parties,
but sometimes left at home; if there were any glimmerings of knowledge; if
there was any wisdom, it was mostly to be found among them; and they acquired
it, not by a laborious course of education, but by experience and reflection
upon the contingencies which happened in those hours of solitude, when the
human mind is most susceptible of instruction.

What they had thus learned, of arts, of improvements, or economy, they taught
to their daughters; hence women were generally more enlightened than men; and
hence also they acquired an extraordinary degree of esteem, and were often
consulted as oracles. Besides the few arts and domestic occupations known among
a people so rude and simple, the mothers also exerted themselves in teaching
their daughters the virtues of prudence and chastity; which they did no less by
example than by precept; and both being united, had so happy an effect, that
the ancient Scandinavian women were not only among the first who attained to
that esteem due to their sex, but who laid the foundation of that honor and
regard, which Europe at present pays as a tribute to beauty and merit.

During the long and successful reign of chivalry in Europe; as women were the
constant objects of romantic heroism and extravagant adoration, we may
naturally conclude, that their education tended chiefly to enable them to show
themselves in such a manner, as to excite heroes to fight for, and lovers to
adore them. Even so late as the beginning of the fourteenth century, there was
hardly any learning among the men; the Greek was so entirely neglected, that
the celebrated Petrarch could not in Italy, nor France, find one person capable
of instructing him in it: the Latin was known in a rude and imperfect manner
only to a few; and hardly was there to be found a woman, who could read the
language of her own country; and if such a one was here and there to be met
with, she was reckoned a prodigy.

When the men, who before had spent their days in tournaments and feats of
arms, began to turn their attention toward the arts of peace, the women were
likewise laid under the necessity of varying their mode of education; as they
found that the same arts which effectually captivated a knight clad in armor
and ignorance, were in vain practiced upon the enlightened scholar and
philosopher. Ambitious still to retain the power they already possessed, and
conscious that the way to please the men was to seem fond of what they approved
of and disliked; they applied themselves to letters and to philosophy, hoping
to keep possession by their talents, of what they had gained by their charms.
Though these measures were not calculated to inspire love, and attract the
heart, and consequently did not produce the effects which the ladies intended,
yet they raised them in that period to a pitch of learning, unknown in any
other. They preached in public, supported controversies, published and defended
Theses, filled the chairs of philosophy and law, harangued the popes in Latin,
wrote Greek, and read Hebrew: nuns became poetesses, women of quality divines,
and young girls, with a softness of eloquent enthusiasm, publicly exhorted the
Christian princes to take up arms for the recovery of the Holy Land. The
learned languages were now considered as indispensably necessary; they were
taught not only to men, but to women of almost all ranks and conditions; who,
not content with Latin only, often read the Old Testament in Hebrew, and the
New in Greek. In this manner was female genius turned into a wrong channel; it
was diverted from the duties of domestic life; it was either soured by study,
or rendered petulant by learning; and while it acquired empty words and false
philosophy, it lost much of its native sprightliness, and became daily more an
object of admiration, and less an object of love.

It has been often observed, that violent exertions of mi^d, as well as of
body, constantly leave a languo^ behind them, in proportion to the efforts that
have been made. This was remarkably the case with female literature; every
mental power had been for a long time over-stretched, and the greatest
relaxation soon followed of consequence: from their knowledge of Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin; from their skill in the empty disputations of the Aristotelian
philosophy, and of divinity, women began at last to discover, that they
acquired only an empty fame; and that in proportion as they gained the esteem
of the head, they became less objects of the heart. On this discovery, it was
necessary for them to change their plan; they therefore began by degrees to
abandon learning, and attach themselves again to those female arts, which were
more likely to be productive of love, than of fame and applause.

While this change of female manners was taking place, the greatest part of
Europe exhibited a scene of seeming inconsistency; enthusiasm and gallantry,
religion and licentiousness, were constantly practiced by the same persons, and
seemed as if perfectly reconciled to each other. Learning, however, declined so
fast, that in a short time women became as famous for ignorance of their own
language, as they had been formerly for their knowledge of others; insomuch,
that during a great part of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, there was
hardly a woman to be found in the politest countries of Europe, who could
dictate a tolerable letter in her own tongue, or spell it with decent
propriety: the only little reading which they at this period commonly concerned
themselves with, was a few receipts in cookery to bring on, and a few receipts
in physic to take off, diseases; together with the wrangling and unintelligible
theology of the times; a science to which women of all ages and countries have
been peculiarly addicted, as it greatly interests their passions; and, perhaps,
consoles them in the many solitary moments in which they are left alone, and as
it were excluded from business and from the world. But even these favorite
studies, and every other part of female amusement and economy, not being
sufficient to fill up all their vacant hours, they now applied themselves
assiduously to various kinds of needle work; and many women of the first rank
were themselves taught and instructed their daughters in, the arts of flowering
and embroidery; which they practiced so well in their leisure hours, that much
of the furniture of their houses was decorated in this manner with their own
hands.

After the discovery and conquest of America, immense treasures had been
constantly imported from thence into Europe. From the trade carried on to the
East and West Indies, to Africa, and other parts of the globe, perhaps still
greater wealth had been accumulated; these at last beginning to operate, turned
the minds of the greatest part of Europe from that sober and oeconomical plan
of life, to which their poverty and imperfect knowledge of trade and
agriculture had subjected them; and substituted in its place, gaiety, expense,
and parade. Numbers of people, who, perhaps, not in the most rigid paths of
justice, had acquired immense fortunes in the East, transported themselves back
to Europe, bringing along with them all the arrogance of wealth, effeminacy of
manners, and love of pageantry and show, for which the eastern nations have
ever been remarkable. These, and several other causes combining together,
totally changed the manners of Europe; and instead of sober frugality, and
other domestic virtues of the women, introduced luxury and dissipation; with a
taste for all the ^insel glare of unsubstantial trifles.

The French, who have always been remarkably distinguished for vivacity and
show, took the lead in this new mode of life, and soon disseminated it all over
Europe; which, for at least these two centuries past, has aukwardly imitated
every light fashion and frippery of that volatile people, with little better
success than a Bear dances a hornpipe, or a Monkey puts on the gravity of an
alderman.

In France, women were first introduced to court; their education, which before
that introduction, consisted in reading their own language, in learning
needle work, and the offices of domestic life, was then by degrees changed to
vocal and instrumental music, drawing, dancing, and dressing in the most
fashionable manner; to which we may add* the art of captivating and governing
their men. This flimsy pattern was copied by every other nation: some strokes
of improvement were from time to time added by the French; till at last almost
every thing useful was boldly struck out from the plan of female education; and
the women of the present age thereby robbed of more than half their native
excellence, and rendered objects more sought after to divert a melancholy hour,
or satisfy a l^wless passion, than to become the social partners of a life
directed by reason and religion. We must, however, allow, that the French
ladies are not all so much devoted to fashion and pleasure, as to neglect every
thing else. France has produced several women distinguished for their judgment
and learning; and even in the present dissipated age, while female coteries
commonly meet for diversion, or for gaming, there are in Paris societies of
women, which meet at stated times to determine the merit of every new work; and
happy is the author who meets their approbation; the French being too polite to
set themselves in open opposition to the judgment of their ladies, whether they
may think it right or wrong.

Should this imperfect attempt, to write the History of the Fair, survive the
present, and be read in any future generation, when this frivolous mode of
female education shall have given place to a better, that our readers may then
have some idea of what it was toward the close of the eighteenth century, we
shall just sketch the outlines of it as now practiced in the politest coun^^^es
of Europe. Among the first lessons, which a mother teaches her daughter, is
that important article, according to the modern phrase, of holding up her head,
and learning a proper carriage: this begins to be inculcated at the age of
three or four at latest; and is strenuously insisted on for many years
afterward. When the young lady has learned imperfectly to read her own
language, and sometimes even sooner, she is sent to a boarding-school, where
she is instructed in the most flimsy and useless parts of needle work; while of
those, which she must need, if ever she enters into domestic life, she is left
entirely ignorant. While she is here, some part of her time is also al^^^ed to
learning to read either her own language, or the languages of some of the
neighboring kingdoms; all of which are too frequently taught without a proper
attention to Grammar or Orthogrophy. Writing and Arithmetic, likewise employ a
part of her time; but these, particularly the last, are only considered as
auxiliary accomplishments, which are not to be carried into life, and
consequently deserve but little attention; the grand effort is generally made
to teach the girl what the woman will relinquish; such as drawing, music, and
dancing; these, as they are arts agreeable to youthful sprightliness, often
engage the young lady so much, as to make her neglect, or forget every thing
else. To these are added, the modes of dressing in fashion, the punctilios of
behaving in company; and we are sorry to say, that into some schools have been
introduced masters to teach the fashionable games at cards; a dissipation, if
not a vice, which already prevails too much among both sexes, and may perhaps
still gain ground by this early initiation.

Such, in general, is the education of female boarding-schools; in some,
indeed, there may be a few other things taught besides those we have mentioned;
but whatever be taught, or however they be conducted, it is too true, that the
girl, after having been there for some years, comes home to her parents quite a
modern fine lady; with her head full of scraps of French, names of great
people, and quotations from romances and plays; and quite disgusted at the
antiquated virtues of sober frugality, order, or economy. We cannot cast our
eyes on the picture we have drawn, without a secret wish, that it were less
just; nor shall we drop the curtain before it, without mentioning with
pleasure, tha^ some parents adopt a better plan; and that some young ladies,
even thus educated, have had unde^standing enough to lay aside the greatest
part of the abovementioned frippery, and cultivate such knowledge, and such
virtues, as were ornamental to society, and useful to themselves.

Such, with a few trifling variations, is the common course of European
education; a course, which seems almost entirely calculated to cultivate the
personal graces, while the care of the head, and of the heart, is little, if at
all, attended to; and the useful duties of domestic life, but too often turned
into ridicule, as the obsolete employments of such silly women as lived a
century or two ago, unacquainted with fashion and with pleasure. Women so
educated, may be sought after to help in trifling away an idle hour; but
whatever progress their personal charms may make on the passions, when the
hours of trifling and passion are over, they must infallibly be neglected, if
not despised. With the fop and beau, creatures still more insignificant than
themselves, they may perhaps expect a better fate; but let them consider, how
little pleasure they generally take in the company and conversation of their
own sex; and that the fop, and the beau, are only women in breeches. Let such
also, as never entertained an idea but of conquests and admirers, consider,
that when youth and beauty shall be on more, when the crowd of flatterers and
admirers shall have ceased to attend, something will then be necessary to fill
up the void, and prevent the peevishness and disgust which it so often
occasions; that the natural source of this something, is friendship; and that
friendship cannot exist, unless it is built upon the foundation of reason and
of sense.

If the history of the education of women in Europe, where they are objects so
interesting, and so much esteemed by the men, has given but little pleasure in
the recital, it will give still less in Asia, Africa, and America, where they
are commonly either enslaved or disregarded: in both which cases nothing is so
necessary as ignorance; nor would any thing so effectually spoil them for their
slavery, as education and knowledge; which, by opening and expanding their
minds, would soon discover to them, that our sex assumed a power not founded in
nature; and treated them with a severity inconsistent with gentleness and
humanity: for these reasons, it is the interest of the men, that almost no
culture should be bestowed on their minds, lest it should teach them to assert
the rights of nature, and refuse to submit to the yoke of bondage.

In several of the warmer regions of Asia and Africa, where women are
considered merely as instruments of animal pleasure, the little education
bestowed upon them, is entirely calculated to debauch their minds and give
addtional charms to their persons. They are instructed in such graces, and
alluring arts as tend to inflame the passions; they are taught vocal and
instrumental music, which they accompany with dances, in which every movement,
and every gesture, is expressively indecent: but they receive no moral
instruction; for it would teach them that they were doing wrong: no
improvement; for it would show them that they were degrading themselves, by
being only trained up to satisfy the pleasures of sense. This, however, is not
the practice of all parts of Asia and Africa: the women of Hindostan are
educated more decently; they are not allowed to learn music or dancing; which
are only reckoned accomplishments fit for ladies of pleasure: they are,
notwithstanding, taught all the personal graces; and particular care is taken
to instruct them in the art of conversing with elegance and vivacity: some of
them are also taught to write, and the generality to read, that they may be
able to read the Koran; instead of which, they more frequently dedicate
themselves to tales and romances; which, painted in all the lively imagery of
the East, seldom fail to corrupt the minds of creatures shut up from the world,
and consequently forming to themselves extravagant and romantic notions of all
that is transacted in it.

In well regulated families, women are taught by heart some prayers in Arabic,
which at certain hours they assemble in a hall to repeat; never being allowed
the liberty of going to the public mosque. They are enjoined always to wash
themselves before praying; and, indeed, the virtues of cleanliness, of
chastity, and obedience, are so strongly and constantly inculcated on their
minds, that, in spite of their general debauchery of manners, there are not a
few among them, who, in their common deportment, do credit to the instructions
bestowed upon them; nor is this much to be wondered at, when we consider the
tempting recompense that is held out to them; they are, in paridise, to
flourish forever, in the vigor of youth and beauty; and however old, or ugly,
when they depart this life, are there to be immediately transformed into all
that is fair, and all that is graceful.

In China, where education is in greater esteem than in any part of the world;
where it is almost the only road to preferment, and where the men are
consequently at the greatest pains to acquire it, we might naturally expect,
that as their women possess a considerable share of esteem and regard, they
also should not be neglected in their education: but whether they are even
taught to read or write their own language, which is a work of many years, we
are not informed by any of the voyages and travels that have fallen within our
observation; as the task of learning to read or to write the Chinese language
is so long and laborious; and as among the men it seems chiefly confined to
such as aspire after employments of state, we are of opinion, that women are
seldom or never instructed in it. We are told, however, that such as are rich
learn music, the modes of behavior, and ceremonial punctilios of the country;
which last they cannot possibly be without; as a failure in the least
circumstance, as the number of bows to a superior, or manner of making them,
would infallibly stamp the mark of ignorance on the person so failing: women
are in general also taught a bashfulness and modesty of behavior, not to be
met with in any other country: this, however, is too often but a semblance; a
mere outside virtue, which the wearer can occasionally put on, or shake off, as
she has occasion to appear virtuous, or to yield to the temptations of vice.

Such, with very little variation, is the education of women all over Asia.
When we turn toward Africa, we find the men still more brutish and ignorant,
and the women consequently more abused and neglected. But however ignorant and
brutish the present inhabitants of Africa are, their country was, in the time
of the Roman empire, the seat of the sciences, and produced no small number of
scholars, as well as heroes. The African love of learning was then so great,
that in Egypt a library was collected; which, for its number of books, equalled
almost any of our modern times; and, for costliness, much excelled all that we
are now acquainted with; being most of them wrote in letters of gold, by
dissolving it in some liquid, which, among them, is a peculiar secret, and
writing with the solution as we do with ink. When the Turks made themselves
masters of Egypt, this famous library was, by superstition, condemned to the
flames; avarice, however, a passion much less destructive, saved a part of what
superstition had devoted to ruin: the Sultan had ordered all the books to be
burned, but such as treated of Mahomedism; the minister, who executed his
orders, burned only all that were old and in bad order, saving all the new and
elegant which he privately sold among the officers of the court. Since this
period, the faith of Mahomet has spread itself over the greatest part of
Africa; literature has daily declined, and, at the present time, almost the
whole of its people, of whatever religion, have hardly any vestige of learning,
of arts, or of sciences left among them. Agriculture is consigned entirely to
the women, and managed in the most rude and slovenly manner; the few trades and
arts practiced among them, are only the result of necessity, and carried on
with a slowness and want of invention, which strongly marks their deficiency of
genius.

Among people, in such a condition, it would be in vain to expect any female
learning; all the care that is taken to instruct that miserable sex, is only in
teaching them to bear the load of oppression laid on their shoulders by their
lazy and imperious masters, which we shall afterward have occasion to mention;
while, from one another, they learn the tawdry modes of dressing and
ornamenting themselves as practiced in their country. This slavery of the
persons of women, and total neglect of their minds, naturally excites our
indignation; but to account for it, we must consider, that it has been a custom
from the earliest antiquity in these regions; and that custom is stronger than
reason and humanity joined together; that the Africans, and even the Mahomedans
in Asia and in Europe, never make companions of their women, nor associate with
them, but in the moments dedicated to love and dalliance; hence the women have
no opportunity of practicing upon the men those arts, by which, in other
countries, they gain an ascendency over the heart, and interest even reason, as
well as humanity, in their favor.

The education of the various tribes of savages, who inhabit the vast ^ontinent
of America, seems in general better adapted to their mode of life than that of
Europe; the whole scope of it being well calculated to make them patient of
every possible evil and suffering, which may befall them in the course of a life
destined almost to one continued scene of dangers and fatigues: nor is this
plan of education confined to boys only; it is extended to girls also, who are
taught to bear the rigors of the climate, the fatigues of labor, the cravings
of extreme hunger, and other vicissitudes of fortune, not only with patience,
but with resolution and fortitude. In a great part of North America, it is a
fundamental rule in education, never to beat their children of either sex;
which* say they, would only weaken and dispirit their m^nds, without producing
any good effects; and, therefore, whenever a mother sees her daughter behave
ill, instead of having recourse to the rod, she falls a crying; the daughter
naturally enquires the cause; the mother answers, because you disgrace me; a
reproach which seldom fails to produce an amendment; but, should it happen
otherwise, the mother, as a last resource, throws a little water on her face; a
disgrace with which she is commonly so much affected, that she seldom ventures
to do any thing that may subject her to a repetition of it.

In Japan, the same gentleness must be used in the education of children; the
punishments inflicted in most other nations, only make them more stubborn and
refractory; and sometimes there, as well as in America, have drove them to
commit suicide; a crime to which the Japanese are addicted on the most ^rifling
affront; and which the Americans coolly and deliberately perpetrate, when tired
of life. -- This stubborness of temper is not peculiar to Japan, or to America;
it seems either to depend on savageness of manners, or perhaps to be peculiar
to some distinct kinds of the human race; as we may find it also in Greenland,
and several other places; even where the people have but little resemblance to
each other in manners, customs, or diposition.

Of all the ancient inhabitants of America, the Peruvians seem to have been the
most enlightened; it has been supposed, that this was owing to their first Inca
being an European, accidentally shipwrecked on their coast. However this be, it
is certain, that they greatly surpassed all their countrymen in arts, in
manners, and even in learning; their Virgins of the Sun, in particular, were
brought up in the temple dedicated to that luminary, with great care; and
instructed by women, appointed for the purpose, in every female art and
accomplishment known among them; and in the practice of the virtues of
chastity, honesty, and benevolence; virtues for which the ancient Peruvians
were eminently distinguished. In Mexico, also, their young women of quality
were educated by matrons, who overlooked their conduct with great
circumspection. From these instances it appears, that in South America, where
they enjoy a milder climate, whose spontaneous productious preclude the
necessity of procuring subsistence by the perilous occupations of fishing and
hunting, their education too, is of a softer nature than in North America;
where tenderness would effectually disqualify them for bearing the fatigues of
their occupation, and the severities of their climate. But while North
Americans educate their young women in the hardy manner we have mentioned, they
seem at the same time to blend this education in such a manner, as if they wish
to throw into the female composition, some of that softness of manners and
person which men in all ages and nations have at least had some faint ideas of
in the other sex. While their male children are young, they lay them on the
skins of panthers, that they may thereby acquire the strength, cunning, and
agility of that animal. Their females they lay on the skins of fawns, and other
mild animals, that, like them, they may become soft, gentle, and engaging.

When we take a retrospective view of these sketches of the education of women,
it affords matter of astonishment, that a sex, who are the sharers of our
nature, and destined to be the companions of our lives, should have been
constantly either shamefully neglected, or perverted by what was meant to serve
as instruction. In Europe, their education seems only calculated to inspire
them with love of admiration, of trifling, and of amusement. In most other
places of the globe, it goes a step farther; it tends to eradicate every moral
sentiment, and introduce vice dressed up in the garb of voluptuous refinement.
Scarcely has there ever appeared in any period, or in any nation, a legislator,
who has made it the subject of his serious attention; and the men in general,
who are greatly interested, that women should be sensible and virtuous, seem,
by their conduct toward that sex, to have entered into a conspiracy to render
them otherwise.

When such is the hard fate of women, we cannot wonder that the want of
literary knowledge has in all ages marked the female character: there has,
however, in all ages, and among all nations, been some particular women, who,
either by being endowed with more genius, or by turning it into another
channel, have acquired no incompetent share of the learning of the times in
which they lived; thus, though we have already seen that the Greek women were
in general extremely ignorant, there were some exceptions to that common
character. Arete, the daughter of Aristippus, taught philosophy, and the
sciences to her son; who, on that account, was called Me^rodidactos; i. e.
taught by his mother. Corinna, a Theban poetess, no less than five times bore
away the palm in triumph from the celebrated Pindar; and Aspasia, a noble
Milesian lady, instructed Pericles, the famous Athenian philosopher. We have
already mentioned some of the learned Roman ladies. France and England have had
a Decier, a Carter, and many others too tedious to mention. In Italy, where
poets, a few centuries ago, were revered as divinities, several women have
arrived at no mean degree of reputation in that art; and our own times have
seen the ceremony of a poetess being solemnly crowned with laurel at Rome.

These particular instances, however, have no influence on the women in
general. A genius of either sex, will infallibly soar above the common level;
but the herd of mankind, who feel not the same impulse, nor are actuated by the
same fire, will still jog on in the ordinary track; while our warmest wishes
are, that female education were an object more considered by the legislature,
and better planned by parents and guardians. We would not have it understood as
our opinion, that women should pore out their fair eyes in becoming adepts in
literature. Nature seems not to have intended them for the more intense and
severe studies; besides, should they proceed so far as to rival, or even equal
us in learning, we should perhaps grudge them the laurels of fame, as much as
we do the breeches: and the gaining of these laurels would rob their brows of
many of those charms, which to them are more valuable, as they are by us more
esteemed. We pretend not to chalk out the plan in which women should be
educated; only, this we venture to affirm, that it should, if possible, be such
as to avoid ignorance on the one hand, and pedantry on the other: ignorance
makes a female companion contemptible, pedantry makes her ridiculous; nor is it
easy to say which of the two is most disgusting.

CHAPTER III. Of the Employments and Amusements of Women.
IN every country, where civilization and culture have begun to take place, and
where the inhabitants are not obliged to be continually employed in procuring
the necessaries of life, women are considered, not so much as the partners of
our toil and labor, as the sweetners of our pleasures and enjoyments: while we
exert ourselves abroad, in cultivating the fields, carrying on trades, and
working at manufactures, we leave them at home to enjoy the fruits of our
industry; when we return, we lay these fruits at their feet, happy ourselves,
if we can contribute to their happiness.

Women, being thus exempted from the labor of procuring their subsistence,
have a great deal of time upon their hands, which the domestic duties that fall
to their share are not sufficient to fill up; such is human nature, especially
when the spirits are active, and the imagination lively, that time of this kind
is of all others the most disagreeable: in order, therefore, to fill up this
blank, as well as to vary the scene of human life, a variety of little
employments, diversions, and amusements, have been contrived; many of them
adapted to both sexes, and some of them to the fair sex only.

In states of the most savage barbarity, or in those but a few degrees removed
from it, women being considered only as the slaves and drudges of the men, and
as the means of perpetuating their race, are destined only to labor in their
fields, or in their houses, and to bring up their children. Thus, constantly
employed, they have but little time; and constantly depressed, they have but
little inclination for amusement: in such states and conditions of human
nature, we shall therefore meet with few female diversions, and these too, only
such as seem to have arisen from nature, or from chance, and not from any
exertion of genius, or refinement in the pursuit of pleasure.

In the East, where women are exempted from labor; not because they are
esteemed and regarded, but because it would render them less delicate
instruments of those voluptuous pleasures in which the Easterns place their
chiefest happiness; they are confined to seraglios and harams, where neither
their employments nor amusements can admit of much variety; and where a large
portion of their time is consumed in regret, or slumbered away in that soft
indolence and relaxation of body and mind, which the inhabitants of the banks
of the Ganges reckon the highest felicity that can be attained in this world,
and the chief ingredient in the beatitude of that which is to come.

As the necessities of nature must be satisfied before any other appetite can
be formed, or object fixed upon, employments must therefore have been every
where prior to amusements, which could only come in as secondary
considerations. Accordingly we advance many centuries into the history of the
world, before we have any account of amusements, and many of the first ages of
barbarity; the subsequent ones of care and simplicity, after the first
foundation of states, generally pass away, before they have time to think of,
or inclination to almost any diversion or amusement. Private and trifling
diversions may arise from merriness of heart; public ones are only founded on
idleness and affluence.

In the earlier ages of antiquity, it was not inconsistent with the highest
dignity, to act in what we would reckon the meanest of menial employments.
Gideon and Arunah assisted in the various labors of husbandry. Abraham went
and brought a calf from the flock, skinned it, and gave it to his wife, who
dressed it: then he himself took butter and milk, and the calf which he had
dressed; set them before the angels, and stood by them under a tree; a custom
to this day continued among many of the eastern nations, especially in the
Levant; where nothing is more common than to see their princes fetch home from
their flocks, and kill, whatever they have pitched upon for the use of their
families; while the princesses their wives, or daughters, prepare a fire, and
perform the office of an European cook-maid. We shall have occasion to see
afterward, that such employments were not peculiar to the people, nor to the
ages we are considering.

Another part of female employment in the earlier ages, was grinding of corn:
the ancients had not, and in many countries, they still have not, mills so
constructed as to go by wind or water: theirs were only two small stones, the
uppermost of which was turned by the hand, a task generally performed by two
women. Such were used in Egypt in the time of Pharaoh; for Moses, in the
relation of the plagues which infested that country on account of the
Israelites, says, that the firstborn, throughout all the land died, from the
firstborn of Pharaoh who was upon the throne, to the firstborn of the
maidservant that was behind the mill. They were used in the time of our
Savior, who says, two women shall be grinding at the mill; the one shall be
taken, and the other left. They are used at this day, all over the Levant, and
even in the north of Scotland; where the women who turn them, have a particular
song which they then sing, intended perhaps to divert them from thinking on the
severity of their labor. When the women had ground the corn into meal, it was
likewise their province to make it into bread. Sarah was ordered by her
husband, when he entertained the angels, to make cakes for them. Cakes, among
many of the ancients, were offered on the altars of their gods, from which
custom even the Israelites did not altogether abstai^^^ ^s the scriptures
frequently inform us, that (...) baked cakes to the Queen of Heaven.

Pasturage was almost the only method of subsistence in the times we are
speaking of; and the women of every rank and condition, as well as the men,
were not exempted from attending on the flocks, drawing water for them to
drink, and doing all the other offices which the nature of such an employment
required. Pasturage obliged the ancient Israelites, and other inhabitants of
the East, to embrace a wandering life, that they might procure fresh food for
their flocks. Instead, therefore, of dwelling in houses, as we do, they erected
only tents, for the convenience of frequent removals: these tents were made of
camel's hair and wool, the spinning and weaving of which was a part of the
occupation of their women; and from the time that cloth was substituted as a
covering for the body, instead of the skins of animals, the whole operation of
making it devolved also on the women, who weaved it in the most simple manner,
by conducting the woof with their fingers, instead of a shuttle.

In countries where the arts are but in their infancy, every man is generally
his own artificer. The men make the various instruments which they employ in
their work, and the women make the cloth for covering themselves and their
families: but in the days of Moses, the Israelites seem to have been advanced a
few degrees beyond this state. Metallurgy seems to have made a considereble
progress: even in the time of Abraham, they had instruments, probably of steel,
for sheering their sheep: Abraham had a sabre, which he drew to sacrifice his
son Isaac. And they had even arrived to works of taste in gold and silver: they
must, therefore have been at this period more advanced in the arts, than the
Greeks at the time of the siege of Troy, whose arms and shields were only made
of copper; or than many savage nations at this time, whose arms are only
hardened wood, sometimes pointed with flints, or bones of animals.

Such only is the imperfect account we are enabled to give of female
employments in the patriarchal ages. Their amusements and diversions, if (...)
had any, are still involved in deeper obscurity. (...) most in every period,
and among every (...) however wild and uncultivated, we find some (...) of
singing and dancing: poems, contain^^^ the principal circumstances of the
history of their country, and the praise of their gods and heroes, were in use
among the ancient Phoenicians, Arabians, Chinese, Greeks, Mexicans, etc. It is
probable, therefore, that the ancient Israelitish women amused themselves with
singing the songs of their poets; which, among them as well as among their
neighbors, were chiefly composed either in praise of the Deity, to thank him
for some remarkable deliverance, or to celebrate some martial achievement of
themselves or their ancestors. And that these poems were not always composed,
nor always sung, by the men only, appears evident from the song of Barak and
Deborah, handed down to us by Moses. Jubal, the brother of Tubal Cain, had long
before this time invented musical instruments: it is not, therefore,
improbable, that the Israelitish women accompanied their songs with
instrumental music; a custom we often meet with in early ages, and among
uncultivated people.

Besides the recital of songs and poems, we may reckon dancing among the female
diversions of the times we are reviewing. David danced before the ark of the
Lord; and we find old Barzilai bewailing his incapacity for that exercise, in a
manner that showed how much it was the favorite, and perhaps the religious,
diversion of the times in which he lived. As women are generally at all times,
and particularly while in the bloom of youth and beauty, more cheerful,
light-hearted, and given to the sportive amusements than men; it is highly
probable, that they did not sit inactive spectators of a diversion so much in
use: and on some festival occasions, especially sheep-sheering, we have the
strongest reasons to believe, that there were promiscuous meetings, where both
sexes rejoiced, made merry, and perhaps danced together. Dancing i^ perhaps not
less ancient than songs, nor less practiced by savage nations, over whom music
has commonly a power, to which even the most delicate Italian ear is a
stranger. It elevates them to extacy, and often prompts them to exert
themselves till they fall down breathless. Even the wre^^he^, who, in America,
smart under the rod of European slavery, though so dispirited, as in appearance
to have bid an eternal farewell to happiness and pleasure, start up at the
power of music, and dance as if their bodies were strangers to pain, and their
hearts to sorrow.

In the times we are considering games of chance were not known, and even in
the days of Solomon, who with an unheard of degree of magnificence and
libertinism had indulged himself in every vanity, and in every delight, neither
games nor theatrical entertainments seem to have been introduced. If we may
credit the commentators on the Talmud, all kinds of games and spectacles were
not only forbid, but abhorred by every good Israelite, on account of the
judgments which had fallen upon such as had ventured to be present at them
among the neighboring nations. The comment on the book of Ruth introduces old
Naomi dissuading her daughter-in-law from returning into the land of Israel,
because women were not there allowed to go to the theaters, as among the
Gentiles. The Jewish comment on the Lamentations of Jeremiah, introduces the
church of that people expostulating with God, that she had never indulged
herself in entering into such profane places; and the Talmud itself expressly
forbids, that they should enter them on any consideration whatever.

On this, and some other accounts, it would seem that the amusements of the
women, in the times we are speaking of, were but few and simple. Perhaps one of
the most common was, regaling themselves in the open air, as the scripture
expresses it, every one under his own vine, and under his own fig tree; a
custom as ancient as Abraham, and at this day almost the only amusement
practiced in the East; where the heat of the climate disposes more to
relaxation in the shade, than to the sportive diversions used by the active
inhabitants of colder regions.

We are informed by Herodotus, that in Egypt, the employments of the women,
like most of the other customs of that people, were totally different from what
they were in other countries. We have already mentioned, that the Egyptian
women were occupied abroad in trade, merchandise, and agriculture; and we now
add, that according to this author, they left all the domestic employments and
cares to their men. We are, however, rather of opinion, that this was not
strictly the case: the mercantile caravans, which traveled in places so rude
and unhospitable as the neighborhood of Egypt, were probably not composed of
women; the fine linen, for which Egypt was so remarkable, was probably not spun
by men, who seem by nature to have an abhorrence at the distaff. But as the
division of the employments of life between the two sexes, in this country, is
by the disagreement of authors involved in so much doubt and obscurity, at a
period so distant, we cannot pretend to throw any light upon the subject.

From the faint glimmerings of ancient history it would seem, that the public
amusements and diversions of the Egyptians were only a kind of religious
festivals, which they celebrated with singing, dancing, feasting, and pompous
processions; in which the women bore a great part, and being adorned with a
variety of flowers and garlands, carried in their hands things symbolical of
the festival they were celebrating. Besides the joining in these public
processions, women of distinction used to keep their birth-days with feasting
and rejoicing. On the birthday of a queen, or of a daughter of Egypt, the
whole court was treated in a magnificent manner, and paid their compliments to
the lady on whose account they were assembl^^. Great men followed the example
of their prince, called together their friends and dependants, and spent the
birth-days of their wives and daughters in mirth and festivity. With regard to
the private amusements of the Egyptian women, history is entirely silent. It is
probable, however, that among a people so highly cultivated, they were not
altogether without some of those sportive diversions, which tend to invigorate
the body by unbending the mind.

From the Egyptians till we come to the heroic ages, we only meet with a few
scattered hints concerning the manner in which women employed or amused
themselves. The Phoenician women, whose husbands were famous for trade and
navigation, are said to have spent much of their time in writing and keeping of
those accounts, without which trade cannot be properly managed. The Lybian
women, warlike as their husbands, dedicated a great part of their time to feats
of arms, and to the chase: even their amusements were some of them calculated
to instill a martial spirit: one tribe, in their country, annually celebrated a
festival in honor of Minerva, in which the young women divided into two
parties, and fought with sticks and stones, till one of the parties was
defeated. As this annual conflict was fought in honor of the goddess, they
imagined that all the wounds received in it were under her peculiar care; and
that she interested herself so much in their cure, that she suffered none to
die of them, but such as had forfeited their title to her favor by the loss of
their virginity. It is probable, that these wounds were seldom of consequence
enough to become mortal; and when they were, it was easy to fix this stigma of
female levity on the unhappy sufferer, who could not raise from the dead to
vindicate her injured reputation. Thus, though we can consider the institution
in no other light than a piece of state policy, it was excellently calculated
to preserve chas^ity: not to join in the engagement was a tacit acknowledgment
of unchastity; to be wounded in it, was considered as certain death to her who
was so. Few women, therefore, would risque themsemselves, who were conscious of
being gulty; few women would dare to be guilty, when it was reckoned so
impossible to avoid a discovery.

In what manner the women of the Syrians, Babylonians, Medes, and Persians, who
are almost the only nations which make any figure in the periods we are
reviewing, were employed, is nearly all conjecture. We may, howe^er, venture to
affirm, that among the opulent they were not put to any servile or laborious
tasks; as such would have been altogether inconsistent with the delicacy in
which they were brought up, and the extraordinary finery with which they were
decorated. As the Babylonians were famous for their manufactures of rich
embroidery, sumptuous vestments, fine linen, magnificent carpets and hangings;
and as weaving embroidery, and other works of the like nature, were a principal
part of the occupation of women, in the periods we are considering, we may
reasonably conjecture, that they were employed in fabricating of these, as well
as in preparing that finery with which they ornamented their persons. We have
reason also to suppose, that in nations so rich and luxurious as those we have
mentioned, where women were brought up in the lap of ease and indulgence, they
would have several public as well as private amusements; but what these were,
or how conducted, it is in vain for us at this period, to attempt to discover.
We are informed, that the Babylonians had a great variety of musical
instruments; and as music is a recreation well adapted to the sentimental
feelings of the female heart, it is probable their women did not neglect it.
The Medes and Persians were also famous for music and dancing. Music, among
them, was called in to heighten the pleasure of the festive board; at which
they sung, and played upon instruments, the monarchs themselves sometimes
taking a part in this, as well as in every other thing which promoted mirth and
joillity. We are inclined to believe, that it was among the Medes and Persians
that custom was first introduced of bringing in singing and dancing women, in
order to divert a company.

Among the nations that have been hitherto mentioned, we could do little more
than observe in general, that such was the employment, and such the amusement
of the fair sex. Descending to periods less remote, we meet with descriptions
more particular. In the Lesser Asia, where it would seem that women were far
from being so much despised and neglected, as in many other parts of the world,
even those of the first quality were not ashamed to perform the office of a
washerwoman. We shall afterward have occasion to take notice of the same
custom in Greece. The Grecian wives and daughters, of whatever quality, were
not, in the heroic ages, brought up in idleness. Penelope, queen of the famous
Ulysses, is so frequently introduced by Homer at her loom, that almost every
one has heard the story of Penelope's web, a story which has been frequently
applied to the slow and thriftless operations of the women of our modern times.
The famous Helen, while confined by the besiegers of Troy, employed herself in
an extraordinary piece of embroidery, which represented most of the battles
fought between the Greeks and Trojans: and Andromache, when she heard of the
death of Hector, embroidered a representation of that tragical scene, and
adorned it with ^lowers. But such soft employments, such works of taste, were
not the sole occupations of the women in the times we are delineating. The same
Andromache, who with her needle painted (...) the fall of the hero of her
country, was not ashamed to feed, and take care of, the horses of that hero
when living.

Besides the arts of weaving and embroidery, which were not unknown to the
women in the times of Moses, the Grecian fair ones employed themselves in
spinning, which they performed standing, and in every other branch of the
manufacture of cloth; a custom which was not obliterated even in the most
polished times of their states. Alexander the Great, and many others of their
heroes and statesmen, wore garments, spun and woven by their wives and sisters:
and this appears to have been the practice of the earliest antiquity, and we
find Solomon, in his praises of a virtuous woman, enumerating, among other
qualities, that of clothing her husband in purple and scarlet. The Greek women
had particular rooms allotted to their work, near the apartments where they
lodged. When they were respected by their husbands, and not given to
intriguing, the provision and management of all necessaries within doors were
committed to them.

As the Greek ladies were almost constantly employed, and as voluntary
employment often banishes even every wish of pleasure and dissipation, we have
reason to believe that they had few, if any, private diversions or amusements;
which are generally the offspring of idleness, as appears plainly from the
difference, in this respect, between the women and the men; the former, as we
have observed, being fully employed, had no need of amusements; the latter
being frequently, and, in Sparta, even by law obliged to be constantly idle,
were thereby induced to have recourse to games and sports of various kinds to
fill up their vacant hours, and prevent that uncomfortable tedium which so
constantly attends idleness: to some of these public sports the women were
admitted, and from others excluded by the severest penalties. Their legislator
possibly imagined, that should they be indiscriminately admitted to all the
amusements of the men, they would acquire an unsuitable boldness, and neglect
the several duties and offices required of them at home. To what we have here
observed the Spartan women are, however, an objection: we have already seen,
that they amused themselves with the masculine exercises of wrestling, throwing
darts, etc. But this is not all: they were obliged to appear naked at some of
their solemn feasts and sacrifices, and to dance and sing, while the young men
stood in a circle around them; an amusement highly indelicate, or, if a
religious ceremony, only worthy of the Cyprian goddess.

In the earlier periods, while the Greeks found abundance of employment in
procuring subsistence, in plundering their neighbors, or avenging their own
quarrels; they had but few gods, and, hardly perhaps, any festivals besides
that of the vintage, when they used to make merry together with the fruits they
had gathered. In the latter, when they became idle, by devolving all their
labor upon slaves, and their gods had increased almost to the number of their
men, the festivals celebrated in honor of them became also nearly innumerable
and were many of them accompanied with dancings, revellings, pompous
processions, and other ostentatious ceremonies: into almost all of them the
women were not only admitted, but in several of them acted a principal part as
singers, dancers, priestesses, etc. When, therefore, the institutions of a
religion are in this manner more calculated to attract the eye, than to amend
the heart; when instead of social and moral duties, they prescribe gaudy
processions, and ostentatious ceremonies; these in a great measure supply, and
are actually turned into public diversions and amusements. This seems to have
been remarkably the case in Greece; where, though every one of their numerous
festivals was instituted in honor of some god, or in commemoration of
something which they fancied was connected with religion, they often lost sight
of the original institution amid the glare of ostentatious ceremony with which
it was celebrated.

Another cause, which contributed to make the religious festivals of the Greeks
be considered as amusements and diversions, was that ridiculous buffoonery that
constituted so great a part of them: it would be tedious to enumerate one half
of these buffooneries; let a few serve as a specimen. At a festival held in
honor of Bacchus, the women ran about for a long time seeking the god, who,
they pretended, had run away from them: this done, they passed their time in
proposing riddles and questions to each other, and laughing at such as could
not answer them; and at last often closed the scene with such enormous
excesses, that at one of these festivals, the daughters of Minya, having, in
their madness, killed Hippasus, had him dressed and served up to table as a
rarity. At another, kept in honor of Venus and Adonis, they beat their
breasts, tore their hair, and mimicked all the signs of the most extravagant
grief, with which they supposed the goddess to have been affected on the death
of her favorite paramour. At another, in honor of the nymph Cotys, they
addressed her as the goddess of wantonness with many mysterious rites and
ceremonies* At Corinth, these rites and ceremonies, being perhaps thought
inconsistent with the character of modest women, this festival was only
celebrated by harlots. Athenaeus mentions a festival, at which the women laid
hold on all the old bachelors they could find, and dragged them round an altar;
beating them all the time with their fists, as punishment for their neglect of
the sex. We shall only mention two more; at one of which, after the assembly
had met in the temple of Ceres, the women shut out all the men and dogs,
themselves and the bitches remaining in the temple all night: in the morning,
the men were let in, and the time was spent in laughing together at the frolic.
At the other, in honor of Bacchus, they counterfeited frenzy and madness; and
to make this madness appear the more real, they used to eat the raw and bloody
entrails of goats newly slaughtered. And, indeed, the whole of the festivals of
Bacchus, a deity much worshipped in Greece, were celebrated with rites either
ridiculous, obscene, or madly extravagant. There were others, however, in
honor of the other gods and goddesses, which were more decent, and had more
the appearance of religious solemnity, though even in these, the women dressed
out in all their finery; and adorned with flowers and garlands, either formed
splendid processions, or assisted in performing ceremonies; the general
tendency of which was to amuse rather than instruct.

Wherever women are advanced a few degree* above the most abject slavery,
nothing is more natural to them than a constant endeavor to attract the
attention of our sex, by a display of their native charms, set off to the b^st
advantage by dress and ornament. But it is only in states polished to excess,
that they have imagined, that to dress and display all their charms, are the
only things with which they have any business or concern in this world. Such,
as we have now seen, were not the ancient Greeks, nor such were the Romans in
the early period of their empire. Tanaquil, the queen of Tarquin, one of the
first and best kings of Rome, was admitted to public honors on account of the
use she had made of her distaff; and Lucr^^ia, whose tragical story is so well
known in the Roman history, when her husband and some friends with him,
unexpectedly arrived from the army in the middle of the night, was found with
her maids spinning and working in wool; and the general practice of this
period, as well among the Romans as the Greeks and other nations, was, that the
women manufactured all the clothes used by their husbands and families; not
thinking the useful and necessary arts of life so incompatible with elegance
and grandeur as they began to do afterward, and as they unfortunately do still
in our modern times: but while their husbands and relations were laboring for,
or defending them abroad, they at home were providing them with clothes and
other necessaries, according to their rank, and the fashion of their country,
and thus mutually forwarding one common interest; but in subsequent periods,
when luxury, with its numerous train of attending evils, had crept into Rome,
the women became by degrees less useful, and ceased to be employed in
proportion as they were diverted and amused.

History, so far as we know, ha^ not acquainted us, whether the Roman ladies
had any private diversions: their public ones were such as were common to both
sexes; as bathing, theatrical representations, horse-races, snows of wild
beasts, fighting with one another; and sometimes with men, whom the emperors in
the plenitude of their despotic power ordered to engage them; naval battles,
and gladiators hacking one another to pieces. The Romans, of both sexes, spent
a great deal of time at the baths; which at first, perhaps, were interwoven
with their religion, at last, were only considered as refinements in luxury;
they were places of public resort, where all the news of the times were to be
heard, where people met with their acquaintances and friends, where public
libraries were kept for such as chose to read, and where poets recited their
works to such as would hear. In the earlier periods of Rome, separate baths
were appropriated to each sex; but luxury beginning by degrees to thrust out
decency, they at last came to bathe promiscuously together; the men, however,
being dressed and undressed by the men; and the women, following the example,
by those of their own sex only. The emperor Adrian prohibited this indecent
manner of bathing, and re-established the separate baths; inclination, by
degrees, overcame the prohibition, and Marcus Aurelius renewed it.
Heliogabolus, the patron of gluttony and indecorum, formally abolished it; and
it was again renewed under Alexander Severus. But debauchery was by this time
become too powerful to be restrained by law; and in spite of every effort,
promiscuous bathing continued till the time of Constantine; who finally
annulled it, by adding the precepts of Christianity to the legislative
authority. There were likewise at Rome public walks, planted on each side with
rows of trees, as in modern times; to which both sexes resorted in the
evenings, to walk and amuse themselves. The emperors sometimes also gave
lotteries; in which the women had tickets, that entitled them to prizes. In
short, so much did the Roman women recede from the custom of antiquity, in
mixing themselves with the men, that at last there was hardly an amusement, a
business, or debauchery, in which they were not engaged, either as parties or
spectators.

CHAPTER IV. The same Subject continued.
MEN, though in many respects exactly similar in all ages and countries, in
others are so dissimilar, that they can hardly be considered as the same kind
of beings; their similarity is in all times and places, the effect of nature;
their dissimilarity the effect of art, and of the habits and customs which have
arisen from it. These every where govern and direct more than one half of their
thoughts and actions, lay them under obligations stronger than the laws of
their country; and, in many cases, obliterate even the laws of nature. Such was
the case with the Roman women at the public baths; such is the case at present
in Russia, and many other parts of the world; where female modesty not only
gives place to custom, but, by custom, is in time entirely eradicated.

As the other articles, which we mentioned in the list of diversions and
amusements of the Roman ladies, are already so well known, we shall not enter
into a particular detail of them. When from the Romans we turn our eyes toward
those nations, who afterward overturned their empire, we find them, though by
the Romans denominated barbarians, in many circumstances, less deserving of
that contemptible epithet than these insolent depopulators of the world. We
find their women placing no small share of female excellence in the exercise of
the domestic, and still more in that of the conjugal virtues: we find that
their mothers had early instilled into their minds that modesty, which more
than any ornaments adorned; and that frugality and industry which in a barren
climate, and almost unassisted by the men, maintained them. Their employment
was not only to take care of, and manage all the domestic concerns of the
family, but also to provide whatever could be obtained by peaceful industry;
for their husbands, inclined only to occupy themselves in war and hunting, left
every thing else to the conduct and direction of their wives.

The Celtes, Gauls, Germans, and perhaps every other northern people, deemed
agriculture an ignoble profession; only fit for slaves and women: even the
Visigoths, on the coasts of Spain, devolved the care of their flocks and their
fields on their women, and encouraged them to support the fatigue of managing
them, by establishing annual assemblies, in which those women who had most
distinguished themselves in agriculture received public applause. The men, in
all the nations we have mentioned, counted it only glorious to live by the
sword and the bow, and consequently, when not engaged in war, or in the chase,
sunk into slothful indolence; and could only be said to live, because they ate,
drank, and slept. Every necessary work being thus left to the women, they were
perhaps so fully employed as to have no time for any thing else; if they had
any diversions or amusements, as they had no historians, and as those of other
nations were but imperfectly acquainted with their manners, we have no account
of them.

We shall afterward have occasion to relate, that the far greater part of the
female sex in Asia, Africa, and America, are in a state of the most abject
slavery and employed only in the execution of every slavish and laborious task.
We shall not therefore now take up the dismal tale, but content ourselves with
mentioning a few particulars only, and these chiefly such as relate to women,
who are the least exposed to feel the oppressive effects of despotism. The
Hindoo women, the Mahommedans of Bengal, Naugaracut, Lahor, and several other
places of the East, are, in general, not so much oppressed by slavery, as in
many parts of Africa and America; because, in the former places, they are
considered only as an article of delicacy and pleasure; in the latter only as
the slaves of their lords, and the breeders of children. To the woman of
Hindostan, we owe a great part of those works of taste so elegantly executed on
the manufactures of the East; the beautiful colorings and exquisite designings
of their printed cottons; all the embroidery, and a part of that filligree
work, which so much exceeds any thing in Europe. The deficiency of taste
therefore, with which we so commonly charge them, does not seem to be so much a
defect of nature as of education: brought up in luxurious indolence, excluded
from all the busy scenes of life, and like children provided with all those
things, the acquisition of which calls forth the powers of the mind and body,
they seldom have any motive to exert themselves; but when such a motive exists,
they have often exhibited the most convincing proofs of their ability.
Mherul-Nissa, who was afterward the favorite Sultana of Jehangire, emperor of
Hindostan, being, with several female slaves, at first shut up in a despicable
apartment of the seraglio, on the comfortless allowance of two shillings per
day, in order to raise her own reputation, and to support herself and slaves in
a better manner than that scanty pittance would admit of, began to call forth
the powers of taste and invention, which had hitherto lain dormant: she
produced some admirable pieces of tapestry and embroidery, painted silks, with
the most exquisite delicacy; and invented a variety of female ornaments,
superior to those in common use; these being bought up with avidity over all
the city of Delhi, made her so famous, that the Sultan paid her a visit; and
captivated with her sense and her charms, from that moment became her slave.

Such are the female employments of the East; they are nearly the same among
the Turks now settled in Europe; every Turkish seraglio or haram has a garden
adjoining to it, and in the middle of this garden a large room, more or less
decorated, according to the wealth of the proprietor; here the ladies spend
most of their time with their attendant nymphs around them, employed at their
music, embroidery, or loom; nor should we wonder, if in these retreats we find
more real pleasure and enjoyment, than in the unbounded freedom of Europe,
where love, interest, and ambition, so often destroy their peace; and where
scandal, with her envenomed shafts, too often strikes equally at guilt and
innocence.

So little do the writers of voyages and travelers know what passes in the
penetralia of the harams of the East, and so private are these recesses kept
even from the eye of speculative intrusion, that our knowledge of what is going
forward within them is exceedingly imperfect: this only in general seems
certain, that the ladies of the great, spend their time lolling on silken
sophas, bathing in rose water, perfuming themselves with costly essences, and
adorning their persons, solicitous by every method to attract the attention,
and obtain the greatest share of the conjugal favor of their lord. Public
amusements they have none; as these would necessarily expose them to be seen; a
thing which, through custom, the women themselves seem little less afraid of
than the jealous tyrants who confine them.

In the empire of the Mogul, the women are often called into the apartments of
the men after supper, where they spend the remainder of the evening in regaling
themselves with betel Betel is a root, which the Easterns make use of as the
Europeans do tobacco; it is chewed by all ranks, and by men, women, and
children.
, with a few of the liquors of the country, and in conversation; but in these
cases they are constantly veiled; and to offer to unveil, or even to touch one
of them, would be considered as the greatest rudeness; and perhaps punished
with immediate stabbing. At court they are frequently admitted into a gallery,
with a curtain before them, through which, without being seen, they can see and
hear whatever passes. It has sometimes happened, that the throne has been
occupied by a women, who never appearing in open court, issued her imperial
mandates from behind this curtain; like an invisible being producing the
greatest effects, while the cause of them was wrapped in darkness and obscurity.

At Constantinople, where the inhabitants still retain the manners of the
Asiatics, and in most places of the Levant, the Turks, who love indecent
amusements, choose out in the evening a green spot, in some thick shade, in
which they spread a carpet; and sitting down cross-legged together, men and
women, upon it, divert themselves with drinking coffee and sherbet, while their
female slaves attend round them to play, sing, or dance, as they shall direct;
the mistress, or lady, of the first quality in the party, often leading the
dance, in the same manner as Diana is said to have done with her Nymphs on the
banks of the Eurotas. But though women of rank, at Constantinople, may lead off
a dance, such does not seem to be the general practice of the Asiatics, from
whom they are descended; at least, they do not dance for amusement; it is true,
the Mogul emperors often make their wives and concubines dance before them, and
the other great men imitate their example; but this is not a voluntary act of
the women; it is what they are obliged to by the command of a superior; and
when this superior retires, they exercise the same authority over their own
slaves, who are also obliged to dance for their amusement. We have already
seen, in the beginning of this chapter, that dancing was practiced at an early
period in the East; and we find that it still prevails among all nations, rude
and cultivated; only with this difference, that the rude dance to show their
strength and agility; the cultivated for exercise, and to show the gracefulness
of their persons and motions; and so much are mankind almost every where
delighted with dancing, that the indigent in many places have converted it into
a trade, from which they derive no uncomfortable subsistence.

In the neighborhood of Surat, the Hindoos have many magnificent temples; and
in every temple are a number of Bramins or priests, dedicated to the service of
the god there worshipped. A part of that service consists in dancing on
religious assemblies, and other solemn occasions; and these dances are
performed by young women, the most handsome and beautiful in the country. When
Mamood first took the magnific^nt temple of Sumnat, he found there five hundred
dancing girls, and three hundred musicians.
These reside in the temple, and are by the Bramins carefully collected from
every place, where their own influence, or the veneration of their temple
reaches. In order to induce them to enter into this service, besides the
immense rewards held out to them in the world to come, they have some peculiar
privileges in this. They may leave the temple when they please; and being
accounted holy, they are then eagerly sought after in marriage, and have the
preference in this respect to all other women. While in the temples, they are
entirely under the direction of the Bramins; and it is by many supposed, that
they are also entirely appropriated to their pleasures; but however this be,
they are hardly ever allowed, like the other female dancers of the country, to
perform for the amusement of the public.

Besides these religious dancers, there is almost in every large city,
companies of dancing girls, called Balliaderes; who, in the manner of our
strolling players, go about for the amusement of the public; and who will
exhibit their performances at the house of any person, who is able to pay what
they demand; or may be seen by any one for a trifle at their public assemblies.
These beautiful girls are constantly followed by an old deformed musician, who
beats time with a brazen instrument, called a Tom; and continually at every
stroke repeats the word Tom with such vociferation, that he soon works himself
into a kind of phrenzy; the Balliaderes, at the same time eager to please, and
intoxicated with the music, and the smell of the essences with which they are
perfumed, soon after begin to be in the same state: their dances are in general
expressive of the passion of love, and they manage them so as to give, even the
most ignorant, tolerable ideas of that passion in all its different situations
and circumstances; and so great is their beauty, so voluptuous their figure, so
rich and ingeniously contrived their dress, that they seldom perform without
drawing together a numerous crowd of spectators.

Strolling female dancers, who live by that profession, are not, however,
peculiar to the East Indies; they have of late been met with in Otaheite, and
several other places; but beside their strolling dancers in Otaheite, they have
a dance called Timoradee, which the young girls perform, when eight or ten of
them can be got together; it consists in every motion, gesture, and tone of
voice that is truly lascivious; and being brought up to it from their
childhood, in every motion, and in every gestur^, they keep time with an
exactness scarcely excelled by the most expert stage-dancers of Europe. But
though this diversion is allowed to the virgin, it is prohibited to the wife;
who, from the moment of marriage, must abstain from it forever.

That such women a^ have rather been the outcasts of fortune, and are
consequently obliged to exert themselves, in order to gain a subsistence,
should make dancing a profession, and exhibit their performances for money, has
nothing in it extraordinary; but that both men and women, who reckon themselves
so far above want, as to be ashamed to perform for hire, should become
strolling dancers from choice, in some degree excites astonishment, as being
perfectly inconsistent with the ideas which we entertain in Europe. Such,
however, in the island of Ulietea, were met with by Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander,
who have given the following description of them: In the course of our walk, we
met with a company of strolling dancers, who detained us two hours; and during
all that time afforded us great entertainment; the company consisted of two
women dancers, and six men, with three drums: they were some of the most
considerable people of the island, and though they were continually going from
place to place, they did not, like the strolling companies of Otaheite, take
any gratuity from the spectators. The women had upon their heads a considerable
quantity of plaited hair, which was brought several times round their head, and
adorned in many parts with the flowers of the Cape Jessamine, which were stuck
in with much taste, and made a headdress truly elegant; their necks, shoulders,
and arms, were naked; so were their breasts, as low as the parting of the arm;
below that they were covered with black cloth, which fat close to the body; at
the side of each breast, next the arm, was placed a small plume of black
feathers; upon their hips rested a quantity of cloth, plaited very full; it
reached up to the breast, and fell down below into long petticoats; these quite
concealed their feet; which they managed with as much dexterity as our
opera-dancers could have done; the plaits above the waist were brown and white
alternately, the petticoats below were all white.

In this dress they advanced sideways in a measured step, keeping excellent
time to the drums, which beat briskly and loud; soon after they began to shake
their hips, giving the folds of cloth that lay upon them a very brisk motion,
which was in some degree continued through the whole dance; though the body was
thrown into various postures, sometimes standing, sometimes sitting, and
sometimes resting on their knees and elbows; the fingers also being moved, at
the same time, with a quickness scarcely to be imagined. Much of the dexterity
of the dancers, however, and the entertainment of the spectators, consisted in
the wantonness of their attitudes and gestures; which was indeed such as
exceeds all description.

From the earliest ages, dancing appears to have been either a religious or an
imitative exercise; David danced before the ark of the Lord, the Philistines
danced before Dagon, many of the contemporary nations frequently danced at
their solemn meetings, in their groves, and on their high places; the Greeks
did the same at some of the festivals celebrated in honor of their gods; and
the travelers of our own times give us numberless accounts of the dancings of
the savages before their idols. So different, however, are the ideas we have
formed of religion, that we are apt to consider dancing as altogether
inconsistent with its solemnity; but, perhaps, those who thought otherwise,
introduced it as a sign of gratitude and thankfulness, for health, vigor, and
agility; and, to show the gods, that they were cheerful and happy in the
enjoyment of their blessings, and under the administration of their government;
and proceeding from such sentiments in the worshippers, it could not be to the
gods an unacceptable service. It has likewise been much used in an imitative or
symbolical manner. The Indians dance their war-dance, to show their strength,
the agility, and ferocity they can exert in battle; and the women we have
mentioned indecently dance, what may be called their love-dance, to show how
well they are qualified for the rapturous enjoyments of that passion; and it is
only in the polite countries of Europe that we dance purely for the sake of
dancing. If rude and barbarous nations make their dances expressive of their
employments and their feelings; it is worth considering, whether we might not
improve on the plan, and add sentiment and expression to what we at present
only look upon as frolic and amusement.

Besides dancing, which does not as in Europe seem an amusement voluntarily
practiced by all ranks and conditions of women; in the east they have the
diversion of bathing, which is so closely interwoven with their religion as
well as with their pastime, that we can hardly say to which of them it belongs.
In warm countries, where cleanliness is so absolutely necessary to the health
and sweetness of the body, as almost to deserve a place among the moral
virtues; there is scarcely a religious system into which frequent bathing has
not been introduced, as a ceremony without which the gods would not accept the
prayers and sacrifices of men, and hence both sexes are more accustomed to
bathe than among us, who by religion are not enjoined any such duty. But there
are in the East other causes, which perhaps even more forcibly prompt to the
use of the bath than religion itself. The first is inclination, which must
operate in the strongest manner in climates scorched by a vertical sun; to give
us some idea of the strength of this inclination, in such climates, we need
only reflect on what we sometimes feel in the scorching summer months on
entering into a cool shade, or viewing a pool of water; the second is the love
of liberty, every bathing-place set apart for the use of the women is a kind of
public rendezvous, where the sex in general meet to talk over the news, the
scandal, and the fashions; it is a sacred asylum, where no man dare enter, and
where women are consequently free from the tyranny of their husbands and
guardians; and besides, in going to and coming from it, they sometimes manage
so as to be seen by their lovers, or make an assignation with their gallants:
on all these accounts, we are not to wonder that bathing is so much practiced
in the East; and especially by the fair sex, who have hardly any other liberty
than that which they enjoy on this occasion.

We have already mentioned the indecent manner in which the Romans of both
sexes bathed promiscuously together; the Greeks in the heroic ages did the
same, with this difference only, that the places they used were not so
confined, being commonly some river, or the sea itself. To the indelicacy of
these two nations, so famous in history, we shall oppose the practice of the
Turkish Ladies at Adrianople, as related by lady Mary Wortley Montague. I went,
says she, to the bagnio about ten o'clock; it was already full of women, I was
in my traveling habit, which is a riding-dress, and certainly appeared very
extraordinary to them, yet there was not one of them that showed the least
surprise or impertinent curiosity, but received m^ with all the obliging
civility possible. I know no Europe^^ court where the ladies would have behaved
themselves in so polite a manner to such a stranger: I b^lieve there were two
hundred women, and yet none of those disdainful smiles and satirical whispers
that never fail in our assemblies, when any body appears that is not dressed
exactly in the fashion; they repeated over and over to me, charming, very
charming; the first sophas were covered with cushions and rich carpets, on
which sat the ladies, and on the second their slaves, behind them, but without
any distinction of rank by their dress, all being in the state of nature; that
is, in plain English, stark naked, without any beauty or defect concealed; yet
there was not the least wanton smile or immodest gesture among them. They
walked and moved with the same majestic grace which Milton describes our
general mother with; there were many among them as exactly proportioned as ever
any goddess was drawn by the pencil of a Guido or a Titian -- and most of their
skins shiningly white, only adorned by their beautiful hair divided into many
tresses, hanging on their shoulders, braided, either with pearl or ribbon,
perfectly representing the figures of the graces.

I was here convinced of the truth of a reflection I have often made, that if
it were the fashion to go naked the face would be hardly observed I perceived
that the ladies of the most delicate (...) and finest shapes had the greatest
share of my admiration, though their faces were sometim^s l^ss beautiful than
those of their companio^s; ^o tell you the truth, I had wickedness enough to
wish secretly that Mr. Gervais could have been there invisible; I fancy it
would have much in proved (...) art to s^e so many fine women naked, in (...)
postu^^s, some in convers^tion, some wo^^ing, other^ drin^ing coffee or
sherbet; and many, negligently lying on their cushions, while their slaves
(generally pretty girls of seventeen or eighteen) were employed in braiding
their hair in several pretty fancies. -- They generally take this diversion
once a week, and stay there at least four or five hours without getting cold,
by immediate coming out of the hot bath into the cool room. -- I was charmed
with their civility and beauty, and should have been very glad to pass more
time with them, but was in haste to see the ruins of Justinian's church, which
did not afford me so agreeable a prospect as I had left, being little more than
a heap of stones.

As we have hitherto met with but little diversity in the employments of women,
as their amusements have not been numerous in the countries we have surveyed,
we now proceed to take a view of Europe; where, though we may not perhaps be
able to find the scene of female employments enlarged according to our wishes,
we shall at least find a long and ample list of female diversions and
amusements. -- If by employment we understand being occupied in such things as
are useful to society, in that case women of ra^k and quality, in most of the
polite countries of Europe, may be struck entirely out, as having no employment
at all; and should we even admit works of fancy and taste into our list of
useful employments, such is the love of dissipation, that even few of these are
at present executed by ladies of fashion. Desce^ding from the most elevated
ranks of female life, to those placed in a middle station, who neither have
reason to b^ uplif^ed wi^h the pride ^f wealth, made gid^y with the glare of
pref^^m^nt* nor depressed by the pinching hand of pov^r^ty* such we should
na^urally expect to ^ind (...) themselves and to their families; such we could
heartily wish the impartiality of historians would allow us to paint them. But
even in this most eligible of all human conditions, where their time is not
devoured by the giddy vortex of pomp and ceremony, where it is not wrested from
them by the labors necessary to procure daily bread; to what is it dedicated?
seldom! we are afraid, to useful purposes; but, rather to copying the examples
of the superior ranks, and to gadding abroad after every fashionable folly and
amusement: nor in saying this have we acted the part of declaimers; the
portrait we have drawn is only too faithful a representation of the times, and
naturally points out to us that we are to look for the useful and the
beneficial, only among such women as are obliged to gain a subsistence for
themselves, and perhaps for their children, by their own industry. The whole
human race is perhaps naturally averse to labor. From this general view of
women, it would seem that they are particularly so, especially in Europe, where
the softness of their frame, of their education, and the common indulgence they
meet with from our sex, teach them to look up to us as to beings not only
obliged to supply all their wants, but even to minister to all their pleasures,
seldom considering how far such a ministration is agreeable to our inclination;
and even sometimes insisting on running the giddy round of amusement, when
conscious that it is out of our power to supply the means of its useless
extravagance. But this is not all; in many companies, especially of the politer
sort of women, we have heard the inconsiderate assembly, as with one voice,
exclaim against the marriages of such as were poor, why, say they, should such
people marry? they can only fill the country with beggars! never recollecting,
that if such only were to marry, as could afford to bring up their children in
idleness, they themselves would want servants to do for them those offices they
think so much beneath their dignity, and that the strength of a hive does not
consist in the drones that devour, but in the bees that collect the honey.

But to return to our ladies of rank and fashion, there are still to be found
among them several, who bestow no inconsiderable share of time and attention on
the concerns of their families, as also upon the cultivation of some of the
fine arts, as music painting, drawing, etc. To run through the long and varied
list of occupations, in which women of the middling and lower conditions of
life employ themselves for pleasure, or for profit, would be tedious to our
female readers, who know them much better than we do; we shall therefore only
observe in general, that in all the polite countries of Europe, the proper
office of women of middling fortune is the care, inspection, and management of
every thing belonging to the family, while that of the men is to provide by
their labor and industry what the women are to manage with care and frugality.
When we descend to the lower and more useful classes of women, who not having
been cast into the lap of fortune, are obliged to work that they may live; we
find their employments various and extensive: most of the manufactures of
Europe, which do not depend so much upon strength as upon delicacy, are in a
great measure, carried on by women, and many of those which are even of a
rougher kind, receive a last polish from their softer touch. It is to their
patient industry and ductile hands, that we owe our finest linens, cambries,
and lawns: it is to them also that we are indebted for a great part of our gold
and silver laces, our embroideries, and a variety of other works of taste and
elegance, too tedious to mention. Another part of them, whose lot is cast in a
different, though not less useful manner, employ themselves in assisting the
husbandman in a variety of the less laborious branches of agriculture; and, not
a few there are, who even toil in reaping and gathering in the harvest: but
what we ought to value above every thing, is that cleanness, which by their
means we enjoy in our houses and clothes; benefits which we could hardly, or at
least aukwardly, procure for ourselves.

It may perhaps be thought strange, that in describing the various employments
of women, we have not hitherto mentioned that which of all others is their most
natural and common office, the nursing and bringing up of children; a subject
which we have reserved entirely for this place, that we might not be under the
necessity of so frequent a repetition, as we should have been otherwise led to
by its occurring in every period, and in every country we have had occasion to
mention.

The most tender care and anxious solicitude for their infant offspring is an
innate idea throughout the wide extent of animal nature, much more strongly
imprinted on the minds of females than of males: a wise institution of
Providence, for which various reasons will easily occur to the intelligent
reader, and which we need not therefore take the trouble of pointing out.

A little attention to the nature and economy of the brute animals will
convince us, that the care of their young is an innate principle, and not the
effect of reasoning; but we shall be still more convinced of this, if we
attentively consider the females of the human genus, in savage and in civil
life; a consideration that will uniformly point out to us, (...) this innate
care and anxious solicitude diminish gradually, in proportion as women advance
more toward that perfection, or rather imperfection of politeness, to which
several nations have now arisen; where folly, and fashion, and the love of
pleasure, have so much engrossed their affection, as in most cases greatly to
weaken, and in some totally to obliterate, a passion hardly less natural than
that of self-preservation.

That women were, as well as other animals, intended by nature to nurse and
bring up their own children, is a truth which we presume nobody will deny;
hence rigid philosophers, in dogmatizing on this subject, have as usual shown
their cynical moroseness, by branding such of the sex as did otherwise, with
every indignant epithet; never considering that ill-humour, particularly when
exerted against a woman, seldom serves to reclaim; nor that nature in many
cases seems to have left something in such a situation that art might have room
to improve it; nor that they themselves, while they are railing from their
studies at the women for deviating from nature, are at the same time deviating
most widely from her in almost every action of their lives. But let us consider
the matter a little more attentively, and we shall find that nature gave to
horses tails: convenience directs us to cut them: she gave to men hair and
beards, but we reckon it no crime to crop the one and shave the other: she gave
to women breasts, and furnished them with milk, the natural food of infants;
but that they should be thereby constantly obliged to nurse them, would be
almost as whimsical as that we should be obliged to let our hair and beards
remain in a state of nature; especially as it now appears, by many repeated
trials, that children can in some cases be brought up better by the milk of
another woman than by that of the mother, and that they frequently do
exceedingly well without any milk at all: every thing else, therefore, being
equal, we are of opinion that there is no such preference due to the milk of
the mother, as physicians and philosophers would willingly make us believe; nor
can they from experience, the only sure guide in such enquiries, deduce any
such inference; all young animals, we imagine, may naturally thrive best upon
the milk of animals of the same spe^ies, but to carry this idea to individuals,
is giving a limited and narrow view of the operations of nature, and we might
almost with an equal degree of credibility suppose, that a young plant could*
no where grow so well as in the same hot-bed which nourished its parent, as
that a child could not thrive as well by the milk of any healthful woman, as by
that of its mother.

To suppose, therefore, that a child does not equally thrive by good milk from
any other person, is establishing a specific quality in the milk of every
mother, adapted to the constitution of her own child only; and putting the
important business of rearing children on such a footing, that when the mother
chances to die, the poor infant must either expire soon after, or, at best,
live a feeble monument of improper nourishment; and so perpetually point out a
blunder in the constitution of nature. Nor do the young of the human species
only, thrive equally on the milk of the species; it is the same with the young
of all other animals; at least of the domestic animals with which we are
acquainted. The calf and the lamb do just as well when they suck another cow or
ewe, as when they suck the dam which brought them forth; provided the animals
be healthful, and the quantity of milk sufficient to maintain the young ones
committed to their care; nay, we have never, in some of the best breeding
counties in England, been able to observe any difference, if they had plenty of
milk, whether they received it by sucking or lapping.

From these observations it appears, that what has hitherto been alleged of the
mother's milk being the only proper nourishment for her own child, has only
been the vision of theory, and not the result of experience. We would not,
however, on that account, endeavor to dissuade women from this most pleasant
task of nursing; we persuade ourselves, that it is in most cases their duty;
and if their minds are not corrupted by pursuits less natural, we flatter
ourselves, that, in all cases, they will find it their greatest pleasure;
especially when they consider, that by so doing they have the dear pledges of
their connubial love constantly under their own care and direction; whereby
they are safe from the severity, carelessness, and inattention of the female
mercenary, who is but seldom one of the best of her sex; such being, with
difficulty, prevailed upon to quit the care of their own infants, for the sake
of money, unless urged to it by lawless necessity.

There are a variety of other arguments, which offer themselves in favor of
this practice; but as they have been so frequently mustered, by almost every
author who has wrote on nursing, we shall not now intrude them on our fair
readers: we cannot, however, quit the subject, without making one observation,
which we do not recollect to have met with. In every place, where the practice
of giving out children to nurse is common, the state is thereby a considerable
loser; because it is the idle* and wealthy only who can afford to give them
out, and the poor only who are obliged to take them in* whence it evidently
follows, that the number of the children of the rich is increased, and of the
poor decreased; for a woman who sends her child to nurse as soon as it is born,
has, or may have, a child every year; whereas she, who, after having suckled
her own child, is obliged to take in another, cannot again bring forth a child
in less than twenty-seven months, or perhaps three years. But a state is not so
much enriched by the children of wealthy and independent parents, as by those
of the poor; as the number required to govern and direct are few, in proportion
to those who are governed and directed. May not this be one of the causes, why
Great Britain sends abroad so many poor young gentlemen, resolutely determined
to be rich? May it not also be one of the causes, why, at home, she is
sometimes at a loss for laborers, and often for able-bodied men to man her
fleets and recruit her armies? May it not, in time, produce such an increase of
children to the rich, and so much decrease the poor, that we may become like
the Spaniards? almost all gentlemen; too proud to work, and too poor to be idle.

Were we to judge whether every woman should nurse her own children, from the
practice of the females of other animals, we should certainly find it to be a
duty from which she could hardly find any excuse to exempt herself; as almost
the whole of the birds and the beasts perform this task to their own young The
Ostrich and the Cuckoo do not hatch their eggs, nor take care of their young.
The Ostrich lays her eggs in the sand, and they are hatched by the sun. The
Cuckoo lays them in the nest of another bird, who, mistaking them for her own,
hatches them, and rears the young.
. Were we to judge of it from the history of man, we should find, that in
almost all nations it has been the common practice; though to that practice,
like all other general rules, there have been many exceptions. We have reason
to believe, that the wives and concubines of the patriarchs constantly suckled
their own children; the same custom obtained among the Egyptians, the
Canaanites, the Scythians, the Medes and Persians; and it invariably takes
place at this day in every nation, where culture has not degenerated into vice,
and where the voice of nature is stronger than that of pleasure.

What at first gave rise to the custom of one woman suckling the ^^ild of
another, must have been the death or sickness of the mother: indolence taking
the hint from this, and willing to be excused from the toil of tending and
suckling, devolved the important offices on slaves, and on mercenaries. When,
or where, this became at first the practice, history has not informed us; we
find it, however, to have been pretty general during many of the most
flourishing ages of the Grecian states; almost every nation, and often every
province, is peculiarly remarkable for some produce of its soil, or
qualification of its inhabitants; the Spartan matrons had acquired the glory of
being famous for nursing; they laid aside the use of swaddling-bands; a custom
which had prevailed from the remotest antiquity; they used children to eat
every sort of food; taught them not to be afraid when alone, or in the dark;
and to relinquish those peevish and fretful humors, which often render them so
troublesome and disagreeable: on these accounts, Spartan nurses were eagerly
sought after, and hired by such as could afford them, into all the other states
of Greece: several of the most eminent warriors and statesmen gloried in having
been nursed by the matrons of Sparta. It was not, however, a general custom for
the Grecian women to give their children out to nurse; their poets, as well as
those of the Romans, frequently introduce their ladies of the first quality
suckling, and taking care of their children; but as the Romans imitated the
Greeks in almost all their manners and customs, as they became more alive to
the feelings of luxury, and less to those of nature, they copied them also, in
giving their infants to be suckled and taken care of by slaves and hired
nurses, while they themselves rioted in all the pomp and extravagance of the
richest and most extravagant city in the world.

When the frozen regions of the North poured out swarms of barbarians into the
Roman empire, they overturned not only the whole system of Roman government,
but also that of luxury and of pleasure; these being dissipated, nature resumed
her empire, and instigated the women again to apply themselves to the task of
suckling and rearing their own children. Several centuries elapsed amid the
depopulations of war, and marked by ferocity of manners; when these gave place
to the arts of peace and cultivation, luxury, and the love of pleasure, began
to creep in, and women resum^d the practice of putting their children to nurse,
that they might have more time to bestow upon pleasure and amusement. The
French and Italians, who have always taken the lead in fashion, set the first
example; they were soon followed by Britain, and the other neighboring
nations, with such exactness, that at present, there is scarcely to be found in
Europe a woman of family and fashion who will take the trouble of nursing her
own child; but happy were it, if the contagion ended among these, and did not
spread itself to the middling ranks of life; who, fond of imitating their
superio^s, relinquish likewise the task of nursing, on various pretensions,
that, like these superiors, they may dedicate themselves more freely to the
rage of pleasure.

Such are the present employments of our women; but employment is not the mode
of the times. In all the polite countries of Europe, those of rank and fashion,
as well as those in decent circumstances, having an extraordinary portion of
time upon their hands, with an almost irresistible inclination to pleasure in
whatever form it offers itself, are more often to be met with at the shrine of
amusement than of industry: and hence it has been commonly observed, that
wherever there is a show, an entertainment, or a crowd, the women are more
numerous than the men: but theatrical entertainments of all kinds; balls,
assemblies, operas, ridottos, and particularly reviews, seem to be the scenes
of their peculiar delight; because, perhaps, at these, they can not only
indulge their natural propensity for show and ostentation, but find them also
convenient places for love, or for intrigue. Riding, walking, sailing, and, in
some countries of Europe, even skaiting, and being drawn on the ice in sledges,
are female amusements. Besides these, and many others too tedious to mention,
the women of fashion, in most parts of Europe, spend a great part of their time
in receiving and returning visits; and, in some of the politer nations, modern
visiting is not spending a social hour together; it consists only in her
ladyship ordering her coachman to drive to the doors of so many of her
acquaintances, and her footman, at each of them, to give in a card with her
name, while the lady of the house, though in the polite phrase, not at home, is
looking through the window all the time to see what passes; and, in some
convenient time after, returns the visit, and is sure to be received in the
same manner.

Shopping, as it is called, is another fashionable female amusement, in order
to which, two, three, or sometimes more ladies, accompanied by their gallants,
set out to make a tour through the most fashionable shops, and to look at all
the most fashionable goods, without any intention of laying out one single
sixpence. After a whole forenoon spent in plaguing mercers and milliners, they
return home, either thoughtless of their folly, or which, perhaps, is worse,
exulting at the thoughts of the trouble and disturbance they have given.

But of all the happy inventions discovered by modern ingenuity for the killing
of time, card-playing is justly entitled to the pre-eminence. With an
immoderate itch for this amusement, which we are at a loss whether to reckon
public or private, both sexes, and all ranks and degrees of people are deeply
infected; particularly indolent clergy, and women, who, having little to do,
dedicate themselves so assiduously to play, that the habit is in many become so
strong, as to be foolishly reckoned even necessary to their existence. To
cards, when made use of only to unbend the mind fatigued with study, or to pass
away an idle hour, we have no objection, nor do we flatter ourselves, that any
thing we can say on the subject will, in the least, influence the conduct of
such as are habituated to them. We would only, therefore, as we pass along,
recommend to the ministers of religion, to set a watch over their tongues,
while playing with bad success, lest an unguarded oath, or a few silly
exclamations at a card-table, should do more hurt to religion, and to their
sacred character, than they are aware of. To the fair, to the lovely virgins of
this favorite island, when thus engaged, we would recommend the strictest care
of their temper, lest something should escape from their lips, that may belie
the soft, the bewitching appearance, with which nature has painted their
exterior forms.

To the female diversions and amusements now mentioned, we might add many more;
but as a bare recital of names, makes a dry and unentertaining page, and as a
description of each would be tedious and insipid, we shall only observe, in
general, that such is human, and particularly female nature, when tutored by
European art, that it constantly shows a greater proclivity to the gay and the
amusive, than to the sober and useful scenes of life; and loves better to sport
away time amid the flowers that strew the path of pleasure, than to be
entangled among the briars and thorns which perplex the path of care. But
notwithstanding this, we must do justice to the sex, in asserting, that as
their attachments are always stronger than those of the men, such of them as
attach themselves to economy and industry, pursue their plan with a steady and
inflexible constancy, which male nature perhaps is incapable of arriving at;
and are neither to be tempted to deviate from it by the hope of pleasure, nor
by the fear of danger and of pain.

CHAPTER V. Of the Treatment and Condition of Women, and the various Advantages
and Disadvantages of their Sex, in savage and civil Life.
THERE is in the fate of women something exceedingly singular; they have at all
periods, and almost in all countries, been, by our sex, constantly oppressed
and adored. And what renders their case still more extraordinary, is, that we
have not oppressed, because we hated, but because we loved them. We have not in
Asia and Africa confined them, because, like the lion, and the tiger, we were
afraid of their depredations; but because we were unwilling that any body
should share with us the pleasure and enjoyment of their company. We have not
in Europe assumed almost the sole management of affairs, because we were afraid
that they would manage them to our prejudice, but only to save them the trouble
of thought and of labor, and to enable them to live in ease and elegance.

Such, however, is not the condition of women in those states approaching the
nearest to savage barbarity; there they have not attained consequence enough
even to merit confinement; and far less, to merit that exemption from labor
and perpetual guardianship, by which, in Europe, they are complimented and
chained. As strength and courage are in savage life the only means of attaining
to power and distinction, so weakness and timidity are the certain paths to
slavery and oppression: on this account, we shall almost constantly ^^nd women
among savages condemned to every species of servile, or rather, of slavish
drudgery; and shall as constantly find them emerging from this state, in the
same proportion as we find the men emerging from ignorance and brutality, and
approaching to knowledge and refinement; the rank, therefore, and condition, in
which we find women in any country, mark out to us with great precision, the
exact point in the scale of civil society, to which the people of such country
have arrived; and were their history entirely silent on every other subject,
and only mentioned the manner in which they treated their women, we should,
from thence, be enabled to form a tolerable judgment of the barbarity, or
culture of their manners.

There is hardly any thing more natural to the rude and uncultivated mind, than
to consider strength as giving unlimited right to whatever it can conquer; it
is one of the first ideas which is derived from attention to the whole of the
brute animals; every one of which constantly appropriates to itself, any thing
it can take from a weaker being of the same, or any other species. Whether the
human mind has in its rude and barbarous state the same innate idea of right,
or whether it has borrowed that idea from the other animals, is uncertain; but
it appears from history, that every savage people either have it from nature or
from imitation; and thence undoubtedly arose at first the barbarous custom of
enslaving and treating with the utmost severity that sex which nature had
formed, not to force, but to charm us into a proper behavior toward them: but
though among people of savage and uncultivated manners, this natural weakness
of the sex, has subjected them to almost every species of indignity and ill
usage; among the civil and polite, it has had a very different effect: these,
disdaining to take the advantage of weakness, and rather considering it as
entitled ^o their protection and indulgence, have, from generosity of
principle, raised women to a rank and condition, in many cases superior even to
that enjoyed by themselves; and this merely in condescension to their weakness:
but as we shall have occasion afterward to mention the causes of the ill
treatment of the sex, we shall at present proceed ^o take a view of their
progress from slavery to freedom, and to mark the various causes which have
more or less accelerated or retarded that progress.

This enquiry we shall begin with the condition of women among the ancient
patriarchs, a condition which we shall find to have been but extremely
indifferent. When Abraham entertained the angels sent to denounce the
destruction of Sodom, he appears to have treated his wife as a menial servant:
Make ready quickly, said he to her, three measures of fine meal, knead it, and
make cakes on the hearth. And from the sequel of the story it is plain, that
she was not admitted to partake of the entertainment she had dressed: In ages
so remote as those we are now considering, the imperfect and mutilated accounts
from which alone we can draw any information, sometimes relate incidents which
have so little resemblance to the manners and customs of our times, that we are
altogether at a loss how to account for them. Though Sarah officiated as a
servant in preparing this entertainment, she had at the same time one, or
rather, perhaps, several handmaids or maidservants under her, but in what
they were employed, or how they served their mistress, we can only conjecture.

We have already observed, that among nations but little cultivated, power is
constantly made use of as a means to enslave; and from this principle we must
derive the ill-treatment of the Israelitish women, and the abuse of their
captives. In the whole early history of that people, there is hardly one
instance of a woman having been treated with indulgence, or of a captive having
experienced humanity.

In many parts of the East, water is only to be met with deep in the earth, and
the drawing of it from the wells consequently fatiguing and laborious. Such,
however, was the task of the daughters of Jethro the Midianite, to whom so
little regard was paid, either on account of the rank of their father, as
high priest of the country, or on account of their own sex, that the
neighboring shepherds not only insulted them, but forcibly took from them the
water they had drawn. Such was the task of Rebecca, who not only drew water for
Abraham's servant, but for his camels also; while the servant stood an idle
spectator of the toil; and what makes his behavior appear the more
extraordinary is, that his circumstances at that time were those, in which men
who have any sensibility generally exert their utmost efforts to please and
become acceptable: he was on an embassy to court the damsel for Isaac his
master's son. When he had concluded his bargain, and was carrying her home, we
meet with another circumstance which strongly marks the inferiority of women in
the times we are now considering. When she first approached Isaac, who had
walked out into the fields to meet them, she did it in the most submissive
manner, as if she had been approaching a lord and master rather than a fond and
passionate lover; from which, as well as from several other parts of the sacred
history, it would seem that women, instead of endeavoring, as in modern times,
to persuade the world that they confer an immense favor on a lover by deigning
to accept of him; made no difficulty of confessing that the obligation was
conferred on themselves This was the case with Ruth, who had laid her down at
the feet of Boaz; and being asked by him who she was, answered, I am Ruth thine
handmaid; spread, therefore, thy skirt over thine handmaid, for thou art a near
kinsman.
. When Jacob went to visit his uncle Laban, a man of considerable property, he
met Rachel, Laban's daughter, in the fields, attending on the flocks of her
father; and in a much later period, Tamar, one of the daughters of king David,
was sent by her father to perform the servile office of making cakes for her
brother Amnon. And still later than this, the queen of Jeroboam king of Israel,
went in person, perhaps on foot or on an ass, to consult an old prophet. The
simplicity of the times in which these things happened, take off a great deal
from their weight, and make them prove less than they would otherwise do; but
in spite of that simplicity, they still make it appear, that women were not
then treated even with the rudiments of that delicacy they have happily
experienced in ages, and among people more polished and refined.

But should the simplicity of the times be admitted as a full excuse for what
we have now mentioned, there are other proofs that women were treated in an
indignant manner, which can admit of no such excuse, as they appear to have
been deliberation enforced by law. Husbands had a discretionary power of
divorcing their wives, without assigning any other reason for it than that they
were not agreeable to them: and as if such a power over the bodies of women had
not been a circumstance sufficiently humiliating to the sex, they had another
power of an extraordinary nature over their minds also. Husbands and fathers
were authorized to annul and make void even the most solemn vows of their wives
and daughters, provided such vows were not made in the hearing of these
husbands and fathers; in which case, if they did not immediately enter their
dissent, they were considered as parties who had approved of ^hese vows, and
could not set them aside afterward. Was not this plainly declaring that women
were beings of a nature so inferior as not to be capable of entering properly
into any solemn or religious engagements for themselves? That in some cases a
kind of public contempt was thrown on the sex, seems to appear from the law
concerning childbed purification, by which it was enacted, That she who had
brought forth (...) ^emale child, should not be accounted clean in less than
sixty-six days; whereas she (...) had brought forth a male was clean in half
th^^ time. As no natural reason can be assigned for such a law, it has
generally been thought expressive of that contempt and degradation which, in
the times we are delineating, was thrown on the sex, as an inferior order of
beings.

To the proofs we have already brought of the despicable condition of women
among the nations we have mentioned, we may add the universal custom of
polygamy and concubinage, both of them impositions, contrary to the inclination
of the sex, and practices which wound so deeply the delicacy of their feelings,
that we cannot suppose any woman voluntarily to agree to them, even where they
are sanctified by custom and by law. Wherever, therefore, they take place, we
may assure ourselves that women have but little or no authority, and have
scarcely arrived at any consequence in society. In such a condition of the sex
we do not expect to find any of them rising into great esteem, and far less to
the supreme power; circumstances which, however even contrary to all
appearances, we sometimes meet with. A wise woman, as she is called in
scripture, saved the city of Abel, by prevailing on the inhabitants to cut off
the head of Sheba, and throw it over the wall to Joab, who thereupon retired
with his army. And Deborah, a prophetess, had been raised to the dignity of
judging Israel, a dignity which she maintained for several years; the
exaltation of these, and of others, into conditions so different from the rest
of their sex, is, perhaps, not to be accounted for upon any other principle
than the power of superstition, which readily believed that every glimmering of
knowledge, and every superior attainment, were inspirations of the divinity;
and taught the people that to the direction of those, whom they supposed thus
inspired, they should yield themselves up to be governed with the most implicit
conf^^ence.

From the ancient people of Israel, and the nations around them, where women
were treated with so much indignity and contempt; let us turn our eyes toward
the Egyptians whom we shall find, on the contrary, using them with a
complaisance and humanity which would have done honor to the most enlightened
ages. As these people were situated in the midst of nations, who in this
particular showed them so ill an example, before we proceed to the facts, let
us enquire into the causes which produced them.

Wherever the human race live solitary and unconnected with each other, they
are savage and barbarous; wherever they associate together, that association
becomes productive of softer manners, and a more engaging deportment. While
people in the neighborhood of Egypt were allowed, by their situation, in every
season, to roam about at pleasure, and while their woods and their rivers
afforded them the means of constantly subsisting themselves by hunting and
fishing; the Egyptians, from the nature of their country, annually overflowed
by the Nile, had no wild beasts to hunt, nor could then procure any thing by
fishing; on these accounts they were under a necessity of applying themselves
to agriculture, a kind of life which naturally brings mankind together for
mutual convenience and assistance; but, besides, they were every year, during
the inundation of the river, obliged to assemble themselves together, and take
shelter either on the rising grounds, or in the houses which were raised upon
piles above the reach of the waters; here the men and the women being
constantly in the company of each other, and almost every employment totally
suspended, a thousand inducements, not to be found in a solitary state, would
naturally prompt them to render themselves agreeable to each other, and hence
their manners would begin more early to assume a softer polish, and more
elegant refinement, than those of the other nations who surrounded them.

From this early society, where the men first became acquainted with the
intrinsic merit of the sex, and where they on their part had an opportunity of
exerting every power, and displaying every charm that could please; they soon
came to be treated in a manner widely different from the women of any of the
neighboring nations. We have already related from Herodotus, that they were
employed in agriculture, and in merchandise; but there is great reason to
believe, that if any of them were employed in agriculture, it was only those of
the meanest condition, and that in general they were exempted from performing
any of the laborious tasks, commonly assigned them by barbarians; a thing which
to us appears to be demonstrated from the whole of the conduct of their men
toward them, and which receives an additional proof from the story of
Psammenitus, one of their kings; who, being made prisoner at the reduction of
Memphis, was with the chief of his nobility placed on an eminence near the
city, while his own daughter, and the rest of the captive women were ordered to
bear water in pitchers from the river; which so mortified the king, that he is
said to have felt more on that occasion than for the loss of his liberty and
kingdom; but, had this been a common custom in Egypt, as we have already seen
it among all the neighboring nations, it could not have been chosen as the
most eligible mode of adding to the sorrows of the distressed monarch. What we
every day see or perform loses all power of affecting us, however degrading in
its nature; while something which we have not been used to, though less
degrading, awakes our keenest sensations, and stings our hearts with the
sharpest affliction.

We shall afterward have occasion to mention, that in a very early period the
practice of confining women was introduced into the East; this practice,
however, instituted by the rage of jealousy, and maintained by unlawful power,
was never adopted by the Egyptians, as appears from the story of Pharaoh's
daughter, who was going with her train of maids to bathe in the river, when she
found Moses hid among the reeds; and also from that of the wife of Potiphar,
who, if consined in the manner of the East, could not have found the
opportunities she did to solicit Joseph to her adulterous embrace. To these
testimonies of the sacred scripture we may add the authority of Herodotus, and
some of the other writers on ancient Egypt, who, besides mentioning several
anecdotes which could not have happened to women in harams and seraglios,
generally agree that they were equal, if not superior, in authority to the men;
and if they were, it would be inconsistent to think that they allowed
themselves to be shut up and deprived of society, by beings who neither had,
nor claimed any superiority over them.

The men in Egypt were not allowed to indulge in polygamy, a state which always
presupposes women to be slaves. The chastity of virgins was protected by a law
of the severest nature; he who committed a rape on a free woman, had his
privities cut off, that it might be out of his power ever to perpetrate the
like crime, and that others might be terrified by so dreadful a punishment.
Concubinage, as well as polygamy, seems either not to have been lawful, or at
least not fashionable; it was a liberty, however, in which their kings were
sometimes indulged, for we find when Sesostris set out on his expedition to
conquer the world, he left the government of the kingdom to his brother, with
full power over every thing, ex^ept the royal diadem, the queen, and royal
concubines. The queens of Egypt are said to have been much honored, as well as
more readily obeyed than the kings; and it is also related, that the husbands
were in their marriage-contracts obliged to promise obedience to their wives; a
thing which in our modern times we are often obliged to perform, though our
wives entered into the promise.

But nothing can exhibit the power and consequence of the Egyptian women in a
stronger light than a law, by which it was ordained, That daughters and not
sons should provide for their parents, when they became aged or indigent. And
we shall only add further, that the honor and respect paid to them, above
those of other nations, likewise (...) from the behavior of Solomon to
Pharaoh's (...). Solomon had many other wives besides this (...), and was
married to several of them before her, which, according to the Jewish law,
ought to have entitled them to a kind of preference; but such was not the case,
for we hear of no particular palace having been built for any of the others,
nor of the worship of any of their gods having been introduced into Jerusalem;
while for Pharaoh's daughter a magnificent palace was erected, and she
permitted, though expressly contrary to the Jewish law, to worship the gods of
her own country; circumstances which we cannot believe would have happened, had
not the regard of the Egyptians for their women, prompted them to have
stipulated with Solomon in the marriage agreement. But loaded with all the
honors and preferments we have mentioned, invested often with the sovereign
power, as well as the management of their own families; the fair sex were
sometimes reached by superstition, that phrenzy of the human mind, which
neither regards the laws of nature nor of nations; a virgin was at certain
times sacrificed to Annubis.

Besides the privilege of succeeding to the throne itself, in default of male
issue, the Egyptian daughters had a right of succession to the paternal
inheritance of their fathers; a right hardly to be met with in any of the
neighboring countries, where women were too much despised to be admitted to
inherit what they could not defend. With this rule the inheritance of the
sovereign authority was not thought so inconsistent, as every subject is
concerned in defending his country in general, while the defense of private
property rests more immediately on the arm of the proprietor. In an early
period of the history of the Assyrians and Babylonians, we also find women
creeping into such consequence as to share with their husbands, and sometimes
to assume to themselves the whole of the royal authority; though we have reason
to believe, that, at the same time, they could not inherit the estates of their
ancestors.

While Ninus, king of Assyria, was besieging Bactria, it is said that the
attempt would have failed, had it not been for the assistance of Semiramis,
then wife of one of his principal officers, who planned a method of attacking
the city, with such superior skill, that he soon became master of it. Ninus
being attracted by the beauty and art of this virago, soon became passionately
fond of her; in the mean time, her husband foreseeing that this passion would
end in his destruction, to avoid falling a victim to licentious despotism,
privately put an end to his life. The main obstacle being thus removed, Ninus
took the adultress to wife, an action which, according to some authors, he had
soon reason to repent, for she having first brought over to her interest the
principal men of the state, next prevailed on her silly husband to invest her,
for the space of five days, with the sovereign power; a decree was accordingly
issued, that all the provinces should implicitly obey her during that time;
which having obtained, she began the exercise of her sovereignty, by putting to
death the too indulgent husband who had conferred it on her, and so securing to
herself the kingdom. Other authors have denied that Ninus committed this rash,
or Semirami^ this execrable deed, but all agree that she succeeded her husband
at his death, in whatever manner it happened. Seeing herself at the head of a
mighty empire, and struck with the love of magnificence and fame, she proposed
to render her name immortal, by performing something that should far surpass
all that had been done by her predecessors; the scheme she fell upon, was to
build, in the space of one year, the mighty city of Babylon; which being
finished within the proposed time, greatly exceeded in magnificence any thing
the world had ever seen: two millions of men are said to have been constantly
employed on it, during the time it was erecting.

From the advancement of Semiramis to the Assyrian empire, it would seem that,
at least, some decent degree of personal liberty was one of the prerogat^ves of
the women of that country; for wherever the sex are strictly confined by their
fathers and husbands, we can hardly suppose their political existence to be
such as could form a party sufficient to bring about a total revolution of
state; and in the Past they are commonly considered as beings too w^ak and
insignificant, ever to be allowed the privilege of mounting a throne, unless
aided by the power of superstition, or the notion of a right derived from their
gods. But though the Assyrian women seem, in general, to have enjoyed some
liberty, yet their monarchs, according to the custom of their neighbors, had
seraglios, where such ladies as belonged to them were probably more strictly
confined than the other women of the country.

That seraglios were a part of the magnificence of the Assyrian monarchs,
appears from several anecdotes in their history, and particularly from the
story of Sardanapalus, who, instead of employing his time in the affairs of
government, dedicated himself entirely to debauchery among his women, affecting
not only the softness and effeminacy of their voice and manners, but learning
also to handle the distaff, and amuse himself by working in the other trifles
with which they were employed. As we have already seen that, in the earlier
ages, women of the greatest rank and quality were not ashamed to perform those
offices, which, in our times, would be considered as beneath the dignity of
their waiting-maids, we are not to be surprised, that the women of the august
monarch of Assyria should employ themselves in spinning; but that the
effeminate monarch himself, who had business and pleasure, in so many shapes,
at his command, should take up the distaff for his amusement, not only excites
our astonishment, but our contempt; and strongly marks the littleness of that
mind, which, surrounded with such a variety, could select a diversion so
insignificant, as well as unbecoming. We may, perhaps, account for this, by
observing that women of talents, superior to the rest of their sex, generally
associate with men, and despise the company of women as trifling and
insignificant; and that men of inferior talents, finding themselves generallly
despised by the men; on that account associate with women. This observation,
besides pointing out the reason why Sardanapalus confined himself, almost
altogether, to the seraglio, likewise discovers the reason why Semiramis
arrived at the royal diadem of Assyria; an elevation which, though it did honor
to the sex in general, yet did not prove, that they had, in general, attained
to that importance to which they are entitled, by the place which they hold in
the scale of rational beings; for, throughout the whole continent of Asia,
women have been, from time immemorial, and still are, considered either as
public or private property, and sold to such husbands as would give the highest
price for them: in Assyria, the former of these was the custom; women being
there the property of the state, and by the magistrates disposed of in marriage
to the best bidder, by way of public auction. We are of opinion, that this
custom, or law, took place after the reign of Semiramis; so that though, in her
time, the sex might be on a more respectable footing, it seems that the
privileges they then enjoyed, were afterward almost entirely wrested from them
by the men.

In an early period of the world, while as yet women had attained to little
dignity and consequence, we find an universal notion of female, as well as of
male deities, had obtained among mankind; this notion did not arise solely from
the polytheism of the times, but also from an opinion that the gods propagated
their species, which mortals could not conceive them capable of doing in any
other way than that of mortal men. All antiquity demonstrates it to have been a
general opinion, that the gods often cohabited with, and had children by the
daughters of men; which children were reckoned partakers of a divine nature in
their lifetime; and after their death were worshipped as real deities. But
Semiramis is the first woman, we believe, who had influence enough, without
pretending to any divine original, to procure the honor of deification after
her death; to have temples erected, and the worship of a goddess addressed to
her, by a numerous crowd of adorers. By what means she procured this
distinction, in a period, and a country where women were not considered as of
much importance, we are not told: while alive, an absolute monarch may easily
command the obedience of subjects in civil matters, but in those of religion,
even the severest despot is often incapable of introducing any change. It is,
therefore, the more extraordinary, that Semiramis had influence enough to
introduce, after her death, what few monarchs have attempted with success when
living. We are aware, that when the custom of paying divine honors to
illustrious persons after death, became universal, it was no very difficult
matter to be ranked among the gods; but to introduce the custom of conferring
that dignity on a sex, which were then so little distinguished, must have been
owing to superior talents and abilities.

Among the Babylonians, who were at first a part of the Assyrian empire, and
afterward became their own masters, women were, probably, of much greater
importance than in Assyria. The whole history of mankind, as well as what we
see among the uncultivated nations of our own times, assures us, that where
women have attained to little or no importance in society, and are only
considered as the servile instruments of supplying our wants, and gratifying
our passions, there is but little care taken, either to adorn their minds, or
their bodies. Among the Babylonians, though we are not informed what care was
taken of the female mind, from a variety of scattered hints, which particularly
abound in the prophets of the Old Testament, we may infer, that the greatest
attention was bestowed in decorating and adorning their bodies, with every
costly ornament which fondness could invent, and affluence supply:
incontestible proofs that they were objects of no small importance, and the
peculiar care of the men. But further, the Babylonians were a wise and
cultivated people; and we may with truth assert, that proper culture of the
human mind has never yet existed, without extending itself to the interests and
conveniences of the fair sex.

That some of the queens of Babylon were more regarded, and of greater
consequence than is common to the herd of women confined in the seraglios of
eastern monarchs, appears from the story of Nitocris, consort of Nabonadius,
known in scripture by the name of Evil Merodach: while Nabonadius, neglecting
the affairs of his kingdom, dovoted himself entirely to scenes of the most
voluptuous debauchery, Nitocris took upon her the care of the state, and
managed it so as to give universal satisfaction; a circumstance, which was not
likely to have happened, had not women possessed a tolerable share of public
esteem and confidence; which, when we consider the influence of female society
among the Babylonians; and that their women were admitted to convivial
meetings, where they lived in a free and unrestrained manner, with more
frequent opportunities than their neighbors of exerting the various arts of
pleasing; and, consequently, of gaining that ascendency which will ever fall to
the share of beauty and of sense, will appear not to have been so difficult for
them to attain, as for the women of the surrounding nations. But
notwithstanding this general importance, such of the Babylonish women as were
poor, like the poor of every country, were destined to attend on, and minister
to the various pleasures of the rich; who, at their regular meals, were served
by a great number of Eunuchs, and singing and dancing girls, carefully selected
from the fairest and handsomest of the country. When the Babylonians became
poor, by the ruin of their metropolis, fathers prostituted their daughters for
gain, and husbands, who had formerly been hindered from using their wives ill,
by a particular law, then broke through every restraint; and, it is said, even
compelled them to offer themselves to strangers for hire.

Concerning the condition of the Scythian women we know little; only that they,
as well as those of the Gauls and Germans, were anciently held in great esteem
for their skill in divination: we know not whether it was on account of this
esteem, or because they were thought weak and inoffensive, that in some cases
the Scythian women were treated with more lenity than the men. By one of their
laws, when a father was put to death, all his sons suffered the same fate along
with him, while the daughters escaped with impunity. These people, the most
plain and simple of all antiquity, being reproached with cowardice, for
retreating from their desert frontiers, before an army much superior to their
own: In those desolate wastes, said they, we have nothing worth fighting for;
but when you arrive at the tombs of our ancestors, and the habitations of our
women, you shall see whether we can defend them.

From the accounts handed down to us of the Phoenicians, they appear to have
been long a flourishing and prosperous people, who had acquired great riches by
their superior skill in commerce and navigation; we may therefore reasonably
suppose, that, in a country, whose inhabitants were so far advanced in the arts
of civil life, the women had attained to that importance we generally find them
possessed of in such countries; especially when we consider the attention that
was paid to ornamenting them, by all the finery that an extensive trade could
purchase from every part of the globe. But though the Phoenicians spared no
cost in adorning their women with all the elegance of the times, they appear to
have stamped upon them one mark of inferiority and subordination; they did not
allow them to wear the Tyrian purple, so famous in those days; not only on
account of its high price, but also as a badge of distinction solely
appropriated to men; and to such of them only as were of the first rank and
dignity, though not then, as it was afterward, altogether confined to royalty.
In the Balearic Isle^, of whose history we have now but a few scattered hints
in some of the Greek writers, so far were they from fixing any mark of
inferiority on the fair sex, that when any of their women were taken captive,
they gave three or four men in exchange for her; a conduct so singular, that
some particular reason for it must have existed, of which we are not informed;
perhaps it was only done at the first planting of some colony, while the women,
as in the origin of Rome, were few and valuable. Among the Lycians, a people of
the Lesser Asia, a custom also obtained* which, at first view, seems to exalt
the women to a consequence much superior to that of the men. In their sex alone
was the fountain of honor and nobility, insomuch that if a woman of quality
married a plebeian, their issue were noble; but if a nobleman married a
foreigner or peasant, the children, in that case were only plebeians. But this
custom, when more nearly examined, will be found to have originated from a
different motive than love or esteem; it is at this day practiced in some parts
of America; and the reason there given for it is, because they are sure who is
the mother of a child; and that the noble or royal blood of a family may, on
her side, be easily preserved; whereas they have no certainty who is the
father; and by the incontinence of a wife, the noble or royal blood may, on the
male side be totally extinguished.

If the Phoenicians treated their women with propriety, we may reasonably
expect to find nearly the same customs concerning them transplanted into
Carthage; as the Carthaginians were originally a colony from Tire, the capital
of Phoenicia. As there was something uncommon in the origin of this colony, and
as it was founded by a woman, whose name has been immortalised by Virgil, and
not unknown even to the generality of female readers, we hope it will not be
deemed altogether foreign to our subject to give a short account of it.

While Tire flourished in all the pomp of magnificence, as the capital of the
Phoenician empire, and the most renowned commercial city in the world,
Pygmalion, being king, had a sister, called Eliza, but known to us by the name
of Dido; which sister he married to Sichaeus, one of their own relations.
Sichaeus was possessed of great riches, which Pygmalion avariciously coveting,
put him to death, that they might fall into his hands. Dido, detesting this
execrable deed of her brother, and desirous to disappoint him of that wealth,
which had been the cause of it, cunningly amused him, till she had got all
things in readiness; and then privately eloped with the most valuable effects
of her murdered husband. After a long series of disastrous events, she at last
landed on the coast of the Mediterranean, at a little distance from the place
where the piratical city of Tunis now stands: there, having purchased some land
of the natives, she settled a colony of such as had adhered to, and followed
her fortune.

Soon after this settlement, the inhabitants of the country, invited by a
prospect of gain, resorted to the strangers with the necessaries of life, and
such other commodities as were most wanted: finding themselves always civilly
treated, they at last gradually incorporated with them into one people. The
citizens of Utica, being their ancient neighbors, began also to consider them
as countrymen; and sent ambassadors, with considerable presents, exhorting them
to build a city on the place where they had first landed; this proposal being
agreeable to the secret wishes of Dido, and her infant colony, the city was
begun, and called Carthada, or Carthage; which, in the Phoenician language,
signifies the New City.

What Virgil has related concerning this first queen of Carthage, is only to be
considered as a poetical fiction; for it appears that she lived at least two
hundred years before the time of his hero Aeneas, and at last finished her
days, not as he represents, a victim to love, but to that kind of conjugal
fidelity then in fashion, which considered it as criminal to marry a second
husband; for, being courted by Jarbas, king of Getulia, and threatened with war
in consequence of a refusal; and having bound herself by an oath to Sichaeus,
never to consent to a second marriage, and unwilling to bring a powerful
invasion on her infant colony; to extricate herself from the difficulty, she
ascended and leapt into a funeral pile which she had caused her subjects to
erect, unconscious of the purpose to which she intended to apply it.

Among a people whose political existence was owing to a woman, and to one who
in her life had conducted them with so much prudence, and at her death made so
disinterested a sacrifice to procure their safety; it is natural to imagine
that the sex would be treated with more deference and regard, than was common
in the periods we are reviewing. Accordingly, we have several reasons to
believe, that the women of Carthage were not, as in many other countries,
obliged to do all the servile drudgery which naturally belonged to the men; nor
to submit themselves to any kind of slavish subjection under that sex. That the
Carthaginians on the contrary had sentiments of a more elevated nature
concerning their women, appears from a story related of them by Diodorus, the
Sicilian. When the city of Tire was besieged by Alexander the Great, the
Tyrians being reduced to the utmost extremity, sent an embassy to the
Carthaginians, imploring their assistance; the Carthaginians being at the same
time engaged in a war with the Athenians, and scarcely in a condition to make
head against Agathocles, the Athenian general, were not able to grant that
assistance they so earnestly wished to give; and to soften the refusal, they
agreed to receive into Carthage all the wives and children of their friends the
Tyrians; that they, at least, might escape the outrages which their sex
generally suffer at the plundering of a city.

It is the characteristic of the men in every enlightened nation to treat the
weaker sex with lenity and indulgence; to this they are prompted, not only by
the softer sensations instilled by nature, but also by that additional
humanity, and those finer feelings, which are commonly the result of knowledge;
and which raise the mind above what is mean, and inspire it only with what is
generous and noble. Hence, whenever we find a people treating their women with
propriety, we may, without any further knowledge of their history, conclude
that their minds are not uncultivated. When we find them cultivated, we may
conclude, that they treat their women with propriety. We shall only add,
therefore, concerning the Carthaginians, that the character they bore for
wisdom, for learning, and the arts, leave us no room to doubt that they behaved
to the fair-sex in general, as became a people so highly distinguished.

Some of the Greek and several of the Roman historians, in mentioning the
ancient Persians, have dwelt with peculiar severity on the manner in which they
treated their women; jealous almost to distraction, though not under the
influ^nce of a vertical sun, they confined the whole sex with the strictest
attention, and could not bear that the eye of a stranger should behold the
beauty whom they adored. Their monarchs placed almost the whole of their
grandeur, and of their enjoyment, in the number and beauty of the women of
their seraglios; which they carefully selected from among the fairest, either
taken captive in war, or produced by their own dominions, and purified them for
their use by a long and tedious preparation, tending to heighte^ the beauties
of nature, and to give an agreeable relish to their persons; a preparation
luxuriously voluptuous, beyond any thing that modern refinement has ever
suggested. Agreeable to an observation we made in the beginning of this
chapter, every circumstance in the Persian history tends to persuade us, that
the motive which induced them to confine their women with so much care and
solicitude, was only exuberance of love and affection; in the enjoyment of
their smiles, and their embraces, the happiness of the men consisted, and their
approbation was an incentive to deeds of glory and of heroism; for these
reasons, they are said to have been the first who introduced the custom of
carrying their wives and concubines to the field, That the sight, said they, of
all that is dear to us, may animate us to fight more valiantly in their
defense. To offer the least violence, even in appearance, to a Persian woman,
was to incur certain death from her husband or guardian: nay, even their kings,
though the most absolute in the universe, could not alter the manners or
customs of the country which concerned them, as appears from Cabas, a
licentious monarch, who, not satisfied with the numerous beauties of his
seraglio, thought he could introduce the community of women, which would afford
him an ample opportunity of satiating his unbounded lust; and therefore issued
a decree, commanding the promiscuous use of all the women of his dominions,
whether married or unmarried; upon which his subjects rose in a rebellion that
ended in expelling him from the throne. Upon the whole, we may infer that the
Persians loved their women with the utmost violence of animal appetite; but had
not learned to treat them with that softness and good nature, which culture and
civilization can only dictate.

Notwithstanding this private jealousy and confinement of the sex, it would
seem that there were at the Persian court women who were introduced on certain
occasions, and with whom every freedom might be used, as we learn from the
story of Megabysus, one of the governors of Darius; who having sent some
Persian noblemen to Amyntas, king of Macedon, to require him to do homage to
his master, Amyntas having complied with the request, gave them a splendid
entertainment. Toward the conclusion of it, they desired that, according to
the custom of their country, the women might be brought in, to which, though
contrary to the custom of the Greeks, the king consented. The Persians heated
with wine, and thinking they might behave to the Grecian princesses as to the
women of Persia, began to take some indecent freedoms; the son of Amyntas,
affronted at the treatment of his sisters, told the Persians, that if they
would allow the women, in compliance with the custom of Greece, to retire and
habit themselves in a loose manner, they would then return, and every one might
choose his partner for the night. The Persians gladly consented to this
proposal, the women retired, the prince dressed some of the most comely of his
young warriors in loose female habits, with poniards under their clothes, and
brought them into the room instead of the women, as soon as the Persians had
each fixed upon his partner, on a signal from the prince, every one drew his
poniard, and slaughtered the whole of them on the spot.

Before we take leave of these dark and unenlightened periods, we have been
running over, where the historic page hardly affords even the glimmering of a
taper to direct us on our way, we must observe, that there are many other
ancient people and nations whom we might have mentioned, but have passed over
them in silence, because we are hardly acquainted with any thing but their
names; or, at most, with a few of their warlike explotsi and remarkable
revolutions. We cannot help, however, making a few obsarvations on the
Sybarites, the most remarkable people of antiquity.

The Sybarites, from the imperfect accounts we have of them, placed the whole
of their happiness in indolence, eating, finery, and women. Their bodies were
so much relaxed with sloth, and their minds with voluptuousness, that the
greatest affront that could be offered to any one, was to call him a Sybarite,
an appellation, which comprehended in it almost every human crime, and every
human folly. In grottoes, cooled with fountains, their youth spent a great part
of their time in scenes of debauchery, amid women, either elegantly adorned by
art, or sometimes reduced to a state of nature. Women of the first quality,
though not disposed of by auction, were treated in a manner somewhat similar;
they were given as a reward to him who, in contending for them, showed the
greatest splendor and magnificence. When any great entertainment was designed,
the women, who were to make a part of the company, were invited a year before,
that they might have time to appear in all the luster of beauty and of dress; a
circumstance which plainly proves that they did not, as some other nations,
value the sex only as objects of sensual pleasure, but as objects which added
elegance to their scenes of magnificence and grandeur; and, perhaps, because
they excelled the men in softness and effeminacy, qualities upon which they set
the greatest value, and cultivated with the utmost assiduity. -- These people,
after having been for many centuries the contempt of the universe, were at last
shamefully driven from their country, and entirely dispersed by the Crotonians.

CHAPTER VI. The same Subject continued.
IN the last chapter we finished the few cursory observations we could make on
those ages which lie hid in the darkness of the most remote antiquity. We now
come to those of the Greeks; a people whose fame has been so much trumpeted,
that we are apt to annex the idea of every virtue to their name, to consider
them as highly polished and civilized, and consequently to expect that, amongst
them, the fair sex were treated with that indulgence, and raised to that
dignity, which they commonly enjoy in nations the farthest advanced in the arts
of culture and refinement: But here we shall be much mistaken; for though the
Greeks were a people severely virtuous in whatever regarded their country, they
were far from being tender and humane, and hardly knew any of those soft
blandishments which smooth the asperity of rugged male nature; and which, while
they render us more agreeable to the women, are only to be acquired in their
company.

It is observed by an able panegyrist for the fair, that one of the greatest
proofs of their intrinsic worth and excellence is, that the greatest esteem and
respect has always been paid them by the wisest and best of nations. Granting
this to be a fact, it follows, that the Greeks forfeited one great claim to
that wisdom which has always been attributed them; for we have good reason to
believe, that they regarded their women only as instruments of raising up
members to the state: considering them in the same cool, dispassionate, and we
may add, unsocial light, as they considered their fields which produced the
corn whereby the members of that state were fed. But lest we should be
suspected of partiality, let us attend to some of the proofs of what we have
advanced.

The animal appetite toward the other sex, is implanted in ours by nature, and
arises at sight; but in order to esteem, to regard women, we must do more than
see, we must, by social intercourse and mutual reciprocation of good offices,
become acquainted with their worth and excellence: this, to the Greeks, was a
pleasure totally unknown; custom had introduced, and law had established, the
mode of obliging women to live retired in their own apartments, scarcely ever
allowing them to appear in public, or have any open intercourse with men; so
that, if they had any amiable qualities, they were buried in perpetual
obscurity: even their husbands being in some of the This was the case at Sparta.
states limited as to the times and duration of the visits made to their wives,
and it being the custom at meals for the two sexes always to eat separately.

The apartments destined for the women, in order to keep them more private,
were always in the back, and generally in the upper part of the house. The
famous Helen is said to have had her chamber in the loftiest part of it, and so
wretched were their dwellings, that even Penelope queen of Ulysses seems to
have descended from hers by means of a ladder; within these, however, women,
especially such as had no husbands, whether maids or widows, were c^osely
confined; the former in so strict a manner that they could not pass without
leave from one part of the house to another, lest they should be seen; which,
as we learn from the story of Antigone, would have been a reflection on their
honor, as well as on the care and integrity of their guardians. New-married
women were almost as strictly confined as virgins; for we find Hermione
severely reproved by her old duenna, for appearing out of doors; a freedom,
which, she tells her, was not usually taken by women in her situation, and
which would endanger her reputation, should she happen to be seen; and we are
further informed by Menander, that the door was the utmost limit allowed to the
freedom of a married woman: it appears, however, from some other authors, that
after they had brought forth a child, this severity was a little relaxed; but
it was then owing only to the indulgence of their husbands, who, perhaps,
thought them now either more prudent or less the objects of temptation; and
might still, if they pleased, retain them in the same rigorous confinement, as
we learn from Aristophanes; who introduces an Athenian lady, loudly
complaining, because women were confined to their chambers, under lock and key,
and guarded, says she, by mastiffs, goblins, or any thing that can frighten
away admirers.

Though the Grecian women lived thus separated from the men, yet they were not,
like those of Asia, confined to seraglios, and obliged to share among a great
number the scanty favors of one man. Nor does their confinement appear in some
cases to have been so much the effect of jealousy, as of indifference; the men
did not think them proper companions; and that ignorance, which is the common
result of a recluse life, gave them too good reason to think so. Nothing in
Greece was held in estimation, but valor and eloquence; nature had
disqualified the fair sex for both; they were therefore considered as mean and
contemptible beings, much beneath the notice of heroes and of orators, who
seldom favored them with their company, unless prompted by nature, or by the
desire of propagating future orators and heroes like themselves. Thus deserted
by a sex, which ought to be the source of knowledge, the understandings of the
wnmen were but shallow, and their company uninteresting; a case which
invariably happens in every country where the two sexes have little
communication with each other.

But confinement was not the greatest evil which the Grecian women suffered; by
other customs and laws they were still more oppressed: it was not in their
power to do any judicial act without the consent of a tutor or guardian; and so
little power, even over themselves, did the legislature devolve upon women,
though ripened by age and experience, that when the father died, the son became
the guardian of his own mother. When a woman was cited into court, she was
incapable of answering without her guardian; and therefore the words of the
proclamation were, We cite A. B. and her guardian. In making a will, it was not
only necessary that the guardian should give his consent, but that he should be
a party. These facts show, that the Greek women were under the most complete
tutelage, whereby they were deprived of almost all political existence; and
teach us to consider a guardian and his pupil as the substance and the shadow,
the latter of which could not exist without the former. But this is not all; we
have already mentioned some of the slavish employments to which they were put,
and shall now add, that, in the heroic ages, the women did all the slavish and
domestic offices, even such as were inconsistent with the delicacy and modesty
of the sex; they conducted the men to bed, dressed and undressed them, attended
them while in the baths, dried and perfumed them when they came out of them;
nor were these, and such other offices only allotted to servants or slaves, no
rank was exempted from them. The princess Naussica, daughter of Alcinous,
carried her own linen to the river in a chariot, and having washed and laid it
on the bank, sat down by it, and dined on the provision she had brought along
with her. When such was the employment of their own women of rank, we cannot
expect that their captives should share a happier fate; accordingly, we find
Hector lamenting, that, should Troy be taken, his wife would be condemned to
the most slavish drudgery; and Hecuba bewailing, that, like a dog, she was
chained at the gate of Agamemnon.

In the state of wedlock, a state of all others the most delicate, the
Lacedaemonians seem to have been destitute of all the finer feelings; for,
despising that principle of mutual fidelity, which in some degree appears to
have been cherished by every people only a single degree removed from the
rudest barbarity, they, without any reluctance, borrowed and lent wives with
each other; a kind of barter totally inconsistent with that sympathetic union
of souls, which always does, or ought to take place, between husband and wife:
but the matter did not end here; for, by the laws of Solon, a lusty well-made
young fellow might, when he pleased, demand permission to cohabit with the wife
of any of his fellow-citizens, who was less handsome and robust than himself,
under pretense of raising up children to the state, who should, like the
father, be strong and vigorous; and such an unreasonable demand, the husband
was not at liberty to reject: what still further shows how little delicacy
existed in their connections with their wives, is their conduct in a war with
the Myssinians; when, having bound themselves by a solemn oath, not to return
to their own city till they had revenged the injury they had received, and the
war having been unexpectedly protracted for the space of ten years, they began
to be afraid that a longer absence would tend greatly to depopulate their
state; to prevent which, they sent back a certain number of those who had
joined the army, after the abovementioned oath had been taken, with full power
to cohabit with all the wives, whose husbands were absent. Nothing can more
plainly discover the despicable condition of the Grecian women: the state, as a
body politic, regarded them only as instruments of general propagation; and
their husbands indelicately acquiesced in the idea, which they never could have
done, had they been actuated by any thing but animal appetite, and had not that
appetite been fixed more on the sex than the individual.

Whichever way we turn us in the Grecian history, we find the most convincing
proofs of the low condition of their women. Homer considers Helen, the wife of
Menelaus, as of little other than a part of the goods which were stolen along
with her; and the restitution of these, and of her, are commonly mentioned in
the same sentence, in such a manner, as to show, that such restitution would
have been considered as a full reparation of the injury sustained; so that
Menelaus did not place the crime of Paris in having debauched his wife, but in
having stolen from him to the amount of so much value. And the same author, in
celebratng Penelope, the wife of Ulysses, for refusing in his absence so many
suitors, does not appear to place the merit of her conduct in a superior regard
to chastity, or in love to her husband; but in preserving to his family the
dowry she had brought along with her, which, on a second marriage, must have
been restored to her father Icarius: and though Telemachus is always
represented as a most dutiful son, we find him reproving his mother in a
manner, which shows that the sex in general were not treated with softness and
delicacy however dignified, or with whatever authority invested. Your widowed
hours, apart, with female toil,
And various labors of the loom, beguile.
There rule, from palace cares remote and free,
That care to man belongs, and most to me.
From the celebration of some of their public games, women were prohibited by
the severest penalty: to the festival at Eleusis, they were not to go in
chariots: in some laws, they were classed with slaves; women and slaves were
forbid to practice physic. It was a custom in Greece to expose such children as
they thought themselves not able to maintain, or likely to derive any advantage
from: daughters, according to Possidippus, being more costly in their
education, and less likely to be beneficial afterward, were more frequently
treated in this manner than sons. A man, though poor, will not expose his son;
But if he is rich, will scarce preserve his daughter.
A custom which we shall have occasion to take notice of, in the course of this
work, as prevailing in several nations, sunk in ignorance and barbarity. Of all
the Greeks, the Thebans were the only people who had a positive law against
this horrid custom.

Let us now turn our eyes to the other side of the picture, and take a view of
the privileges bestowed by law or custom on the Greek women: though we no where
find that they were ever admitted to public authority, nor even to share, as in
some countries, the rank and power of their husbands; yet, in the earlier ages,
they had a vote in the public assemblies, which was afterward taken from them.
They succeeded equally with brothers to the inheritance of their fathers; and
to the whole of that inheritance, if they had no brothers. But to this last
privilege was also annexed a clog, which must have been extremely disagreeable
to every woman of sentiment and feeling; an heiress was obliged, by the laws of
Greece, to marry her nearest relation, that the estate might not go out of the
family; and this relation, in case of her refusal, had a right to sue for the
delivery of her person, as we do for goods and chattels: but, on the other
side, as it sometimes happened that this claimant was old or impotent, it was
provided by law, that if he did not, in a convenient time, impregnate his wife,
she might apply to any one she pleased for that purpose.

He who divorced his wife, was obliged either to return her dowry, or pay her
so much per month by way of maintenance. He who ravished a free woman, was
constrained in some states to marry her, in others to pay a hundred, and in
others, again, a thousand drachmas. But what reflects more honor on the Greeks
than any thing we find in their behavior toward women, is the care they took
of female orphans. He who is the next in blood (says their law) to an orphan
virgin, who has no fortune, shall marry her himself, or settle a fortune upon
her, according to his quality; if there be many relations, all equally allied,
all of them, according to their several qualities, shall contribute something
toward her fortune. After all, when we impartially consider the good and ill
treatment of the Grecian women, we find that the balance was much against them,
and may therefore conclude, that though the Greeks were eminent in arts, though
they were illustrious in arms, in politeness, and elegance of manners, the
highest pitch to which they ever arrived, was only a few degrees above savage
barbarity.

In more early periods of the Roman republic, as in the infancy of almost all
the ancient nations, we find every thing involved in fable and absurdity:
immortality and mortality hardly distinguishable from each other; heroes,
demigods, and goddesses, performing almost every action, and residing in every
grove. Such ridiculous notions, wherever we meet with them, afford the most
infallible proofs of ignorance and barbarity, and constantly vanish in
proportion to the increase of reasoning and knowledge.

Agreeably to this observation, the earliest accounts of the Romans exhibit a
rude and uncultivated people, but little acquainted with decency, and entire
strangers to that delicacy which takes place between the two sexes in nations
tolerably advanced in civilization and society. Their first appearance, as an
independent state, was as an handful of robbers, or banditti; and one of the
first of their memorable actions, was the capture of some young women, to
enable them to raise up members to the state they had erected: to these women,
however, they behaved in a manner that we have seldom an opportunity of
observing among a people so little cultivated. They treated them with so much
kindness, and had the address so to (...) them, that they absolutely refused to
be rescued from their ravishers; but as many of our female readers may not be
acquainted with this history, we shall give them a short sketch of it.

When Romulus, the founder of Rome, had formed his infant republic, finding
that he had no women, and that none of the neighboring nations would give
their daughters in marriage to men whom they considered as a set of lawless
banditti; he was obliged by stratagem to procure for his citizens, what he
could not obtain for them by entreaty. Accordingly, having proclaimed a solemn
feast, and an exhibition of games in honor of Equestrian Neptune, and by that
means gathered a great number of people together; on a signal given, the
Romans, with drawn swords in their hands, rushed among the strangers, and
forcibly carried away a great number of their daughters to Rome. The next day
Romulus himself distributed them as wive^ to those of his citizens, who had
thus by violence carried them away This is what we frequently find mentioned in
history, by the name of the Rape of the Sabine Virgins.
. From so rude a beginning, and among a people so severe and inflexible as the
Romans, it is not unnatural for the reader to expect to find, that women were
treated in the same indignant, if not in a worse manner, than they were among
the nations we have already mentioned. In this, however, he will be mistaken;
it was the Romans who first gave to the sex public liberty* who first properly
cultivated their minds, and thought it as necessary as to adorn their bodies:
among them were they first fitted for society, and for becoming rational
companions; and among them, was it first demonstrated to the world, that they
were capable of great actions, and deserved a better fate than to be shut up in
seraglios, and kept only as the pageant^ of grandeur, or instruments of
satisfying illicit love; truth^ which the sequel of the history of the Sabine
women will amply confirm.

The violent capture of these young women by the Romans, was highly resented by
all the neighboring nations, and especially by the Sabines, to whom the
greatest part of them belonged; they sent to demand restitution of their
daughters, promising, at the same time, an alliance, and liberty of
intermarrying with the Romans, should the demand be complied with. But Romulus
not thinking it expedient to part with the only pos^ible means he had of
raising citizens, instead of granting what they asked, demanded of the Sabines*
that they should confirm the marriages of their daughters with the Romans.
These conferences, at last, produced a treaty of peace; and that, like many
others of the same nature, ended in a more inveterate war. The Romans having in
this gained some advantages, the Sabines retired; and h^ving ^^eathed a while
^ent a second embassy to demand their daughters, were again refused, and again
commenced hostilities. Being this time mo^^ suc^essful, they besieged Romulus
in his citadel of Rom^ and threatened immediate destruction to him and all his
people, unless their daughters were restored. In this ala^^^ng situation,
Hers^^a, wife o^ Romulus, demanded an audience of the senate, and (...) ^^fore
them a desig^, which the women had formed among themselves, without the
knowledge of their husbands, which was, to act the part of mediators between
the contending parties. The proposal being approved, a decree was immediately
passed, per^^^^ting the women to go on the proposed negotiation; and only
^^quiring, that each of them should leave one of her children, as a security
that she would return; the rest, they were all allowed to carry with them, as
objects which might more effectually move the compassion of their fathers and
relations. Thus authorized, the women laid aside their ornaments, put on
mourning, and carrying their children in their arms, advanced to the camp of
the Sabines, and threw themselves at the feet of their fathers. The Sabine
king, having assembled his chief officers, ordered the women to declare for
what purpose they were come; which Hersilia did in so pathetic a manner, that
she brought on a conference between the chiefs of the two nations, and this
conference, by her mediation, and that of the other women, soon ended in an
amicable alliance.

As a reward for this most important service of the Sabine women, several
privileges and honorable marks of distinction were granted them by the senate;
all immodest and licentious discourses were forbid in their presence, and no
indecent objects were to be brought before them; every one was ordered to give
way to them in the street. In capital cases, they were exempted from the
jurisdiction of the ordinary judges. And lastly, their chi^dren were allowed to
wear a golden ball hanging at their breast, and to be clothed with a
particular robe, called Pretexta. But all these honors and priveleges not
being thought sufficient, some time after a festival was instituted, and called
Matronalia, in honor of the Sabine matrons. During this festival, the Roman
matrons served their slaves at table, and received presents from their
husbands; sacrifices were then also offered to Juno Lucina, to induce her to
assist them in childbearing.

From a service so signal, conferred by women on an infant republic, and from
the peculiar notice taken of that service, we should naturally conclude that
the Romans were then a cultivated people, and that their women were treated
with all that softness and indulgence due to the tenderness of their sex. Such
a conclusion, however, would be erroneous, for the Romans were at this period
strangers to every softness and refinement of manners, and the honors bestowed
on the Sabine women were only sudden and indigested effusions of gratitude,
which did not operate uniformly on the whole of their conduct toward a sex
that nature and obligation ought to have rendered dear to them.

The Roman women, as well as the Greeks, were under perpetual guardianship, and
at no age, nor in any condition, were ever trusted with the management of their
own fortunes; they were in case of wills, and perhaps in other cases, not
admitted as evidence; every father had a power of life and death over his
daughters; but this power was not restricted to females only, it extended to
sons as well as daughters. Sumptuary laws, generally more grievous to women
than to men, as they restrain their most darling passions, were long in force
at Rome: the Oppian law prohibited them from having more than half an ounce of
gold employed in ornamenting their person, from wearing clothes of diverse
colors, and from riding in chariots either in the city or a thousand paces
around it. They were strictly forbid the use of wine, or even to have in their
possession the key of any place where it was kept, for either of which faults
they were liable to be divorced by their husbands; and so careful were the
Romans in restraining their wom^n from wine, that they are supposed to have
first introduced the custom of saluting their female relations and
acquaintance, on entering into the house of a friend or a neighbor, that they
might discover by their breath whether they had tasted any of that liquor. This
strictness, however, began in time to be relaxed, till at last, luxury and
debauchery becoming too strong for every law, the women indulged themselves in
equal liberties with the men. But such was not the case in the earlier ages of
Rome, Romulus even permitted husbands to kill their wives, if they found them
drinking wine; and if we may believe Valerius Maximus, Egnatius Metellus,
having detected his wife drinking wine out of a cask, actually made use of this
permission, and was by Romulus acquitted. And Fabius Pictor relates, that a
Roman lady having picked the lock of a chest, in order to come at the key of a
place where some wine was kept, her parents shut her up and starved her to
death.

Women were liable to be divorced by their husbands almost at pleasure*
provided the portion was returned which they had brought along with them. They
were also liable to be divorced for barrenness, which, if it could be construed
into a fault, was at least the fault of nature, and might sometimes be that of
the husband. Such were the disadvantages attending the Roman women, but they
were not all that they labored under; a few sumptuary laws, a subordination to
the men, and a total want of authority, do not so remarkably affect the sex, as
to be coldly and indelicately treated by their husbands and lovers. Such a
treatment is touching them in the tenderest part; but such, however, we have
reason to believe, they often met with from the Romans, who had not yet
learned, as in modern times, to blend the severities of the patriot, and
roughness of the warrior, with that soft and indulging behavior, so
conspicuous in our modern patriots and heroes. But husbands not only themselves
behaved roughly to their wives, they even sometimes permitted their servants
and slaves to do the same; the principal Eunuch of Justinian the Second,
threatened to chastise the Empress, his master's wife, in the manner that
children are chastised at school, if she did not obey his orders.

But to dwell no longer on the grievances of the Roman women. We have already
mentioned some of their honors and privileges; and the following, which we
shall add, will show, that upon the whole, their condition was much preferable
to that of the women of any people we have hitherto mentioned.

In endeavoring to point out some of the particular honors conferred on the
Roman ladies, in periods posterior to those we have already run over, we shall
not introduce the story of Lucretia, whose tragical exit was productive of so
much blood and devastation; nor of Virginea, whose end, if possible, still more
tragical, almost overturned the empire of Rome. These effects were, perhaps,
more the result of an honest indignation against ravishers and murderers, than
proofs of general regard paid to the sex. Beauty in every country has had a
power of commanding love, and private friendships between individuals of the
different sexes have every where been productive of regard; but when public
honors and privileges are granted to the sex by a legislative body, not under
the influence of beauty, nor the con^roul of passion, as was the case with the
senate of Rome, they are the strongest proofs which can possibly be adduced of
female merit.

The public honors conferred on the Sabine women we have already mentioned;
but the Romans did not confine honorary rewards to them only, but
indiscriminately bestowed them on the sex whenever merited. They hung up the
distaff of Tanaqui^, the consort of Tarquin, in the temple of Hercules; not
only as a public reward for the proper use she had made of it, but also to
encourage others to follow so laudable an example. When Coriolanus, in revenge
for some affront offered him at Rome, was ready at the head of a victorious
army of the Volsci to lay that city in ashes; when the tears and prayers of his
friends, of the nobility, and even of the venerable senate, were insufficient
to divert the storm; Veturia his mother, by the persuasion of the Roman
matrons, having prevailed on him to lay aside his resentment; the senate
desired that the women engaged in this affair should ask any favor they
thought proper; when, unambitious of rewards, they only begged that they might
be allowed to build, at their own expense, a temple to the fortune of women.
The senate, surprised at so much disinterestedness, ordered the temple to be
immediately built on the very spot where Coriolanus had been prevailed upon to
sacrifice his resentment to the love of his country; which being completed,
Veturia was consecrated priestess. A Dictator of Rome having vowed to dedicate
a golden vase of a certain weight to Apollo, and the senate not being able to
procure a sufficient quantity of gold to make it, the ladies voluntarily parted
with many of their trinkets for that purpose. The senate, struck with the
unsolicited generosity, decreed that funeral orations should thenceforth be
made for the women as well as for the men, and that they should be allowed to
ride in chariots at the public games.

The sacred function of ministering at the alt^rs of the gods has, in most
countries, been wholly reserved for the men; but this was not the case at Rome,
they had priestesses as well as priests, who officiated in several of their
temples. Besides these, they had a pecular order of priestesses, called
Vestals, who resided in the temple of Vesta, and whose office was to keep the
palladium The statue of Pallas, which the Romans believed would secure the city
from being taken so long as it remained there.
, which was considered as the security of the empire, and to preserve the
sacred fire of the goddess in perpetual vigor. The prerogatives of this order
demonstrate not only the confidence which the Romans had in their women, but
also the regard they paid to their religion. When the principal magistrates,
even though consuls, met a vestal, they gave way to her; any insult offered to
a vestal was punished with death; if any of the order happened to meet a
criminal carrying to execution* he was immediately released, provided the
vestal affirmed the meeting was accidental. They were the only women whose
evidence was received in courts of justice; they were the umpires of the
differences which happened between persons of the first rank; they were allowed
the liberty of being interred in the city, a liberty seldom granted even to
their greatest heroes; and in their hands, as in an inviolable asylum, were
deposited the wills and testaments of such as were afraid that frauds and
forgeries might be committed by their relations. When the deification of
emperors and of heroes became fashionable at Rome, the women soon also
insinuated themselves into this species of honor; their statues were set up in
the temples, and public sacrifices were offered to, and incens^ burnt before
them. The highest honor that could be conferred on a Roman hero, who had been
slain in the defense of his country, was to be buried in the field of Mars; an
honor which, in length of time, came also to be shared by illustrious women.
Among the Romans, women generally ate and drank with the men, and in later
times were even admitted to their convivial meetings; liberties, which in so
full an extent we have not found them hitherto enjoying; they also shared the
honors and even titles of their husbands, and at one period honors of a
nature not usually bestowed on the sex were instituted for them only.
Heliogabalus gave his mother a seat and vote in the senate of Rome, and some
time after instituted a female senate, and placed her at the head of it. The
business of this senate was to regulate the important affairs of dress and
fashion; but this institution did not long survive its despicable founder; soon
after his death it was dissolved; nor did any succeeding emperor ever afterward
attempt to re-establish it.


But amid all these honors, and all these public testimonies of approbation,
we have reason to believe that the Romans sacrificed more to merit than to
love; and that while their women shared with them almost every honor and every
privilege, they were in general treated at home rather with the cool esteem of
friendship, than with the warm indulgence of tenderness and affection. If the
whole tenor of their conduct gives us reason to think that such was their
behavior to their own women, we have but too many undoubted proofs to assure
us, that their captives of the fair sex were often treated even with the most
horrid barbarity; their political virtue was so rigid and severe, that it never
suffered humanity in the least to interfere where the interest of their country
was concerned. Hence, in order to aggrandize the Roman name, and stike terror
into conquered nations, they often dragged beauty and grandeur at the wheels of
their triumphal chariots, and exposed queens and princesses, without regard of
rank or of sex, to degradations, and to tortures that even a savage would blush
for. Not contented with ravishing, they also scourged the daughters of the
British queen Boadicea. After they had overcome the army of the Ambrones, their
women being in a fortified camp, for some time defended themselves; but finding
they could not be able to hold out, desired to capitulate, and required no
other condition than that their chastity should not be violated; but even this
single condition was not granted by the cruel and libidinous Romans. But we
will not proceed to blacken the historic page with a list of such enormous
crimes.

CHAPTER VII. The same Subject continued.
THE Celtes, Gauls, Germans, and other northern nations, upon whom Tacitus and
his cotemporary writers so liberally bestow the epithet of Barbarians, were, in
several respects, less so than the Romans, who, at that time, thought
themselves the only polished people upon the globe; the greatest part of these
nations treated their women, if not with a politeness, at least with a regard
superior to that of those very Romans who gave them so horrid an appellation.

In Germany, when the regal dignity descended to a woman, they allowed her to
enjoy it, and women often governed with a steadiness and sagacity which did
honor to the sex, and excited the admiration of the neighboring nations; the
greatest heroes neither disdained to fight under their banners, nor be
r^^^lated by their councils, as they imagined them to be endowed with a kind of
oracular wisdom, and a prudence more than human. In their treaties with one
another, female hostages were given by the ancient Germans; and by these they
reckoned themselves more firmly engaged than by an equal, or even a superior
number of the other sex. In their warlike excursions, they carried their women
along with them, and sometimes even to the field of battle, where their cries
and shouts served to intimidate their enemies, and to animate their friends
with martial ardour; and even sometimes to inflame and support them, when ready
to yield to superior numbers, or more steady discipline. The approbation of the
fair they esteemed as the most honorable reward of their bravery, and for
them, as being what they valued most, they fought with the most determined
resolution. When they had turned their backs on the enemy, their wives often
painted so pathetically the horrors of captivity, that they were prevailed
upon, with double fury, to return to the charge, rather than submit themselves
to such indignity. A civil war having once arisen among the Gauls, to decide
the quarrel, two armies were drawn out into the field, extended front to front,
and just ready to commence a dreadful carnage, when the women with dishevelled
hair rushing in between them, put a stop to the work of destruction, and had
the address to reconcile them to each other. From that time forward, the Gauls
admitted the women to their councils, when peace or war was to be debated; and
from that time also, such differences as arose between them and their allies
were terminated by female negotiation; and, agreeably to this custom, we find
it stipulated in their treaty with Hannibal, that should the Gauls have any
complaint against the Carthaginians, the matter should be settled by the
Carthaginian general; but should the Carthaginians have any complaint against
the gauls, it should be refered to the Gaulish women. The Goths obliged him who
debauched a virgin to marry her, if she was equal to him in rank; if not, he
was constrained to give her a fortune equal to his own condition; if he could
not give her such a fortune, he was condemned to death; because a woman thus
dishonored, had no chance of obtaining a husband without a fortune; and
because it was by marriage only that a state could be properly peopled.

To these proofs of the regard, and even of the veneration, which the ancient
inhabitants of the North paid to their women, we shall add, that they
considered them as having something sacred in their character, endowed with a
foresigh^ of future events, as interpreters of the Divine will in this world,
and as a part of the reward of the blessed in the next. The Cimbri, says
Strabo, when they took the field, were accompanied by venerable hoary-headed
prophetesses, clothed in long white linen robes. A crowd of beautiful virgins,
says the Edda The Edda is the sacred book of the ancient Scandinavians and
other northern nations.
, wait the heroes in the hall of Odin, and fill their cups as fast as they
empty them. It is worth remarking in this place, that many of the ancient
eastern religions, and Mahometism, which was copied from them, taught, that a
great part of the joys of Paradise consisted in beautiful women. But then they
were to enjoy them as such; whereas the Northerns were satisfied with having
their cups quickly replenished by them: a circumstance, which plainly shows,
that the predominant passion of the East was love; that of the North, drinking.

The ancient Britons appear not to have been behind any of the other northern
nations in the veneration and regard paid to their women; they had tamely
submitted to every reiterated evil, and to every species of oppression which
the cruel and avaricious Romans had laid upon them; but when these lawless
destroyers scourged their queen, and ravished her daughters, their resentment
was kindled, they arose to revenge the cause of the sex; and had their
discipline been equal to their valor, they would at that time have put an end
to the Roman insults, and extirpated them from the British isles.

Though it appears from what has been related, that the ancient inhabitants of
the North valued and esteemed their women, yet their conduct toward them was
far from being all of a piece; while they revered them as beings inspired with
a ray of the Divinity, according to the custom of Asia, from whence they
originally came, they at the same time treated them as servants, or rather as
slaves. The wives and children were not allowed to eat with the husbands, but
waited upon them at their meals, and afterward ate up what they had left. Among
the ancient Danes, and several of their northern neighbors, convivial feasting
was more frequent than perhaps among any other people; almost every occurrence
and business was productive of a feast, where eating and drinking was carried
to the most abominable excess. But to such feasts, we have reason to believe,
the women were only admitted as servants; and that they stood behind their
husbands and friends, supplying them with meat and drink, and took care of them
at last when their drunkenness had rendered them incapable of doing any thing
for themselves. The German women, like those of the Greeks and Romans, were
under perpetual guardianship; but it was generally to the care of some person
of prudence and experience they were committed, and not to their own sons, as
in Greece. When any person was murdered, the laws of their states took no
notice of it; the ideas of civil society were not then so much perfected, as to
consider every individual as, in some degree, the property of the community;
the relations of the party murdered were only supposed to have sustained a
loss, and, therefore, to the relations only it belonged to revenge the death,
or to agree with the murderer for a sum of money by way of compensation.
Neither of these privileges were, however, vested in the women; they were not
allowed to take vengeance, because, perhaps, cruelty and bloodshed did not suit
with the softness of their nature; they were not to take the compensation,
because they were considered as too weak and feeble to extort it.

In general the women of the North seem not to have been indulged with much
property. The Visigoths were bound by a law not to give more to a wife than the
tenth part of their substance. The German women anciently succeeded not to any
inheritance, though afterward they were permitted to succeed after the males
of the same degree of kindred. But the most subordinate of all female
conditions seems among them to have been that of a wife to her husband. The
husband of an adulteress was allowed to assemble her relations, in their
presence to cut off her hair, strip her naked, turn her out of his house, and
whip her from one end of the village to the other. A woman thus publicly
exposed could never wipe away the stain of so foul an infamy; the most
circumspect behavior could never call back her lost character, nor could any
motive ever prevail on another to marry her, though youth, beauty, fortune, and
every advantage, combined to allure him.

We have already mentioned, that a law among the Goths obliged a man to marry
or give a portion to the woman he had debauched. Among the Angles, and many
other of the northern nations, wounds and injuries were fixed by law at a
certain price; and a wound given to a virgin was estimated at double the value
which was set upon it when given to a man of the same rank. If this law
originated from a sense of the weakness and inability of the sex to defend
themselves, it demonstrated a legislature not inattentive to their interest: if
from humanity* or from love, it showed in the men a degree of civilization,
which the histories of those ages in many circumstances seem to contradict.

The mythology of all antiquity is full of female as well as male deities. The
Hebrews, and many of their neighboring nations, worshipped the Queen of
Heaven; the Phoenicians adored Astarte; the Scythians, Apia; and the
Scandinavians, F^igga, the consort of Odin. Wherever female deities have
obtained a place in the religion of a people, it is a sign that women are of
some consequence; for we find in those modern nations where women are held in
the most despicable light, that even their deities are all of the masculine
gender. As there were in the North female deities, so they had priestesses who
ministered in their groves, and at their altars. The Egyptians, Phoenicians,
Carthaginians, and many other of the ancients, offered to their gods human
victims; sometimes of the male, and sometimes of the female gender: the
Northerns followed their example, only with this difference, that we have
reason to believe they never sacrificed any females. Whether they were not
thought victims of sufficient importance to be offered to their gods; whether
they spared them from lenity and indulgence; or from the consideration of the
loss that population would sustain by their death, is uncertain. But when we
take a view of the whole of their conduct toward the sex, we are much inclined
to attribute it to indulgence and affection.

As the inhabitants of the North were not distinguished by a quickness of
sensibility, as they devoted most of their time to a passion for arms, and to
the pleasures of the table, we may conclude that love held ^o violen^ dominion
over them; and yet they esteemed and regarded their ^^men, forming, in this
particular, a striking contrast to the Asiatics and other southern people, who
have ever been dis^^^guished by the warmest love, entirely divested of the
smallest degree of regard or esteem. An Asiatic, while he approaches his
mistress as if she were a divinity, treats her as a criminal, and considering
her as entirely made for his pleasures; he is at the same time her tyrant and
her slave: while the Northerns did not seem to have looked on the sex as
destined for their pleasures, so much as for their convenience and assistance:
they did not view them as the slaves of their power, and the panders of their
lust, but as their friends and companions; nor did they approach them with the
fawning submission of inferiors, and at the same time treat them with the
haughty disrespect of superiors.

In tracing the history of the treatment and condition of women downwards from
the periods already reviewed, our chief business will be among the descendants
of those northern nations, of whom we have been now speaking; who at length
dissatisfied with the cold and barren regions they inhabited, where, on a
scanty and hard-earned pittance, they dragged out a miserable existence; and
convinced, as every uncultivated people were, that the sword gave a right to
whatever they could conquer by it; set out in swarms toward the south, and in
process of time overran all Europe, propagated their race, and diffused their
manners and customs as far as they extended their arms.

We have already seen, that they carried their wives and children with them
into the field; which being a scene not only adapted to the growth of riot and
debauchery, but where these vices may more easily elude the vigilance of
justice; many of the strictest laws became necessary for their preservation,
and several of this nature were enacted by the Franks. When in the field, their
operations were from time to time settled in a council, of which their wives
made a part; and when in danger of being defeated, they were more afraid of
their reproaches than of the swords of their enemies. The men, constantly
employed in war or in drinking, had neither time nor inclination to acquire
useful knowledge. The women, more at leisure, from the little they became
acquainted with, were by the men considered as oracles: they were supposed to
be able to interpret dreams, and had actually learned the virtues of a few
simples. Hence both virgins and matrons were employed in dressing the wounds of
their lovers and husbands. With all these acquisitions, at that time so
extraordinary as well as useful; with all that majestic beauty, for which they
were so famous in the songs of their bards; is it any wonder, that the
daughters of the North were the first who inspired the men with sentimental
feeling, and with ideas little short of adoration? But such is the nature of
man, especially when he is but a few degrees removed from barbarity, that while
he adores a woman for her beauty, he scruples not to attack and ruin her
virtue. Such was not the complexion of the times we have already delineated;
but it became the complexion of these we are now considering. An universal
spirit of piracy and emigration had crept into the North: one half of its
inhabitants were constantly wandering in quest of new adventures, and of new
settlements. Wanderers, who have neither property nor possessions to serve as
hostages for their good behavior, are generally licentious in their manners:
hence it became necessary for those who had acquired settlements, not only to
secure their property, but also their wives and children, from these lawless
wanderers, in castles, and in strong fortifications.

In this manner women became first subject to a species of confinement in the
North, not because they were, as is alleged in the South, wicked and
libidinous, but because they were beautiful, weak and defenseless. This
confinement, however, not being the effect of jealousy, as in Asia, but of
prudence, and desire of securing their women from the insults of licentious
banditti; when a woman found a lover, or a husband, to protect her from the
rudeness and barbarity of the times, she could then venture abroad with
impunity in his company. Hence every woman naturally wished to engage such a
champion; and every man of spirit, fond of the honor arising from it, as
naturally inlisted himself in the service. And in this manner arose the
institution of chivalry; an institution, which, though it owed its birth to
chance and the necessity of the times, made so rapid a progress, that in a
little while it was sufficient for a fair lady to have it publicly known, that
such a gallant warrior was her declared champion, and would revenge every wrong
done to her, whether in his presence or absence: this enlarged still the circle
of her liberty, and more restrained the hand of insult and violence.

Besides the title a young warrior had to the approbation and favor of her
whom he thus defended, there was another, and, if possible, a still more
prevailing motive, the love of glory; in these times, the most anxiously
coveted, and most intimately connected with such generous and disinterested
actions as defending the weak, and rescuing the oppressed. All these
considerations prompted the youthful warrior to take upon him an office, which,
while it flattered his love, at the same time, by its acquisition of fame, no
less fed and nourished his vanity: and as the man acquired honor, and the name
of valor, by undertaking to defend an innocent and helpless woman; so the
woman acquired an additional luster, and the name of beauty, by being thus
distinguished by a gallant champion. Thus the honor and interest of the two
sexes became mutually blended together, and they reflected additional luster
and reputation upon each other; a truth to which all the historical records of
these times bear the most ample testimony.

It is not a little remarkable, that in the same periods in which women were
gradually rising into consequence in one part of Europe, they should be losing
it altogether in another. While the spirit of chivalry made them objects almost
of adoration in the North, Mahomet had established a religion in Asia, which
divested them almost of every privilege, and of all political consequence: this
religion, brought over into Europe, and established in the West by the
conquering arms of his successors, not only sunk the power of beauty almost to
nothing, but condemned the whole of the sex to perpetual subordination and
imprisonment.

This is a striking proof, that the actions of men are regulated by no fixed
principle: but, in the ages we are considering, another not less striking is,
that human nature endeavored to assume the most contradictory appearances; it
endeavored to blend the meek and forgiving spirit of the religion of Jesus,
with the fierce and intolerant spirit of war and bloodshed. It endeavored to
mix the soft sentiments of love, with the revengeful dictates of affronted
honor; and the same tender sentiment which bound a lover to his mistress,
instigated him, in the most savage manner, to cut the throats of all those who
openly professed either to love or hate her. In short, nothing had at this time
acquired any consistency: religion was a mixture of paganism and superstition,
and law was a compound of weakness and injustice. While the pilgrim traveled
to Jerusalem to obtain forgiveness of his sins, he was adding daily to the
load, by pillaging and debauchery on the way. Religion thus reduced to penance
and ceremony, was too weak to combat the passions; and law, if ridiculous in
its modes of investigation, was still more conspicuous for being feeble in its
power of execution. In such a crisis, something distinct from both became
necessary. The men had already begun to glory in being the protectors of such
women, as they were attached to by love and friendship: it was but carrying the
idea one step farther, from being the champion of a single woman, to become the
champion of the whole sex, and thereby establish a more complete system of
chivalry; a thing which actually happened, after the spirit of crusading had
been entirely obliterated by a repetition of unsuccessful attempts.

Such is the imperfection of our nature, that to chance and necessity we owe
the far greater part of our useful discoveries, as also the further improvement
of such as are already but imperfectly known. This was the case with chivalry:
it originated from love, honor, and the necessiity of defending women in the
time of lawless depredation, and had at first for its object the defense of one
woman only: afterward it extended to the protection of the whole sex; and by
degrees stretching itself still wider, its object became distressed innocence,
wherever it was found suffering by the hard hand of injustice and oppression.
Arrived at this period, it was considered as the most honorable and exalted of
all professions; was eagerly courted by all ranks of mankind; nor were any
candidates, however elevated in their station, admitted into it, without the
fullest credentials of valor, honor, and probity, or a long train of previous
discipline; and even the admission itself was calculated to inspire a love of
glory and of benevolence; it was performed at the altar by ceremonies no less
awful than pompous, and well calculated to instill into the mind of the young
hero, the most enthusiastic love of honor, disinterestedness, and truth.

The effects of this institution, which at last became so rididculously
whimsical, as to be finally laughed out of the world by the inimitable
Cervantes, were in the beginning highly beneficial to society: even war was
divested of half its horrors, when it was carried on by men trained up in the
principles of honor and humanity: weakness, which before had every thing to
fear from power, and hardly any protection by law, now began to enjoy itself in
security, when it found strength and fidelity engaged to defend it; and as
weakness was more peculiarly the lot of women, they were also objects of the
peculiar care and attention of this institution. H^nce they now began to feel a
consequence, to which they had hitherto been strangers; they were politely
treated by all, because it was known that their cause was the cause of
chivalry. They were approached with submission by the brave; they were the
judges even of bravery itself, and entrusted with the distribution of the
rewards bestowed on it at public tournaments; where a smile of approbation on
the knight to whom they delivered them, was often considered by him as a
greater reward than all the glory he had acquired by his invincible arm. The
men considered tournaments as the theaters where they were to gain applause;
and lovers, as those of acquiring the esteem of the fair. Nothing (says a
French historian) was longed for by the ladies with so much impatience; and
this not so much from the pleasure of beholding a magnificent spectacle, as
from the glory of presiding there: it was by them that the prize of these shows
was always distributed; they were the soul and capital ornament of them: to
animate the courage of the champions, they used to give them a token, which was
sometimes a scarf, a veil, a coif, a sleeve, a bracelet, a knot, a detached
piece of their attire, and sometimes, a curious piece of work of their own
doing; and with these, the knight decorated the top of his helmet or of his
spear, his shield, his coat of arms, or some other part of his armor.

To such a pitch of enthusiastic veneration of the fair sex did the institution
of chivalry carry the ages in which it flourished, that the least contemptuous
word uttered concerning any of them, disqualified a knight for the duties and
privileges of his profession: and a lady having cause of complaint against a
knight, used to touch the helmet or shield of his arms, as a token of applying
to the judges, for a trial of his crime; when, after proper inquiry, if the
delinquency was proved, the hapless culprit immediately suffered the penalty of
exclusion, and could never again be restored to his dignity, but by the
intercession of the fair and most solemn promises of better behavior for the
future. As the greatest part of the nobility and gentry were, in the times we
are considering, of the order of chivalry, this institution was in that order a
sufficient barrier against indecent liberties and scandalous reports. But the
lower orders of men were not to be bound by the silken cords of honor: to keep
them, therefore, within the limits prescribed by decency, other motives were
devised: the laws of the Thuringians ordained, that he who stole the clothes of
a woman while bathing, or at any time threw dirty water upon her, should be
severely fined; and that all compositions for injuries should be doubled, when
the injury was done to a woman. The laws of the Franks enacted, that he who
squeezed the hand of a free woman should pay fifteen sols, twice as much if he
laid hold of her arm, and four times as much if he touched her breast. These
were powerful restraints on indecorum; and though they strongly mark the
character of the times, yet they show the influence of women, or rather,
perhaps, the attention of the men to preserve their delicacy, as well as
chastity, from every rude invader.

Arts, sciences, and learning had, at the subversion of the Roman empire, been
almost totally eradicated; a people brought up to obtain every thing by the
sword, had no idea of gaining a subsistence by the still peaceful means of
labor and economy. Learning, and every art thereon depending, was for several
centuries despised, as mean and contemptible; and a gentleman who had stooped
to become a scholar, or to learn any thing useful in civil life, was considered
as having degraded himself for ever. Among people thus circumstanced, nothing
was so difficult as to make any improvement: accordingly we find, that many of
the middle ages were more stationary than, perhaps, any period in the history
of mankind.

Among the nations who conquered the Roman empire the Christian religion had
been early introduced; but its peaceful precepts, and even all the coercive
powers with which it was armed, were but feeble and unavailing, when opposed to
customs sanctified by time, and to minds grown haughty and intolerant by
success; and it was many ages before it could ^ame that wild and romantic rage
for fighting, with or without cause, for which the inhabitants of the north had
been so remarkably distinguished. This religion had, however, another good
effect: differences of opinion arose concerning it; disputes were carried on to
decide these differences; disputes necessarily gave rise to emulation, and
emulation to some degree of learning. When the faculties of the human mind have
been exerted on a few subjects of enquiry, these subjects began to multiply;
and still as they increase, the avidity of the mind in pursuing them increases
also: hence, in some measure, we may see the reason, why, toward the beginning
of the twelfth century, learning began to be cultivated with so much assiduity,
though it had been totally neglected before. With the revival of learning, a
new and more rational importance was added to women: their former importance
had been derived from superstition, and a wild and romantic spirit of honor:
their present, began to erect itself on the foundation of tenderness and sense.
Whatever tends to aggrandize the mind, and to add to the stock of knowledge and
sensibility, is in favor of the fair sex, and makes ours lavish fresh
endearments and fresh dignities upon them. Accordingly, in tracing the history
of the middle ages a little downwards, we shall find that women, by the remains
of chivalry, and the introduction of real politeness, arrived at a consequence
to which they never attained in any other period.

The professors of the Christian religion, one sect only excep^^d, The Quakers.
never admitted women to the dignity (...) priesthood; but in the times we are
speaking of, they made great strides toward it. While Charlemagne swayed the
scepter in France, confession was considered as so absolutely necessary to
salvation, that, in several cases, and particularly at the point of death, when
no priest or man could ^e had, it was by the church allowed to be made to a
woman. And in the sixteenth century, it was no uncommon thing for
church livings, the revenues of abbeys, and even of bishoprics, to be given
away with young ladies as a marriage-portion. Thus women exercised a kind of
sacerdotal function; and though they did not actually officiate at the altar,
they enjoyed what many of the priests themselves would have been glad of; the
emoluments of the altar, without the drudgery of its service.

When any material difference happened between man and man, or when one accused
another of a crime, the decision, according to ancient custom, established by
law, was, to be by single combat, or by the ordeal trial; from both of which
ridiculous manners of appealing to heaven, women were exempted. When a man had
said any thing that reflected dishonor on a woman, or accused her of a crime,
she was not obliged to fight him to prove her innocence; the combat would have
been unequal; nor was she obliged to submit to the ordeal trial; it was
inconsistent with the delicacy of the female character and constitution; but
she might choose a champion to fight in her cause, or expose himself to the
horrid trial, in order to clear her reputation: such champions were generally
selected from her lovers or friends: but if she fixed upon any other, so high
was the spirit of martial glory, and so eager the thirst of defending the weak
and helpless sex, that we meet with no instance of a champion ever having
refused to fight for, or undergo whatever custom required in defense of the
lady who had honored him with the appointment. To this we may add another
motive; he who had refused, must inevitably have been branded with the name of
coward; and so despicable was the condition of a coward, in those times of
general heroism, that death itself appeared the most preferable choice, nay,
such was the rage of fighting for women, that it became customary for those,
who could not be honored with the decision of their real quarrels, to create
f^ictitious ones concerning them, in order to create also a necessity of
fighting. Thus when, from its primitive laudable intention, of succouring the
distressed, chivalry had degenerated to a kind of finical fighting madness, it
was no uncommon thing for a knight to post himself in some public place, and
there, by his doughty weapons, and formidable appearance, force every
passenger, either to acknowledge the superior charms of his Dulcinea, or fight
him on the spot. The latter of which seldom happened, unless, perchance, he met
with some person as mad as himself.

However much this may have the air and appearance of romantic fiction, it is
nevertheless, verified by a number of historical facts. Nor was fighting for
the ladies confined to single instances, crowds of gallants entered the lists
against each other; and even kings called out their subjects, at the commands
of their mistresses, to show their love to them, by cutting the throats of
their neighbors, who had not in the least offended them. In the fourteenth
century, when the countess of Blois, and the widow of Montfort, were at war
against each other, a conferrence had been agreed on, upon pretense of settling
a peace, but in reality to appoint a combat, for deciding which of the two
ladies was the most handsome: instead of negociating, they soon challenged each
other; and Beaumanoir, who was at the head of the Britons, publicly declared,
that they fought from no other motive than to see by the victory, who had the
fairest mistress. In the fifteenth century, we find an anecdote of this kind
still more extraordinary. John duke de Bourbonnois published a declaration,
that he would go over to England, with sixteen knights, and there fight it out,
in order to avoid idleness, and merit the good graces of his mistress: and, to
crown all, James IV. of Scotland having, in all tournaments, professed himself
knight to queen Anne of France, she summoned him to prove himself her true and
valorous champion, by taking the field in her defense, against his
brother-in-law, Henry VIII. of England. He obeyed the romantic mandate; and the
two nations bled to feed the vanity of a woman. Warriors, when ready to engage,
even invoked the aid of their mistresses, as poets do that of the Muses. If
they fought valiantly, it reflected honor on the Dulcineas they adored; but if
dastardly, they turned their backs on their enemies; the poor ladies were
dishonored for ever. However different in their natures are love and fighting,
the former was then the most prevailing motive to the latter. The famous Gaston
de Foix, who commanded the French troops at the battle of Ravenna, took
advantage of this foible of his army: he rode from rank to rank, calling by
name his officers, and even some of his private men, recommending to them their
country, and their honor; and above all, to show what they could do for the
love of their mistresses. The same spirit which led the men to so extravagant
an adoration of women, when in happiness and prosperity, dictated to them, that
even their punishments, when absolutely necessary, should not offend against
decency. In the ninth century, women by the laws of Kenneth, king of Scots,
were punished by drowning, or burying alive.

From what has been now related, many of our fair readers may, perhaps,
imagine, that in the times we have been delineating, women were more completely
happy, than in any other period of the world: but this was not in reality the
case; custom, which governs all things with the most absolute sway, had,
through a long succession of years, given her sanction to such combats as were
undertaken, either to defend the innocence, or display the beauty of women.
Custom, therefore, either obliged a man to fight for a woman who desired him,
or marked the refusal with eternal infamy; but custom did not oblige him in
every other part of his deportment, to behave to this woman, or to the sex in
general, with that respect and politenss, which have happily distinguished the
character of more modern times. The same man, who, in the middle ages, would,
at the command, or for the defense of a woman, have encountered giants, or
gigantic difficulties, had but little idea of adding to her happiness, by
supplying her with the comforts and elegancies of life; and would have thought
himself affronted, had she asked him to stoop and ease her of a part of that
domestic slavery, which almost in every country falls to the lot of women. But,
besides, men had in those ages nothing but that kind of romantic gallantry to
recommend them; ignorant of letters, of arts, sciences, and of every thing that
refines human nature, they were in every thing, where gallantry was not
concerned, rough and unpolished in their manners and behavior: their time was
spent in drinking, war, gallantry, and idleness; and in their hours of
relaxation, they were but little in company with their women; and when they
were, the indelicacies of the carousal, or the cruelties of the field, were
almost the only subjects they had to talk of. Hence they could not be proper
companions for a sex, who, shrinking with reluctance from indelicacy and
barbarity, generally turn their thoughts to softer subjects.

In the sixth century, while the persons and characters of women were defended
with a romantic enthusiasm, incredible in our days, they were, at the same
time, considered as beings contaminated with a certain degree of pollution;
which, at particular periods, was so great, that it rendered every thing
unclean which they approached; hindered the operation of medicines, the effects
of churning and brewing, and even stopped the growth of vegetables. The surest
road to paradise was to abstain from women; they were not suffered to approach
the altar, nor to touch the pall which covered it, unless when, by the priests,
it was delivered to them to be washed. The eucharist was too holy to be touched
by their naked hands; they were, therefore, ordered by the canons of the
church, to have a white linen glove upon the hand into which they received it.

From the subversion of the Roman empire, to the fourteenth or fifteenth
century, women spent most of their time alone; almost entire strangers to the
joys of social life; they seldom went abroad, but to be spectators of such
public diversions and amusements as the fashion of the times countenanced.
Francis the First was the first who introduced women on public days to court;
before his time, nothing was to be seen at any of the courts of Europe, but
long-bearded politicians, plotting the destruction of the rights and liberties
of mankind; and warriors clad in complete armor, ready to put their plots in
execution. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, elegance had scarcely
any existence, and even cleanliness was hardly considered as laudable. The use
of linen was not known; and the most delicate of the fair sex wore woollen
shifts. In Paris, they had meat only three times a week; and one hundred livres
(above five pounds) was a large portion for a young lady. The better sort of
citizens used splinters of wood, and rags dipped in oil, instead of candles;
which in those days, were hadly to be met with. Wine was only to be had at the
shops of the apothecaries, where it was sold as a cordial; and to ride in a
two-wheeled cart, along the dirty rugged streets, was reckoned a grandeur of so
enviable a nature, that Philip the Fair, prohibited the wives of citizens from
enjoying it. In the time of Henry VIII. of England, the peers of the realm
carried their wives behind them on horseback, when they went to London; and, in
the same manner, took them back to their country-seats, with hoods of waxed
linen over their heads, and wrapped in mantles of cloth to secure them from the
cold. Many of those things, we now suppose, must have been hard and
disagreeable to the delicacy of female nature. Custom, however, must have
reconciled them to what would appear to us almost intolerable. But there was
one misfortune, even beyond the power of custom to alleviate; they were in
perpetual danger of being accused of witchcraft, and suffering all the
cruelties and indignities of a mob, instigated by supersttion and enthusiasm;
or being condemned by laws, which were at once a disgrace to humanity and to
sense; even the bloom of youth and beauty, could not save from torture, and
from death; but when age and wrinkles attacked a woman, if any thing uncommon
happened in her neighborhood, she was almost sure of atoning with her life,
for a crime which she never committed.

When we take a retrospective view of these sketches, when we compare the times
in which women were only treated with romantic gallantry, and strangers almost
to every enjoyment which did not flow from that source; with these, in which
they share our friendship, and partake of almost all our joys, we cannot
hesitate a moment to declare, that the present condition of the fair sex, every
thing impartially considered, is greatly preferable to what it was while they
were approached as demigoddesses, and in the scale of political society treated
as ciphers.

CHAPTER VIII. The same Subject continued.
IN the last chapter, we traced the condition of women down almost to our own
times, and shall now resume the subject, by endeavoring to give some account
of the present rank and consequence of the sex. But as it would be a task much
too tedious, and subject us to many useless repetitions, to consider this
subject in every particular state and kingdom of the world, we shall divide it
into three distinct heads. In the first, we shall treat of the most savage and
uncultivated states of human life. In the next, of those holding a middle
degree between barbarity and cultivation. And in the last, of those where civil
society is arrived to the greatest perfection.

Man, in that rude and uncultivated state in which he originally appears in all
countries, before he has been formed by society, and instructed by experience,
is an animal, differing but little from the wild beasts that surround him; like
them, so great a part of his time is employed in procuring food, that he has
but little left for any other purpose; and like them too, his ideas seldom
extend farther than to a few sensual gratifications, in which he indulges
without reason, and without economy: thoughtless of the wants and hardships of
tomorrow, and, consequently, but ill provided against them. Among his few
sensual gratifications, we may reckon the pleasure arising from his commerce
with the other sex: if, in savage life, we can call such commerce a pleasure,
where, entire strangers to every reciprocal affection, and intellectual feeling
arising therefrom men are totally indifferent what sentiments their fem^le
partners entertain of them, provided they submit tamely to satisfying their
appetites; and where (...) regard the men as lords and masters, whom, in all
things, they are obliged implicity to obey.

As women are, by nature, weaker than men, their rank and condition must every
where be invariably regulated, by the esteem and regard of that sex. The esteem
and regard of the men must be founded on their own susceptibility of nature;
and that susceptibility must be called forth into action by the mental
qualifications and personal beauties of the women. In savage life, unless when
urged by revenge, or delighted with the chase, men are dull, phlegmatic, and
almost destitute of susceptibility: women have hardly any mental
qualifications; nursed in dirt and slovenliness, with but little ornament, and
still less art in disposing of it; burnt with the sun, and bedaubed with
grease, they are objects rather of disgust than desire; hence they are not the
objects of love, but of animal appetite only; are seldom admitted to any
distinguishing rank, and as seldom exempted from any distinguishing slavery.

As in savage states, where hunting, fishing, and war are the only employments,
vigorous exertions of strength and courage are necessary: were women
sufficiently endowed with these, they might supply every deficiency, and
greatly enhance their value in the eyes of the men. By these, however, they can
conciliate no affection, nor arise to any consequence; they are qualities
denied them by nature, and they cannot reap the fruit of what she has not
planted. In civilized countries, women have a thousand arts to supply this
deficiency of strength and courage, and maintain a balance of power against the
men; arts which, with a tolerable assistance from nature, they have brought to
such perfection, that they can often engage the heart in their favor, while
the (...) is against them: but in savage life, cast as it (...) the lap of
naked nature, exposed to every har^^^^p, with every bleak wind of heaven
blowing on their head, their forms are but little engaging; with nothing that
can be called culture, their latent qualities, if they have any, are like the
diamond while enclosed in the rough flint, incapable of showing any luster:
thus destitute of every thing by which they can excite love, or acquire esteem;
destitute of beauty to charm, or art to sooth, the tyrant man; they are by him
destined to perform every mean and servile office, a fate which constantly
attends the weak, where power and not reason dictates the law. In this the
American and other savage women differ widely from those of Asia, who, if they
are destitute of the qualifications necessary to gain esteem, have beauty,
ornament, and the art of exciting love.

Among the brute animals all are equal, and superior strength only can acquire
superior power: thus the bull or the stag who has beaten the whole herd, in
consequence becomes their leader. Exactly the same thing takes place among
savages; he who has given the most signal proofs of his courage and strength,
assumes the right of being chief of the warriors of his own tribe or nation; a
situation in which he is often not distinguished by personal ornaments, or by
that pageantry and show, in Europe and Asia reckoned so necessary an appendage
of authority, but by the authority itself. But this right, however firmly he
was established in it, does not descend to any of his family: if his son
aspires at it, he must acquire it in the same manner as his father. Their
women, as we have hinted above, being by nature disqualified from arriving at
eminence in war, are, consequently, for ever debarred from arriving at superior
rank or power. In civilized countries, a woman acquires some power by being the
mother of a numerous family, who obey her maternal authority, and defend her
honor and her life. But even as a mother, a female savage gains little: her
children daily accustomed to se^ their father treat her nearly as a slave, soon
begin to imitate his example, and either pay little regard to her authority, or
shake it off altogether. Of this the young Hottentots afford a remarkable
proof; the boys are brought up by their mothers till about the age of puberty,
when they are taken from them, and with several ceremonies initiated into the
society of the men; after which it is reckoned manly for them to take the
earliest opportunity of returning to the hut of their mother, and beating her
in the most barbarous manner, to show that they are now out of her
jurisdiction: nor is this a private act, for should the mother complain to the
men of the Kraal, they would only applaud the boy, for showing so laudable a
contempt of the society and authority of women.

To support this single evidence of the wretched condition of women in savage
life, we have unhappily too many collateral proofs. The most rude and barbarous
states of human existence, are those employed wholly in fishing, hunting, and
war; and wherever we find the men altogether employed in this manner, we find
the women either totally neglected, or destined to every slavish, and to every
laborious office. In the Brazils, women are obliged to follow their husbands to
war, and, supplying the place of beasts of burden, to carry their children,
provisions, hammocks, and every thing wanted in the field, on their backs. And
in the isthmus of Darien, they send their women along with warriors and
travelers, to answer every purpose of our baggage-horses.

In every despotic state slavery is a chain; the prince at the head of it
oppresses his courtiers, they oppress the inferior officers, the inferior
officers oppress the whole of the subjects, and every subject oppresses the
women; and so contemptible is the sex, in some countries, that even an alliance
with the first despot of it, confers on them neither dignity nor privilege. The
sovereign of Giaga in Africa, does not exempt his own wives from the slavish
customs of the country; one carries his bow, another his arrows, a third his
provisions, etc.; and when he eats or drinks, they are obliged all to fall down
on their knees in token of respect. The wives and daughters of his subjects are
condemned in the fields to toil along with the slaves, while the men, not less
cruel than idle, many times to stimulate them to labor, bestow an equal degree
of correction upon both. Mamood the Second, emperor of Hindostan, at that time
one of the richest and most extensive monarchies on the globe, contrary to the
custom of his country, had only one wife, whom he obliged to do every part of
his household drudgery. One day having complained, that she had burnt her
fingers in baking his bread, and desired that he would allow her a maid to
assist her, I am, said he, only a trustee for the state, and determined not to
burden it with needless expenses; a speech more adapted to the patriotic pride
of a Greek or Roman, than to the luxurious effeminacy of the East; as it
demonstrated, that every spark of love, and even of humanity, were lost in
attention to his country.

The fondness of a woman for her offspring is so remarkable, that in Scripture
it is represented as the most powerful of all human feelings: Can a woman
forget her sucking child? Yet, to such a degree is the ill-usage of the sex
carried in some savage countries, that it even obliterates this feeling, and
induces them to destroy the female children of their own body, that they may
thereby save them from that wretchedness to which they themselves are subject.
Father Joseph Gumill^, reproving one of the female inhabitants of the banks of
the Oronooko, for this inhuman crime, received the following answer: I wish to
God, Father, I wish to God, that my mother had, by my death, prevented the
manifold distresses I have endured, and have yet to endure as long as I live;
had she kindly stifled me in my birth, I should not have felt the pain of
death, nor the numberless other pains to which life has subjected me. Consider,
Father, our deplorable condition, our husbands go to hunt with their bows and
arrows, and trouble themselves no farther; we are dragged along with one infant
at our breast, and another in a basket: they return in the evening without any
burden, we return with the burden of our children; and though tired with long
walking, are not allowed to sleep, but must labor the whole night in grinding
maize to make chica for them: they get drunk, and in their drunkenness beat us,
draw us by the hair of the head, and tread us under foot: and what have we to
comfort us for slavery, perhaps of twenty years? -- A young wife is brought in
upon us, and permitted to abuse us and our children. Can human nature endure
such tyranny? -- What kindness can we show to our female children, equal to
that of relieving them from such servitude, more bitter a thousand times than
death? I repeat again, Would to God, my mother had put me under ground the
moment I was born Shocking as this description may appear, it is greatly
exceeded by two others exhibited by the Abbe Raynal in his History of the
European settlements; the one by the Spaniards, and the other by the French and
English. We have thought proper to mention them in a note, as they are
practiced by people whom we do not class among savages, and therefore we
cannot, with so much propriety, insert them in the text. Speaking of the first
settlement of St. Domingo, The natives, says he, were indiscriminately chained
together like beasts; those who sunk under their burdens, were compelled to
rise by blows. No intercourse passed between the sexes but by stealth; the men
perished in the mines, and the women in the fields, which they cultivated with
their weak hands. Their constitutions, already exhausted with excessive labor,
were still further impaired by an unwholesome and scanty diet; the mothers
expired with hunger and fatigue, pressing their dead or dying infants to their
breasts, shrivelled and contracted for the want of a proper supply of milk. The
fathers either poisoned themselves, or hanged themselves on those very trees on
which they had just seen their wives and children expire. The whole race became
extinct. In another place, speaking of the slaves of the Europeans in general,
he observes, That such hard labor is required of negro women, both before and
after their pregnancy, that their children are either abortive, or live but a
short time after delivery; mothers, rendered desperate by the punishments which
the weakness of their condition occasions them, snatch sometimes their children
from the cradle, in order to strangle them in their arms, and sacrifice them
with a fury mingled with a spirit of revenge and compassion, that they may not
become the property of their cruel masters.
! Perhaps this complaint may be a little exaggerated; but should even the great
outlines of it be true, they fully evince the deplorable condition of savage
women: and that they may be true, appears from many similar instances among
barbarous nations.

The Greenlanders, who live mostly upon seals, think it sufficient to catch and
bring them on shore, and would rather almost submit to starve, than assist
their women in dragging the cumbrous animals home, in skinning, or dressing
them. In some parts of America, when the men kill any game in the woods, they
fix a mark to a tree, at the root of which they lay it, and traveling many
miles home, send their women to bring it to their habitation; a task which
their own laziness and pride equally forbid. Among many of the tribes of
wandering Arabs, the women are not only obliged to do every domestic and every
rural work; but also, to take care of the horses, which they are obliged to
feed, to dress, to bridle and saddle for the use of their husbands. The Moorish
women, besides being obliged to do all the same kinds of drudgery, have also
some few fields to cultivate; the whole of that labor likewise falls upon
them, while their husbands stand idle specttators of the toil, or sleep
inglorious beneath a neighboring shade. In few savage countries are women
admitted to the honor of eating and drinking with the men; but are obliged to
stand and wait upon them while at meals, to serve them with whatever they call
for, and, after all, to sit down themselves and eat up the refuse of what they
have left; which, unless in times of great plenty, is commonly but a penurious
repast. In Madura, the husband generally speaks to his wife in the most
imperious and contemptuous tone; while she, with fear and trembling, approaches
him, and pronounces not his name, but with the addition of every dignity and
title she can devise; while, in return for all this submission, he frequently
beats and abuses her in the most barbarous manner. Being asked the reason of
such a behavior, one of them answered, As our wives are so much our inferiors,
why should we allow them to eat and drink with us? If they commit faults, why
should they not suffer correction? It is their business only to bring up our
children, pound our rice, make our oil, and do every other kind of drudgery,
purposes to which only their low and inferior natures are adapted.

Among some of the negroes on the coast of Guinea, a wife is never allowed to
appear before her husband, nor to receive any thing from his hand, but in a
kneeling posture. In some parts of America women are not allowed to be present
at their temples, or join in their religious assemblies; and in the houses
where the chiefs meet to consult on affairs of state, they are only suffered to
enter and seat themselves on the floor, on each side of the passage. In
Hindostan they are not allowed to give evidence in any court; and so difficult
is it to shake off the customs of barbarity, that this privilege was but lately
granted them in Scotland. Some of the Caribs, who are remarkable for the
slavery of their women, being asked, why they held them in subjection? We
subject our women, said they, because they are weaker than us, while in Europe
a whole nation of you submit to one man, who is perhaps not so strong as any of
you; and even sometimes, we are told, to one woman, a thing of which we have no
idea. In the kingdom of Potany, so low is the condition of women, that numbers
of female slaves are kept by the great, not to satisfy the appetite of their
master, nor to do his necessary business, but to be hired out to strangers for
the purposes of prostitution. Many of our readers we presume, are not ignorant
of the Circassian custom of breeding young girls, on purpose to be sold in the
public market to the highest bidder. But we decline the subject, afraid that if
the matter be scrupulously examined into, it will be found, that women are in
some degree bought and sold in every country whether savage or civilized.

To all these indignities offered to the sex, we may add the general custom in
many savage countries, of presenting their wives and young women
indiscriminately to strangers for hire; of making them dance naked before them;
and of divorcing, and even in some places of Tartary Of this Dr. Cook relates a
recent example, Some young men belonging to my hospital, says he, returning
home one evening, and having been overtaken with liquor, as they passed by the
Kalmuck tents they went in and gave a woman liquor to intoxicate her; the
husband not being present gave them opportunities of using what liberties they
pleased; in short, it was said she was caught by her husband in the very act.
He dismissed her guests without quarreling with them, put his wife to death,
and, next morning, I, with others, saw them draging the dead body toward a
bridge, from the middle of which he threw it into the river.
, of destroying their wives almost at pleasure. Such, in general, is the
picture of savage life; more particular figures might easily be added to the
group of which it is composed, but we are afraid that it is already
sufficiently disgusting to our fair readers, and would not willingly make it
more so. Women so oppressed with slavery and irritated by ill usage, can have
no affection for their husbands, and but little for their children; and when an
opportunity of shaking off the yoke is offered, it is no wonder that they
betray the one, and leave to fortune, or trample upon, the other. This was
verified in the women of South America. When the Spaniards first arrived in
those regions, the sex soon discovered that they treated them in a very
different manner from that of the natives, and while the unfortunate remains of
the men were endeavoring to separate themselves from the sword that pursued
them, by immense deserts, and almost impenetrable forests; the women ran in
crowds over the bodies of their murdered husbands and children, to enjoy a
consequence and kindness in the arms of the Spaniards, which so much the more
delighted them, as they had never been accustomed to it. To the attachment of
these women we may, in a great measure, ascribe the conquest of the New World;
they usually served the Spaniards as guides, frequently procured them
subsistence, and sometimes betrayed the conspiracies formed against them.

Although such in general is the behavior of savages toward their women, yet,
like all other human actions, that behavior is not so uniformly of a piece, as
not to admit, now and then, of being chequered with something which has more
the appearance of softness and of humanity. This inconsistency of behavior,
more or less, takes place in all nations, and is an incontestible proof that
manners and customs are every where more the offspring of chance, than of
systematic arrangement. Among the Hurons, and Iroquois, though women are in
every other respect treated as slaves, such is the power of matrons over their
own families, that they can prevail upon them to go to war, or desist from it,
as they please; and, if a matron even wishes to engage in a war party, any one
who is not connected with her, either with a view to appease the ghosts of any
of her slain relations, or to procure prisoners to supply their places, she has
only to make him a present of a collar, or a necklace of shells, which operates
as the mandate of a fair lady did in the times of chivalry, and seldom fails of
engaging the champion to take up the hatchet in her favor.

When the Iroquois return from war, if they have taken any prisoners, they
constantly set apart some of them for the use of the public, and these the
council of the nation dispose of as they think proper. But such, in this
particular, is the power of the mothers of families, that they may, if they
please, invalidate this determination of the council, and dispose of the
prisoners otherwise, or become sole arbitresses of the life or death of such as
have been absolved or condemned by it. We have already observed that the
dignity of a chief among savages, depending upon personal prowess, is commonly
elective. Among the Hurons it is, however, not only hereditary, but descends in
the female line, so that it is not the son of the chief, but his sister's son
who succeeds him; and if this whole line be extinct, then the sole power of
choosing another chief is vested in the noblest matron. Every Huron chief is
assisted by a council, and one of this council must be chosen out of every
distinguished family; this choice too is the prerogative of the women, and they
may, and even sometimes do, appoint one of their own sex. It is farther related
by some authors, that every thing among this people is transacted in the name
of the women; but those who have had the best opportunities of being acquainted
with their politics assure us, that this authority is no more than nominal, and
that the men acquaint the women only with such affairs as they think proper,
and make use of their names as in other countries one does the seal of an
office.

Among the Natches the supreme authority is also hereditary, and descends not
only in the female line, but seems to devolve equally on a male and female of
that line; the male is called the man chief, and the female the woman chief.
The woman chief is not the wife, but the sister, or other nearest female
relation of the man chief. She is attended by as numerous a retinue, and has
the same a^thority, deference, and respect, as the man chief; but these are not
all, she has, besides, the most singular female privilege that history gives
any account of: when she dies, not only her husband, but even all her retinue,
are obliged to follow her into the other world, that she may there be served
and attended upon by them, in the same manner as in this. We shall have
occasion to mention afterward, that in the East it has been a custom time
immemorial, for wives to burn themselves on the funeral pile of their deceased
husbands, and for the slaves, and even horses of the great, to be buried with
them, in order to serve them in the other world; but this is the only instance
we find of a husband being obliged to sacrifice himself to the manes of his
wife; and even this instance will not so much excite our amazement, when we
consider that the Natches worship the sun, and that the woman chief is by them
held as a descendant of that luminary; while the man to whom she is married is
but a common, and generally an inferior mortal, that she may the more easily
govern and enslave him in life, as well as at death, and in the world to come.
Something similar to this is practiced by the Africans about Zaara, where birth
and rank impart to some women a right of choosing a husband, whom they keep in
extreme subjection, and even condemn to the most abject slavery, when
dissatisfied with his conduct or condescension. The sisters of the Grand
Seignior are also generally married to the officers of that tyrant, whom they
govern with the most absolute sway. From this honor and deference paid to the
woman chief among the Natches, we should naturally imagine that the condition
of their women should be in general preferable to what it is among other
savages; and we meet with a few anecdotes in their history, which seem to hint
that some other females, besides the great woman chief, have particular
privileges and honors conferred on them; but however this be, it is certain
that the sex are in general condemned to the same slavery as in other parts of
America.

Among the few female privileges which glimmer through the horrid scene of
savage life, that of personal liberty is undoubtedly the greatest; the love of
savages is seldom directed so much to any individual as to the sex in general;
hence they have little jealousy, at least not enough to prompt them to confine
their women: but, though in many savage countries they are so far from being
jealous of, that they will even offer their wives to strangers; in others, they
seem tenacious of the rights of the husband, and afraid of every strange
invader. Captain Wallace, in his passage through the straights of Magellan,
having sent out a boat to go on shore, some of the natives who were on board
his ship, leaped into their canoes and paddled after her, shouting and making a
great noise; the people in the ship could not understand the meaning of this,
those in the boat were as much at a loss, till they approached the shore, when
they discovered some women gathering muscles among the rocks, who, on hearing
the alarm from their countrymen, ran away as fast as they could scour. No
people seem more rude and barbarous than the inhabitants of this coast, and
yet, from this fear, it seems they are not entirely strangers to jealousy; a
passion, which, though far from being the general characteristic of savages, is
yet in several other places to be found among them. But then, it is commonly
the paroxysm of an hour which rages violently and again subsides, till a new
occasion call it forth, and not that settled and cautious suspicion of warmer
regions, and half civilized people, to whom, -- trifles light as air,
Are confirmations strong, as proofs of holy writ.


That women should have much property, among a people who hardly possess any
thing but the provisions of the present hour, and the empty walls of a
miserable hut, is not to be expected; of what little there is, they have,
however, commonly a share; but the clothes, arms, and utensils belonging to
savages, being often buried along with them, and the land, for the most part,
the property of the community, there is seldom any thing to inherit that is
worth transmitting from one generation to another. Dignity is hereditary only
among the Hurons and Natches; in almost every other barbarous country it is but
imperfectly known. Authority is derived solely from personal strength and
courage, and hardly attended with any badges of distinction. In polite
countries, women share in some degree the authority, and generally the honor
of their husbands; in savage life they share in neither. It is, however, of
some little advantage to be married to a war chief, and in some places to be
the mother of a numerous family, who can provide for, or defend them when
necessary. The privilege of precedence, which in Europe has the power of
fascinating almost every female mind, does not disturb the peace of savages,
nor kindles up a spark of envy in their breasts. What we formerly observed of
the women of the ancient Germans, Celtes, and Gauls, may be equally applied to
the savage women of the present times; they are commonly their only physicians
and surgeons, and, in some cases are possessed of secrets, by which they have
cured diseases that have baffled the skill of expert European physicians. This
sometimes procures them a little more regard, and gives them a greater
consequence than they would otherwise enjoy, but they derive still a greater
degree of consequence from a superstitious source; many of them are supposed to
be endowed with a supernatural, or magical power of curing diseases, and making
discoveries in futurity; ignorance often applies to these, to recover what it
has lost, or to procure what it desires; and, however they may be treated at
others times, they are sure, on these occasions, to have the liberty of doing
and directing as they please.

From these rude scenes of uncultivated nature, where the ills attend on female
life are so numerous, and its privileges so few; let us now turn our eyes
toward such people as, in their progressive state, have shook off the rudeness
of the most savage barbarity, and are beginning to advance to a social and
civil condition.

The first step which a people sunk in brutality of manners commonly make
toward cultivation, is by beginning to bestow some attention on the future, as
well as on the present hour, and to provide against those times of scarcity,
whose severity their own neglect and inattention has brought upon them so
often, and with such accumulated misery; this, a little consideration easily
points out to them to be most readily accomplished, by turning from the
predatory to the pastoral state; and so having constantly in their possession a
stock of tame animals, any of which they can take and use at such times and
seasons when they cannot find a supply of provisions in the rivers and forests
around them. In this state are the greatest part of the wandering hordes of
Tartars and Arabs, who, by pasturage alone, procure to themselves no
uncomfortable subsistence. As this is but one step in the progress from savage
to civil life, the progress of female improvement has among them advanced but
one step also; the passion for dress, a passion so natural to the sex, wherever
they meet with the least kind indulgence, begins to show itself; while among
the rudest savages, it is repressed by unkindness, and often obliterated by
oppression. Women only dress to give an additional luster to their charms, and
only wish to be charming to please the men; but, where the love of the men is
directed more to the sex than the individual, a woman has no motive to excite
even a wish of being superiorly beautiful. On the contrary, where love is
directed more to the individual than to the sex, where the men distinguish by a
peculiar attention and regard her, who has the art, by ornament and dress, to
appear more charming than her companions, who are not less beholden to nature;
there, the most powerful motive to appear beautiful is held out. The passion
for ornament among the Tartars and Arabs proceeds from this source: the men are
fond of seeing their wives loaded with finery, and will undergo any hardship,
or part almost with any thing but their horses, to procure it for them.

There are a variety of places in Africa, and even some in Asia, where,
although the inhabitants have arrived at the pastoral state, they appear but a
little removed from the barbarity of the mere fisher and hunter; but, where
they have carried the ideas of association and civilization so far, as to apply
themselves to agriculture, they are in general somewhat more humane, and the
effects of that humanity show themselves, in some parts of their behavior, to
the fair sex; we are not, however, to imigine that this rule is general, but,
like all others, liable to many exceptions.

On some parts of the coast of Guinea, the women are even so far distinguished
as to have a vote in their public assemblies; while in many others, their
condition is wretched beyond our imagination. On the banks of the Niger, the
women are generally handsome, if beauty can consist in symmetry of features,
and not in color; they are modest, affable, and faithful, and an air of
innocence appears in their looks and in their language, which is inexpressibly
soft; their men, not insensible of these perfections, treat them with a
friendship, and a softness of love beyond the reach of the frigid ideas of a
northern. When we approach more toward the East, the complexion and character
of the Africans become worse. Situated in an ungrateful soil, hardly improvable
by culture, they are obliged to subsist mostly upon the produce of their bow
and of their hook; their women have not the amiable modesty, nor engaging
beauty of those on the banks of the Niger; their language, like the soil they
inhabit, is harsh and dsagreeable; and they are to the men objects of but
little love, and have almost no political consequence.

In the island of Formosa, and among some tribes of the Peruvians, daughters
are more regarded than sons, because, as soon as a woman is married, contrary
to the custom of other countries, she brings her husband home with her to her
father's house, and he becomes one of the family; so that parents derive
support and family-strength from the marriage of a daughter; whereas sons, on
their marriage, leave the family for ever. Besides the inhabitants of the banks
of the Niger, there are several other people in Africa who do not treat their
women with that rudeness and barbarity, which we should naturally expect from a
people so little cultivated. In particular there is one tribe distinguished by
the name of Pholeys, whose constant maxim is, if possible, to live in peace;
who are no indifferent proficients in some of the arts of civil life; and,
perhaps, second to no people on earth in benevolence and humanity: their women
have all the advantages of society, and all the indulgence of friendship and
love.

Though pasturage, agriculture, and every thing that brings mankind into
society, is generally in favor of women; yet the first efforts of a people in
agriculture commonly lay an additional load of labor on the shoulders of that
sex; so that they lose, at first, by an institution, which afterward turns
greatly to their advantage. This is the case in many parts of Asia and Africa;
imperfectly acquainted with the cultivation of the ground, it yields them but
an indifferent increase; to cultivate it is, therefore, considered as an
employment not worthy of the time of men, but only fit for women, who cannot in
any other thing employ themselves to greater advantage. Hence, to all the
labors to which they had formerly been accustomed, is added those of digging
the ground, sowing the seed, and reaping the harvest; toils which, in a sultry
climate, must be exceedingly disagreeable to the delicate constitutions of a
sex, which nature seems to have formed for softer purposes. But we have already
had occasion to enumerate too many of the evils to which (...) s^x are
subjected; we shall therefore no^ (...) their improvement toward the that
state (...) find them in polished society, than backwards to that savage one,
over which, for the sake of humanity, we would wish to throw a veil.

Though politeness teaches us to consider the confinement of women as an
unlawful exertion of superior power, and to shudder at it as an unmerited
severity; yet we find it practiced almost all over Asia, Africa, and even in
some parts of Europe: but what seems rather extraordinary, is, that wherever it
takes place, it affords a demonstrative proof of the inhabitants being arrived
some degrees farther in civilization than mere savages, who have hardly any
love, and, consequently, as little jealousy; who, not regarding their women so
much as to be solicitous about their good behavior, give loose to their
freedom, and are unconcerned about their conduct.

This confinement of the sex, which we shall have occasion to discuss more
fully afterward, does not appear to be extremely rigid in the empire of the
Mogul; it is, perhaps less so in China, and in Japan hardly exists. In the
dominions of the Grand Signior, women are more strictly guard^d; and in Persia
have, time imm^morial, hardly enjoyed the least degree of lib^^ty, so powerful
^s the rage of jealousy, and so rooted the opinion of female frailty. But
though ^^men are confined in the Turkish empire, they ^xperience every other
in^ulgence; they are all^w^d, at stated times, to go to the public baths; their
apartments are richly, if not elegantly furnished; they have a train of female
slaves to serve and amuse them* and their persons are ado^ned with evey costly
ornament* which their fa^hers or husbands can (...) short, the^r (...), upon
the whole, seems so eligib^^, that lady M^^^ague scrup^^, not (...) affirm,
that they are the only free and happy women on the globe; though we rather
suspect, that her ladyship would not have changed her English freedom for all
the finery and gloom of the first Haram, or even of the seraglio of
Constantinople. Notwithstanding the strictness of confinement in Persia, their
women are treated with several indulgences; perhaps to divert their attention
from brooding on the wretchedness of their situation, they are loaded with the
finest silks, and ornamented with the jewels of the East; but all these
trappings, however elegant, or however gilded, are only like the golden chains
sometimes made use of to bind a royal prisoner.

The Mahomedan women, in the empire of the Mogul, are rather of more
consequence than either in Turkey or Persia. Among the lower and middling
ranks, they are not strictly confined; and in the seraglio, they sometimes
acquire no small influence over the despot, at whose frown so extensive an
empire trembles. Noor-Jehan, whom we formerly mentioned by the name of
Mher-ul-Ni^sa, having become the favorite wife of the emperor Jehangire, soon
afterward placed her own relations in almost all the principal employments of
the empire, introduced such luxury and magnificence, that to use the words of
an oriental writer, expensive pageants, and sumptuous entertainments, became
the whole business of the court; the voice of music never ceased by day in the
street, and the sky was enlightened at night with fireworks and illuminations:
her name was joined with that of the emperor on the current coin; she was the
spring which moved the machine of the state; her family took rank immediately
after the princes of the blood and were admitted even to the most secret
apartments of the seraglio. Such, however, was only the influence of superior
beauty, and superior sense; it was not common for women to govern in this
manner; though they frequently moved in degrees of inferior consequence. The
seraglios of people of rank are guarded with a stricter severity than those of
the lower order; such people, every where, have a mixture of pride and
jealousy, which far surpasses the simple feelings of the clown: besides the
disagreeableness of perfidy in his women, the grandee adds to it, the stain
which his honor would suffer, should any of them be corrupted by one of
inferior quality; and even the women themselves are said to glory in their
confinement, as it conceals them from vulgar eyes; and there have been
instances, where they rather chose to be burned to death, when their apartments
had accidentally taken fire, than submit to the indelicacy of being exposed to
public view.

Where so great a number of wives and concubines are allowed, an almost
unlimitted power is necessary to restrain them from the utmost disorder and
confusion. This power is the same despotism in miniature, which prevails in the
state; and has the same effect upon the passions, reducing them all under the
dominion of fear. Even female jealousy, which, in other countries, transports
the soul into the regions of fury and despair, is curbed within the walls of a
Haram; the women may there repine in secret, but they must clothe their
features with cheerfulness when their lord appears; contumacy only draws down
on them immediate punishment; they are degraded, chastised, divorced; and even
put to death, according to the degree of their crime, or the indignation they
have excited: their friends may murmur in secret at their fate; but there is no
redress in the laws of their country, nor does public justice take any
cognizance of the affairs of the Haram. Though the laws of Hindostan suffer
women thus to be abused, yet so sacred are their persons, that they must not in
the least be violated, nor even looked at by any one but their husbands. This
f^^ale privilege has given an opportunity of executing many conspiracies;
warriors, in such carriages as are usually employed to convey women, have been
often conveyed, without examination, into the apartments of the great; from
whence, instead of issuing forth in the smiles of beauty, they have rushed out
in the terror of arms, and laid the tyrant at their feet.

The concealment of their women is a sacred tenet among the Mahomedans of
Hidostan; even brothers cannot visit their sisters in private; and strangers
must, upon no account, see them; for another to be conscious of the existence
of a man's wives seems even a crime; and he looks surly and offended if their
health is enquired after: in every country, honor consists in that which a man
is most solicitous to secure; this, in Hindostan, is the chastity of his wives;
a point, without which, the Asiatic must not live. This opinion the despot
always encourages; as the possession of the women of his most powerful
subjects, is the best pledge of their fidelity, when without the reach of his
immediate chastisement: when the governor of a province falls under the
suspicion of his prince, the first step taken against him, is, an order that he
shall send his women to court: if he sends but one, though far from being his
greatest favo^rite, she is considered as the most inviolable security for his
good behavior: if he hesitates, or promises obedience at some future period,
when it shall be more convenient, he is immediately declared a rebel; his
affection for the woman whom he sent as a hostage, is not considered as the tie
which binds him to fidelity, but his honor is placed in her person; and that
honor, in case of disloyalty, would be in the power of his sovereign to
violate. So sacred are women in India, that, even in the midst of slaughter and
devastation, the common soldier leaves them unmolested; the Haram is a
sanctuary against all the licentiousness of victory; and ruffians, covered with
the blood of a husband, shrink back with veneration from the secret apartment
of his wives. Whether this depends upon custom, or on religion, is uncertain;
but it is not altogether confined to India. At Constantinople, when the Sultan
sends an order to strangle a state-criminal, and to seize on his effects; the
ruffians, who execute it, enter not into the Haram, nor touch any thing
belonging to the women.

But in spite of all this seeming veneration, this sacredness of person, the
women of Asia are, in general, only a kind of ciphers, held up to be the sport
of fortune; subjected, not only to the nod of a tyrant lord, but also to his
eunuchs, still more merciless and tyrannical. Educated in a manner which tends
only to debase their minds, by obliterating their virtues; torn with jealousy
and chagrin, even their pleasures are joyless; and in a very few years, their
period of youth and beauty being over, that of neglect, which is long and
unsupportable, commences. Solomon had threescore queens, and fourscore
concubines; but a petty Hindoo chief has been known to have two thousand women
confined within the walls of his Haram; and appropriated to his pleasure only.
Strange that the rights of humanity and of population should be so publicly
violated! but they are not violated by the Asiatics alone; the Europeans,
caught with the contagion, have imitated their example. The Portugueze, after
their first settlement in India, became so debauched, that many of them had
seven or eight concubines; which they did not confine like the natives, but
obliged them to labor, and forced from them the money they had earned; nor
have other Europeans refrained from debaucheries, which disgraced their
religion and their humanity.

The whole of the ancient inhabitants of Hindostan, distinguished by the name
of Hindoos, are divided into classes, or casts, every one of which rises
gradually in rank and dignity above another; and every one of which most
rigidly keeps within itself, nor ever mixes, either by marriage or any kind of
connection, with those beneath it: hence women have not, as in other countries,
an opportunity of advancing themselves by marriage; being obliged to marry into
the cast to which they belong: the Hindoo women are not, however, guarded with
that strictness and severity, which is exercised over the Mahomedans. In some
places, even those of considerable rank appear publicly in the street. In
Ethiopia, the women are of more consequence than among the Mahomedans, or
Hindoos of Asia. Poncet tells us, that the sister of the reigning emperor,
while he was there, had a palace of her own, appeared frequently in public,
mounted on a mule richly caparisoned, and surrounded by four or five hundred
women, sounding tabors and singing verses in her praise. In China, which, for
politeness of manners, is little inferior to any part of Europe, women seem to
enjoy the same rank, and to share in the honors and dignities of their
husbands. The emperor may raise to the dignity of empress, any one of his women
whom he pleases; and we are informed by Duhalde, that on an occasion of this
nature, after all the great officers and mandari^s had paid their compliments
to the emperor* the princesses of the blood, and all the ladies of the first
quality, with the wives of the great mandarins, went to the palace; into which
being introduced, according to their rank, by a mistress of the ceremonies, the
first eunuch presented himself, whom the mistress of the ceremonies thus
addressed: I humbly beseech the empress, in behalf of this assembly, to
vouchsafe her presence, and place herself on the throne; which she having done,
all the ladies made two curtsies, fell on their knees, and struck their
foreheads against the ground; then stood up, in the same order, in the
profoundest silence, while the empress descended from the throne and withdrew.
Though honors of such a nature are paid to a Chinese empress, and to every
woman according to her rank, yet the fair sex are hardly entrusted with any
property, and have no fortunes. Circumstances which, though at first view we
may consider as an affront and indignity, are, notwithstanding, among the
Chinese, symptoms of love and regard. That wise people, solicitous of their own
happiness, and of that of the sex, endeavor, by this means, to prevent a woman
from being chosen as a wife, on the sordid motives of interest and avarice. A
wife, therefore, being constantly chosen from love, and having no separate
interest from that of her husband, nor any independence to render her undutiful
and impertinent, the chain of matrimony, which in many other countries is made
of iron, is, in China, only a silken cord. In Japan, the women of the Deyario,
or great hereditary emperor and high priest, seem to be venerated and honored
in a degree not much inferior to himself. And in Siam, we have an account, by
Kempfer, of a funeral of one of their queens; so magnificent, as to leave no
room to doubt that the women are not considered there in a despicable light.

Before we take our leave of Asia, it may not be improper to observe, that the
account here given of the condition of their women; an account strangely
chequered with good and evil, but in which the evil, for the most part, greatly
predominates, may be materially different from the ideas conceived of it by our
fair readers, who have formed their opinions from eastern tales and romances;
which, if not contradicted by facts, would impose upon us a belief, that their
women were the most beautiful, and the most happy beings in the creation;
because the men constantly approach them in the most submissive manner, while
every flowery epithet, for which the eastern language is so remarkable, hangs
upon their tongue; and every promise they make, is to last for life, or for
eternity. But the reverse of the picture shows us, that they keep in the
cruelest subjection and confinement, the beings they seem to adore; and while
they appear to humble themselves at their feet, are actually the jailors who
confine, and the tyrants who enslave them. Even among the Chinese, whom we may
reckon the politest of the Asiatics, wives are sometimes strangled at the death
of their husbands, that they may go and serve them in the other world.

Such as we have described, is the condition of women, among many of those
people who hold a kind of middle rank, between savage barbarity and
civilization; but as the culture of manners, and of the social principle among
mankind, does not always proceed upon an uniform plan, but is varied, according
to the genius, to the necessities, and to a thousand other circumstances, we
find one nation often excelling another in one or two points of refinement,
while in every other point of the same kind, it is greatly behind it. Thus, in
Otaheite, an island lately discovered in the South Sea, the inhabitants, though
hitherto unacquainted with any part of the globe, but a few more islands
scattered around them; though sons of pure nature, and almost entirely fed and
clothed by her hand; though without the least knowledge of art, or glimmering
of science, are, nevertheless, social among themselves, civil and polite to the
fair sex, allowing them every rank and dignity, and even the supreme authority
of the island, when it is their birthright; treating them with a deference and
indulgence, which the weakness and softness of their nature seems to require;
and yet, though they have carried their politeness thus far; though the two
sexes constantly live together in promiscuous society; at meals, which bring
the people of polite nations together, the sexes in Otaheite are separated. The
women sometimes serve the men at their repasts; but never eat with them, or in
their company; so that it is presumable, the action of eating or drinking is,
in this island, ranked among the number of female indelicacies: we, who are
constantly used to other manners and customs, reckon it extraordinay that women
should refuse to eat in the presence of men; but it is still more
extraordinary, that some of the chiefs of this people, either from a principle
of pride, or for some other reason that we are not acquainted with, will not
deign to put any thing into their own mouths, but, like children, must be
constantly fed by their women. Perhaps the same cause, which induces the
Otaheitean to this slabbering dignity, operating in Europe, would induce a man
to be served in plate, or to ride in his coach; in the East, to burn costly
perfumes, add more beauties to those already languishing in his seraglio, and
more slaves to those who attend on his person; and, in America, to hang more of
the ghastly spoils of war round his body, and add to the natural ferocity of
his visage, by painting himself frightful.

It is somewhat remarkable, that over the greatest part of America, which, at
present, may be called the native country of savage barbarism, the men have in
general but one wife; while in Asia and Africa, where they are commonly a
little more civilized, an unrestrained polygamy should still take place; and
that, while in many other respects they treat their women better, this custom,
which gives them their rivals for their inseparable companions, should not have
been abolished. But so permanent and unalterable are the customs of the East,
and particularly this of a plurality of wives, that, in all probability, it
will be among the last of the chains of female slavery that will be broken; and
if we can believe many of the missionaries, who were sent to propagate
Christianity among them, there were none of the precepts of that religion,
which they found so much difficulty of making them conform to, as that of
confining themselves to one wife; a thing which they thought so absurd and
unreasonable, that they could not believe it to be agreeable to the will of the
great Lord of the universe.

CHAPTER IX. The same Subject continued.
IN these imperfect sketches, which we have already given of the rank and
condition of ancient and modern women, we are sorry to say, that it was long
before we found them getting into possession of the common rights of mankind;
that at present, in more than one quarter of the globe, they are the most
abject slaves; and in much more than another, perpetual prisoners: while in
that little corner of it, called Europe, they only possess the consequence to
which they seem entitled by nature, in the scale of intelligent beings. It is,
therefore, with pleasure we now arrive at that part of our history, which leads
us to consider their condition in polished and civil society; which, in other
words, is considering it only in Europe; after having seen it in a ^^ght, which
does so little honor to our sex, and adds so much wretchedness to theirs, in
every other part o^ the globe.

But though the fair sex are, in Europe, commonly treated with an affection and
indulgence, which in other parts they are either quite strangers to, or only
enjoy on particular occasions; yet, as all Europe is not equally cultivated in
manners, the condition of women is not in every part of it equally eligible.

Russia, which we consider as an European nation, though comprehending in its
dominions a part of Asia, has only begun a few years ago to assume the polish
of the Europeans; and is as yet far from having attained that softness of
behavior, which must distinguish every people before they can treat, with
propriety, a sex, whose acute feelings, both of body and of mind* demand lenity
and indulgence. The condition of women in Russia is, therefore, much less
desirable than it is in England, France, or Italy. A late empress of Russia, as
a punishment for some female frailties, ordered a most beautiful young lady of
family to be publicly knouted, in a manner which was hardly less indelicate
than severe. The same empress, at another time, allowed several ladies of the
first quality to suffer the punishment of the knout publicly, and afterward to
have their tongues cut out: while these cruel sentences were executing, they
were exposed on the backs of men, with no covering, but a scanty petticoat.
Such were the Russians only a few years ago; when in every other part of
Europe, and even among people whom we call barbarians, the law, when
necessarily obliged to inflict punishment on female delinquents, never violated
the rules of decency. It has been asserted by many travelers, that a Russian
bride, on her wedding-night, presented the bridegroom with a whip of her own
making, in token of her subjection; and thought herself much slighted, if he
did not immediately make a trial of it upon her person. Later travelers,
however, assure us, that if ever such custom did exist, they could find no
remaining traces of it at present.

Though the women at Petersburg are not confined to their apartments, they go
little abroad, being but just emerging from a state of barbarity. In their
conversation, and their actions, there is hardly any thing of that softness and
delicacy which distinguishes the sex in other parts of Europe; even their
exercises and diversions have more of the masculine than the feminine. The
present empress, with the ladies of her court, sometimes divert themselves by
shooting at a mark. Drunkenness, the vice of almost every cold climate, they
are so little ashamed of, that not many years ago, a lady would have returned
to the house of her friend the next day, to thank her for doing her the
pleasure of making her drunk the day before; nor is it long since the
regulations for the assemblies, at the court of Petersburgh, contained this
remarkable article; an article which, perhaps, is still extant: And it is
further ordered, that ladies shall not get drunk upon any pretense whatever,
nor gentlemen before nine o'clock.

However unfavourable this account of the Russian women may appear, their
condition is far from being so despicable, as we might from thence naturally
imagine. They share the rank and splendor of the families of which they are
sprung, and of the husbands with whom they marry, and even the supreme
authority; which at present is enjoyed by an empress, whose head does honor to
her nation and to her sex; although on some occasions the virtues of her heart
have been much suspected. In the military, the widows and daughters, as well as
sons of officers, are provided for by government; the widows, if young, are
allowed one year's pay, according to the rank of their husbands, by way of a
portion; if old, they have a fourth of the pay of their husbands during life,
and their daughters have the same till the age of fifteen; when they are
supposed to be fit to marry, or otherwise to provide for themselves. In civil
life, the sex are protected from insult by several salutary laws, and, except
among the peasants, are exempted from every kind of toil and slavery, enjoy
such portions as are given them, or fall to their share by heritage; and, upon
the whole, seem approaching fast to the enjoyment of that consequence to which
they have already arrived in several parts of Europe.

In the other northern countries of Europe, the state of women is, in many
respects, but mean and contemptible. In Lapland, Norway, and Poland, they have
hardly even separate apartments, except in some houses of their first nobility.
Estates, as well those that are acquired, as those that are hereditary, descend
to the children in the following proportions: in Poland, a son has always two
shares, and a daughter one; nor can a father dispose of his fortune otherwise,
without a judicial sentence to enable him so to do. In Denmark, women may
succeed as heirs to any inheritance, but no female of whatever rank or
condition, can sell, dispose of, or in any other manner alienate any land, but
must leave it to the heir at law, who, on her demise, is empowered to take
possession of it; notwithstanding any devise, bargain, or sale that she may
have made in her lifetime to the contrary. In Britain, daughters are excluded
from inheriting hereditary estates, so long as there are any sons alive; but
such estates as the fathers have acquired, they may give to their daughters, or
leave to them by will, though they have sons at the same time living. In
Piedmont, females cannot inherit a fief as long as any of the male line are
alive. Though the British ladies seldom enjoy titles or honors in their own
right, yet they constantly share in those of their husbands, wives of bishops
and judges only excepted; and further, a man of the highest quality, by
marrying a woman from the very lowest of the people, confers upon her the same
rank and quality as he enjoys himself; whereas no man, however mean, can again
altogether reduce her to her original state; the title she had once acquired by
her noble husband she retains by the complaisance of her acquaintance, till
death, though she should again be married to the meanest plebeian. English
women have never had any power conferred on them to ennoble their husbands, but
of late it has not been uncommon to bestow titles and honors on women, in
their own right, with a power of transmitting them to their male posterity. In
Germany, female honors run in a channel something different from that of
Britain, they are only the property of birth, or attainable by marriage, and on
the decease of a husband the wife, if she was his inferior, descends to that
rank in life which she occupied before marriage. Some writers on the Germanic
constitution have alleged that this is a political institution to encourage
matrimony among the great; but, as women are seldom averse to this state, to
place the loss of being unmarried on their side, is putting the weight into the
wrong scale.

As being vested with the management and disposal of property, whether in goods
or estates of inheritance, is a privilege from which women, in most ages and
countries, have either been entirely debarred, or enjoyed under a great variety
of limitations and restrictions; and as this privilege is one of those which
confers the greatest power and dignity, and upon which mankind set the greatest
value, we shall endavour to give our readers some idea how far it has been
granted or denied to the sex, whose history we are now considering.

To give portion to women at the time of their marriage was an ancient custom
amongst some nations; Pharaoh gave the city of Gazer as a portion to his
daughter when she became the wife of Solomon king of Israel; but we have great
reason to believe that, in such early times, (...) the management nor disposal
of the portions (...) were vested in the person of the wife, but that she, and
the dowry which came along with her, were almost equally considered as the
property of the husband. Almost the whole history of remote antiquity presents
us with a scene, in which women appear too inconsiderable to have acquired any
of the goods of fortune, or to have been trusted with them when acquired by
their parents or relations. Among the ancient inhabitants of Chaldea and
Arabia, we are told, that women could not hold the possession of any
inheritance; and the decision of this matter by Moses, shows that, in his time,
no precedent had existed of females having any such privilege. The daughters of
Zelophe had brought before Moses, the priests, the princes, and the
congregation, a petition, setting forth, that their father, after having always
demeaned himself properly, had died in the wilderness, having no sons; on which
account they thought themselves entitled to a possession among the brethren of
their father, which Moses, by the commandment of the Lord, not only granted
them, but also ordained, that in future, when a man died, having no sons, his
inheritance should become the property of his daughters. A decision, which
seems to be the basis on which the succession of women is, in many countries,
founded at this day.

As the Egyptians had the greatest esteem and veneration for their women, and
even in many things submitted themselves to their direction, we have great
reason to believe that they allowed them property, and the succession to the
estates of their ancestors; especially when we consider that the Greeks, who
were originally a colony from Egypt, were, besides the Hebrews, the only people
of antiquity, whom we find indulging them with this privilege. The ancient
Romans, trained up to war and to arms, to take by conquest the land of their
neighbors, and to retain by force what they had thus conquered, had no idea
that women should inherit what they could neither conquer nor defend; but
fathers, in time, thinking it hard that their sons should be rich in
possessions, while their daughters had none; and that more distant male
relations should take the estates as heirs at law, contrived to make such
provisions for their daughters, as rendered the estates so taken of little
value. The people, irritated at this proceeding, and convinced from the relics
of barbarity still lurking in their minds, that women ought not to have any
inheritance, passed the Voconian law, by which it was ordained, That no woman
should be left heiress to an estate, even though an only child; a law, which
continued in force till the Romans became more refined and softened in their
sentiments, when a regard to the weaker sex broke through the unjust restraint
laid upon them, and granted them a right of succession, after the death of
brothers, both in movables and in land.

Barbarity of manners is almost every where productive of the same customs. So
little did the Lombards think women qualified to inherit estates, that, by
their law, even the natural children, distant male relations, and the public
treasury, might share the inheritance with daughters. This law was softened
among the Saxons, where the father and mother were bound to leave their estate
to their sons, and to their daughters if they had no son. Among the
Burgundians, daughters were neither allowed to be heirs in conjunction with
sons, nor to succeed to the crown. The Salique lands among the Franks seem to
have been of a tenure similar to those in the times of the feodal system, held
under a lord, for which the tenant was to perform military service; women were
not admitted as inheritors, or tenants of such lands, for a plain reason,
because they were not qualified to perform the military service by which they
were held; but methods were afterward discovered to elude this prohibition: he
who wanted to make his daughter equal to his son, carried her before the
commissary, and said, My dear child, an ancient and impious custom bars a young
woman from succeeding to her father; but as all my children are equally given
me by God, I ought to love them equally; therefore, my dear child, my will is,
that my effects shall be shared equally between you and your brethren. This
Salique law, which in modern France seems little if at all regarded by the
subject, is still in force with regard to the crown, no woman ever being
allowed to inherit it. But though the French will not suffer a woman to sway
the scepter, they cannot hinder her from ruling the monarch which holds it; a
case which has so often happened, that, in spite of their Salique law, they
have been more under the direction of women than any of the neighboring
kingdoms.

The laws which preclude females from enjoying property and inheritance have,
perhaps, in every other country, beside France, been confined to the subject.
Among many of the nations of antiquity, among the present Asiatics, and even in
some parts of America, where women in general have no property, and almost no
political existence; where it was never heard that they enjoyed any land, nor
were even trusted with the management of their own persons, they have been
allowed, in failure of male issue, to mount the throne, and manage the affairs
of a state; a practice so inconsistent with reason, that the only cause we can
assign for it is superstition.

From the mean and servile condition of the fair sex in barbarous countries,
they seem to be rendered incapable of property. Whatever they acquire by their
labor, whatever they take in the chase, is entirely under the administration
of the male relations and friends, by whom they are protected, and from whom
they receive a scanty and precarious subsistence. Wherever polygamy is
countenanced, women cannot possibly enjoy much property: property creates
independence; and a woman who is independent would not submit to so many
rivals, and so scanty a share of the favors of a husband. Wherever women are
strictly confined, they can have no property; any thing further than food and
raiment, to them would be unnecessary; and any thing that could not be brought
within the walls of a Haram, they could not manage. Wherever the sex are
publicly bought and sold, whether as wives or as slaves, they can have but
little property; they are in such cases the property transferred themselves,
and consequently in a state too mean to be trusted with other property, perhaps
reckoned more valuable than they are. When we meet with so great a variety of
causes which deprive women of property, when we consider how widely these
causes are disseminated, we shall find that it is only in a few of the politer
countries of Europe that they are possessed of this privilege, and even there,
with such restrictions, that in many cases they can hardly be said to enjoy
what they possess; but as we shall have occasion afterward to treat more fully
of the rights and privileges of the British women, which are in a great measure
similar to those of the other polished countries in the neighborhood, we shall
not at present anticipate that part of our subject.

In those stages of human society that intervene between the most uncultivated
state of nature and a taste for elegance and refinement of manners, pageantry
and show seem to employ the utmost attention, and to be considered as the only
proper appendages of grandeur, strong proofs of which are afforded us by almost
all the nations of the East, and by Poland in the North; the Polish women of
fashion seldom go to visit one another without being attended by the most
numerous train of servants, carriages, and flambeaus they can muster; but when
we follow them home, we meet with nothing adequate to this parade; their
apartments are but poorly furnished, and but hardly clean, and themselves are
the mean and fawning slaves of there husbands, who, except in the articles of
equipage and dress, scarcely treat them as rational beings. In Germany, where
the taste is in general less formed, the women are more fond of family
pageantry, and more crammed with family pride than in France or England. In
Italy, of a warmer temperament, they aim more at captivating the heart than the
eyes, and have there, as well as in France, attained almost to an absolute
dominion over the men; a prerogative which in Portugal seems much on the
decline; for though, in the time of Alphonso, when the Portugueze were an
honor to human nature, the man who insulted a woman, or broke any promise he
had made to her, was degraded from whatever rank he enjoyed; at present, the
false gallantry introduced, authorizes him to commit every perfidy of that
nature with impunity.

In England, France, Italy, and those other parts of Europe which have arrived
nearly at the same degree of politeness; prompted by a mixture of humanity and
love, the men have entirely exempted the women from every species of labor,
except what is absolutely necessary among the poor for obtaining their daily
bread; and even there, it is with pleasure we often see the rustic clown, while
he wipes the sweat from his brow, endeavoring to lighten the burden and
alleviate the task of the sunburnt daughter of labor who toils by his side.

So extensive are the effects of politeness in Europe, that it has not only
softened the actions and manners of him who, tutored in the lap of ease, has
received the polish of a good education; but of him also who, left to nature,
has nothing to boast of but what he received from her hand. This spirit of
sympathetic indulgence, or of polite gallantry, does not stop at endeavoring
to ease the load of female toil, or to mitigate the severity of that labor for
which their natural weakness seems to have incapacitated the sex; it expands
itself to every part of the conduct of the men which has any relation to them.
We give to a woman, even though of inferior quality, the right hand, show her
every token of respect, and place her in every situation of honor. We lavish
our substance upon ornaments for our wives and daughters, and reckon, that when
they appear in elegance and taste, they reflect a luster and credit upon us. We
are hurt when they behave improperly, and on the contrary, persuade ourselves
that their good conduct adds a dignity to our character and reputation. In
short, we are so deeply interested in every thing that relates to them, that
they may be considered as the arbiters of our fate, and the spring which sets
in motion, and continues to direct, almost every action of our lives; such is
the indulgence we show them, and such the power we put into their hands, that a
proverbial saying has from thence arisen, that England is the heaven of women,
and the hell of horses.

In France, Italy, and Spain, the deference paid to women is still greater than
in England, and generally proceeds from different motives; here, the honors we
confer upon them flow from a mixture of love for their persons, and esteem of
their virtues; there, it arises, for the most part, only from a kind of
customary gallantry, which seems directed more to the sex than the individual.
A Frenchman, the moment he is in the company of a woman, whether young or old,
beautiful or otherwise, declares himself her admirer, talks of flames and
darts, and pays her a thousand compliments on her beauty. An Italian, when he
is introduced to a lady, approaches her in the most humble and submissive
manner, kisses her hand, and if she is handsome, and of quality, considers her
a sublime being, an angel in a human form, and consequently never to be
approached but with the greatest reverence. The Spaniard goes yet a step
farther, the whole ^ex is to him an object of little less than adoration; he
retains still a tincture of the spirit of knight-errantry in every thing
relating to women, and will readily venture his life to save any of them from
trouble or from danger; the object of his love is never less than a goddess,
whom he always mentions with all the extravagance that metaphor and hyperbola
can dictate, and to a woman above the rank of a peasant, he never presents any
thing but in a kneeling posture.

These improvements, in the condition of the fair sex of Europe, seem naturally
to point out to us, that they are there the most happy, as well as the most
deserving of beings; but the external appearance of things is but an unfaithful
mirror, whose representation we cannot altogether depend on. Women are in some
degree every where the slaves of superior power; in Asia, imprisoned, and
constantly reduced to act by the impulse of another, without any will or any
inclination which they can gratify, their triumphs lasting only a few moments;
their rivalry, animosities, and confinement, till death. In Africa and America,
the mere drudges of their proud tyrants, they labor to procure subsistence for
themselves and husbands, and when they have done, are treated little better
than our dogs; they receive only chastisement and crumbs. In Europe, for the
most part, but improperly, or slightly educated; and at all times kept in a
state of dependence, by the restrictions of a severe legislation, which, in the
management and disposal of what property is allowed them, commonly cramps the
freedom of their will. Dishonored and disgraced beyond all possibility of
redemption, by the commission of faults, which in the men are hardly considered
as any thing but acts of gallantry; and even in the state of matrimony, a state
to which they naturally aspire, more indissolubly bound than their husbands.
The law affords them no relief, unless the cruel partner to whom they are tied,
has attempted to take away their life; and while he may riot with impunity in
adulterous amors, if the wife retaliates, by copying his example, he
immediately procures a divorce, and may turn her out without subsistence to the
scorn and contempt of her own sex, who, in such cases, seldom look with pity
even on a repenting sinner.

Though we have marked, as we came along, several of the causes of the good and
ill-treatment of women, yet we flatter ourselves it may not be improper to
conclude this chapter with a more accurate view of them. Were we on this
subject to reason from analogy, we should not hesitate to say, that there is in
nature a principle, which strongly prompts us to behave with lenity and
indulgence to the fair sex; as almost the whole of the irrational creation
presents us with a picture of such behavior: the cock, when he has found any
provision, calls his hens together to partake of it; and the males of all the
feathered kind, for the most part, provide for the females while hatching.
Among quadrupeds, though there appears less indulgence, and even less
assistance on the part of the male, yet the former is in many cases very
distinguishable, and the latter not altogether unknown to the diligent
observers of nature. No male of any species of animals we are acquainted with,
will fight with, or use a female of the same species rudely, unless highly
provoked; and even then, he will correct her with lenity and seeming
reluctance. But while we reason on this subject, if we trust to analogy, it
will certainly mislead us. And when we turn ourselves from reasoning upon
principles, to the observation of facts, a slight survey of man, in his savage
state, will soon convince us, that he has no natural propensity, nor instinct,
which determines him to use the females of his species with tenderness and
indulgence; or if he has, it is, like many other natural instincts, totally
obliterated in his youth by habit and education. We are told, indeed, by
Charlevoix, that some of the savages of North America will, by no means, be
prevailed upon to strike, and hardly even to defend themselves against a woman;
but should this be true, it is only a local custom; for we are assured almost
by every traveller, that savages, in a variety of parts of the world, on the
most trifling occasions, beat and abuse their women without mercy.

We have already observed, that power, when not influenced by humanity, is
commonly made use of only to enslave. On this principle, we may assert, that
the most general and extensive cause of the ill treatment of women, is the
imbecility of their constitutions, and the impossibility of asserting the
rights of nature against a sex so much their superiors in strength. The next
cause, is the insensibility of the men, or that savageness of disposition,
which not only eradicates humanity, but prompts only to animal appetite,
instead of the sentimental feelings of love; a cause which, more or less,
prevails in almost every country, and particularly in those, where society and
the various refinements thereon depending, are but little and imperfectly
known. Men constantly accustomed to gain their subsistence by fishing and
hunting, are trained up in the exercise of every cruelty against the brute
creation: hence in their wars, the same cruelty diffuses itself upon their
antagonists and prisoners; and hence too, even the tender and inoffending fair
sex are subjects upon which they exercise that ferocious and unfeeling temper,
which, from their earliest infancy, has been nourished by their employments and
their difficulties; and which neither religion, admonition, nor example, have
ever conspired to restrain; nor the sympathetic feelings of the heart revolted
against, as barbarous and inhuman. Whatever be the original difference in the
feelings of the human heart, we know they are capable of being altered, and
made better or worse by education and example; an incontestible proof of which
arises from the behavior of the genteel, and common people of England, who
must be nearly alike by nature; and yet by education, the employments of life,
and the example of low company, the latter are often brutal and ferocious in
their manners, while the former are distinguished for humanity, and the more
exalted feelings of the soul.

A third cause of the ill-treatment of the sex is, their general want of proper
education and instruction. In savage life, without any engaging qualification
of mind, and destitute of every ornament of body, except only a few things
which render them more disagreeable, they have nothing but sex to engage the
attention, and soften the rugged nature of the male. In countries a little more
cultivated, as in Asia, though they lavish every ornament on their persons,
their minds commonly present a blank; scarcely even here and there shaded with
the outlines of knowledge and sensibility. In moderate climates, women acquire
sense and experience, as their charms and beauty expand. In Asia, if they ever
become sensible and intelligent, it is at an age when their short and fleeting
beauty, which commonly begins to fade at eighteen, is all over. This is one of
the strongest reasons why the women of the East are so little esteemed. In
countries, where the manners are finished by the last touches of polish and
refinement; the levities, expensive follics, and irrestrainable propensity to
pleasure and admiration, frequently procure to the softer sex ill-treatment
from ours; and force us even to despise and condemn the heart, which is lodged
in the form we adore.

A fourth cause of the ill-treatment of women is, often, their taking too
little care to make themselves agreeable. This is commonly the case in savage
life, where, if nature has denied them charms, they have no other way of
attracting the heart; and where, if she has not denied them, the possessors
have not learned to set a proper value upon them, nor to improve their power by
correspondent qualifications of the mind. But this is not a case only to be met
with in savage countries; in the most cultivated states of society, we often
meet the careless slattern, who disgusts us with her indelicacy; the conceited
beauty, who, trusting to the favors she has received from nature, exacts from
us the tribute she thinks due to them, with a petulant presumption, which
frustrates all its own intentions; and the hapless wanderer from the paths of
virtue, who, lost to honor and to shame, lays aside every thing pleasing in
the manners of the best of her own sex, and adopts every thing disgusting in
the worst of ours. To these characters we may add the unthinking wife; who, as
soon as she has stepped over the threshold of matrimony, leaves behind her
every delicacy, and every soft and engaging art, by which she attracted the
lover.

In polite countries, women reckon themselves ill-treated, if they are not
beloved, accosted with respect, and even their wishes prevented by all the
nameless little offices of good-breeding: accustomed to be constantly
approached, with an air of submission that borders on adoration, to be
constantly flattered, on account of their beauty and accomplishments, and
wanting sagacity to distinguish mere gallantry from the real sentiments of the
heart, they at last become pert and assuming, and often rude and ill-natured to
such as they think do nor offer a sufficient quantity of the incense of praise
at the shrine of their beauty: having arrived this length, they soon become
objects of contempt, and sometimes of ill-treatment. No class of females are so
apt to fall into this tract as those called beauties; who, though their company
is eagerly coveted at every place of public amusement, are not so eagerly
selected to retire with into that private scene of domestic life, where the
mask must be laid aside, and the train of flatteries discarded.

The power of appropriating entirely to ourselves what we love and esteem, is
so strongly rooted in our nature, that it has given birth to jealousy, one of
the strongest passions that convulse the soul; and from this jealousy arises
another fruitful source of the ill-treatment of women; it is the cause that
has, time immemorial, shut them up in the gloom of perpetual imprisonment in
the East, and debarred them from every joy that can flow from friendship, and
from society. It is the cause which, in Hindostan, and more particularly in
Persia, has subjected them not only to the chastisement of an enraged husband,
but even to death itself for an offense no greater than looking at a stranger.
But we turn from such scenes of horror, to view the other side of the picture.

The general causes of the proper treatment of women are simple, and may be all
comprehended in the education of the one sex, and the behavior of the other.
It is want of education and instruction that makes the savage; and it is the
proper application of them, that form the man of society and the gentleman. A
man brought up in any of the polite countries of Europe, is, from his earliest
infancy, taught to do a thousand good offices to the fair sex; to honor and
indulge them; and, as he grows up, to provide for, and defend them: hence every
kindness, and every duty he can perform to them, are so imperceptibly
interwoven with his nature, that he takes them for nature itself: but lest this
attachment of education should not be strong enough to form a kind of balance
of power between the two sexes, the Author of nature has wisely provided, that,
at a certain age, love should spring up to lend its assistance, and add a
motive still more powerful, than even custom and education, to induce us to do
the fair sex every kind and indulgent office, which the delicacy of their
situation, and the weakness of their nature, may stand in need of. But we must
here carefully distinguish between that love, which, in civil life, is a
mixture of animal appetite and sentimental feeling; and that which, in savage
life, is animal appetite only. The last, though it may prompt men, when
immediately under its impulse, to be fawning and complaisant, must be but short
and inconstant in its operations; and, consequently, unable to restrain the
common rudeness and oppression of the men, or raise the women to any degree of
consequence and dignity. The first, more steady and uniform, inspires with an
unremitting attention to do good offices, to protect, and screen from
oppression the weakness which savages despise; with a generosity of sentiment,
which does honor to politeness and to humanity. Nor are the fair regarded and
defended only by such individuals as are connected with them by love,
friendship, and other motives of passion and interest, but by the generality of
men in civil life, from sentiments of gallantry; and by every wise legislature,
which, in proportion to the weakness of that sex, exerts itself the more
strenuously to protect their persons and interest.

Such, and many more, are the happy effects which the fair sex experience from
education and from love; but in the individuals, with whom they are more nearly
connected, good sense, and humanity of temper, are likewise necessary, in order
to establish their security from ill-usage. There are in domestic life, a
thousand little incidents where sentiments will unavoidably jar; but should
even this happen so frequently, as to interrupt all peace, and be productive of
a constant acrimony of temper, a man of sense, when connected with a woman whom
he cannot love in his heart, will never degrade himself so as to use her ill;
and will be sorry that he is obliged to pity, where he would wish to love.

That propriety of female behavior, which inclines the men to favor, and
treat the sex with the greatest indulgence, which the manners and customs of
the country they reside in will admit of, is of various kinds, and would be
tedious to run over. In savage countries, it consists mostly in performing the
tasks of labor assigned them; in yielding the most abject submission to their
husbands; and taking proper care of the children they have by them. In the
East, it consists in resigning themselves with a seeming alacrity to
confinement; being perfectly skilled in all the arts of pleasing, and avoiding,
with the utmost circumspection, every cause of jealousy. In Europe it is more
unlimited; it consists in goodnature, sensibility, delicacy, chastity, the
domestic virtues, and a thousand other qualities; which, when joined to a
competent share of beauty and female softness, are almost sufficient to sooth
the most rugged nature, and change the cruellest temper into gentleness and
humanity.

CHAPTER X. Of the Character and Conduct of Women.
AS the circle of female action is commonly more narrow and circumscribed than
that of the other sex, so their good or bad character is also for the most
part, comprised under fewer virtues and vices: and in the East, where they are
by confin^ment totally excluded from action and observation, we may say with
Pope, That they have hardly any character at all.

At the head of the qualities, which make up the good or bad character of each
sex, there is generally placed some cardinal virtue, or vice; which is set, as
it were, in the fore-ground; and to which all the rest of the figures in the
groupe are subordinate. Thus what is the most highly estimated in men, is
courage and sensibility; and what gives the highest luster and polish to the
women, is modesty, and that soft and gentle temper, which is ^ver ready to
sooth affliction, and to pity distress. As these two virtues form the great
outlines of the character of the fair sex, a large portion of what we have to
say on the present subject, will necessarily be employed in enquiring, how far
they have followed the paths that lead to them, or deviated into those that
lead to their opposite vices, from the earliest ages of antiquity to the
present time.

From the very beginning almost of time, as we may learn from some hints thrown
out by Moses, and conjecture from the rude and uncultivated state of society,
we have no great reason to believe, that modesty and chastity were among the
favorite virtues. The reasons assigned for the destruction of the world by the
deluge; those assigned for the posterior destruction of Sodom; and the conduct
of Lot's d^^ghters, are all too evident proofs of our assertion. Proceeding
forward to the patriarchal ages, the scene is but little altered; for we there
find, that when Abraham had gone down into Egypt to avoid a famine, he had such
an opinion of the dissoluteness of the people of that country, that he was
afraid they would murder him, in order to get possession of his wife; and to
avoid that danger, ag^eed with her to say, that she was his sister: a falsity
and meanness, which he again repeated, when he afterward journeyed with her in
Gerar, in the land of the Philistines; a meanness, which plainly points out,
that he would rather have suffered her tamely to have been debauched, by the
people of any country into which he went, than run any risk on her account.
This pusillanimous example was likewise copied by his son Isaac, when he went
with Rebecca, his wife, into the same country of Gerar; and the speech of
Abimelech to him, on finding that he had deceived him, plainly points out the
ideas they then entertained of debauchery; one of the people might lightly have
with her.

The severe revenge, however, taken on the Sechemites, for the rape of Jacob's
daughter, seems to insinuate, that the men paid no little regard to the
chastity of their women; at least to those that were of her rank and condition;
though the answer these avengers made to their father Jacob, when he reproved
them for their cruel perfidy, plainly shows us, that public prostitution was in
that simple and early period far from being unknown. Should he deal with our
sister (said they) as with an harlot? And we are sorry to observe, from the
relation of the adventure of Judah, with Tamar, his daughter-in-law, who had
personated a harlot, in order to force him to procure her a second husband,
that in his days, that profession seems neither to have been uncommon, nor
attended with any great degree of infamy. In periods so exceedingly remote as
those we are now delineating, the general conduct of the Hebrew women, with
regard to chastity, seems extremely uncertain. We may, however, with great
propriety lay it down as a rule, that the virtues and vices of the two sexes
always keep nearly an equal pace with each other; and as we find the patriarchs
themselves no way famous for continence, we cannot reasonably expect that their
women were distinguished by this virtue: a conjecture, which is but too well
confirmed by the ancient history of the Jewish nation; Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, had all of them several concubines as well as wives. David rioted in
concubinage, and even in adultery; nor seems to have been checked in either,
till he also became a murderer. Solomon set no bounds to his voluptuous
appetite; and, from every neighboring nation, selected a numerous train of
women; among whom he spent a great part of his time in lewdness and debauchery.

If the women, in the times we are speaking of, were not remarkable for
chastity, we have scarcely any better reason to think they were more
conspicuous for the sympathetic tenderness of the sex. Sarah, in a cruel
manner, turned out the concubine and child of her husband, almost without
provision, and in a desert country, where they had both nearly perished of
hunger; nor was she instigated by jealousy to the barbarous deed; it was the
common custom to have concubines, and she herself had given Hager to her
husband. Jael, in cool blood, drove a nail into the temple of Sisera, to whom
she had promised protection, and perfidiously slew him as he lay asleep in her
tent. Delilah, a Philistine, who was married to Samson, treacherously betrayed
the husband of her bosom to her countrymen. But not to draw the character of a
people from single instances, it was customary among the nations which
surrounded the Israelites, in those times, to offer human victims to their
idols; a custom which they also sometimes imitated, when the parents of both
sexes attended, while their children passed through the fire to Moloch. These,
and several other instances we could give, but too plainly show that mankind in
general were then immersed in rudeness and cruelty, vices from which even the
softer sex were not in the least exempt.

The character of some of the other nations, in the remote periods we are now
considering, was, perhaps, still less famous for purity of female manners than
that of the Hebrews. In Egypt, the story of Potiphar's wife presents us with an
almost unparalleled instance of female effrontery; but as it would be unjust to
stigmatize a whole nation from the impudence and lewdness of one woman, let us
look into their history; a history which will but too well convince us that the
proofs of female manners being debauched in Egypt, are far from being confined
to this single instance.

Pheron, successor to Sesostris, the first king of Egypt, having become blind,
was told by an oracle, that he should recover if he washed his eyes with the
urine of a woman who had never known any man besides her own husband; he began
by making trial by that of his own wife, and afterward of that of many other
women, to no purpose, and was at last happily restored to fight by the urine of
an obscure woman; upon which he bestowed upon her great rewards, and ordered,
that all those who had given him such proof of their incontinence should be put
to death. Chemmis, another of their kings, who is said to have erected the
largest Egyptian pyramid, being at a loss how to procure materials for carrying
on so extraordinary a work, at last, considering how much the people were given
to debauchery, ordered his own daughter to become a prostitute, and to demand
that each of her paramours should bring a large stone to be employed in the
building carried on by her father; these stones she collected in such numbers,
that they were found not only sufficient to finish the great pyramid already
begun, but with the remainder she erected a small one to her own memory. Though
both these stories carry along with them the most evident marks of fable; yet,
as fable was so frequently made use of in the East, to convey instruction or
reproof, they might nevertheless be highly characteristic of the manners of the
times: but, besides, if we may form any judgment of the character of a nation
from its customs and religious ceremonies, which, if we may be allowed the
expression, are the truest pictures of its heart, they will teach us to
entertain but a low opinion of the decency and decorum of the ancient Egyptian
women.

They had a custom in Egypt of going several times every year to celebrate a
festival of Diana at Bubaste; as they commonly went by water, the boats were
promiscuously crowded with men and women, and when they passed near any town or
village, they stopped, in order to give an opportunity to the women on board to
make a kind of trial of skill with those on shore, in the most obscene language
and gesticulations; when, at last, after a variety of these indecent
skirmishes, they arrived at the place of their destination, they celebrated the
festival in honor of their goddess, by rites which would hove dishonored the
vilest of the race of mortality, by drinking, rioting, and committing such
debaucheries that ancient authors were ashamedfully to describe them. Among
other nations we find but too many examples of men endeavoring to debauch
their women when living; the Egyptians afford us the only one we meet with,
where they sacrilegiously defiled themselves with them when dead. It was a
custom in this country, immediately after death, to deliver the body to the
embalmers, to be by them prepared for burial; but young women of great beauty
were at last, contrary to this custom, obliged to be kept till the symptoms of
putrefaction began to appear, lest the embalmers, as had sometimes happened,
should abuse their dead bodies.

Notwithstanding this public licentiousness, the laws of Egypt seem not to have
been in the fault, but the constitutions of the people appear to have been warm
and libidi^ous beyond measure; no^ were the civil laws only well calculated for
the preservation of chastity, and securing the weaker sex from every insult
upon their honor, but those of religion also conspired to assist them. The
Egyptians seem to have been the first among the ancients who paid a proper
respect to the temples of their gods; the neighboring nations polluted them
with every species of lust and intemperance; the Egyptians hallowing them,
ordained that men should religiously abstain from women within their sacred
walls, and that ablutions, similar to those instituted by Moses, should be used
after the commerce between the sexes.

We have already observed that tenderness for their own offspring is one of the
most powerful feelings of the female heart; but that, powerful as it is, a
variety of causes have often weakened, and sometimes totally obliterated it. To
these already taken notice of, we shall now add, that this has in Egypt been
done by superstition, in Greece and Rome, by a romantic patriotism; the
Egyptian women rejoiced when their children were devoured by their sacred
crocodiles; the Greeks and Romans, when they were slain in the wars, undertaken
to defend or enlarge their country: would we were able to say, that in modern
times maternal tenderness did not often cease to show itself on account of
causes more frivolous and not less culpable. The religious character of the
Egyptian women can only be drawn from that of their men; those were
superstitious beyond almost a possibility of belief, they worshipped animals of
every kind, and even paid an extravagant degree of adoration to the vilest of
reptiles and insects; and what is not a little extraordinary, the animal that
was adored and worshipped in one district, was frequently held in the utmost
abomination in another. As women have been in all countries less apt to examine
and reason upon matters, than men, they have ever been more credulous and
superstitious; we may therefore suppose that every whimsical extravagance in
the Egyptian religion had the women in general as its vo^ari^s.

In no country was there ever such powerful motives devised to oblige people to
preserve an untainted character as in Egypt; it is well known to our learned
readers how much the honors of sepulture were valued among the ancients, and
the horrid ideas they annexed to the situation of that soul whose body lay
unburied. The Egyptian legislature, availing itself of this universal
prejudice, ordained, That no person should obtain burial till a rigorous
examination had passed into his conduct when living; for this purpose the
corpse was ordered to be carried into an island in the lake Moeris, where the
people sat as judges upon it, and decreed, or denied it burial, according as
the character came out good or bad. The boatman who was first employed in
carrying dead bodies over to this solemn trial, being named Charon, has given
origin to the poetical fable of Charon ferrying souls over the Styx, or from
this world to the next. From the few scattered hints only which we have
remaining of ancient Egypt, we can with little certainty say any more of their
character or conduct; so different are the accounts we meet with concerning
them, some affirming that the women did all the business without doors, while
the men confined themselves within; others asserting, that the men confined all
their women from jealousy, and never allowed them the use of shoes, that they
might not be able to walk abroad; but these accounts may relate to different
periods, or to different districts of the same country.

That modesty and chastity, which we now esteem as the chief ornament of the
female character, does not appear in times of remote antiquity to have been
much regarded by either sex. At Babylon, the capital of the Assyrian empire, it
was so little valued, that a law of the country even obliged every woman once
in her life to depart from it. This abominable law, which, it is said, was
promulgated by an oracle, ordained, That every woman should once in her life
repair to the temple of Venus; that on her arrival there, her head should be
crowned with flowers, and in that attire she should wait till some stranger
performed with her the rites sacred to the goddess of debauchery.

This temple was constructed with a great many winding galleries appropriated
to the reception of the women, and the strangers who, allured by debauchery,
never failed to assemble there in great numbers, being allowed to choose any
woman they thought proper from among those who came there in obedience to the
law. When the stranger accosted the object of his choice, he was obliged to
present her with some pieces of money, nor was she at liberty to refuse either
these, or the request of the stranger who offered them, whatever was the value
of the money, or however mean or disagreeable the donor. These preliminaries
being settled, they retired together to fulfill the law, after which the woman
returned and offered the goddess the sacrifice prescribed by custom, and then
was at liberty to return home. Nor was this custom entirely confined to the
Babylonians; in the island of Cyprus they sent young women at stated times to
the seashore, where they prostituted themselves as a tribute to Venus, that
they might be chaste the rest of their lives. In some other countries, a
certain number only were doomed to prostitution, as it is supposed, by way of a
bribe, to induce the goddess of debauchery to save the rest.

When a woman had once entered the temple of Venus, she was not allowed to
depart from it till she had fulfilled the law: and it frequently happened that
those to whom nature had been less indulgent than to others, remained there a
long time before any person offered to perform with them the condition of their
release. A custom, we think, sometimes alluded to in scripture, and expressly
delineated in the book of Baruch: The women also, with cords about them,
sitting in the ways, burn bran for perfume; but, if any of them, drawn by some
that passes by, lie with him, she reproached her fellow that she was not
thought as worthy as herself, nor her cord broken. Though this infamous law was
at first strictly observed by all the women of Babylon, yet it would seem that,
in length of time, they grew ashamed of, and in many cases dispensed with it;
for we are informed that women of the superior ranks of life, who were nor
willing literally to fulfill the law, were allowed a kind of evasion; they were
carried in litters to the gates of the temple, where, having dismissed all
their attendants, they entered alone, presented themselves before the statue of
the goddess, and returned home. Possibly this was done by the assistance of a
bribe, to those who had the care of the temple.

It has been alleged die some of those authors, who can find nothing in
antiquity but virtue and excellence, that the oracle which instituted this law,
considering Venus as a goddess who delighted in debauchery, not only meant to
satisfy her by this public act of prostitution, but also to induce her to
preserve, during the rest of their lives, the innocence of such women as had
thus shown that they were her votaries, by voluntarily dedicating themselves
for once to her service; as also to raise in the minds of their women a
detestation of unchastity, by the shame they must have suffered in exposing
themselves to so public a prostitution. But whatever may be said in its
justification, a law of this kind is in its nature indefensible, and, from
whatever motive it proceeded, must have been ill calculated to promote virtue
and morality; as it is obvious, even almost to the slightest observer, that
such is the disposition of human nature, that the barrier, which separates
between vice and virtue, once overleaped, it from that moment loses half its
restrictive power, and in a little time becomes no barrier at all. It appears,
therefore, that no great degree of credit is due to Herodotus, when he affirms
that the Babylonish women having once fulfilled the obligation imposed upon
them by this law, could never after be prevailed upon to deviate from modesty
and virtue; nor to Aelian, who says, that the Lydians and inhabitants of the
isle of Cyprus, who had similar laws, which these last carried even farther
than the Babylonians, obliging every woman to abstain from marriage till she
had gained a fortune suitable to her by prostitution, were ever after
inflexibly v^rtuous.

Such assertions are too gross to be swallowed by an impartial observer of
human nature; and, besides, are every where falsified by the conduct of the
Babylonish women. The sacred writings of the prophets are almost in every page
filled with reproaches against them for their lewdness and debauchery; but not
to rest the validity of what we have said entirely on that foundation, the same
Herodotus, who had told us of the inviolable chastity of the Babylonian women,
informs us a little after, that when their city was taken by Cyrus, such was
the licentiousness of the place, that fathers, without any scruple prostituted
their own daughters for hire. And Quintus Curtius not only confirms the same
thing, but adds, that even husbands were not ashamed on that occasion to
deliver their wives to strangers for m^ney; actions which are in no respect
consonant to the virtuous character pretended by some to be derived from the
vicious source of public prostitution. Were it necessary to multiply proofs of
the licentious character of the Babylonian women, we could instance the
prodigious number of courtezans, which were among them, whose profession did
not render them contemptible in the public opinion, as it always does where
virtue and modesty prevail. The drunkenness of the sex, who used frequently to
attend the convivial meetings of the men, where, themselves not less convivial,
they often ate, drank, and made merry, till by degrees divesting themselves of
all modesty, they sometimes finished the debauch in the original state of
mother Eve; nor was this the practice of the meanest of the sex only, nor of
the most lewd and abandoned, it was that of women of all ranks and conditions;
but we cannot wonder at finding a people lewd and abandoned, when the
ceremonies of their religion, and the divinities they worshipped, taught them
the hopeful lesson.

When error and absurdity have the sanction of religion to support them, our
own times afford us too many proofs of what mischiefs they may be productive;
and were we not daily convinced of this by experience, we should hardly be able
to give credit to what has been now related of the Babylonians. But they were
not the only people of antiquity led astray in this manner; there scarcely
existed one single religion, in the times we are speaking of, the rites of
which were not solemnized either with cruelty or debauchery, or both; and
scarcely was there one god or goddess adored, who was not famous for lust and
intrigue; such, in a notorious degree, was Jupiter, the greatest of their
deities, such was Vulcan, such was Venus, and such the great Syrian goddess,
whose temples were crowded with the votaries of lust, who disseminated that
vice among the people, greatly to the corruption of the manners of both sexes.
But rites of cruelty and debauchery were naturally enough suggested as proper
modes of worshipping divinities, who delighted in uncleanness and in blood.

This corruption of manners reigned but too universally among the ancients. The
Messagetae, a people of Scythia, being confined to one wife, while the nations
around them were indulged with the liberty of polygamy and concubinage; in
order to put themselves in some degree on a footing with their neighbors,
introduced a kind of community of wives, and a man who had an inclination to
the wife of his friend, only carried her into his wagon or hut, and hung up a
quiver while she was there, as a sign, that they might not be interrupted. In
this manner were decency and the most sacred ties of matrimony publicly
violated; but what decency, what regard to the most solemn institutions can we
expect in a people who were so rude and barbarous, that when any of their
relations became old, they met together, and along with some cattle set apart
for the purpose sacrificed them to their gods; then having boiled together the
flesh of the human and the more ignoble victims, they devoured it as a most
delicious repast? The Lydians were still more debauched than the Messagetae. In
the reign of Jardanes, so ungovernable was their lust, that Omphale, the king's
only daughter, could scarcely, even within the walls of the royal palace, find
shelter from the licentious multitude. Omphale at length succeeding to the
throne of her father, punished with the utmost severity such as had formerly
abused her; on the women, whom it appears she considered as not less criminal
than the men, she revenged herself in a singular manner; she ordered, that,
over all her kingdom, they should be shut up with their slaves.

The Scythians, whose character is far from being the most abandoned of the
ancients, seem not to have much cause to boast of the chastity and fidelity of
their women; the greatest part of their men having on some occasion made an
expedition into Asia, were detained there much beyond their expectation, when
their wives, either impatient of their long absence, or despairing of their
return, took their servants and slaves, and invested them in all the privileges
of their absent husbands. These, sometime after hearing that their masters were
about to return, fortified and entrenched themselves, in order to hinder them
from entering into their own country, and claiming their wives and possessions.
The Scythians having advanced to their slaves, several skirmishes were fought
between them, with doubtful success, when one of their leaders advised his
countrymen not to fight again with their own slaves as with equals, nor to
attack them with warlike weapons, which were signs of freedom, but with such
whips and scourges as they had formerly been accustomed to make them feel. This
advice being put in execution, the whips recalled their ideas of slavery, and
all the pusillanimity naturally attending it; they threw down their arms and
fled in confusion, many of them were taken and put to death, and not a few of
the unfaithful wives destroyed themselves, to avoid the resentment of their
injured husbands. Though this story has been by different authors varied in
several of its circumstances, yet as so many have agreed in relating it, we
have not the least doubt of its authenticity, especially as we are assured that
the Novogorodians, whose city stands in Sarmatian Scythia, had formerly a coin
stamped in memory of it, with a man on horseback shaking a whip in his hand;
and it is supposed that the ancient custom in Russia, which is now happily
forgot, of the bride presenting the bridegroom on the nuptial night with a
whip, originated from this story of the Scythian wives.

We have already related the manner in which the Babylonish women were admitted
to the riotous feastings of the men; a custom which, only with a few more
restrictions, took place also in Media and Persia, as appears from the story of
Amyntas, king of Macedon, already also related; a story which incontestibly
proves that, in the times we are considering, the Persian women were of as easy
virtue as the men could wish them; but the voluptuous and libidinous character
of that court, cannot be better delineated, nor painted in stronger colors,
than we find it in the book of Esther, where we have a relation of Ahasuerus,
one of their monarchs, carrying his refinements in debauchery to such a length
as we have no instance of any where else on record.

Now when every maiden's turn was come to go in unto king Ahasuerus, after that
she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the women, for so were
the days of their purification accomplished; viz. six months with oil of myrrh,
and six months with sweet odours, and with other things for the purifying of
the women.

Then thus came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given
her to go with her out of the house of the women into the king's house.

In the evening she went out, and on the morrow she returned into the second
house of the women, to the custody of Shaasgaz, the king's chamberlain, which
kept the concubines; she came unto the king no more, except the king delighted
in her, and that she were called by name.

Such was the expense, and such the refinement necessary to fit women for the
arms of the Persian monarch; and such was the perpetual imprisonment and
continence to which he condemned the hapless wretches, who, with all this
parade of voluptuousness were destined for one night only to the hateful
pre-eminence of his bed; in short, it was in the court of Persia, where we may
properly say, that lawless love reigned triumphant, where mothers mixed in
incestuous commerce with their sons, daughters with their fathers, and sisters
with their brothers. Artaxerxes Memnon, having fallen in love with his own
daughter Atossa, and himself entertaining some scruples, his passion was
fomented, and his scruples dissipated by his mother: Are you not, said she, set
by the gods over the Persians, as the only rule of what is becoming or
unbecoming, virtuous or vicious? A speech, which strongly indicates that daring
spirit of woman, which when urged by any of the more violent passions, has
often overleaped every barrier, and borne down every difficulty, from which
male nature has shrunk back with trembling and reluctance. Another of the
Persian kings, entertaining some scruples on an occasion of a similar nature,
convened the magi to give him their opinion: We can find no law, said they, in
Persia, to authorize a man to marry his own daughter, but our laws authorize a
king to do whatever he pleases.

In countries where there is, as in Persia, an unlimited liberty of polygamy
and concubinage, jealousy in the fair sex is a passion much weakened by the
variety of objects that divide it, and the restraint laid on it by the
despotism of the men; we should not therefore expect to find it operating very
strongly. But even here, where the king is the severest despot of the country,
and women only the tools of his lust, and slaves of his power, we meet with
instances of this passion exerting itself in the most cruel manner. Xemes,
among many other amors, had conceived a passion for the wife of his brother
Masistus, which he prosecuted for a long time by promises and threatenings,
without any success, when, quite tired of so many fruitless efforts, he at last
changed his attack from the mother to her daughter, who, with much less
opposition, yielded herself to his wishes. -- Amestris, his queen, having
discovered the amor, and imagining that the daughter only acted by the
direction of her mother, from that moment resolved on the severest revenge. By
ancient custom in Persia, the queen had a right, on the king's birthday, to
demand of him any favor that she thought proper; Amestris asked that the wife
of Masistus should be delivered into her hands, whom she had no sooner received
than she ordered her breasts, nose, tongue, and lips to be cut off, and thrown
to the dogs, and that she should be detained to see her own flesh devoured by
them.

Among a people so abandoned, and so much the slaves of cruelty and lust, a
people who made every thing subservient to voluptuousness and debauchery, it is
natural to think that modesty among the fair sex could scarcely have any
existence. -- This, however, was not universally the case; a few women, even in
Persia, were far from being destitut^ of that (...) modesty and sensibility
which are the ornament of their sex, and the delight of ours. Atossa, the
daughter of Cyrus, and the wife of Darius, being attacked with a cancer in her
breast, and thinking it inconsistent with the modesty of her sex to discover
the diseased part, suffered in silence till the pain became intolerable, when,
after many struggles in her own mind, she at last prevailed on herself to show
it to Democedes, her physician. We might mention more particular instances of
the modesty of the Persian women, but we pass over them, to take notice of an
anecdote of a lady in a neighboring kingdom, which shows, that, in the times
under review, there were some women susceptible of sentiment and feeling;
things which are not frequently met with in the East. Tygranes and his
new-married wife being taken prisoners by Cyrus, Tygranes offered a great
ransom for her liberty; Cyrus generously released them both without any reward;
as soon as they were alone, the happy couple, naturally falling into a
discourse concerning their benefactor; What do you think, said Tygranes, of his
aspect and deportment? I did not observe either, answered the lady. Upon what
then did you fix your eyes, said Tygranes? Upon the man, returned she, who
generously offered so great a ransom for my liberty^

So little was modesty and chastity cultivated among the ancients, that many
nations seem to have had no idea of either. The Ausi, a people of Lybia,
cohabited so promiscuously with their women, that the whole of the children of
the state were considered as a community till they were able to walk alone,
when, being brought by their mothers into a public assembly of the people, the
man to whom a child first spoke was obliged to acknowledge himself its father.
The wives of the Bactrians were, through a long series of years, famed for
licentiousness; and custom had given such a sanction to their crimes, that the
husbands had not only lost all power of restraining them, but even durst hardly
venture to complain of their infidelity. In Cyprus, an island sacred to Venus,
the very rites of their religion were all mingled with debauchery and
prostitution. And the Lydians, and many other nations, publicly prostituted
their daughters, and other female relations, for hire. But to multiply
instances of the depravity of ancient manners would be endless; mankind, even
when bridled by the strongest penal laws, and restricted in their passions by
the sacred voice of religion, are but too often, in the pursuit of unlawful
pleasures, apt to disregard both; what then must they have been before society,
before laws existed, and when religion lent its sanction to encourage the vices
and deprave the heart? In those times we have the greatest reason to believe
that debauchery reigned with but little control over two-thirds of the
habitable globe.

CHAPTER XI. The same Subject continued.
AS the history of the nations we have hitherto been considering is so
enveloped in those clouds of darkness which obscure antiquity, we shall leave
it, to make some observations on the character and conduct of the women of
Greece.

Of this so much distinguished, so much admired people, who, for many ages,
shone so illustrious in arts and arms, and whose panegyric has been sounded so
loud in ancient and in modern history: we sincerely wish that a regard for
truth did not oblige us to give so indifferent a character. But when we have
said that they shone in arts and arms, we have completed their eulogium. When
we consider them as patriots, they appear distinguishable; when we consider
them as men, and as citizens of the world, they almost excite our horror. Other
nations made laws to m^^e nature better, and to enforce humanity. Th^se of some
of the Grecian states were calculated to (...) nature and humanity from the
human heart. In short, (...) whatever view we contemplate this (...) we find
them remarkable only for an unnatur^l austerity of manners, for the mo^^
inflexible sev^rity, and a life hardly softened by one agreeable shade in the
whole picture.

The character we have hither^o drawn of the fair sex is calculated to excite
but f^w of these pleasing emotions; we would wish to war^ our bosoms whenever
we contemplate objects so dear to us, but we write the history of Women, not
their panegyric; truth, therefore, still obliges us to exhibit to view
characters hardly more amiable or engaging than those we have already drawn.

In a preceding chapter we have observed that, during the whole of what are
called the heroic ages, the history of Greece is nothing but a compound of the
most absurd fable; from that fable it however appears, that their gods an^ men
employed much of their time and ing^nuity in seducing, stealing, and forcibly
debauching their young women, circumst^nces which naturally suggest an idea
that those ^omen who could not be obtained by any other means must have been
virtuous; nor indeed does it appear that they were then much less so than in
those succeeding periods, when the Greeks flourished in all their splendor,
and were reckoned a highly polished people; nay, they were perhaps, more so,
for infant coloni^s and kingdoms commonly display ^ore virtu^ than th^^e
already arrived at maturity; the re^^on is plain, the first have not yet
attained ri^^es, the sources of idleness and debauchery, the ^ast have attained
them, and are corrupted. But the Greeks, even in the infancy (...) their
existence as a people, seem to have ^een remarkably vicious, for w^ hardly meet
with any thin^ in their early history but murd^r, ^^pes, and usurpa^ions;
witness the (...) of the kingdom of Mycene, of Pelops, and his descendants. The
rapes of Io, Proserpine, Hel^^a, etc. all of which stain the character of their
gods ^^d men with the foulest infamy; and as it ha^ never happened in any
nation that the one sex has ^^en ex^^^dingly vicious, and the other not
par^icip^ted of its crim^s, we may conclude that the Greek women were, in the
heroic ages, far from being famous for any of the moral virtues. The greatest
part of the Grecian princes who assembled at the siege of Troy, were guilty of
many of the most enormous crimes, while their wives, not less flagitious,
murdered almost the whole of them after their return; a thing nearly
incredible, when we consider that in those times custom had condemned the wife
who had lost a husband to perpetual widowhood; but even custom, though often
more regarded than all the laws of heaven and earth, must in time yield to a
general corruption of manners.

But to proceed to times of which we are better informed. The women of other
nations were indecent through the strength of their ungovernable passions; some
of the Greek women were obliged to be indecent by law. In Sparta, what virtue,
what decorum can we expect, when even the strongest temptations to vice had the
public sanction of the legislature? In the heroic ages, while ignorance and
brutality of manners prevailed, we are not much surprised to find the women
conducting the men to the baths, undressing them, and attending to dress and
rub them when they came out; but in Sparta, famed for its salutary laws, and
when Greece was in its most polished condition, we are amazed to find that both
sexes resorted to, and bathed together in the public baths. And this amazement
is still heightened, when we are assured that here also plays were acted by
order of the legislator, where young people of both sexes were obliged to
fight, and to dance naked on the stage, that the m^n, according to his ideas,
might be thereby ex^ited to matrimo^y. What were the consequences or the
inde^^ncie^ we have now mentioned? The intent^^^ o^ Lyc^^gus if he really had
any such intenti^^ (...) but ^ittl^ attended to, and it is agreed (...) sexes
went to those plays only for the sake of debauchery; and further, that,
disgusted by this shameless exposure, the men paid less regard to the women,
and the women became less virtuous, and at last grew dissolute to such a degree
as to be thereby distinguished from all the other women of Greece. Euripides,
and some others of the Greek authors, bestow upon them epithets which decency
will not allow us to translate, nor were these epithets the overflowings of the
gall of satyric poets and violent declaimers only, but the cool and considerate
reflections of the impartial historian; but we would not be understood as
altogether confining dissoluteness and debauchery to the women of Sparta, those
of many of the other states were little inferior to them. In Thracia and
Boeotia they every third year held a festival in memory of the expedition of
Bacchus into India, at which both married women and virgins, with javelins in
their hands and dishevelled hair, ran about like furies bellowing the praises
of the god, and committing every disorder suggested by madness and folly.

Wherever public prostitution becomes so fashionable that it is attended with
no disgrace in the opinion of the male, and with exceedingly little in that of
the female sex, there, we may assure ourselves, the morals of the women are
highly contaminated; a circumstance of which Athens afforded the most glaring
proof. In that city courtezans were not only kept in a public manner by most of
the young men of fashion, but greatly countenanced, and even publicly visited
by Solon their lawgiver, who applauded such young men as were found in the
stews, because their going to these places rendered them less apt to attempt
the virtue of modest women. But Athenian courtezans were not only visited by
their great lawgiver, but also by the celebrated Socrates, and most of their
other philosophers, who, not content with going frequently to see them
themselves, even sometimes carried their wives and daughters along with them; a
circumstance of which we do not recollect to have heard in any other country,
and which could not but tend to give these wives a mean opinion of virtue, when
they saw the preference that was given to vice; and when such of their own sex
as thus publicly deviated from the paths of chastity were so openly esteemed
and regarded, it was natural for those of a different character to pay the less
regard to that chastity, the practicing of which gained them no superior
privilege nor advantage.

The whole history of ancient Greece presents us with courtezans enjoying
uncommon reputation and honor; to account for this, we must lay it down as a
fundamental principle, that our sex has a natural inclination to the company
and conversation of the other. Now, in Greece, modest women were all so
strictly confined, that none were allowed to see or converse with them but
their nearest relations; and from this confinement it naturally followed, that
they were uncultivated, and ignorant of learning, and of almost every thing
that was transacting in the world; they were, therefore, but ill qualified to
entertain or amuse the men with their conversation. The Grecians had a natural
taste for the beautiful, a taste which was greatly improved by their statuaries
and painters; but the beauties of their modest women were rendered invisible by
veils, and unengaging by aukwardness. The very reverse was the case with the
courtezans, they improved their charms by every art, showed them unveiled in
every public place, and all had access to their company and to their houses.
Not ignorant of the disadvantages that other women labored under, they availed
themselves of, and improved, their own more happy situation; they dedicated a
great part of their time to the arts and sciences, to the knowledge of public
affairs, to speaking with elegance and propriety, and above all to the arts of
pleasing, which, whenever properly managed by women of beauty, have an
ascendancy over us that they themselves seem but half acquainted with. Hence it
is not difficult to see how the Grecian prostitutes crept into such
consequence; they had art and nature on their side, and modest women being all
imprisoned, they had no rivals to contend with.

The present inhabitants of Geece seem to have pretty nearly copied the pattern
of antiquity; unchastity, with them, and even the trade of prostitution, are
considered but as very trifling affairs, which any woman may be guilty of
without losing her character. A Greek girl will agree with a Frank for any
limited time he pleases: the Subasci will as easily grant them a license to
live together for that time; and should any one be caught with her, during the
continuance of it, they would both be fined, and exhibited through the nearest
city, mounted together on an ass. At Venice, the courtezans of the present time
seem nearly on a footing with those of ancient Greece. By the strongest
sumptuary laws, the Venetian nobility are restrained from spending their money
almost on any thing but their mistresses: and while the modest women feel their
inclinations curbed in almost every article of luxury and expense by these
laws, the courtezans, either above or below their notice, evade them altogether.

As the female form is of a softer and more delicate nature than that of the
male, so their minds are generally more finely attuned to the gentler feelings
of tenderness and humanity; but the Grecian women, either by nature, or more
probably by custom, were in this respect miserably ^eficient. At an annual
festival, celebrated in honor of Diana, all the children of Sparta were whipped
till the blood ran down on the altar of the goddess. Under this cruel ceremony,
which was inflicted, as they pretended, to accustom them to bear pain without
murmuring, some, almost every year, expired. The inhuman barbarity was
performed in the presence of the whole city; the fathers, and what our female
readers will hardly credit, even the mothers, beholding their children bathed
in blood, and ready to expire with pain, stood exhorting them to suffer the
number of lashes assigned them, without a groan or a complaint. It may be
alleged here, that women being spectators and encouragers of a cruel ceremony,
is no proof of their want of proper feelings, but only an instance of the power
of custom. A doctrine to which we cannot altogether assent, being persuaded,
that there are many of the fair-sex, of a composition so humane and tender,
that even custom could not reconcile them to barbarity; but allowing it to have
that power, what folly were the men guilty of in instituting such a ceremony?
they were robbing the women of every thing valuable in the female mind, and
laboring to make them what they were not intended to be by nature.

But this inhuman custom was not the only proof that the Greek women were
divested of that female tenderness which we so much admire in the sex. There
was in Greece a custom, if possible, still more barbarous; as soon as a boy was
born at Sparta, he was visited by a deputation of the elders of each tribe; if
he appeared to be of a weakly constitution, and not ^^kely to become a stout
and healthful member of their state, they judged him not to be worth the
trouble of rearing; and therefore ordered him to be thrown into a quagmire, at
the bottom of the Mountain Taygeta. This was valuing human beings, exactly as
we would do an ox or an ass; and entirely setting aside all the moral turpitude
of murder. It was only, however, practiced at Sparta; and we should have hoped,
that, even there, it was contrary to the inclination, and without the consent
of the women; were we not assured by a variety of authors that the Spartan
dames, in every cir^umstance, almost entirely governed their husbands. To the
barbarous customs, now mentioned, we shall add only one more. To so weak and
expiring a state was the paternal instinct of nature reduced among the Greeks,
that they frequently, as we have already related, exposed such children as they
were not able, or did not choose, to maintain. Though the Greeks might expose
infants, they could not sell a daughter, or a si^ter, unless she became a whore.
A barbarity, which, more or less, prevailed in all the Grecian states; except
at Thebes, a city, where, to the immortal honor of the inhabitants, it was so
much abhorred, that, by their laws, it was capitally punished. We shall finish
this subject, by observing, that the Spartan matrons received the news of their
sons having been slain in battle, not only without any signs of grief, but even
with an appearance of extravagant joy and satisfaction, which they took the
most early opportunity of showing in public. Those same women, however, who
pretended to have imbibed so much heroism, that they were strangers to every
fear, but such as arose on account of their country, when they saw Epaminondas,
after the battle of Leuctra, marching his victorious army toward Sparta,
testified by their behavior, that they were subject to fears of another
nature; and that all their joys and sorrows arose not solely from the
prosperity or adversity of their country. They ran up and down the streets in
terror and despair, filling the air with shrieks, and transfusing their own
timidity into the men, caused more disorder than the approach of the victorious
army.

When we come to the history of the matrimonial compact, we shall see how the
Grecian women behaved to their husbands; and shall at present sum up the rest
of their character, by observing, that at Athens, even drunkenness seems to
have been among the number of their vices; as is evident by a law of Solon, in
which it is enacted, that no woman shall be attended by more than one servant
when she goes abroad, unless when she is drunk. It would seem that the Athenian
women also made use of the darkness of the night to screen them in their
intrigues; for another law of Solon ordains, that no woman shall walk abroad at
night, unless she inte^^^^ to play the whore; and from several other ordinances
of this legislator, it plainly appears, that to keep women within the bounds of
that decorum proper to their sex, was a matter of no small difficulty; for, to
the laws we have just now mentioned, he was obliged to add others, which show
that the sex were only to be governed by coercive measures. He ordained, that
no woman should go out of the city with more provisions than could be purchased
for an obolus, nor with a basket higher than a cubit; and if a woman went
abroad at night, she was to be carried in a wagon, preceded by a flambeau:
from all which it seems evident, that the design of Solon was to make the
Athenian women decent and virtuous. If Lycurgus had the same intention in the
laws that he gave the Lacedaemonians, we cannot help thinking that he had but
ill studied human nature; for as a learned author of the present age has
observed, though nakedness of both sexes is no incentive to lust, and though
the inhabitants of countries where no cloths are used, are not on this account
less virtuous than their neighbors, where they are used, yet there may be
modes of clothing which more powerfully excite the passions, than the most
absolute nakedness. Of this kind, in our opinion, was the dress of Sparta. We
shall have occasion afterward to describe it, and at present shall only
observe, that it has been exclaimed against by a variety of the writers of
antiquity.

Though such is the general character of the Greeks, we have happily no
instance of a corruption of manners having spread itself over a whole nation,
in such a manner as to leave nobody free from the contagion. In the midst of
licentiousness and barbarity, at least in those periods, that were subsequent
to the siege of Troy, the Grecian women afford us several instances of
chastity, conjugal fidelity, and maternal affection. In the heroic ages, or
those periods when their states were in infancy, they appear to have been
abandoned almost to every species of wickedness; but when we turn to the
Romans, we find the case quite otherwise. In the earlier periods of the Roman
republic, before the wealth poured in from innumerable conquests, had
introduced luxury and dissipation, no women were more famous for their virtues,
none more infamous afterward for their vices. The whole history of Rome, for
several ages after its foundation, bears testimony to the tenderness,
frugality, and chastity of her women. Of this nothing can be a stronger proof,
than the long period that intervened between the foundation of the republic and
the first divorce; a period of five hundred and twenty years, though the men
had a power of divorcing their wives almost at pleasure. To this proof we could
add a great variety of others, but shall only mention the story of the rape of
Lucretia, which in the strongest manner demonstrates the value which the Roman
women set upon the most unspotted chastity. Lucretia, being violated in secret,
could not have found the smallest difficulty in concealing what had happened;
and besides, should it have been discovered, the fraud and force made use of
against her were sufficient to have quieted her conscience, and exculpated her
to her husband and the public from every imputation of criminality: yet, so
exalted were her ideas of chastity, that she was resolved not to give back to
the arms of her husband, a body even involuntarily polluted, nor to survive the
guiltless stain which her honor had suffered; but calling together her friends
in the presence of her husband, she revealed to them the secret of the rape
that had been committed upon her; and while conjuring them to revenge her
injured name, she stabbed herself in the breast with a dagger she had concealed
under her garments for that purpose.

The care taken by women to preserve their chastity will always be in
proportion to the value set upon it by the men. When the women find that the
men pay but little regard to this virtue, that they are as much caressed, and
have as good a chance for a husband after they trespassed the rules of it as
before; the strongest obligation laid upon them to preserve it, is then taken
off. In the earlier periods of the Roman republic, this seems to have been the
cause of such inviolable chastity: the men had the highest regard for it; they
not only avoided any thing inconsistent with purity of manners, any thing that
could give offense to modsty, in their serious hours; but even in their gay and
sportive humors, when the watch is apt to slip aside from the door of the
lips, never transgressed the bounds of decency, nor indulged in frolic and
dalliance, even with their own wives, before a third person: they slighted and
despised the woman who had voluntarily yielded herself to an unlawful embrace;
nor did any thing hurt their honor so much, as to have a wife or a daughter
violated; and methods of the most extraordinary nature were often taken to
prevent or revenge such insults.

Husbands and fathers, valuing chastity more than life, several times killed
their wives and daughters, when they had no other means of preventing them from
being ravished; and women themselves, fired by this example, not unfrequently
sacrificed their lives to preserve their honor. Virgineus, when he had tried
every possible method to save his hapless and beloved daughter Virginea from
the tyrant Claudius, who, under pretense of claiming her for his slave, wanted
only to have her in his own power, that he might debauch her; having obtained
leave to speak to her before she should be delivered to the tyrant by the
judgment of the court, took her in his arms, and wiping the tears from her
eyes, drew near to some butchers' shops, which stood in the Forum, where causes
were publicly tried, and where Virginea had just been adjudged the property of
Claudius. There, snatching up a knife, and turning to his daughter, My dear
child, (said he) this is the only way left to save thy liberty and thy honor.
Go, Virginea! go to thy ancestors whilst thou art yet free and undefiled! Thus
saying, he plunged the fatal knife into her breast; and such was the regard of
the Romans to chastity, that almost the whole of the people rose in arms, to
revenge the injured father, and the murdered daughter.

Could any thing more forcibly demonstrate the manner in which the Romans
exerted themselves to preserve the delicacy, as well as the honor of their
women, it would be the following circumstances: -- Manlius, a patrician and
Senator of Rome, having inadvertently saluted his wife in the presence of his
daughter, and being by the Censors accused of an indecency; the Senate, after
solemnly considering the matter, struck him off the list of their order. Julius
Caesar, having heard some indecent reports of his wife, immediately divorced
her, without enquiring whether she was guilty or innocent; and being asked the
reason of so severe a treatment, I would not (answered he) have the wife of
Caesar even suspected. When several of the vestal virgins had been at one time
corrupted, the Romans reared a temple to Venus Verticordia, or the turner of
hearts; and worshipped her with such ceremonies, as they imagined would incline
her to turn the hearts of the Roman women to that chastity which they were in
danger of forsaking. When such were the private, such the public instances of
the regard shown to chastity by the men; when the women forfeited every thing
that was dear and interesting to their sex; if they deviated from it, can we
wonder, that the Roman ladies, while this was the case, were remarkable beyond
any thing that history has handed down to us, for this most exalted of female
virtues?

Such was the state of chastity in Rome, till the Romans extended their
conquests into Asia; and returning, brought along with them the amazing wealth,
as well as voluptuous manners, of the nations they had plundered; when all the
boasted patriotism of the one sex began to give way to the most shameful
venalty, and all the chastity of the other, to the force of the fashionable
vices just introduced among them. This venalty of the men was whetted by the
now luxurious manner of living, and extravagant taste for pageantry and show,
and gratified by getting into offices of the state, and plundering the
provinces, or selling the interests of their country. Women too, not less fond
of being publicly conspicuous, had no other method of acquiring money to become
so, than prostitution. Such an innovation of manners altogether overturned
every sober plan of frugal economy, and turned the ideas of both sexes
entirely upon riches, and the parade of the public shows and diversions, which
these enabled them to give and to attend. This immoderate desire of shows
brought a low and shameless freedom into fashion, and women contended with each
other, who should bribe highest to obtain the favors of a player. Debauchery
reduced fertility; but as fertility was not their wish, they learned to procure
abortions, that their pleasures might suffer the less interruption; at last,
jaded even with these pleasures, which they had tried the most unnatural means
to vary, their lewdness become too powerful to be restrained by law, and bore
down every obstacle that opposed its course. The men, tinged with the
licentious manners of Asia, and contaminated with every crime, now paid nearly
the same respect to her who had forfeited her title to chastity, as to her who
had not. Hence lewdness and debauchery, neither afraid of shame nor of
punishment, became fashionable among every rank and condition of women, while
chastity was considered only as an antiquated virtue.

Courts are but too frequently the seminaries of vice. This was evidently the
case at Rome. The empresses generally took the lead in lawless indulgence: the
example of the great is commonly followed by the little: from the court, a
scene of the most shameless libertinism, hardly to be paralleled in history,
disseminated itself all over Rome. Women danced naked on the stage, bathed
promiscuously with the men, and, with more than masculine effrontery, committed
every sort of irregularity. By the unbounded license thus given to unlawful
pleasures, matrimony became unfashionable, and was considered as a confinement
and a burden, not consistent with Roman freedom and independence. To these
ideas also the conduct of the married women did not a little contribute, and
raised in the husbands such a disgust at marriage, that even Metellus the
Censor, who ought to have been the protector of that institution, made the
following speech to the people against it: If it were possible for us to do
without wives, we should deliver ourselves from this evil; but as nature has
ordained, that we cannot live very happily with them, nor without them, we
ought to have more regard to our own preservation, than to transient
gratifications. Rome is the only place that ever furnished an instance of a
general conspiracy among the married women to poison their husbands.

A variety of laws were from time to time devised by the Romans to stop the
progress of public prostitution. Among others it was ordained, that all
courtezans should take out a license from the court of the Aediles; which they
should renew once every year, and without which they should not be allowed to
carry on their trade; that their names, and the price of their favors, should
be wrote upon the doors of their houses. These, one would have imagined, were
such conditions as no women who had the least remaining spark of sensibility
would have agreed to. But the torrent of vice was not to be stopped so easily:
women, who were wives and daughters to Roman knights, were not ashamed to apply
for such licenses; and the infection was even reaching higher. Vistilla, a lady
of a Praetorian family, with an unparalleled effrontery appeared in public
court before the Aediles, and declaring herself a prostitute, demanded a
license to enable her to exercise her trade. Debauched as the Romans then were,
under a prince so dissolute as Tiberius, their fears were alarmed; and the
senate enacted several laws to restrain at least women of rank from degrading
themselves and families by a conduct so infamous: they ordained, no women whose
father, grandfather, or husband, was a Roman knight, or of any higher quality,
should be allowed to take upon her the trade of prostitution. The debauchery of
the women was also the occasion of the Voconian law, which we have already
mentioned; but when corruption had interwoven itself so dexterously into the
manners and customs of the Romans, laws became too feeble to bring on a
reformation. The emperor Titus prohibited all public stews: the prohibition was
but little regarded. When Severus mounted the throne, he found on the roll of
causes to be tried, no less than three thousand prosecutions for adultery: he
had formed a scheme of reformation; from that moment he abandoned it as
impossible.

But it was not the manners and customs of the Romans only, that were tinged
with debauchery: that vice at last insinuated itself into their religious
ceremonies also. Fond of imitating the Greeks, the Bacchanalian mysteries,
which they celebrated, were at length introduced into Rome, and filled the city
with a scene of horror and prosligacy, as appears from Livy, hardly equalled in
the annals of any country. An obscure Greek (says he) came from Etruria, but
brought with him none of those arts which that most accomplished people have
introduced, to improve our minds and persons; a little paltry priest and
fortune tellers, not one that shocked the minds of the people, by publicly
professing to make a gain and a trade of some religious ceremonies which he
openly taught, but he was the minister of secret rites; he had his mysteries,
in which but few were at first initiated, but which were afterward
communicated to men as well as women, without distinction or restraint. To
these rites an entertainment of (...) finest wines and most exquisite dainties
was ad^^^, to entice the greater numbers to become members of the society.

When drinking had deprived them of their senses, and when the night, with the
mixed company of young and old, and of men and women, had put an end to all
modesty, every sort of vice began at once to be practiced, as every one found
the means of those lusts at hand, to which he was by nature most addicted. Nor
were these crimes confined to one species only, the promiscuous debauchery of
men and women of rank and family; but from thence issued false witnesses, false
seals, false oaths, and false deeds; and even poisons, and assassinations, so
secret, that they could not sometimes find the bodies to bury them. Many crimes
were perpetrated by fraud, many by force, which no person knew of: for amid
such a scene of debauchery and slaughter, attended with the howling of the
people, and the noise of the trumpets and cymbals, it was impossible to hear
the cries of those who were calling for assistance. At first, the extent of the
city, and a willingness to endure an evil of this sort, made it pass unnoticed;
but Posthumus the Consul was at last informed of it.

At first their chapel was appropriated to women only, no man being on any
account admitted into it: there were three days set apart in each year for
initiation into the Bachanalian mysteries; and the women, in their turn, were
usually created priestesses. Paculla Minia Campana altered every thing, as if
directed by the gods so to do: she first initiated men, Menius and Herennius,
her own sons; and instead of confining the time of initiation to three days in
the year, she extended it to five times every month, and fixed the time in the
night. By this means the sacred rites became common, the men and women made but
one company, and the darkness increased their licentiousness: no wickedness, no
abomination, was left unpractised. If there was any one who resented their
insults, or came behind them in wickedness, he was sacrificed as a victim; nor
did they blush to glory in this as the height of their religion.

The men prophesied with fanatical tossing of their bodies, as if they were
possessed; and the women, with their hair dishevelled, and dressed after the
manner of Bacchanals, ran to the Tyber with burning torches, which they plunged
into the water, and drew out still in a flame. Whoever refused to join with
them, or partake of their guilt, or submit to their indecencies, they bound on
a machine, and hurried out of sight to some unfrequented wood, pretending that
the gods had taken him. There were among them many of the first quality of both
sexes; and after two years they made a rule, that no person should be initiated
who was more than twenty years of age; judging, that such were most likely to
be seduced to their errors, and submit to their debaucheries.

To all these instances of the flagitious character of Roman women, we may add,
that they appear to have been the first who practiced the trade of prostitution
in their own country; it seems to have been a custom from the earliest
antiquity, that the prostitutes of every nation, were women who resorted to
them from other nations, and were called strangers; hence a strange woman, and
an harlot, generally signify the same thing in scripture; and hence the
repeated injunctions which Solomon laid upon his son, not to give his strength
to strange women. This custom of women betaking themselves to another country
when they became prostitutes, we have reason to believe, was universal among
the ancients; whether it was, that every people, willing to have it believed
that their own women were more virtuous than those of their neighbors, would
not suffer them to prostitute themselves at home; or whether such women as took
upon them this shameful trade, were instigated by some little remains of
modesty, to leave their own country and practice it among strangers; we shall
not take upon us to determine: but we are assured, that the Greeks, however
debauched and licentious, commonly adhered to this custom, while the Romans,
who broke through every restraint, paid no regard to it.

But lewdness and debauchery were not the only vices of the Roman women;
through the whole of their existence as a nation, the Romans were remarkable
for their cruelty. Several of their laws, as that which gave to fathers a power
of life and death over their children, and to husbands a power hardly less
extensive over their wives, are a proof of this: but it appears in a still
stronger light, when we consider the barbarous treatment of the slaves, by
whips and tortures; and the deluges of blood which were shed almost by every
usurper of the empire, sometimes from suspicion, oftener perhaps from mere
wantonness and barbarity of nature, the spectacles of wild beasts, tearing
criminals and captives to pieces, and gladiators hacking one another down for
the amusement of the public; and last of all, their behavior toward those
unhappy nations who were conquered by their arms. Nor was Roman cruelty only a
male vice, the softer sex were far from being proof against the contagion. In
the 220th year of Rome, Tullia, the daughter of Severus, then king of the
Romans, having, with her husband Tarqui^, conspired to assassinate her father,
and place themselves on the throne in his stead; the order for the atrocious
deed being given in a tumult of the people, the infamous Tullia, mounted her
chariot with an air of triumph to return to her house; in the street through
which she was drove, the murderers had just left the king's body bleeding and
hardly breathless; the dismal spectacle struck the charioteer with horror, he
checked his horses, and petrified with amazement, could not proceed! Why do not
you go on, cries Tullia, what stops you? Alas! said he, turning about to her as
he spoke, That is the body of the king, your father! At these words, snatching
up a stool that was in the chariot, and throwing it at his head, Go on, cried
she, and do not be afraid of driving over a dead body. The driver obeyed, and
the blood of the father is said to have stained the chariot and the clothes of
the inhuman daughter. Antony having ordered Cicero to be beheaded, and the head
to be brought to him, when it arrived, his wife, Fulvia, laid hold of it,
struck it on the face, uttered many bitter execrations, and placing it between
her knees, drew out the tongue, and pierced it with a bodkin. To these we might
easily add many more instances of the cruelty of the Roman women, but we drop a
subject so disagreeable.

After the Romans became acquainted with Asia, in whatever light we view their
women, they scarcely exhibit any amiable qualities, except some imperfect
relics of their ancient patriotism, a virtue, which unless exercised with the
greatest moderation, scarcely ever adorns the female character. As wives, we
have seen that the Roman matrons were frequently unchaste; as mothers, not less
frequently careless and unnatural, luxurious and extravagant beyond measure; at
last, they became almost entirely the creatures of ambition, and of pleasure;
even religion, which almost in every age and country, seems to have been more
devoutly cultivated by the women than the men, does not appear at Rome to have
had any superior power over the female heart; their women attended at
processions, when any public calamity was to be averted, and were sometimes
made priestesses of certain temples; but we read of few peculiar acts of their
piety, and of few sacrifices which they offered to propitiate the gods of their
country.

Such is the general character of the Roman women; were we to descend to more
particulars, we might give instances almost without end of their depravity, and
not a few of their virtue. Before the Republic was contaminated with the
riches, which from every quarter of he plundered globe flowed to Rome, they
were in general the best of wives, of mothers, and of citizens; having by their
mediation, advice, and money, several times saved the sinking state; and it is
with pleasure we remark, that even amid the general depravity we have been
delineating, there still appeared many amiable and virtuous characters, who
bravely stemmed the tide of popular corruption, and in ages overrun with every
vice, stood forth the advocates of virtue, of maternal tenderness, and of
conjugal fidelity; preserving their children and husbands, from falling victims
to the horrid proscriptions of Octavius, Antony, Lepidus, Nero, and many
others, who, with a barbarity which can hardly be equalled in history, caused
to be murdered in cool blood one half of the nobility of Rome.

CHAPTER XII. The same Subject continued.
LEAVING the Romans, and proceeding in our enquiry, we again descend into the
regions of historical obscurity, where we are presented with a group of nations
and people, now hardly distinguishable from each other, and of many of whom, we
scarcely know any thing but the names. Of such people it would be vain, as well
as ridiculous, to attempt a minute and circumstantial character; we shall,
therefore, content ourselves with sketching the outlines of it among that group
of northern nations, which we have no authentic accounts to enable us to
delineate more distinctly.

Though in a state of the utmost uncultivation of manners, and attached to
religions which inculcated but few of the precepts of morality; and in many
cases directly contradicted them; the women of the ancient northern nations
were not destitute of virtue and of excellence; early in life, they learned
that modesty which adorned their character; and that industry which often
maintained themselves and their husbands, when these failed to procure
subsistence by their hunting, or their depredations: educated by chaste
mothers, and fortified in female virtue by every example around them, chastity
became almost an innate principle in their minds, and daily acquired strength
by the contempt which was thrown by the men upon those who disregarded it; a
contempt so great, that no woman could violate her chastity, without
precipitating herself into the most dismal certainty of perpetual celibacy, as
none could in this case entertain even a distant hope of pardon, or of a
husband, who was not, as in modern times, to be obtained by riches, nor the
alliance of the great, but only by personal attractions, most strictly attached
to unspotted personal virtue.

Tacitus draws a beautiful picture of ancient German simplicity and chastity,
in the following words. A strict regard for the matrimonial state characterises
the Germans, and deserves our highest applause. Among them female virtue runs
no hazard of being debauched by the outward objects of the senses, or of being
corrupted by such social gaieties as inflame the passions; chastity once
forfeited is never forgiven; vice is not made the object of mirth and raillery,
nor is fashion pleaded as an excuse for being corrupt, or for corupting others;
good customs and manners avail more among these barbarous people, than good
laws among such as are more refined. We are apt to place the greatest purity of
manners in particular states of cultivation and refinement; experience,
however, shows us that we are often in the wrong. From this account of Tacitus,
the ancient Germans appear to have exceeded in some points of morality, the
most polished and instructed nations of Europe; nor were the Goths behind them,
they deemed purity of manners their distinguishing characteristic, and
therefore they said, Though we punish fornication in our own countrymen, we
pardon it in the Romans, as they are by nature and education weak, and
incapable of reaching to our sublimity of virtue.

By an ancient law of Iceland, any one who kissed a woman against her
inclination, was condemned to exile; and even he who obtained her consent,
subjected himself thereby to a fine of three marks of silver. We have in a
former chapter taken notice of some laws of this nature among the northern
nations, and shall here add, that they were in general so solicitous of the
honor of their women, and took such care that no indecency should be offered
to them, that their laws in most places prescribed the manner in which the two
sexes should behave to each other. The Goths prohibited even a surgeon from
bleeding a free woman, unless in the presence of her father, mother, brother,
son, or some other near relation; and fixed a fine upon a man who presumed to
touch a woman against her will, according to her quality, and the part of her
body he touched. In other places, a fine was also imposed on him who kissed a
woman, except in sporting, at convivial meetings, or on returning from a long
journey. These, and many other laws of the same nature, among the inhabitants
of the north, not only stood as so many sentinels on the threshold of virtue,
but by rendering all access to the fair sex so exceedingly difficult, and even
dangerous, taught men to look up to them as a kind of superior beings, and
stamped upon them a value which arose nearly to adoration; a value, which they
never can attain to, where modern freedom and gallantry make the access to them
so easy; and, where their own vanity prompts them to appear constantly in every
public place, and cheapen themselves by a visible fondness to be disposed of.
There is not perhaps in nature a more general law, than that which induces us
to value every thing in proportion to the pains and labor it has cost us. The
women of the nations we are considering, naturally chaste, proud, and difficult
of access, both by custom and by law, were not to be gained by every slight
attack, nor did they yield to every pretended admirer: nothing but a lover's
rendering himself worthy of his mistress by valor, and every other acquisition
then in estimation, could make her propitious to his wishes; hence he seldom
got possession of the object of his heart, but after a long train of labors
and difficulties; and the value he had for her, was measured by the
retrospective view of all that he had gone through on her account. But a
further discussion of this subject will fall more naturally under the head of
courtship.

An historian endeavoring to delineate the characters of people so little
known, as many of those we have already mentioned, as well as those we are now
considering, may be compared to an antiquarian, solicitous about discovering
the real size of our ancestors, in the times when they were said to be
gigantic; but not being able any where to find an entire statue, or skeleton,
can only find the foot or hand of a statue, or the bone of an arm or leg of a
skeleton; when calculating that such parts of a regularly formed body, bear
such proportions to the whole, he can discover with a tolerable degree of
precision what the size of the whole was. In like manner, though the historian
has only broken and interrupted sketches of the character of a people, he may,
by carefully comparing them together, and tracing the relations they bear to
the virtues and vices that make up the whole of a human character, be able to
form a tolerable conjecture concerning the people to whom they belong. Thus
from every anecdote handed down to us of the women of the north, we may
delineate them to have been chaste, frugal, industrious, and possessed of some
little share of knowledge, which gave them in many respects a (...) occasion
formerly to mention, that the worship of polluted deities, and celebration of
religious ceremonies remarkable for impurity, have greatly contributed to
contaminate the manners; and we cannot help here observing, that though the
object of christian adoration, and the rights of the christian religion, are by
far the most pure and holy, the ministers of that religion were, in the times
we are speaking of, quite the reverse. When almost every priest, who should
have taught by example as well as by precept, gave himself up to lewdness, and
publicly kept often a variety of loose women about him, what can we expect from
the people? When the priests and the people were licentious, the women could
not escape the contagion; every rank was whirled into the vortex of lewdness,
and the rudest of manners. The queen of Navarre published a volume of Tales,
too indelicate for the ear of a courtezan. Queen Elizabeth of England was not
only much addicted to swearing, but even to the most vulgar and familiar kind
of oaths, which she uttered in a vulgar and indelicate manner. About her time,
however, the manners of Europe were beginning to assume that chastity and
elegance for which we are now so happily distinguished. But before we survey
the character and conduct of the present European women, it is necessary for us
to take a view of the other parts of the globe, and proceed gradually from
those states approaching the nearest to nature, to those where the human
species has received the highest polish from art.

The nearer that mankind approach to a savage state, the less difference in
every age and in every country is perceivable among them: in this state, their
observations, their pursuits, are narrow and limited; their attachments few,
but strong; and their resentments lasting and implacable. Beyond these, their
condition admits of little variation; consequently their character, which in
polished nations is formed and influenced by a thousand different circumstances
and situations, having but few of these to operate upon it, is marked with much
stronger, though sewer and more uniform appearances.

In savage life, female delicacy has no existence* the most absolute nakedness
raises not a blush; no^ can any action excite the idea of shame: and as
chastity itself has not, in many places, the same value stamped upon it as in
civil society, deviations from it are either considered as no fault, or at most
as a fault of a very trifling nature, which neither draws down on a delinquent
the ridicule and contempt of her own sex, nor the neglect and desertion of
ours. The instances we could give of this would be almost endless. Among the
Natches, husbands voluntarily lend their wives to each other, and married as
well as unmarried women, without the least ceremony, offer themselves to
strangers; nay, in some places, they even complain to their countrymen, and
desire them to revenge the indignity they have suffered, when refused by a
stranger. In the district of the Hurons, not the least degree of of criminality
is fixed upon her who offers herself to prostitution: it is a practice, into
which girls are early initiated by their parents, and in which the custom of
their country continues them through life. In many parts of South America, so
little restraint is laid on the commerce of the sexes, that it plainly appears
to be considered as an object not worthy of legislation. Don Ulloa reports,
that the ancient Peruvians did not knowingly marry such women as were virgins,
and if on trial they found them such, were highly affronted at being imposed
upon: an^ it is said, that in the kingdom of Thibet, no woman who has not been
deflowered is reckoned fit for matrimony.

The Brazilian women are so far from paying any regard to chastity, that they
even violate every principle of decency; not being in the least ashamed to
prepare and administer to the men stimulating potions, to create or increase
their natural desires; which when they wish to raise to an extravagant height,
the potions sometimes prove mortal. At Mindanao, as soon as a stranger arrives,
the natives flock about him, and eagerly invite him to their houses: the person
whose invitation he accepts, is sure to offer him a female companion, whom he
is obliged to accept, and to return a genteel present for the unsolicited
favor. This custom, which, besides implying an absolute and disposing power in
the male, likewise supposes female unchastity to be a matter of no
consideration, is observed at Pulo Condore, Pegu, Siam, Cochin-China, Cambodia,
in some places of the East Indies, and on the coast of Guinea. In Otaheite,
chastity does not seem to be considered as one of the virtues, nor is the most
public violation of it looked upon either as criminal or indecent. The women
not only readily and openly trafficked with the English sailors for personal
favors, but were brought by their fathers and brothers for that purpose, as to
a market; and those who brought them were always abundantly conscious of the
superior value of youth and beauty.

Besides a strict regard to chastity, there is in the female character a
certain softness of temper and disposition, mixed with a kind of timidity and
incli^ation to pi^y, which may vie with delicacy, beauty, and even with modesty
itself, in rendering a woman amiable in the eyes of every beholder. But of this
quality savage women in every climate are almost entirely destitute. Brought up
amid the storms of rough and unhospitable climates; exposed to the vicissitudes
of hunger and of cold; obliged to procure most of their food by carnage and
destruction; and constantly accustomed to scenes of cruelty; their hearts are
steeled against every soft sensation; and pity, one of the most engaging
ornaments of the female mind, reckoned a weakness, which it is incumbent on
them to subdue. We have therefore no reason to expect in them any of that
engaging softness, which constitutes the essence of female friendship, and
forcibly engages the heart: nay, so far are they, in general, from being
susceptible of any of the compassionate sensations, that the very reverse is
their character.

Among many of the tribes of North Americans the women commonly go out to meet
the warriors on their return home; and though these warriors have treated their
captives, from the moment they fell into their hands, with an inhumanity of
which we can hardly form any idea; yet the period of their real sufferings may
be said only to commence at the time they are met by the women. It is almost
incredible to believe, with what degree of transport and rage these furies
attack them; and he only can form any conception of it, who has frequently
witnessed the power of the passions over the female mind, and their
concentrated power over the female savage; where, being but few in number,
their whole strength is collected, as it were, into a focus. Has any woman
among those who go out to meet the warriors, lost a husband, a son, a brother,
or near relation; though thirty or forty long years have conspired to blot him
out of her remembrance, they have conspired in vain. Frantic with revenge, she
falls on the first captive she meets, and violates decency, humanity, and
mercy, at every wound. Nor is this short-lived effort of a sudden passion: she
goes on till her bodily strength is quite exhausted; but the same insatiable
thirst of revenge urging her implacable mind, she no sooner recovers herself a
little, than she renews the horrid task; a task, which, with no other
interruption than what is absolutely necessary to refresh the ferocious
tormentors, generally continues in the camp, through the whole of the first
night after the arrival of the women: and when the prisoners are afterward
finally condemned, when they are led out to suffer, such a scene of torture as
the history of no other people ever yet paralleled, and which we think too
shocking to describe, the women are the principal executioners, or rather
relentless fiends, who inflict tortures that even hell might shudder at.

To those accustomed to softer manners, and to nations less sullied by such
inhuman crimes, this female barbarity must appear as unaccountable as it is
shocking: but it must be still more so, when we inform our readers, that
captive women, though they have not taken up the hatchet, nor come out in an
hostile manner, are treated with the same indiscriminate rage of cruelty as the
men, and fall at last victims to the lingering tortures inflicted by their own
sex.

Such is the state of chastity, such that of humanity, among the savage women
of North America. But from these unpromising specimens we are not rashly to
conclude, that they are destitute of every virtue, and of every excellence.
Their inhumanity is not so much the effect of nature, as of education. Revenge
is a principle, which, from the earliest periods of antiquity, has operated
strongly on every ignorant and unlettered people. The Israelites hardly treated
their captives with less cruelty than the Americans; they made them pass
through the brick-kilns, and under saws and harrows of iron. The practice of
almost all the ancients was nearly the same: every country had its tutelar
deities; and it was imagined, that a more acceptable service could not be
rendered to these, than to stain their altars with the blood of the enemies of
that country which they patronised; thus, cruelty to captives was almost in
every country a religious ceremony, which took such hold of the human mind,
that the thoughts of the sufferings of the victims, were totally absorbed in
those of the service done to the deity. But, besides this, there was among the
ancients another principle, which powerfully urged them to inflict various
torments on their captives; the manes, or ghosts, of those who had fallen in
battle, were supposed to to roam about in a kind of melancholy mood, till their
blood was avenged on their enemies; and, they were even sometimes supposed to
appear to, and solicit their surviving friends to this vengeance; which was the
more fully accomplished, the more horrid the tortures that were inflicted.
Strongly excited by the latter, if not also by the former of these motives, we
discover that an exuberance of friendship to their deceased relations, is the
source from whence arises that variety of torments with which they execute
their enemies.

Were this horrid barbarity of the American women congenial to their nature, or
what they delighted in from mere wantonness, we should reckon them the most
execrable of all human beings; but we pity them, when we consider it as the
effect of the most unbounded, though mistaken friendship; and indeed, of all
the marks which most peculiarly characterise savage life, friendship and hatred
are the strongest. As an injury done to a savage, is never to be fo^^iven; so a
good action is held in everlasting remembrance, and commonly attaches him to
you in a ^^^^^^ship, which adversity cannot shake, which danger cannot terrify,
nor even death itself turn aside from your interest. In places where chastity
is required of the sex, this quality makes them the most faithful and
inviolable of all wives. Where chastity is not required, if they are but
tolerably well used by their husbands, it binds them in an attachment to their
interests and persons, far surpassing every thing that we ever meet with in
civil society. As to their other qualities, they are submissive and obedient to
their husbands; patient sufferers of hunger, cold, pain, and all that variety
of wretchedness to which their lives are daily exposed; strenuous exerters of
their powers, when stimulated by want, but seldom blessed with a talent for
unremitting industry; and still seldomer, perhaps, with foresight enough to be
productive of economy. Like all other ignorant people, the most absolute dupes
of superstition, by which constantly deceived themselves, they constantly
deceive one another, and still more deceive their men, who take the ravings of
a distempered female brain, for the infalliible suggestions of the Great Spirit.

In ascending from these scenes, where we are presented with nature in her most
rude and uncultivated shape, to those where she is just beginning to put on an
appearance something less disgusting, we naturally turn our eyes from the
frozen regions and trackless wastes of North America, to the more indulgent
climates of Africa and Asia; though we are sorry to say, that, even in many
parts of these, we find the progress of civil society and cultivation of
manners, to have advanced but a very few degrees beyond the Americans.

In traveling over (...) vast peninsula of Africa, we naturally expect to
(...) among so many different people, a great diversit^ (...) manners and of
character; in this, however, we (...) much disappointed, for notwithstanding
the great variety of climates that the Africans inhabit, and different forms of
government to which they are subjected, they are every where nearly the same
kind of people; a general sameness and uniformity of sentiments and usages,
running through the whole of those immense regions they possess, with some
trifling difference only in the degrees of the same qualities; and with this
remarkable coincidence of the whole, that these qualities are commonly the
worst of those which have disgraced human nature; insomuch that among their
neighbors it is a proverb, that all the inhabitants of the globe have a
mixture of good and evil in them, except the Africans.

When we take a survey of the ancient, and the present Africans, it is with
some surprise, that while we find their manners and customs to be nearly the
same, we discover at the same time, that every spark of genius, and every idea
of moral rectitude, seem almost entirely dissipated from among them. The names
of Hannibal, of Asdrubal, and Terence, show that they were formerly famous for
heroes, and for poets; and after the introduction of the Christian religion
among them, the names of Cyprian, Augustine, and Tertullian, do credit to their
divinity; they were in old time renowned for their industry in cultivating the
ground, for their trade, navigation, caravans, and useful arts; at present they
are infamous for their idleness, ignorance, superstition, treachery; and above
all, for their lawless methods of robbing and murdering all the other
inhabitants of the globe, as the piratical states of Tunis and Algiers every
day demonstrate.

It would seem, that lost as they are to almost every virtue, they still retain
some sense of their own flagitiousness of character; but as they do not choose
to amend, their priests, or Marabouts, endeavor to justify them by the
following story: Noah, say they, was no sooner dead, than his three sons, the
first of whom was white, the second tawny, and the third black, agreed upon
dividing among them his goods and possessions: after having come to this
resolution, the greatest part of the day was spent in sorting that variety of
goods which their father had left, so that they were obliged to adjourn the
division of them till the next morning: having supped, and smoaked a friendly
pipe together, they all went to rest, each in his own tent. After a few hours
sleep, the white brother got up, seized on the gold, silver, precious stones,
and other things of the greatest value, loaded the best horses with them, and
rode away to that country where his white posterity have been settled ever
since. The tawny awaking soon after, and with the same criminal intention, was
surprised when he came to the storehouse, to find that his brother had been
beforehand with him, but resolving to make the best of a bad bargain, hastily
secured the rest of the horses and camels, and loading them with the best
carpets, clothes, and other remaining goods directed his route to another part
of the world, leaving behind him only a few of the coarsest of the goods, and
some provisions of little value. When the third, or black brother, came next
morning, in the honesty of his heart, to make the proposed division, and could
neither find his brethren, nor any of the valuable commodities, he easily
judged that they had tricked him, and were by that time fled beyond any
possibility of a discovery. In this most afflicting situation, he took his
pipe, and set him down to consider on the most effectual means of retrieving
his loss, and being revenged on his persidious brothers. After revolving a
variety of schemes in his mind, he at last fixed upon watching every
opportunity of making reprisals on them, and laying hold of, and carrying away
their property as often as it should f^ll in his way, in revenge for the loss
of that patrimony of which they had so unjustly deprived him: having come to
this resolution, he not only continued in the practice of it all his life, but
on his deathbed laid the strongest injunctions on his descendants to do so to
the end of the world.

From this short sketch of the general character of the Africans, the prospect
before us, when we descend to particulars, is but unpromising, though in some
places the gloomy scene is here and there chequered with a few of the virtues.
Some of the tribes of wandering Arabs are remarkable for fidelity, when they
have engaged themselves in the protection of a stranger. Many of them are
conspicuous for their temperance and hospitality, and their women, upon the
whole, are far from being indelicate or unchaste. In Egypt, they never appear
unveiled, and at public assemblies sit also behind a curtain, that they may not
be seen by the men. Among the Hottentots, though they have no claim to
delicacy, they are simple and inoffensive, chaste and submissive to their
husbands. On the banks of the Niger, they are tolerably industrious, have a
considerable share of vivacity, and, at the same time, a female reserve, which
would do no discredit to a politer country: they are modest, affable, and
faithful, and an air of innocence appears in their looks, in their language,
and gives a beauty to their whole deportment. When from the Niger, we approach
toward the east, the African women degenerate in stature, complexion, and
sensibility, as well as in chastity, that chief of the female virtues; even
their language, like their features, and like the soil they inhabit, is harsh
and disagreeable, and their pleasures resemble more the transports of fury,
than the gentle emotions communicated by agreeable sensations. Upon the western
coasts of Africa, are extended for a considerable way, a people called Zafe
Ibrahims, or offspring of Abraham; they have long flowing hair, and are much
fairer than any other of the Africans; but what is most remarkable, they are
not like the rest of their countrymen, addicted to plundering, nor to murder,
being of a free, liberal, and hospitable spirit, much given to dancing and to
songs, of which love is constantly the subject; and while in many other parts
of Africa, both men and women paint in such a manner as to add to their
deformity, the women here paint after nature, and improve the charms she has
given, by such colors as have the nearest resemblance to her in her most
beautiful appearance: to all this we may add, that they are strictly taken care
of by their parents, and on that account difficult of access to strangers.

One peculiar custom of this people, though not properly belonging to our
subject, we cannot help mentioning: none but the chief lords of their country
have the privilege of killing any animal, which they always do with a great
deal of ceremony; nor would any of the people, though urged by the strongest
necessity, eat that which was killed by any other person. Another custom hardly
less singular, is, that all children born on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays,
are reckoned accursed, and exposed in the woods to die of cold and hunger, or
meet with a more merciful death from the jaws of the wild beasts; but so
compassionate are the women, that in spite of the punishments threatened
against them by the men, and of the more tremendous terrors held over them by
superstition, they frequently steal, and bring up these children privately at
the hazard of their own lives. On the banks of the Gambia, this female
character is reversed; though they put on an appearance of modesty, it is in
fact nothing but an appearance, and when opportunity offers, they will very
readily grant any favor for a little coral, a silk handkerchief, or some
trifle of a similar nature.

Besides the places now mentioned, several of which we have only lame and
imperfect accounts of, there are in Africa many others, of which we know little
more than the names. Ethiopia, Lybia, Zanguebar, and some others, have hitherto
been almost impervious to European travelers; and the only people who have
dared to enter them, have been Jesuits; whose relations, wherever religion or
interest were concerned, have gained no great credit among mankind; and
mercantile adventurers, so hot in the pursuit of gain, that they never examined
any thing which had not a relation to that subject.

Beyond the river Volta, in the country of Benin, and almost every where upon
the Gold Coast, the women, though far from being famous for any of the virtues,
would not be disagreeable in their looks, were it not for the abominable custom
of marking their faces with scars, for the same purposes as our European ladies
lay on paint. Though in few respects better than savages, there is a particular
opinion over all this country, which tends to humanize the mind: this is a firm
persuasion, that to whatever place they remove themselves, or are by any
accident removed, they shall after death return to their own country, which
they consider as the most delightful in the universe. This fond delusive hope
not only softens the slavery to which they are often condemned in other
countries, but also induces them to treat such strangers as come among them
with much civility; being persuaded, that they are come there to enjoy
paradise, and receive the reward of virtuous actions done in other bodies. The
people who border upon Zaara are the most peaceable and good-natured of the
Africans; their food is simple, and they bestow little labor in procuring it;
they spend a great deal of their time in public amusements; but neither to
these, nor to any other places of common resort, are the women ever admitted;
assembled together in houses by themselves, they spend the time in female
employments and amusements, and no men are ever admitted into their society.
This confinement, though not of so strict a nature as in many places of the
world, has the effect that confinement generally has upon beings who ought to
be free, it renders them less virtuous.

As we cannot give a minute and circumstantial character of the African women,
we shall conclude what we have to say on that subject, by observing, that when
we look back upon this general and particular character we have drawn, we find
the former, which, like all national characters, is drawn from the men, much
worse than the latter, which we have chiefly taken from the women; and perhaps
even that former is not so bad as it is represented, being sketched out almost
entirely, either by declaiming priests of their own nation, or by Europeans,
who are strongly prejudiced against the Africans, on account of the losses they
have sustained by their plunderings and depredations. These things, no doubt,
justly excite our indignation, and extort from us every ungracious epithet; but
were we to have the character of the Europeans drawn by an African, would he
have more reason to be indulgent to us? No; he might treat us with still
greater severity; what a horrid scene would he probably paint? he would
delineate a people, who profess a religion, the precepts of which breathe
nothing but gentleness and humanity, in spite of nature, and in spite of that
religion, carrying away by fraud and force, every year, thousands of his
helpless countrymen into slavery; he would tell how their merciless masters
exact from them a labor superior to their strength, and even suffer that
strength to fail for want of sustenance; he would tell of the whips, the
tortures, and the deaths inflicted on his countrymen, should they ever happen
to consider themselves as human beings, or venture to assert the rights of
nature and of humanity! -- he would tell -- but we desist from the dismal tale,
as we feel ourselves almost transformed into Africans while we relate it.

In our progress from America to Africa, we meet with but little improvement in
the manners and character of the people; and when from Africa we pass into
Asia, we find that they have only left the Africans a very few degrees behind
them, almost in every thing but peacefulness of disposition and gentleness of
manners. While the African, like the tiger of his forests, lies in wait to
plunder and destroy; the Asiatic, contented with a little rice, and some of the
simplest productions of nature, reclines beneath the shade, and gives labor
and luxury to the winds; let him but enjoy his rice, his women, and his ease,
and he asks no more.

The beautiful scenes which present themselves on the banks of the Ganges, and
along the plains of Hindostan, are almost beyond description; the air is
perfumed at some seasons with the most delicious fragrance, arising from a
variety of flowers, and no less a number of fruits, which yield a wholesome and
refreshing nourishment. The trees form a shade impenetrable to the rays of the
sun: here bountiful Nature has left the Asiatic nothing to pursue but pleasure;
and hardly any thing else do the Hindoos, who are the ancient inhabitants of
the country, pursue. Relaxed by the climate, more than half of this pleasure
consists in ease and indolence; which has taken such hold of them, that a
saying from one of their favorite authors is frequently in their mouths: It is
better to sit still than to walk; better to sleep than to awake; but death is
best of all. If we may credit some modern travelers, so extravagant is their
love of rest, that the women of Allahabad can hardly be prevailed upon to reach
out their hands to save their own children, when in danger of being trod to
death by carriages passing along the street. Such is the picture of the
Hindoos. The Mahommedans have more activity, stronger passions, and a cruelty
and ambition which are hardly to be restrained within any bounds.

In considering the character of the Asiatic women, there are two things which
claim our utmost attention. The first is, that the narrow and limited sphere in
which they move, almost entirely divests them of every thing that arises from
liberty and society, and consequently of much of their characteristic
distinction. The second, that they are so closely shut up from the observation
of all Europeans, that our accounts of them are extremely mutilated and
imperfect, as well as in many points false and ridiculous. We may, however,
observe of them in general, that as a spring bent by an external force is
constantly endeavoring to restore itself; so they, unjustly deprived of their
liberty, are constantly exerting all the cunning they are masters of, in order
to deceive the tyrants who have secluded them from the world and the sweets of
society; and by long custom, assisted by nature, and urged by necessity, they
are become great adepts in those arts of deception, which tend to procure them
a temporary liberty, or favor an intrigue.

Chastity and unchastity are almost the only things that can characterise the
women of the East. Shut up for ever in impenetrable Harams, they can hardly be
called creatures of the world, having no intercourse with it, and no use for
the social and oeconomical virtues which adorn its citizens. If being good
wives consists in care, frugality and industry, these are all things entirely
out of their power: if being such, consists in loving their husbands, and
tenderness to their children; the first of these is also rendered next to
impossible by the behavior of those tyrants who style themselves husbands; and
the last is much weakened by transferring upon the children some part of that
dislike they have to the father. To the joys of friendship they are, perhaps,
entire strangers: the men treat them in such a manner, that it is impossible
they can esteem them; the women are their constant rivals. The only virtues,
then, which the Asiatic fair can put in practice, are such as relate to their
religion, and their chastity; but even in the exercise of religion they are
circumscribed. As they are not allowed to attend on the public worship of the
gods of their country, they can have no other religion than the silent
adoration of the heart; and as to chastity, the manner in which they are
disposed of to, or forcibly taken by husbands, and the behavior of these
husbands to them through life, are the most unlikely methods in the world to
make them famous for that virtue.

But though these observations may be pretty generally applied to the Asiatic
women, there are some exceptions. The Bramins, or priests of India, though they
confine their women like the rest of their countrymen, yet, by treating them
with lenity and indulgence, they secure their virtue by attaching their hearts.
Married to each other in their infancy, they have the greatest veneration for
the nuptial tie: their mutual fondness increases with their strength; and in
riper years, all the glory of the women consists in pleasing their husbands; a
duty which they consider as one of the most sacred of their holy religion, and
which the gods will not suffer them to neglect with impunity. While the rest of
the Hindoo women take every opportunity to elude their keepers, these
voluntarily confine themselves, at least from the company and conversation of
all strangers, and in every respect copy that simplicity of life and manners,
for which their husbands are so remarkable.

If we except these we have now mentioned, of all the other Asiatics the
Chinese have perhaps the best title to modesty. Even the men wrap themselves
closely up in their garments, and reckon it indecent to discover any more of
their arms and legs than is necessary: the women, still more closely wrapped
up, never discover a naked hand even to their nearest relations, if they can
possibly avoid it. Every part of their dress, every part of their behavior, is
calculated to preserve decency, and inspire respect; and what adds the greatest
luster to their charms, is that uncommon modesty which appears in every look,
and in every action. Charmed, no doubt, with so engaging a demeanor, the men
behave to them in a reciprocal manner; and that their virtue may not be
contaminated by the neighborhood of vice, the legislature takes care that no
prostitutes shall lodge within the walls of any of the great towns in China.
Such are the Chinese women represented by some travelers; but it is by others
doubted, whether this semblance of modesty be any thing else than the custom of
the country; and alleged, that notwithstanding of so much seeming decency and
decorum, they have their peculiar modes of intriguing, and embrace every
possible opportunity of putting them in practice; and that, in these intrigues,
they frequently scruple not to stab the paramour they had invited to their
arms, as the surest method of preventing detection and loss of character. A
few, perhaps, of the most flagitious may be guilty of such enormous crimes; but
we persuade ourselves, that they are only very few; and we are happy in having
it in our power to inform our fair readers, that such relations are not to be
found in any of our modern travelers, whose veracity is most to be relied on.

So different over all the world are the sects of saints, as well as of
sinners, that besides the Bramins, a set of innocent and religious priests, who
have rendered their women virtuous by treating them with kindness and humanity,
there are another sect of religio-philosophical drones, called Fakiers, who
contribute as much as they can to debauch the sex, under a pretense of superior
sanctity. These hypocritical saints, like some of the ridiculous sects which
formerly existed in Europe, wear no clothes; considering them only as proper
appendages to sinners, who are ashamed, because they are sensible of guilt;
while they, being free from every stain of pollution, have no shame to cover.
In this original state of nature, these idle and pretended devotees, assemble
together sometimes in armies of ten or twelve thousand, and under a pretense of
going in pilgrimage to certain temples, like locusts devour every thing on
their way; the men flying before them, and carrying all that they can out of
the reach of their depredations; while the women, not in the least afraid of a
naked army of lusty saints, throw themselves in their way, or remain quietly at
home to receive them.

It has long been an opinion, well established all over India, that there is
not in nature so powerful a remedy for removing the sterility of women, as the
prayers of these sturdy naked saints. On this account, barren women constantly
apply to them for assistance; which when the good-natured Fakier has an
inclination to grant, he leaves his slipper, or his staff, at the door of the
lady's apartment with whom he is praying; a symbol so sacred, that it
effectually prevents any one from violating the secrecy of their devotion: but,
should he forget this signal, and at the same time be distant from the
protection of his brethren, a sound drubbing is frequently the reward of his
pious endeavors. But though they will venture sometimes, in Hindostan, to
treat a Fakier in this unholy manner; in other parts of Asia and Africa, such
is the veneration in which these lusty saints are held, that they not only have
access when they please, to perform private devotions with barren women, but
are accounted so holy, that they may at any time, in public or in private,
confer a personal favor upon a woman, without bringing upon her either shame
or guilt; and no woman dare refuse to gratify their passion. Nor indeed, has
any one an inclination of this kind; because she, upon whom this personal
favor has been conferred, is considered by herself, and by all the people, as
having been sanctified and made more holy by the action.

So much concerning the conduct of the Fakiers in debauching women, seems
certain. But it is by travelers further related, that wherever they find a
woman who is exceedingly handsome, they carry her off privately to one of their
temples; but in such a manner, as to make her and the people believe, that she
was carried away by the god who is there worshipped; who being violently in
love with her took that method to procure her for his wife. This done, they
perform a nuptial ceremony, and make her further believe, that she is married
to the god; when, in reality, she is only married to one of the Fakiers who
personates him. Women who are treated in this manner are revered by the people
as the wives of the gods, and by that stratagem secured solely to the Fakiers,
who have cunning enough to impose themselves as gods upon some of these women,
through the whole of their lives. In countries where reason is stronger than
superstition, we almost think this impossible: where the contrary is the case,
there is nothing too hard to be credited. Something like this was done by the
priests of ancient Greece and Rome; and a few centuries ago, tricks of the same
nature were practiced by the monks, and other libertines, upon some of the
visionary and enthusiastic women of Europe. Hence we need not think it strange,
if the Fakiers generally succeed in attempts of this nature; when we consider,
that they only have to deceive a people brought up in the most consummate
ignorance; and that nothing can be a more flattering distinction to female
vanity, than for a woman to suppose herself such a peculiar favorite of the
divinity she worships, as to be chosen, from all her companions, to the honor
of being admitted to his embraces; a favor, which her self-admiration will
dispose her more readily to believe than examine.

Besides this method of decoying women into the temples, for the sake of
debauchery, there are other temples, where they are supplied with them in a
more open manner; being voluntarily offered by their parents, and dedicated by
the priests while infants, with great pomp and solemnity, to the service of
their gods; they dance and sing before the chief idol on solemn festivals, with
all the wantonness of venal charms, and temptation of loose attire, in order to
attract the spectators, to whom they afterward prostitute themselves for the
benefit of the temple to which they belong; and at the expense of which they
were brought up. When such is the religion of the East, when such are the
deities there worshipped, can we expect chastity to be a virtue much regarded
among the women, or that the men can secure it by any other methods than locks,
bars, and eunuchs?

But it is not the religion of the Hindoos only, that is unfavourable to
chastity; that of Mahomet, which now prevails over a great part of India, is
unfavourable to it likewise. Mahomedism every where indulges the men with a
plurality of wives, while it ties down the women to the strictest conjugal
fidelity; hence, while the men riot in unlimited variety, the women are in
great numbers confined to share among them the scanty favors of one man only.
This unnatural and impolitic conduct induces them to seek by art and intrigue
what they are denied by the laws of their prophet. As polygamy prevails over
all Asia, this art and intrigue follow as the consequence of it; some have
imagined, that it is the result of climate, but it rather appears to be the
result of the injustice which women suffer by polygamy; for it seems to reign
as much in Constantinople, and in every other place where polygamy is in
fashion, as it does on the banks of the Ganges, or the Indus. The famous
Montesquieu, whose system was, that the passions are entirely regulated by the
climate, brings as a proof of this system, a story from the collection of
voyages for the establishment of an East India Company, in which it is said,
that at Patan, the wanton desires of the women are so outrageous, that the men
are obliged to make use of a certain apparel to shelter them from their
designs. Were this story really true, it would be but a partial proof of the
effect of climate, for why should the burning suns of Patan only influence the
passions of the fair? Why should they there transport that sex beyond decency,
which in all other climates is the most decent? And leave in so cool and
defensive a state, that sex, which in all other climates is apt to be the most
offensive and indecent? To whatever length the spirit of intrigue may be
carried in Asia and Africa, however the passions of the women may prompt them
to excite desire, and to throw themselves in the way of gratification, we have
the strongest reasons to reprobate all these stories, which would make us
believe, that they are so lost to decency as to attack the other sex: such a
system would be overturning nature, and inverting the established laws by which
she governs the world.

In Otaheite, an island lately discovered in the great Southern Ocean, we are
presented with women of a singular character. As far as we can recollect, we
think it is a pretty general rule, that wherever the sex are accustomed to be
constantly clothed, they are ashamed to appear naked: those of Otaheite seem
however to be an exception to this rule; to show themselves in public, with or
without clothing, appears to be to them a matter of equal indifference, and the
exposition of any part of their bodies, is not attended with the least
backwardness or reluctance; circumstances from which we may reasonably infer,
that, among them, clothes were not originally invented to cover shame, but
either as ornaments, or as a defense against the cold. But a still more
striking singularity in the character of these women, and which distinguishes
them not only from the females of all other nations, but likewise from those of
almost all other animals, is, their performing in public those rites, which in
every other part of the globe, and almost among all animals, are performed in
privacy and retirement: whether this is the effect of innocence, or of a
dissoluteness of manners to which no other people have yet arrived, remains
still to be discovered; that they are dissolute, even beyond any thing we have
hitherto recorded, is but too certain. As polygamy is not allowed among them,
to satisfy the lust of variety, they have a society called Arreoy, in which
every woman is common to every man; and when any of these women happens to have
a child, it is smothered in the moment of its birth, that it may not interrupt
the pleasures of its infamous mother; but in this juncture, should nature
relent at so hor^id a deed, even then the mother is not allowed to save her
child, unless she can find a man who will patronise it as a father; in which
case, the man is considered as having appropriated the woman to himself, and
she is accordingly extruded from this hopeful society. These few anecdotes
sufficiently characterise the women of this island. In some of the adjacent
ones, which were visited by his Majesty's ships upon this discovery, if the
women were not less unchaste, they were at least less flagitious and indelicate.

As the Turks, who now inhabit a part of Europe, were originally Asiatics, and
still retain the manners and customs which they brought from that country,
their women are much given to secret gallantry and intrigue; vices which seem
however to be the worst part of their character: when we view them in the other
departments of female life, we see many amiable qualities conspiring to adorn
them, such as benevolence, charity, and a tenderness of feeling, and softness
of disposition, to which they have hardly ever reached in the most polished
parts of the Christian world. In Lady Montague's description of the visit she
made to the lady of the Grand Vizer of Constantinople, her humility, meekness,
and charity, are delineated in a manner which does honor to the sex. In her
visit to the fair Fatima, while we find the person of an angel, engaged in all
the tender offices of a mother, we must be insensible to every feeling, if our
hearts do not glow with the description. We are indeed but too apt to throw a
veil over every virtue which appears in a people professing a religion so
different from our own, and which have always been taught to consider with
partiality, and to look upon with horror; than which, nothing can more
certainly indicate weakness of mind and want of urbanity. People of all
religions have in them a mixture of vice and virtue; and, on a strict enquiry,
we shall find, that vice oftener flows from a bad education and improper
customs, than from a bad religion: but should the Mahometans, or any other
people, with a religion less pure and holy than that of the Christians, be
found to excel them in many of the moral virtues, they certainly on that
account deserve the more praise, and we the more reprehension; especially when
it is considered what they would probobly have done, had they been in our
situation.

When we take a retrospective view of these imperfect sketches of the character
of the American, African, and Asiatic women, when we see almost the whole of it
comprised in unremitting endeavors to satisfy a voluptuous appetite, when we
see the sex every where abused by slavery or confinement, we cannot help
breathing a wish, that both the one and the other were rectified; and from the
intercourse that has long subsisted between Europe and many of the countries we
have been considering, some amendment in the condition, and reformation in the
manners of the women might reasonably have been expected. But the Europeans who
have gone abroad, instead of carrying along with them that spirit of moral
rectitude, taught by the religion of Jesus, which ought to have demonstrated
their superior virtue as well as superior knowledge, seem in general, the
moment they left their own country, to have thrown aside every principle, and
every idea, but that of amassing wealth, though at the expense of probity, and
of conscience; and instead of introducing more order and regularity among the
ignorant people they visited, have but too often given a loose to every
voluptuous app^^ite, and outdone in every species of debauchery, those who were
neither restrained by their laws, nor their religion; nor ha^ this flagitious
conduct been peculiar to one European nation only, all those who have planted
colonies, and extended their commerce, have been almost equally infamous for
cruelty, oppression, and debauchery.

Soon after the Portuguese had conquered India, laying aside that martial
spirit for which they were then so famous, they gave themselves up to all those
excesses which render the human race odious, and became such monsters, that
poison, conflagration, and assassination, with every other crime, grew familiar
to them. They massacred the natives; they destroyed one another; and while they
raised the hatred of these natives, they lost the courage to make themselves
feared. In the island of Amboyna a Portuguese had, at a public festival, seized
upon a beautiful woman, and regardless of decency, proceeded to offer her the
greatest outrage. One of the islanders, highly resenting such a conduct, first
armed his fellow-citizens, and afterward calling together the Portuguese,
addressed them in the following manner: To revenge affronts of so cruel a
nature as those we have received from you, would require actions, not words;
yet we will speak to you. You preach to us a Deity, who delights, you say, in
generous actions; but theft, murder, obscenity, and drunkenness, are your
common practices. Your hearts are inflamed with every vice; our manners can
never agree with yours. Nature foresaw this, when she separated us by immense
oceans, but ye have overleaped her barriers: this audacity, of which you are
not ashamed to boast, is a proof of the corruption of your hearts. Take my
advice, leave to their repose these nations that resemble you so little: go,
fix your habitations among those who are brutal as yourselves. An intercourse
with you would be more fatal to us, than all the evils which it is in the power
of your god to inflict upon us. We renounce your alliance for ever. Your arms
are superior to ours, but we are more just than you, and we do not fear you;
the Itons are from this day your enemies, fly from their country, and beware
how you approach it any more.

Such were the sentiments of one whom we call a savage, on the behavior of the
Portuguese. When a governor of sense and humanity happened to preside over
their colonies, he endeavored to reform the manners, and restrain the
rapacity, of his countrymen; but his single virtue was always feeble and
unavailing, when opposed to the vices of a contaminated people. The Spaniards,
who in many places succeeded them, not only copied, but even in time fairly
exceeded, the original example. Few of our readers can be strangers to the
cruelties and debaucheries they committed in Mexico and Peru, where they built
churches, endeavored to explain the mysteries of the Christian religion to the
natives, in a language of which they did not understand one word; and afterward
piously slaughtered them as hereties, for not believing what had been so
clearly demonstrated to them. When they had conquered the island of Hispaniola,
they made peace with the natives, on condition that they should cultivate all
the land for their use, and furnish them with a certain quantity of gold every
month. The poor wretches, finding the task insupportable, as well as
impossible, took shelter in their mountains, where they hoped to maintain
themselves till the Spai^rds should be obliged by famine to evacuate their
island. But the Spaniards, in the mean time receiving a supply of provisions
from Europe, pursued them to their fastnesses to revenge, as they said, the
injustice they had suffered; trained their dogs to hunt and destroy them, in
places which to themselves were inaccessible; and, fired with superstition and
a thirst of blood, some of them made a vow to destroy twelve Indians every day,
in honor of the twelve Apostles. What uneasiness would it have given to men so
mild and benevolent, had they thought that their names would have been
prostituted to such infamous purposes!

Humanity recoils at this dismal recital, and sincerely wishes, that the other
powers who have usurped a right in the Indies could be absolved from similar
crimes; but the immense plunder lately brought to England from the plains of
Hindostan and banks of the Ganges, are but too evident proofs of what our
countrymen have there committed. Such loads of treasure are not the produce of
the paths of peace, nor even of the fields stained with blood, and disfigured
by the horrors of war; unless that war, like a deluge, indiscriminately levels
friend and enemy as it goes along. Avarice, fordid avarice, seems alone to have
occupied the breasts of the greatest part of those who have traveled from
Europe to the Indies, and from so fruitful a source has sprung up almost every
other crime. An Englishman who was shipwrecked on the coast of Africa, being
taken and condemned to death by the natives, was saved by a woman of some
distinction in the country; who on a promise that he would marry her contrived
to escape along with him. The wretch had no sooner arrived in an European
settlement, than he sold his deliverer for a slave, and abandoned her forever.
But the vices are not solely attached to the men who have left Europe in
pursuit of gain: even the women who have accompanied them, leaving behind them
the gentleness of European manners and of female nature, have been often hardly
less distinguished for debauchery and cruelty than the men. A virago of this
sort in the East or West Indies, seldom meeting with any opposition to her whim
and caprice, assumes at last a spirit of presumption and tyranny; and lost to
feeling and humanity, wields the whip with such dexterity, as to fetch at every
stroke blood from the back of the naked and unresisting slave; whose only fault
was, that he did not anticipate the wishes of his mistress, or because he let
fall some hints, that he was a creature of the same genus as herself.

CHAPTER XIII. The same Subject continued.
AFTER having traced the character of the fair sex through so many countries,
where we have found the vicious and the disagreeable too frequently to be
predominant; we now, with the utmost pleasure, turn toward Europe, where the
beauties of their character, like those of their persons, will not only engage
our attention, but also attract our hearts. We cannot, however, extend our plan
so far as to hold up to view every beauty and every blemish, which gives a
luster or deformity to the fair, through all the different countries of Europe;
we shall therefore only endeavor to draw the outlines of characters, to
various and complicated for us to finish with any tolerable degree of precision.

We have already observed, that chastity has, in all polished nations, been
ever esteemed the principal ornament of the female character; and we now aver,
that this was never more remarkably the case, in any part of the world, than at
present in Europe. Here we worship no deities that delight in debauchery, as
among the ancients; nor such as, regardless of moral good and evil, concern not
themselves about human actions, as in some part of the world, among the
moderns. Hence the conduct of our women, besides being influenced by the
superior regard paid to chastity among us, is still further influenced by a
veneration for that purity of manners and of character, so strongly inculcated
by the precepts of the Christian religion; and hence, though declaimers and
satirists in every nation of Europe paint their own women as the most lewd and
abandoned in the world, we boldly affirm, that Europe in general is more famous
for the chastity and other good qualities of its women, than any other part of
the globe; for the truth of which we need only appeal to the personal
experience of the traveller, and to the reading of the historian; both of which
afford an ample demonstration of our assertion. We must, however, observe here,
that the virtues of modesty and chastity do not flourish most, where they are
endeavored to be forced upon the women by locks, bolts, and gouvernantes, as
in Spain; nor where unrestrained liberty and politeness are carried to the
greatest length, as in France and Italy; but rather, where, with no other ^^rb
on their personal freedom than what decency requires, they have not carried the
refinements of politeness to such an excess, as to reckon every restraint upon
inclination a mark of rust^^ation and ill-breeding.

In endeavoring to sketch some rude draughts of the character of the European
women, we shall take a view of them as they appear in the principal nations
(...) ^mposed; and as the French reckon themselves of all other people the most
conspicuous, we shall begin with them; a distinction to which we reckon them
justly entitled, as they are the fruitful source of half the fashions that
embellish, and perhaps of more than half the foibles that disgrace, Europe.

As chastity is a virtue which does not seem to flourish in a soil, where too
much or too little culture is bestowed upon it, we must not expect to find it
remarkably vigorous among the French, where politeness is the first of all the
virtues, and where chastity would hardly be entitled to a place as the second.
When travelers, who have always been accustomed to countries where women are
much on the reserve, enter France, where the very reverse in almost every
particular is the case; before they have coolly considered the customs of
different countries, they are apt to conclude that the French have no decency
and no chastity among them. Such conclusions are, however, by much too hasty:
we must not be led by appearances: a French woman of the most unblemished
reputation will, in compliance with the customs of her country, act with a
levity and freedom, both of words and actions, which in England would be an
almost infallible indication of a strumpet; while in France it only indicates,
that a woman has seen the world. We would not, however, insinuate from this,
that chastity is among the French a prevailing virtue: the number of mistresses
kept by the married as well as the single; the little discredit thrown on the
profession of a prostitute, especially if she is an Opera girl, are proofs of
this; and we may add, the general desire of intrigue among the women, and the
little notice taken of it by the men; both of which have at length established
it as a fashion; and in France, not to be fashionable, is a condition much more
dreaded, than not to be virtuous.

In every country in the world, women have always a little to do, and a great
deal to say. In France, notwithstanding of the Salique law, they dictate almost
every thing that is said, and direct every thing that is done: they are the
most restless set of beings in the world; ever in the hurry of action, either
about their own affairs, or those of other people; and equally busy and
solicitous about settling the affairs of the nation, or sticking a pin in its
proper place: to fold her hands in idleness and impose silence on her tongue,
would be to a French-woman worse than death: the sole joy of her life is to be
engaged in the prosecution of some scheme, the more intricate and arduous the
better; and so much the better still, if fashion, ambition, or love be the
subject. Nor is their activity confined to the gay and the pleasant, they even
enter sometimes into the most serious and momentuous concerns of life; the
profoundest depths of politics are not hid from them, and the most solemn
councils have often been summoned, and affairs of the utmost consequence
debated, when the decision had been previously settled by their address and
artifices. Among the rich and opulent, they are entirely the votaries of
pleasure, which they pursue through all her labyrinths, at the expense of
fortune, reputation, and health. Giddy and extravagant to the last degree, they
leave to their husbands economy and care, which would only spoil their
complexions, and furrow their brows. When we descend to tradesmen and
mechanics, the case is reversed; the wife manages every thing in the house and
shop, while the husband lounges in the backshop an idle spectator, or struts
about in his sword and bag-wig.

Matrimony is in France a thing entirely different from what it is in all other
parts of Europe; it does not there subject the helpless female to obedience, to
duty, or even to fidelity, but gives her a right to an unbounded liberty and
the fortune of her husband, while it confers on the husband hardly any right
but that of calling her his wife. In fashionable life, and indeed among all
ranks, as all aspire at being fashionable, it seems to be a bargain entered
into by a male and female to bear the same name, live in the same house, and
pursue their separate pleasures without restraint or control: and so
religiously is this part of the bargain kept, that both parties shape their
course exactly as convenience or inclination may dictate, spurning the joys of
friendship at home, and contemning the censure of the world abroad; they live
in the same house, but seldom see each other, having different apartments,
different sets of acquaintance, different servants, a different equipage, and
different tables. Jealousy is not to be expected (...), it is a monster which
springs from love; but as a French couple come together without love, they live
without jealousy, and commonly jog through life together, enjoying but little
happiness, and feeling perhaps no misery on account of each other.

In the midst of every levity and fashionable folly, there is no part of the
world where literature is more cultivated by the fair sex than in France, nor
any part where the company of men of letters is by them more coveted; a
circumstance, which while it diffuses knowledge among the women, gives an
elegance and cheerfulness to the men, and renders them men of the world as well
as of letters; and a circumstance, which has taught many of the French-women
the valuable secret of reconciling pleasure to improvement: but a secret so
valuable, and so rare in the female world, is not entirely owing to this
circumstance, education also has a share in it; brought up for the most part in
convents, books are often the only means they have of beguiling the tedious
hours of inactivity and silence, and a fondness for them once contracted, the
habit frequently remains for life. Such is female influence over literature, as
well as over every other thing in France, that by much the greatest part of the
productions of the press are calculated for their capacity; and happy is the
author who meets with their general approbation, it is the ladder by which he
must climb (...) fame, and the fountain which will assuredly yield him profit.

It is the property of real and unaffected politeness to banish all the
stiffness, and throw aside those airs of reserve, which in every country appear
more conspicuous as the inhabitants approach more toward barbarism; in no
country does this politeness manifest itself more than in France, where the
company of the women is accessible to every man who can recommend himself by
his dress, and by his address. To affectation and prudery the French women are
equally strangers; easy and unaffected in their persons and manners, their
politeness has so much the appearance of nature, that one would almost believe
no part of it to be the effect of art. An air of sprightliness and gaiety sits
perpetually on their countenances, and their whole deportment seems to
indicate, that their only business is to strew the path of life with flowers.
Persuasion hangs on the^r lips, and though their volubility of tongue is
inde^^tigable, so soft is their accent, so lively their expression so various
their attitudes, that they fix the attention for hours together on a tale of
nothing. In short, if a man is not too far gone in the spleen, there is no cure
so certain as the company of a lively French-woman; but if he is totally
overrun with that disease, her company will augment every symptom, and he will
paint her as a late snarling traveller did, all folly and impertinence.

The peculiar province of beauty is to captivate at the first sight, and to
retain the captive in chains, only for the short time that is necessary to
discover they were forged by beauty alone. The French-women in general, not
being remarkable for beauty, seldom jump into the affections of a man all at
once, but gain upon him by degrees, and practice every female art to retain him
in their service as long as inclination or convenience shall dictate; but the
wind or the fashions which she follows, are hardly more inconstant than a
French lady's mind; her sole joy is in the number of her admirers, and her sole
pride in changing them as often as possible; over the whole of them she
exercises the most absolute power, and they are zealously attentive even to
prevent her wishes, by performing whatever they think she has any inclination
to, their time, their interest, and activity, become wholly devoted to her
will, or rather to her caprice, and they must not presume to exempt any talent
or power from the most slavish servitude to her pleasure; even the purse, that
most inaccessible thing about a Frenchman, must pour out its last sou^, at the
call of his mistress; and should he fail in this particular, he would be
immediately discarded from her train, with a stigma of preferring Mercury to
Venus, which would effectually prevent him from ever gaining admittance into
the train of any other of the fair; a mortification which being exceedingly
unfashionable, would to a Frenchman be almost intolerable.

The French-women reckon themselves the only females in the world who can dress
with elegance, and behave with genuine and unaffected ease, notions which are
diffused so much over all Europe, that these women lead every fashion, and
dictate to every people the manner of behavior; hence they have contracted a
national pride, which is apt to make them look down on the inhabitants of every
other country as miserable beings, but a few degrees above savage barbarity.
Such absolute votaries of pleasure, they have but little time for any other
pursuit, even religion must give place to this darling passion; while a
French-woman is able to drink at the stream of pleasure, she is generally an
atheist; as her taste for that diminishes, she becomes gradually religious, and
when she has lost it altogether, is the most bigoted devotee. Maternal
affection must not interrupt the business of pleasure. Few women in France, who
can afford to do otherwise, nurse, or take much care of their children when
young; but for this neglect they make some reparation, by solicitously using
all their interest to provide for them when they become capable of entering
into the army or the church. But to conclude, on comparing the different
accounts of the French females with each other, we are of opinion, that they
rather sacrifice too much of their delicacy to wit, and of their chastity to
good-breeding; that they pay too little regard to character, and too much to a
ridiculous opinion, that fashionable people are above it; that in fine, they
are too much the creatures of art, and have almost discarded nature as much
from their feelings as from their faces.

If chastity is none of the most shining virtues of the French, it is still
less so of the Italians. Almost all the travelers who have visited Italy,
agree in describing it as the most abandoned of all the countries of Europe. At
Venice, at Naples, and indeed in almost every part of Italy, women are taught
from their infancy, the various arts of alluring to their arms, the young and
unwary, and of obtaining from them, while heated by love or wine, every thing
that flattery and false smiles can obtain in these unguarded moments; and so
little infamous is the trade of prostitution, and so venal the women, that
hardly any rank or condition sets them above being bribed to it, nay, they are
frequently assisted by their male friends and acquaintances to drive a good
bargain; nor does their career of debauchery finish with their unmarried state:
the vows of fidelity which they make at the altar, are like the vows and oaths
made upon too many other occasions, only considered as nugatory forms, which
law has obliged them to take, but custom absolved them from performing. They
even claim and enjoy greater liberties after marriage than before; every
married woman has a cicisbeo, or gallant, who attends her to all public places,
hands her in and out of her carriage, picks up her gloves or fan, and a
thousand other little offices of the same nature; but this is only his public
employment, as a reward for which, he is entitled to have the lady as often as
he pleases at a place of retirement sacred to themselves, where no person, not
even the most intrusive husband must enter, to be witness of what passes
between them. This has been considered by people of all other nations, as a
custom not altogether consistent with chastity and purity of manners; the
Italians themselves, however, endeavor to justify it in their conversations
with strangers, and Baretti has of late years published a formal vindication of
it to the world. In this vindication he has not only deduced the original of it
from pure Platonic love, but would willingly persuade us that it is still
continued upon the same mental principles; a doctrine which the world will
hardly be credulous enough to swallow, even though he should offer more
convincing arguments to support it than he has already done.

If the French women are remarkable for a national pride, which induces them to
look with a mixture of pity and contempt upon every female who is unfortunate
enough to belong to any other country, the Italians are not less remarkable for
a family pride, which instigates them to despise, as beings beneath their
notice, every one who cannot reckon up a long line of illustrious ancestors;
and indeed they often behave as if they were persuaded, that a descent of this
kind conferred upon them a dignity and worth, which all their own worthless
insignificance could not possibly stain or destroy. The Spaniards carry this
family pride even farther than the Italians, and the Germans, perhaps, still
farther than they. It is a remainder of Gothic barbarity, wherever we meet with
it, and one of the most certain appendages of narrow and little minds. Viewing
it in this light, some have confined it almost entirely to the female sex: but
its limits are not so circumscribed; in almost every country, it diffuses
itself in a greater or less degree even among the men; but reigns triumphant in
the ideas of the women, supplies the want of personal merit, and too often
betrays itself in every look and in every action of their lives. In other
respects the women of Italy approach nearer to the French, than those of any of
the European kingdoms; they are not quite so gay and volatile, nor do they so
much excite the organs of risibility; but by the softness of their language,
and their manner, they more forcibly engage the heart: they are not so much the
cameleon or the weathercock, but have some decent degree of permanency in
their connections, whether of love or friendship; not, like French, careless
and divested of jealousy, but often suffering it to transport them to the most
unwarrantable actions.

As we have almost in every other particular characterised the women of Italy,
in our sketches of those of France, we shall now pass on to Spain; a country
which, though almost in our neighborhood, we are less acquainted with, and
less able to give the proper character of its inhabitants, than of the
Hottentots, or Indians on the banks of the Ganges; a circumstance owing to the
Spaniards having formerly almost totally shut up their country from the
intrusion of strangers; and from the genius of some of the most modern
travelers, who, in passing through it, have hardly deigned to take notice of
any thing that was not stamped at least with the rust of a thousand years. From
the little, however, which we learn of the travelers who have visited Spain,
that people have no great reason to boast of the security in which they suppose
they have placed the chastity of their women, by the assistance of locks, bars,
and old duennas. Chastity cannot be properly secured but by virtue, and virtue
never yet was instilled by force. The Spaniards have at last attained
sensibility enough to see this: their locks and bars are falling into disuse,
and their women do not become less chaste; and whatever may be the conduct of
particulars, when we view them as a nation, they rank much higher in this
respect than either the French or Italians, though not so high as some of the
other nations of Europe. A Spanish lady of rank discoursing with some of her
countrymen on gallantry, said that she would heartily despise the man, who,
having a proper opportunity, did not strenuously solicit every favor she could
grant. Every Spanish woman reckons this as a tribute due to her charms; and
though she has no inclination to grant all the favors that a man can ask of
her, she is not the less affronted if he does not ask them.

There is in the Spaniards a native dignity and pride, which far surpasses that
of any other nation; which, though the source of many inconveniences, has
nevertheless this salutary effect, that it sets them above almost every species
of meanness and infidelity. Nor is this a quality peculiar to the men; it
diffuses itself in a great measure among the women also; and its effects are
visible, both in their constancy in love and in friendship, in which respects
they are the very reverse of the French women. Their affections are not to be
gained by a bit of sparkling lace or a tawdry set of liveries; nor are they to
be lost by the appearance of still finer. Their deportment is rather grave and
reserved; and, on the whole, they have much more of the prude than the coquette
in their composition. Being more confined at home, and less engaged in business
and in pleasure, they take more care of their offspring than the French, and
have a becoming tenderness in their disposition to every thing but heretics.

The Spaniards are indulgent almost beyond measure to their women, and there
are several situations in which they take every advantage of this indulgence. A
kept mistress, by indisputable custom, has a right to a new suit of clothes,
according to the qaulity of her keeper, as often as she is blooded; and it is
only feigning a slight illness, and being on a proper footing with the Doctor,
to procure this as often as she pleases. A lady to whom a Cavallero pays his
addresses, is sole mistress of his time and money; and should he refuse her any
request, reasonable or capricious, it would reflect eternal dishonor upon him
among the men, and not only ruin his suit, but make him the detestation of all
the women. But in no situation does their character appear so whimsical, or
their power so conspicuous, as when they are breeding. In this case, whatever
they long for, whatever they ask, or whatever they have an inclination to do,
they must be indulged in. Some even of the lowest station have taken it into
their heads to see the king, have sent to him, and he has gratified their
curiosity. But this whimsical indulgence is sometimes used improperly; for it
has been known, that young men who could not gain admittance to the wives of
others, whom they want to debauch, have dressed themselves like women with
child, and in this disguise carried on their intrigues unsuspected.

It would greatly exceed the limits we have prescribed to ourselves, were we to
give a minute detail of the character and conduct of the women in every country
of Europe; we shall therefore confine our subject to a few observations of a
more general nature than those we have just now exhibited. Though the Germans
are rather a dull and phlegmatic people, and not much addicted to the warmer
passions, yet at the court of Vienna they are much given to intrigue; and an
affair of this kind is so far from being scandalous, that a woman gains credit
by the rank of her gallant, and is reckoned silly and unfashionable, if she
scrupulously adheres to the virtue of chastity. But this, as well as some
things which have been related above, it is hoped, is more the manners of
courts, than of places less exposed to temptation, and consequently less
dissolute; and we are well assured, that in all the nations we have mentioned,
there are many women who do honor to humanity, not by chastity only, but also
by a variety of other virtues.

The greatest part of the other European nations, not having yet arrived at
that point in the scale of politeness, where nature begins to be discarded, and
religion obliterated, their women are of course less the votaries of the
Cyprian goddess. In Great Britain, most parts of Germany, Holland, Switzerland,
Prussia, Poland, Denmark, Norway, and Russia, chastity is still a fashionable
virtue, and the other female virtues attend in her train. Indelicacy is not
substituted for wit, nor are double entendres almost ever heard from the lips
of any female above an oyster-wench or a prostitute. Some women, indeed, of the
higher ranks in England have of late set scandal at defiance, and laughed at
character: but they have commonly found themselves engaged in an unequal
contest; the lash of satire has made them smart, in spite of their seeming
indifference; and their want of a good character has excluded them almost from
every company, and of course from more than half the joys of life. Their
pernicious example is, however, in our opinion, not widely diffused. Our women
are, in general, chaste and delicate; and while we do not give improper
countenance to those who have acted otherwise, will continue to be so. But
should the unhappy period ever arrive, when our men should not distinguish
between her who is virtuous, and her who is not, the character we have here
given of our women will no longer exist, and we shall have ourselves to blame
for having destroyed it.

But besides the virtues of modesty and chastity, in which the women of Europe
far surpass all others, they are not less distinguishable for many other good
qualities both of the head and of the heart. It is in some of the politer
European nations only, where we meet with that inexpressible softness and
delicacy of manners, which, cultivated by education, appears as much superior
to what it does without it, as the polished diamond appears superior to that
which is rough from the mine. In all other parts of the world, women have
attained to so little knowledge, and so little consequence, that we can only
consider their virtues as of the negative kind. In Europe they are of another
nature; they consist not only in abstinence from evil, but in doing good: we
see women every day exerting themselves in acts of benevolence and charity, in
relieving the distresses of the body, and binding up the wounds of the mind; in
reconciling the differences of friends, and preventing the strife of enemies;
and, to sum up all, in that care and attention to their offspring, which is so
necessary and essential a part of their duty.

But, as impartial historians, we hold not up the fair side of the picture
only, but shall turn to the other also. This less lovely side, however, we
shall present to our female readers, without any of the sourness of the
declaimer, or the sarcastical sneering of the satirist; being fully sensible,
especially when we address ourselves to the softer sex, that a reproof is half
lost, where ill nature is joined; and having only in our view, the improvement
of their understandings, and leading them by gentle arts to those paths of
rectitude and decorum, from which some of them have deviated.

Though we have declared it as our opinion, that there is in most parts of
Europe more female virtue than in any other place on the globe, yet even here,
we find women liable to a variety of foibles and failings. As chastity is so
highly valued in almost all the nations of our continent, we meet often with
women who are foolish enough to persuade themselves, and endeavor to persuade
the world, that the possession of it can atone for the want of every other
thing amiable and virtuous; and if any one is hardy enough to hint at their
faults, they answer with no small severity, in the cant phrase, I am an honest
woman, at least.

There is amongst us another female character, not uncommon, which we
denominate the outrageously virtuous. Women of this stamp never fail to seize
all opportunities of exclaiming, in the bitterest manner, against every one
upon whom even the slightest suspicion of indiscretion or unchastity has
fallen; taking care, as they go along, to magnify every molehill into a
mountain, and every thoughtless freedom into the blackest of crimes. But
besides the illiberality of thus treating such as may frequently be innocent,
you may credit us, dear countrywomen, when we aver, that such a behavior,
instead of making you appear more virtuous, only draws down upon you, by those
who know the world, suspicions not much to your advantage. Your sex are in
general suspected by ours, of being too much addicted to scandal and
defamation; a suspicion, which has not arisen of late years, as we find in the
ancient laws of England a punishment, known by the name of ducking-stool,
annexed to scolding and defamation in the women, though no such punishment nor
crime is taken notice of in the men. This crime, however, we persu^de
ourselves, you are less guilty of, than is commonly believed: but there is
another of a nature not more excusable, from which we cannot so much exculpate
you; which is, that harsh and forbidding appearance you put on, and that
ill-treatment, which you no doubt think necessary, for the illustration of your
own virtue, you should bestow on every one of your sex who has deviated from
the path of rectitude. A behavior of this nature, besides being so opposite to
that meek and gentle spirit which should distinguish female nature, is in every
respect contrary to the charitable and forgiving temper of the Christian
religion, and infallibly shuts the door of repentance against an unfortunate
sister, willing, perhaps, to abandon the vices into which heedless inadvertency
had plunged her, and from which none of you can promise yourselves an absolute
security.

We wish not, fair countrywomen, like the declaimer and satirist, to paint you
all vice and imperfection, nor, like the venal panegyrist, to exhibit you all
virtue. As impartial historians, we confess that you have, in the present age,
many virtues and good qualities, which were either nearly or altogether unknown
to your ancestors; but do you not exceed them in some follies and vices also?
Is not the levity, dissipation, and extravagance of the women of this century
arrived to a pitch unknown and unheard of in former times? Is not the course
which you steer in life, almost entirely directed by vanity and fashion? And
are there not too many of you, who, throwing aside reason and good conduct, and
despising the counsel of your friends and relations, seem determined to follow
the mode of the world, however it may savor of folly, and however it may be
mixed with vice? Do not the generality of you dress, and appear, above your
station, and are not many of you ashamed to be seen performing the duties of
it? To sum up all, do not too, too many of you act as if you thought the care
of a family, and the other domestic virtues, beneath your attention, and that
the sole end for which you were sent into the world, was to please and divert
yourselves, at the expense of those poor wretches the men, whom you consider as
obliged to support you in every kind of idleness and extravagance? While such
is your conduct, and while the contagion is every day increasing, you are not
to be surprised if the men, still fond of you as playthings, in the hours of
mirth and revelry, shun every serious connection with you; and while they wish
to be possessed of your charms, are so much afraid of your manners and conduct,
that they prefer the cheerless state of a bachelor, to the numberless evils
arising from being tied to a modern wife.

We shall conclude this chapter with a few general observations on the
characteristic differences of the past and present ages of the world. Such,
among many, is the proclivity to admiring whatever is past and despising
whatever is present, that every thing stamped with the rust of remote antiquity
must infallibly be all good and virtuous, and every thing of a modern date as
unquestionably be vice and folly. According to such, the times of the
patriarchs were the best and happiest periods of the world, even so much so,
that they were distinguished by the splendid title of golden age, while our
modern times are branded with the epithet of the age of iron. To give us some
idea of this golden age, many authors of considerable merit have labored to
persuade us, that the earth brought forth her fruit spontaneously, that the
lion and the tiger were harmless as the lamb, and that mankind, free from
pride, ambition, avarice, and all the vicious and tumultuous passions of the
mind, lived in the most happy security and simplicity; and some have even gone
so far as to represent these times as exempted from those infirmities to which
nature, folly, and climate, have always subjected humanity. These and other
fables of the like nature, though they may do credit to the song of the poet,
disgrace the record of the historian; but in forming our judgment of past
events, we are not to be directed by the poet, the declaimer, the panegyrist,
nor the satirist; we must listen to facts only, and we must also consider the
general complexion of the times in which they happened.

Such authors as we have mentioned would make us believe, that avarice and
ambition were unknown to the happy beings they have placed in the first ages of
the world; but all that remains of the history of these ages* teaches quite
another doctrine, and demonstrates that, almost from the remotest antiquity,
there were wars, entered into with the most flagrant injustice, and carried on
with the most shocking inhumanity* murders and robberies constantly committed,
and the most wanton cruelties often executed without any provocation; that
brother cheated in the most solemn manner his brother; that the fair sex were
maltreated and abused; and in fine, that a savage barbarity of manners
subjected every thing to superior strength. They would likewise persuade us,
that pomp and luxury were then altogether unknown; but these are only
comparative, not absolute terms; as what might well deserve the name of luxury
in one period, would be the utmost simplicity in another. We grant indeed, that
those elegant pleasures which are the result of knowledge, industry, and a
perfection of the arts, had then no existence; but they had a pomp and a luxury
proportioned to their powers, and the means they had of showing them, and in
these they exerted, nay even overstretched themselves perhaps as much as in our
modern times, as we shall see more fully in the sequel of this work. Let us
then no longer continue to ascribe so many chimerical virtues to those ages,
when the plainness and simplicity of manners which then prevailed, was
evidently owing more to their rude and uncultivated state, than to their better
principles; and when the virtues for which they are (...), were more of the
negative than the (...).

Those abandoned cities which were consumed by fire from heaven, need not be
brought as examples of the total corruption of ancient manners. We have
unhappily too many other proofs of it, and of these the diffidence that every
one then entertained of his neighbor, is not the weakest. Abraham and Isaac,
both apprehended that they should be slain for the sake of their wives; and it
was no uncommon thing for a man to require an oath of his neighbor that he
would do him no harm. The stories of Judah and Tamar, his daughter-in-law, and
of the rape of Dinah, give us some idea of the debauchery and injustice which
then reigned upon the earth. Judah condemned Tamar to suffer death for the
crime that he had committed with her, and the perfidious sons of Jacob slew the
Sechemites after they had ratified a treaty of peace with them in the most
solemn manner. Nor were fidelity and honor more respected in private than in
public life; Jacob bargained with his uncle to serve him seven years for his
daughter Rachel; when the service was accomplished, Laban shamefully imposed
upon him Leah, and had even the effrontery to justify what he had done, and
exact another seven years service for Rachel. Jacob deceived his brother Esau;
the sons of Jacob sold Joseph their brother as a slave; an old prophet, by a
pretended commission from the Lord, decoyed a brother prophet to his house, and
made him eat bread and drink water, contrary to the commandment that had been
given him, and for the disobedience of which he was slain by a lion. Such were
mankind in the patriarchal ages.

When we trace their character through the subsequent periods mentioned in the
Old Testament, we meet with a numerous list of the same enormities and crimes.
When from this sacred record, we turn toward the traditions and fragments of
the history of other nations, they give us no more favorable idea of those
primitive times; from them we learn, that men lived at first without
government, and without law, without mutual confidence, or mutual friendship;
passion and appetite dictated what they should do, and they were not solicitous
about the justice, but only about the convenience and utility of their actions.
The whole of the political history of ancient Egypt is a scene of slaughter and
injustice. The cruelty and other crimes of Semiramis excite our indignation,
and the mad exploits of Alexander, were they not so much marked with blood,
would almost excite our laughter. The heroic ages of Greece exhibit little
besides rape, murder, and adultery; and the subsequent periods are full of
tyranny, proscription, and oppression.

The Romans were at first a set of lawless banditti: after they had formed
themselves into a community, and peopled Rome, they became famous for
moderation and justice, wherever the concerns of their republic were not in
question, and at last turned the most venal and profligate of mankind. When the
Roman empire was destroyed, were the crimes of the people extirpated; or does
history paint mankind as meliorated by so great an event? The reverse we are
afraid is the case; gloomy superstition now started up, persecution stalked
terrible behind her, and drenched Europe in blood. Rome erected a spiritual,
when she had lost a temporal, authority, and indiscriminately trampled on the
rights of heaven and earth; scarcely was there a nation among us, whose roads
were not infested with gangs of lawless assassins, who robbed and murdered the
traveller as he went along, and the laws were too feeble to bring these, or
even single offenders, to justice. Nor was a man's own house even an asylum,
where his life and property could be secure; his stronger neighbor often
entered it in the night, and bereaved him at once of property and of life. Such
was the picture of Europe till the beginning of the sixteenth century, when, by
a variety of causes, which it is not our province to enumerate, the manners
began to soften, justice to triumph over oppression, and the whole to assume
that order and security in which we now behold it.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the Influence of Female Society.
OF all the various causes which tend to influence our conduct and form our
manners, none operate so powerfully as the society of the other sex. If
perpetually confined to their company, they infallibly stamp upon us
effeminacy, and some other of the signatures of their nature; if constantly
excluded from it, we contract a roughness of behavior, and slovilenliness of
person, sufficient to point out to us the loss we have sustained. If we spend a
reasonable portion of our time in the company of women, and another in the
company of our own sex, it is then only that we imbibe a proper share of the
softness of the female, and at the same time retain the firmness and constancy
of the male.

Women in all ages have set the greatest value on courage and bravery in the
men; and men, in all civilized ages and countries, have placed the chiefest
female excellence in beauty, chastity, and a certain nameless softness and
delicacy of person and behavior. The cause of this will unfold itself in
considering the nature of the different sexes. Women, in themselves weak,
timid, and defenseless, stand in the greatest need of courage and bravery, to
defend them from the assaults that may be made on their bodies, or advantages
that may be gained over their minds; men, on the other hand, enterprising and
robust, have the greatest need of female softness, to smooth their rugged
nature, to wear off the asperities they daily contract in their business and
connections with one another, and by the lenient balm of endearment, to blunt
the edge of corrosive care.

We have just now observed, that men secluded from the company of women, become
slovenly in their persons, and rough and untractable in their manners; but this
is not all, even their gait assumes a more uncouth appearance, and their voice
a hoarser and less musical tone; their sensations become less delicate, their
sentiments less religious, and their passions seem to have more of the brutal,
than those of the rest of their sex; circumstances which appear but too
conspicuous in sailors, miners, and other people who either spend the greatest
part of their time altogether without women, or in the company of such as have
lost every female excellence. Should it be alleged, that those alterations are
owing to the horrid trade of war, in which sailors are so often engaged, the
same thing should then be observed in soldiers. Should we have recourse to the
surliness of the winds and waves, against which they maintain a perpetual
combat, though these may in some measure account for their behavior, yet it
will appear to an accurate observer, that the ultimate cause is not to be found
only in the want of that social intercourse with the other sex, which of all
things has the most powerful tendency to soften and humanize the mind.

Though men secluded from the company of women, become the most rude and
uncultivated of animals, yet women almost entirely secluded from the company of
men, do not, in some particular cases, lose almost any thing of their softness
and delicacy. In nunneries, for instance, we often persuade ourselves, that
these qualities rather increase; but here we are to consider, that women so
placed, are not altogether excluded from the company of men, having frequent
opportunities of seeing and conversing with them through a grate; and besides,
the melancholy reflections on the sweets of society, of friendship, and above
all, of love which they have for ever lost, give them an air of pensive
softness, which never fail to make the sex appear more lovely, and to raise our
pity, a passion which, we may say, when it has beauty for its object, is more
than sister to love, and inspires us with the strongest partiality.

But though women who are shut up by themselves preserve their native softness
and delicacy, yet those of them, who, abandoned by, or despising the company of
their own sex, associate only with ours, soon become the roughest and most
uncultivated of the human species; a fact which the experience of every one
must have abundantly demonstrated to him, and which affords the strongest
possible proof of the salutary influence of female society. But in order to
show more particularly the benefits arising from this source, let us take a
short view of the state of society among the ancients, and then turn our eyes
toward those countries, where, at present, men and women live almost
constantly separated from each other, and where the men seldom or never deign
to visit the women but to show authority, or to gratify animal appetite.

When we look back to the more early ages of antiquity, we find but little
social intercourse between the two sexes, and that, in consequence thereof,
both were less amiable in their persons and manners. In the patriarchal ages,
it would seem, that the women generally resided by themselves, in apartments
allotted to them in the back-parts of the tents of their parents and husbands;
a custom long after continued, and in some places at this day observed, among
the descendants of the patriarchs; the effects of which, on the tempers and
dispositions of the men, and even upon those of the women, were apparent.
Neither of the sexes were lively nor cheerful; the men were cruel, gloomy,
treacherous, and revengeful; the women, in a lesser degree, shared all these
unsocial vices. Many ages elapsed after the times we are speaking of, before
women arose into consequence enough to become the companions of an hour devoted
to society, as well as of that devoted to love. Even the Babylonians, who
appear to have allowed their women more liberty than any of the ancients, seem
not to have lived with them in a friendly and familiar manner; but the little
intercourse the sexes had with each other, being still greater than that of the
neighboring nations, they acquired thereby a polish and refinement unknown to
any of the people who surrounded them. The manners of both sexes were softer,
and better calculated to please, and to cleanliness and dress they paid more
attention. Such were the effects of female society on the Babylonians; but they
had not carried it far enough to become properly cultivated. The Sybarites, who
had carried it by much too far, in a series of years lost by it, all that
firmness of body and of mind peculiar to the men, and contracted, if we may be
allowed the expression, a more than female effeminacy.

What a rude and barbarous people the Greeks were, during the heroic ages, we
have already seen: when we trace them downward to those periods in which they
become famous for their knowledge of the arts and sciences, we find their
rudeness but a little altered, and their manners softened only a few degrees;
it is not therefore arts, sciences, and learning, but the company of the other
sex only, that forms the manners, and renders the men agreeable. But the
company and conversation of that sex, as we have before related, was among the
Greeks shamefully neglected; and particularly among the Lacedaemonians, who, on
that account, were the most rude and uncivilized of all their neighbors. In
their more early periods, the Romans were scarcely behind the Greeks in
rudeness and barbarity; but they were sometime a community without women, and
consequently without any thing to soften the ferocity of male nature. The
Sabine virgins, whom they had stolen, appear to have infused into them the
first ideas of politeness; but as they spent the greatest part of their time in
the field, or in the Forum, and in general did not make companions of their
wives and daughters, it was many ages before the roughness of the warrior, and
clownishness of the farmer, began to give place to the politeness of the
gentleman; a revolution of manners, which did not begin to show itself till
about the time when the Caesar's assumed the Empire; and from that time the
intercourse between the sexes became so easy, and gallantry grew so much into
fashion, that the hardy Roman was at length softened down to the delicate
voluptuary.

The same causes existed among the nations contemporary with the Romans, and
they produced the same effects. None of the fierce inhabitants of the North had
either time or inclination for the company of their women; and on that account
they were destitute of ornaments and graces, and equally uncultivated in body
and in mind. Were we to proceed on our survey of antiquity, we should find,
that it was only a few centuries ago that the fair sex began in Europe to be
considered in a rational light. Before the introduction of chivalry, they were
looked upon as beings unworthy of the company or attention of the men: by that
institution, they were raised to the rank of divinities, approached with
reverence, and considered as moving in a sphere too exalted for the familiarity
of mortal men; and it was only upon the decline of this romantic turn of mind,
that they began to take that place in the scale of rational beings, for which
nature seems to have intended them; to be social companions, to enhance the
value of all the pleasures, and alleviate all the pains and ills, of life.

From this slight survey of antiquity, let us turn our eyes toward the present
state of mankind in the East; where jealousy, that tyrant of the soul, has
excluded all the joys and comforts of mixed society: there, we shall not only
find the men gloomy, suspicious, cowardly, and cruel, but divested of almost
all the finer sentiments that arise from friendship and from love. There we
shall find, that roughness and barbarity have settled their empire, and triumph
over the human mind: but there, shall we hardly be able to discover the tender
parent, or the indulgent husband; there, shall we with difficulty find any of
the social virtues, or the sentimental feelings: all these are commonly the
offspring of mixed society; and though men may improve their heads in the
company of their own sex, we may affirm, that the company and conversation of
women alone is the proper school for the heart. Should any one doubt the truth
of this, let him turn over a few volumes of the history of any of those
nations, where the sexes live excluded from each other, and he will meet with
the most ample conviction.

When from those unsocial regions, where, by being deprived of the company of
the fair, life is deprived of more than half its joys, we turn ourselves to
Europe, we easily discover, that in proportion to the time spent in the
conversation of their women, the people are polished and refined; and less so,
in proportion as they neglect or despise them. The Russians, Poles, and even
the Dutch, pay less attention to their females than any of their neighbors,
and are of consequence less distinguished for the graces of their persons, and
the feelings of their hearts. The Spaniards, when they formerly had not the
benefits of female society, were remarkable for their cruelties: at this
period, when locks, bars, and duennas are becoming unfashionable, and women
mixing among them, they are fast assuming the culture and humanity of the
neighboring nations. So powerful, in short, is the company and conversation of
the fair, in diffusing happiness and hilarity, that even the cloud which hangs
on the thoughtful brow of an Englishman, begins, in the present age, to
brighten, by his devoting to the ladies, a larger share of time, than was
formerly done by his ancestors.

But if we would contemplate the influence of female society in its greatest
perfection, we must take a view of the Italians and French; in the last of
which, we are constantly presented with tempers so gay and cheerful, that we
are almost tempted to think them superior to all the ills and accidents of
life: among them only we find happiness smiling amid want and poverty, and
pleasure and amusement, with all their sportive train, not only attending on
the rich and affluent, but on the humble villager, and dancing around the
rustic cot. For this fortitude of the French in supporting their spirits
through all the adverse circumstances of the world, for their vivacity and
cheerfulness of temper, various reasons have been assigned, as the lightness of
their food, and salubrity of their air; causes to which a great deal may be
justly attributed, but which are undoubtedly much assisted in their operations
by the constant mixture of the young and old, and by the levity and
sprightliness of female conversation; for we scruple not to assert, that this
vivacity of the French ladies, and the constant attendance paid them by the
men, are the chief causes why the cares and ills of life sit lighter on the
shoulders of that fantastic people, than on those of any other country in the
wor^^*

In all other countries, the men make excursions, and form parties of pleasure,
by themselves: The French reckon that an excursion is dull, and that a party of
pleasure cannot deserve that name, without a mixture of both sexes join to
compose it. The French women do not even withdraw from the table after meals;
nor do the men discover that propensity to have them dismissed, which we so
often meet with in England, and which is a certain indication, that they either
want to debauch themselves with liquor, or indulge in those indecencies of
discourse, which the company of women always restrains. It is alleged by those
who have no relish for the conversation of the fair sex, that their company
curbs the freedom of speech, and restrains the jollity of mirth: but if the
conversation and the mirth are decent, and the company are capable of relishing
any thing but wine, the very reverse is the case; at least it is always
remarkably so among the French: nor is any thing more natural; for, the fair
sex in general being less disturbed by the cares and anxieties of life, are not
only themselves more cheerful, but more eager to promote mirth and festivity.

But the advantages of female society are not altogether confined to the
circumstances we have now related; they extend themselves much farther, and
spread their influence over almost every custom and every action of social
life. It is to the social intercourse with women, that the men are indebted for
every effort they make to please and be agreeable; and it is to the ambition of
pleasing they owe all their elegance of manners, as well as all the neatness
and ornaments of dress. It is to the same cause, also, that they frequently owe
their sobriety and temperance, and consequently their health; for to
drunkenness and irregularity, nothing is so effectual a check, as the company
of modest women; insomuch that it is but seldom we find a man so lost to shame,
as to get drunk when he is in, or to go into their company. To them were are not
less frequently indebted for the calming of violent disputes, and preventing of
quarrels, which, with every other species of rudeness, are happily reckoned so
indecent in their presence, that we often postpone them till another
opportunity; and in the interim, reason resumes the rein which passion had
usurped. But this is not all: many disputes and quarrels, already begun, have
been amicably settled by the interposition of their good offices, or, at least,
the fatal effects of them prevented by their tears and mediation. Fond of the
softer scenes of peace, they have often had the address to prevent, by their
arguments and intercession, the direful effects of war; and, afraid of losing
their husbands and relations, they have sometimes rushed between two hostile
armies ready to engage, and turned the horrid scenes of destruction into those
of friendship and festivity.

In our sex, there is a kind of constitutional or masculine pride, which
hinders us in yielding, in points of knowledge or of honor, to eah other.
Though this may be designed by nature for several useful purposes, yet it is
often the source also of a variety of evils, the most dangerous to the peace of
society; but we lay it entirely aside in our connections with women, and with
pleasure submit to such dictates and behavior from their sex, as from our own
would call up every irascible particle of our blood, and inflame every
ungovernable passion. This accustomed submission gives a new and less imperious
turn to our ideas, teaches us to obey where we were used to command, and to
reason where we used to be in a passion; to consider as only good breeding and
complaisance, that which before we looked upon as the most abject and
unbecoming meanness: and thus the stern severity of the male is softened and
rendered agreeable by the gentleness peculiar to the female nature. Hence we
may rest assured, that it is the conversation of virtuous and sensible women
only, that can properly fit us for society; and that, by abating the ferocity
of our more irascible passions, can lead us on to that gentleness of
deportment, distinguished by the name of humanity. The tenderness we have for
them softens the ruggedness of our natue; and the virtues we assume, in order
to make a better figure in their eyes, sometimes become so habitual to us, that
we never afterward lay them aside.

We are aware, that in this country it is too much the fashion to suppose that
books, and the company of men only, are necessary to furnish every
qualification requisite for the scholar and the gentleman; but we would desire
such as are of this opinion to compare the generality of the gentlemen of this
country, to those of France and Italy, and they find, that though we perhaps
excel them in the deepness of thought and solidity of judgment, we are gratly
their inferiors in urbanity, in address, and knowledge of the world; for though
books may furnish ideas, and experience improve the understanding, it is only
the company and acquaintance of the ladies, which can bestow that easiness of
address, by which the fine gentleman is distinguished from the mere scholar,
and man of business. The French and Italians educate their nobility in the
drawing room, at the toilette, and palces of public amusement, where they are
constantly in the company of women. The English educate theirs at the college,
and at New Market, where books, grooms, and jockies, are their only companions:
the former are often the most fantastical of beings; the latter, the most
ignorant, imperious, and surly: something between these two extremes of
education, while it preserved the dignity and firmness of the man, might infuse
a proper quantity of the softness and address of the woman.

When we look a few centuries backward to those periods, when, even in Europe,
there was but little intercourse between the two sexes, we find that the men
were hardly ruder in their manners than in their persons; they wore long
beards, which totally covered the chin, and often hung a great way down the
breast. Beards are the work of nature, and however troublesome and uncouth, had
no moral turpitude, nor tendency to debauch the manners; but the man had, in
those times, other modes of dressing which violated every idea of decency. As
the ladies began to have more influence, beards were mutilated down to
mustachoes, though the learned exclaimed against the horrid innovation, as
discovering a taste which tended more to gratify the women, than to keep up the
dignity of the masculine countenance; and though the church considered the
mutilation as little short of apostasy, because Moses and Jesus were always
painted with long beards. As the gentlemen found that the ladies had no great
relish for mustachoes, which were the relics of a beard, they cut and curled
them into various fashions, to render them more agreeable; and at last finding
that such labor was in vain, gave them up altogether. But as the gentlemen of
the three learned professions were supposed to be endowed with, or at least to
stand in need of, more wisdom than other people, and as the longest beard had
always been supposed to sprout from the wisest chin, to supply this mark of
distinction, which they had lost, they contrived to smother up their heads in
enormous quantities of frizzled hair, that they might bear the greater
resemblance to an owl, the bird sacred to wisdom and Minerva. Such professional
wigs, however, were long an object of the ridicule of wits, and the dislike of
the women, who, to the honor of their taste and influence, have, in the
present age, banished by far the greater part of them.

Man, secluded from the company of women, is not only a rough and uncultivated,
but a dangerous animal to society; for, in such a situation, the animal
appetite is daily gathering strength, till at last it becomes almost quite
ungovernable; a fact well known to the inhabitants of seaports who have too
frequent opportunities of seeing the force of that ungovernable passion, with
which sailors returned from a long voyage, commonly dedicate themselves to the
worthless women who attend on account of their money. And a fact which also
appears evident from the conduct of the men in all countries, where women are
kept as the miser does his gold: in such countries, the passions of the men are
so raised by partial glances, and by brooding over the thoughts of ideal
beauty, and ideal happiness, in the enjoyment of it, and so inflamed with
almost insurmountable obstacles to that enjoyment, that if they ever happen to
find a woman alone, they attack her in the most furious and licentious manner;
nor have the women here such a power of resistance as they have in countries
where they are accustomed to the company of the men; secluded from them by a
barbarous custom, they naturally form notions of the happiness they would
derive from them, of the most wild and romantic nature: these notions disarm
their virtue, and make them fall an easy prey to the first rude invader. From
this cause it happens, that, in spite of cautious parents, and jealous
husbands, and of locks, bars, and eunuchs, the chastity of women is less secure
in such countries, than where the sexes live free and easy together: we may
therefore assert, that the benefits of mixed society are not confined to the
men alone, but extend to the women also; infuse into their minds a power of
checking the attacks of insolence, and by making man the object of their daily
converse, make him less valuable, and consequently less dangerous, either to
their virtue or their happiness; and we may further aver, that this society
teaches the men to regulate and govern their passions with greater propriety,
as nothing can be more certain, than that rape, adultery, and every evil that
follow them, are more common in countries where the sexes live separate, than
where they enjoy the company of each other.

There is nothing by which the happiness of individuals and of society is so
much promoted, as by constant efforts to please; and these efforts are in a
great measure only produced by the company of women; for men, by themselves,
relax in almost every particular of good-breeding and complaisance, and appear
the creatures of mere nature: but no sooner does a woman appear, than the scene
is changed, and they become emulous to show all their good qualifications. It
is by the arts of pleasing only, that women can attain to any degree of
consequence or power; and it is by pleasing only, that they can hope to become
objects of love and affection; seize which, as they are of all others the
most dear to them, prompt them to cultivate most assiduously the arts of
pleasing; arts for which they are well qualified by nature. In their forms
lovely, in their manners soft and engaging, such are they by nature and by art,
that they can infuse by their smiles, by their air and address, a thousand
nameless sweets into society, which without them would be insipid, and barren
of sentiment and of feeling. But to enjoy any pleasure in perfection, we must
never be satiated with it; and therefore it requires more than common prudence
in a woman, to be much in company, and still retain that deference and respect
which we would voluntarily pay to her, were we seldomer indulged with her
presence. A few centuries ago women were rarely accessible, but, shut up in
houses and castles, lived retired from the bustle of the world. When they
deigned to show themselves, they were approached as divinities: a transient
view of them often set the heart on fire; and their smiles conferred a
happiness, and raised an enthusiastic ardour, of which at this period we can
hardly form any idea. By degrees, as manners became more free, and the sexes
mixed together with less ceremony, women began to be seen with less
trepidation, approached with less deference, and sunk in their value as they
became objects of greater familiarity. Nor was this peculiar to the times we
are delineating: the same effect always has, and always will happen from the
same cause; let the other sex, therefore, learn this instructive lesson from
it, that half the esteem and veneration we show them, is owing to their modesty
and reserve, and that a contrary conduct may make the most enchanting goddess
deg^^erate in our eyes to a mere woman, with all the frailties of mortality
about her. The forward beauty, whose face is known in every walk, and in every
public place, may be given as a toast, and have her name inscribed on the
windows of a tavern, but she rarely ever becomes an object of esteem, or is
solicited to be a companion for life.

We shall conclude what we had to say on the advantages of female society, by
observing, that it seems not only to be the cause of the rise and progress of
polite manners, and of sentimental feelings, but also of the fine arts. When we
view the countries where women are confined, we find the inhabitants of them
distinguished for barbarity of manners; when we view the same countries in the
periods when the women begin to have their liberty, we immediately perceive the
manners begin to soften and improve. In no country can this be more strongly
exemplified than in Spain; they had formerly less communication with the fair
sex than any other people of Europe, and were consequently greatly behind all
of them in politeness and elegance of manners; but since their women have been
under less restraint, the progress of manners has been so rapid, that they are
hardly behind any of their neighbors. To the society of women we are indebted
for the emulation of pleasing, and conferring happiness on others; and to this
emulation we certainly owe the greater part, if not the whole of the fine arts.
If any one doubts of this, let him consider the condition of those countries,
where men have no such motives of emulation, and let him there discover the
fine arts if he can; he may indeed say, that in the East he finds some of those
arts in as great perfection as in Europe; but he discovers also, that they have
existed there time immemorial, without the least advance or improvement: and
why? because the Eastern has no motive to render him emulous of pleasing; has
he a rival in love, he is under no obligation to succeed in preference to him
by showing preferable accomplishments; does he court a coy fair, who shows
reluctance in accepting of him? he is not desirous to gain her affections by
good offices, and by inventions to render her life easy and comfortable, but at
once buys her of her sordid parents or relations. Widely different is the case
in Europe; women of sense judge of the men by the elegance of their persons, of
their manners, and by their intellectual faculties; hence the men have
constantly occasion to show all these to the best advantage, and hence, even
the fine arts, which we cultivate to please and to render us amiable, may be
rationally considered as an effect of female society and of love.

Were we inclined to write the panegyric, instead of the history of the fair
sex, we might enumerate several other advantages arising from their company and
conversation; but, contenting ourselves with what we have already related on
this head, we shall now mention some of the disadvantages arising from our
intercourse with them. By the learned and studious, it has often been objected
to female company, that it so enervates and relaxes the mind, and gives it such
a turn for trifling, levity, and dissipation, as renders it altogether unfit
for that application which is necessary in order to become eminent in any of
the sciences. In proof of this they allege, that the greatest philosophers
seldom or never were men who enjoyed, or were fit for the company or
conversation of woman. Sir Isaac Newton hardly ever conversed with any of the
sex, and it is believed, died at last as much a stranger to the joys of love,
as he had lived a stranger to the fair objects that awaken it in the heart;
Bacon, Boil, Des Carts, and a variety of others, conspicuous for their
learning and application, were but indifferent companions to the fair. Whether
these, and many other instances of the same nature which might be adduced, are
sufficient to establish a general rule, we pretend not to determine. Nothing
however seems more certain than that the youth who devotes his whole time and
attention to female conversation and the little offices of gallantry, never
distinguishes himself in the literary world; but without the fatigue and
application of severe study, such a man often obtains by female interest, what
is denied to the merited improvements acquired by the labor of many years.

But besides this idleness and neglect of study, so much complained of as a
consequence of the company of the women, such company also often leads the men
into a scene of expensive amusements, into a love of finery and ostentatious
show, which they are not able to afford; while regardless of every thing but to
please the giddy and unthinking fair, they rush forward with thoughtless
unconcern on the ruin of their fortunes, and awake not from their dream of
folly till they find themselves plunged into poverty, become the jest of their
acquaintances, and even perhaps sneered at by the very females who led them
into the snare. Against such weakness we sincerely wish to caution the young
and unexperienced part of our sex, and we advise them to be careful how they
associate with any of the other, who are not endowed with sense as well as
virtue; for it is not always to vicious, but frequently to gay and thoughtless
women, that men owe their ruin.

Such as are enthusiastically zealous for the liberties of mankind, have
imagined that the only way to continue a brave, free, and independent people,
is to avoid as much as possible the company of women, the soft strains of
music, and all the luxuries of the table and of dress; and as a proof of their
opinion, they tell us, that the Lydians, the Sybarites, and even the hardy
Romans themselves, were debauched, and at length lost their liberty by their
attention to women.

That all these people were greatly debauched in their manners, history has
left us no room to doubt; but that the company of women was the cause of this
debauchery, is far from being certain; at least if we take a view of the world
as it exists in the present period, it teaches us a different lesson; it points
out to us, in the most clear and distinct manner, that liberty and
independence, the most inestimable blessings of mankind, are no where at so low
an ebb, as in the countries where the women have no political influence, and
where the men keep almost no comcompany with them: it shows us, that the men of
such countries, instead of being the bravest and the most independent, are the
most dastardly and enslaved of the human race; and that on the contrary, in the
wilds of America, where liberty and independence exist in the most extensive
sense of the words, the freedom which the women enjoy in mixing with, and in
some places even of governing along with the men, has not in the least
contributed to destroy these native rights of mankind. That in Europe, where
liberty is generally founded on social and rational principles, calculated for
the good of the community the company of the women has not hitherto so
enervated the men as to induce them to part with it, rather than rouse
themselves from the lap of indolence and ease. About two hundred and fifty
years ago, when Francis the First had not introduced women to court, the French
were not half so much in the company of their women as at present, and yet were
not then a more free and independent people; on the contrary, though we suppose
them to have been sinking in effeminacy ever since that period, we have seen
them at different times make such efforts against arbitrary power as have
rather increased than diminished their privileges. Were the Italians less
slaves to their princes, and to the sea of Rome in former times, when they were
scarcely employed in any thing but arts of superstitious devotion, than at
present, when they almost entirely resign themselves to music and to women? Or
were the Spaniards more free under the gloomy reign of Philip the Second, when,
from motives of jealousy and religion, their women were constantly locked up,
than they are at present when they converse with them? In short, wherever we
meet with a nation of slaves, other causes besides the company of their women
must have contributed to bring them into, and to continue them in, that
despicable state.

Such are the general influences of female society; the particular influence
which every woman of an agreeable person, and a tolerable share of good sense,
has over every man, we cannot pretend minutely to describe; a task of this kind
would be better executed by some female, versant in the exercise of such a
power. When we consider the two sexes into which the human genus are divided,
it appears in the most conspicuous manner, that the Author of nature has placed
the balance of power on the side of the male, by giving him not only a body
more large and robust, but also a mind endowed with greater resolution, and a
more extensive reach. But are these qualities altogether without their
counterpoise? Are women left without any thing on their side to balance this
superiority of our nature? Have they no powers to exert, whereby they can
reduce this seeming superiority to a more equal footing? If they have not, they
may justly complain of the partiality of nature, and the severity of their lot.
But let us attentively consider this matter, and we shall find, that the Author
of our being is no such partial parent: we shall discover, that to each sex he
has given its different qualifications; and these, upon the whole, when
properly cultivated and exerted, put men and women nearly on an equal footing
with each other, and share the advantages and disadvantages of life impartially
between them. To bend the haughty stubborness of man, he has given to women
beauty, and to that beauty has added an inexpressible softness and persuasive
force both of words and actions, which but few of the sex themselves know the
extent of, and which still fewer of ours have the power of resisting. Thus, an
insinuating word, a kind look, or even a smile, often conquered Alexander,
subdued Caesar, and decided the fate of empires and of kingdoms; thus the
intercession of the mother of Coriolanus saved the city of Rome from impending
destruction, and in one hour brought about a happy event, which the senate and
people had despaired of ever seeing accomplished. This power of the women, in
bending the stronger sex to their will, is no doubt, greatly augmented when
they have youth and beauty on their side: but even with the loss of these it is
not always extinguished; of which this last circumstance is an indubitable
proof.

But this power of the women does not altogether consist in smiles, words, and
actions: it often effects its purposes by means less visible, and impossible to
be described: but these means must constantly have for their basis softness and
good nature; they must ever be such as throw a veil over the pride of our
supposed superiority, and make us believe, that we are exerting that sovereign
power, which we consider as our right, when in reality we are yielding it up.
The least appearance of the contrary alarms our pride; and she who discovers to
us her intention to govern by her power, or by her ill-temper, produces an
effect upon us the other sex is not sufficiently aware of, by raising a
disgust, which all our efforts can never conquer, besides, for the most part,
failing in her attempt. In short, such a conduct in a woman is the same thing
as it would be in a lion to fight with his hinder legs, or for a hare to face
about and defy the teeth of the pursuing pack; it is neglecting to make use of
what nature has furnished, and endeavoring to use what she thought proper to
deny.

We could point out here, were it necessary, a great variety of instances,
where women have governed men by the influence of good nature and insinuating
manners; but we defy history to furnish one single instance of this ascendancy
having ever been obtained over a man of sense, by brawling, ill-humour, and a
visible contest for superiority. No man of feeling is proof against the softer
arts of a sensible woman: such arts are armed with an irresistible power. Every
man, almost, is proof against her open attacks; they are the attacks of a be
without a sting. The daughter of Sesostris prevailed upon him by the arts of
persuasion, to undertake the conquest of the world: Attossa, the wife of
Darius, by the same means, engaged him to carry an expedition he had planned
against the Scythians, into Greece. In the empire of the Mogul, where women in
general have but little influence, Noor-Jehan, a favorite Sultana, prevailed
on the emperor her husband, to delegate almost the whole of the sovereign power
into her hands. But a much more noble instance of the exertion of female
influence occurs in the queen of Pythius, a prince of Lydia; who, cruel and
avaricious beyond measure, kept the greater part of his subjects so constantly
employed digging in the gold mines, that they had no time for agriculture, and
were consequently in danger of perishing by famine. Oppressed by this tyranny,
they took an opportunity of his being abroad, and assembled in great numbers,
with tears in their eyes, to lay their complaints before his queen; who,
commiserating their condition, after much revolving in her mind how to relieve
them, bethought herself of the following method: On the return of her husband,
she ordered a magnificent entertainment to be served up to him; but to his
great surprise, when he uncovered the dishes, none of them contained any thing
but gold. Sensible at once of his misconduct, and struck with the propriety of
the method his wife had made use of, in order to open his eyes, that he might
see his folly, and fully convinced that gold could not satisfy his own hunger,
nor save his subjects from famine, he immediately gave orders that in future,
no more than one-fifth part of them should be employed in procuring gold from
the mines, and that the other four parts should betake themselves to
agriculture and the useful arts.

It would be easy to multiply instances, both ancient and modern, of this
ascendency which women of sense have gained over men of feeling; but we shall
confine ourselves to a few. Among these, the empress Livia may justly claim the
first notice; having attained such an influence over her husband Augustus, that
there was hardly any thing he could refuse her. Many of the married ladies of
Rome being anxious to know the means that she had used to attain this end, one
of them at last venturing to ask her, she replied, By being obedient to all his
commands; by not endeavoring to discover his secrets; and by concealing my
knowledge of his amors. Henry the Fourth of France, one of the greatest and
most amiable of princes, affords a most remarkable instance of the power women
may, by gentle methods, acquire over the men. Tender and compassionate in his
nature, he could hardly refuse any thing to softness, entreaties, and tears:
sensible at the same time, and jealous of his honor and power, there was
hardly any thing he would grant, when attempted to be forced from him by
different methods. Hence he was constantly governed by his mistresses, and at
variance with his wives. The Salique law ordains, that the crown of France
shall never fall to the distaff: but the French wom^n have amply revenged
themselves for this affront; by contriving to govern almost every monarch, they
have constantly governed that great kingdom, from the apparent management of
which the law had so positively excluded them.

From scripture, and from education, almost every man has imbibed an idea of
the superiority of his own sex; he is therefore zealous to maintain that
superiority, and jealous of every attack made upon it; but he is at the same
time endowed with a sentimental tenderness for the other sex, and a strong
inclination to promote their happiness; which with regard to them, may be
called his weak side, and which women of sense easily discover, and as easily
take the advantage of. This being the state of things between the two sexes,
nothing seems more plain, than that though men govern by law, women may almost
always govern by the arts of gentleness and soft persuasion. The empire of
woman (says a French author) is an empire of sweetness, ad^ress, and
complaisance; her commands are caresses; her menaces are tears: and ^e may add,
that the power of such commands and of such menaces is like that of faith,
which (...) remove mountains: it is a power which has nature on its side; the
principle by her implanted within us, pleads in favor of the sex, and more
than half performs the task of making us obey all the commands they lay upon
us, ^hen they are laid with gentleness of ^anners* and an ^nsinuating
behavi^ur. But though men of sensibility and good nature may infallibly be
governed by softness and addres^, ^her^ are ^ther^ cast in a rougher mould,
whose he^^ts are strangers to the sinc^ sensations, and whose st^bborn feelings
bend (...) even to prayers and intrea^ies. Women jo^ned to (...) sit down in
silence* and deplo^^ their mi^fortune; a misfortune which is beyond their
^^^wer to remedy; for we have but too good ^eason to affirm, that the temper,
upon which gentle^^^ and go^d-nature are lost, can never be me^^ied by
ill nature. Men of sense will often, for the sake (...) peace, submit to be
ill-treated by a woman; me^ destitute ^f sense, will retort that treatment with
double violence.

CHAP. XV. Sketches of Ceremonies and Customs, for the most part observed only
by Women.
AS the manners and customs of a nation, besides being the most entertaining
part of its history, serve also to characterise and distinguish it from all
others, by pointing out the various pursuits to which the genius of its people
are directed; the whims and caprices which climate, chance, or necessity has
introduced; the force that the intellectual powers have exerted, in contriving
or adopting ceremonies and customs agreeable to reason; in resisting
superstition, and discarding whatever is ridiculous in manners, unbecoming in
religion, or tyrannical in government; so the customs more peculiar to women,
were we enabled by history to give a particular detail of them, on comparing
them with those of the men, would greatly assist us in forming a judgment of
the comparative merit of the two sexes, in discovering the solid and the flimsy
of each, and pointing out which is most directed, in its various pursuits and
pleasures, by reason; and which most follows the dictates of custom, or the
suggestions of fancy.

But, unhappily, of all other parts of the female history, that of their
manners and customs is involved in the greatest obscurity: almost all the
writers of antiquity have eit^er passed over them in silence, or blended them
so intimately with the ceremonies and customs of the men, that we are often at
a loss to discover, with any degree of certainty, what is peculiar to each. Nor
is the subject better elucidated by the moderns, who, in their voyages and
travels, for the most part, only inform us of the dress, complexion, and
behavior of the women in the countries they have visited; which, indeed, is
commonly all that is in their power; for their ignorance of the language of the
people they are describing, precludes them from every species of information,
but what they receive by their eyes. The jealousy of the men, in many places,
hinders them from all access to the women; and the short stay made by a
traveller affords not the necessary time for information. Hence, among the
present inhabitants of the globe, we have but imperfect sketches of what is
peculiar to the one sex, and what to the other.

It has been observed by all who have attentively considered human nature, that
fashion and custom are powers which exercise the most extensive authority over
weak and little minds, either because such are not properly qualified to
examine the causes from which they arise, nor the effects of which they are
productive; or because, after having examined and found them ridiculous, they
have not fortitude enough to prefer singularity to custom, though the former be
founded on reason, and the latter on folly or caprice: and as women in all ages
have been supposed to be more the slaves of fashion, ceremony, and custom, than
the men, this slavery has constantly been made use of to prove weakness and
inferiority of their understandings. We allow, indeed, that if the fact were
established, the proof would be undeniable: but we think it is far from being
established; for we challenge any man of sense and impartiality, to look around
him into the fashions of Europe, and to say whether those of our sex are not as
whimsical and ridiculous as those of the other, and whether our whole
deportment does not declare, that we are as inviolably attached to them.

As the subject of female ceremonies and customs is of the most delicate
nature, and requires to be touched by the softest pencil, it may on that
account have been the more generally passed over in silence: and on that
account, also, we find ourselves obliged to run over it more slightly than is
consistent with the nature of historical information. But we lay it down as a
rule, that we would rather stop something short of the information we could
give, than offend the most delicate ear. As the subject of ceremonies and
customs is so intimately connected with several of those of which we have
already treated, and shall hereafter have occasion to treat in the course of
this work, we shall here only mention a few of those which appear the most
remarkable, and which are either altogether, or for the most part, practiced
only by women.

One of the earliest ceremonies peculiar to the sex which we meet with in
history, is the bewailing of virginity. This was practiced among the
Israelites, Phoenicians, and several of the neighboring nations, by all women
who were obliged to relinquish life before they had entered into the state of
wedlock; or who, by any particular vow being devoted to perpetual celibacy,
were, in consequence of that vow, cut off from all hopes of enjoying the sweets
of love, or of raising up posterity. These last not only continued through
life, at stated times, to deplore the unhappiness of their own fate, but, on
some occasions, assembled their female friends and relations, to assist them in
performing the mournful ceremony. It is supposed, that the reason why the
Israelitish virgin^ bewailed their virginity, was, because every woman
flattered herself with the hope of being mother to the Messiah that was to
come: but among the neighboring nations, the custom must have originated from
other causes; but what these were, it is impossible for us now to discover: we
can only conjecture that as a numerous posterity was reckoned, among the
ancients, one of the greatest blessings, and a particular mark of the divine
favor, that she who was excluded from a possibility of this blessing, and of
this distinguishing favor, might on these accounts suppose herself peculiarly
wretched.

Besides this ceremony of bewailing virginity, there is another, perhaps not
less ancient, which was likewise practiced by the women of Israel, of
Phoenicia, and also by those of Greece and of some other nations: this was the
annual lamentation for the death of Adonis, or, as the scripture calls him,
Thammuz, performed by the Phoenician women, on the banks of the river Adonis,
and by those of other nations, in their cities and houses: but before we
proceed to describe this ceremony, we think it necessary to give some account
of its origin.

Adonis, according to some of the ancients, was a most beautiful boy; Venus on
this account admired him so much from his earliest infancy, that she wished to
have him educated according to her own mind, and therefore committed the care
of him to Proserpine. When he was grown up to a man, Venus demanded him as her
right, but Proserpine, who by this time had also become fond of him, refused
the demand; upon which a violent dispute arose between the two goddesses,
which, after long altercation, was at last referred to the decision of Jupiter.
On hearing both parties, Jupiter decreed, that he should spend one-third of
every year with Proserpine, another with Venus, and during the remaining third,
should dispose of himself according to his own inclination. Adonis, having
spent his portion of his year with Proserpine, went to Venus, and being greatly
captivated with her charms, she had the address to detain him the whole
remaining part of it; upon which Diana, who was also desperately in love with
him, and had flattered herself that he would come and live with her that third
part of the year in which he was a liberty, being highly affronted at the
preference he had given Venus, in the first transport of her resentment, sent a
wild boar to destroy him.

According to others, Adonis being an incestuous child, begot by Cynarus king
of Cyprus on his own daughter, was on that account exposed on the mountains,
and nourished by the nymphs, where Venus accidentally seeing him, fell so much
in love with him, that Mars, jealous of the growing connection, transformed
himself into a wild boar and slew him. Others again say, that while he was
hunting in the Idalian grove, a boar which he was pursuing, turned upon him,
and tore him to pieces; that Venus, commiserating his fate, transformed him
into a flower of a bloody color, and called it by his name; or that being
unspeakably grieved for the loss of her paramour, and resolving that she would
not tamely relinquish her hopes, she followed him to the shades below, and,
demanding him of Proserpine, at length so far succeeded, as to p^evail on her
infernal majesty to allow him to return and spend one half of every year with
her upon earth; which having accomplished, she joyfully ascended from the
shades and relating her success to her companions, instituted a festival in
memory of having brought back from the regions of the dead, the swain whom she
adored.

Such are the stories related of Adonis, and such is said to have been the
institution of the ceremonies with which he was honored. But though the
occasion of this institution, as well as every other thing that has been handed
down to us concerning him, bears the most indubitable marks of fable; yet that
there was such a person as Adonis, and that ceremonies were performed by the
women of several nations, to commemorate his untimely death, and extraordinary
restitution to life, the sacred and profane history of antiquity have equally
contributed to confirm.

The Phoenician women performed the ceremonies sacred to Adonis in the
following manner. Through their country runs the river of Adonis, the channel
of which is, for many miles toward its source, a kind of red earth; this earth
tinges its waters of a bloody color, as often as it is washed down from its
banks and the adjacent country by the rain. Superstition, instead of
attributing this to the natural cause, supposed that the waters were at those
times tinged with the blood of Adonis, or rather that they put on that bloody
appearance, to express their sorrow for the tragical exit he made upon their
banks. This appearance was therefore reckoned a signal by the gods, appointing
the proper time for the celebration of the rites instituted to call to
remembrance that exit. Accordingly the women, at this signal, assembled on the
banks of the river, and began their lamentations, which were of the loudest and
most lugubrious nature, and such as they commonly uttered upon the loss of
their most near and dear relations. The lamentations, ended, they disciplined
themselves with whips, then offered a sacrifice, and on the day following,
pretending that Adonis was revived, and had ascended through the air to the
upper regions, they shouted for joy, shaved their heads, and obliged all who
would not comply with this custom to prostitute themselves in the temple of
Venus, as a recompense to that goddess, for having neglected a part of the
ceremony sacred to the memory of her beloved paramour.

The women of Byblus also performed the first part of his ceremony with
mourning and lamentation, during which the priests of Osiris in Egypt wrote to
them that they had found the god whom they were seeking, sent the letter in a
small ark made of papyrus, which is said to have gone by sea of its own accord,
and performed its voyage in seven days. As soon as it arrived in the port, the
women who were met together to mourn and to lament, changed the scene to
dancing, feasting, and rejoicing, because he was found alive whom they had
mourned as being dead.

The Israelitish women also celebrated these rites; for Ezekiel tells us, that
on being brought to the door of the Lord's house, he saw their women weeping
for Thammuz. They are supposed to have observed them in the following manner.
They laid an image of Adonis on a bed, and having for some time lamented over
it, a light was brought in by the priest, who anointed the mouths of the
mourners, and whispered to them that salvation was come, that deliverance was
brought to pass; upon which the image was taken as from a sepulcher, and they
rejoiced at its restitution to life, with a joy no less extravagant than their
sorrow had been on account of its death.

These mysteries were also celebrated by the Greeks, in the following manner:
All their cities put themselves into mourning, coffins were exposed at every
door, the statues of Venus and Adonis were carried in procession, with all the
pomp and ceremony practiced at funerals, the women tore their hair, beat their
breasts, and counterfeited all the actions and gestures usual in lamenting the
dead. Along with the procession were carried shells filled with earth, in which
were raised several sorts of herbs, especially lettuces, in memory of Adonis
being laid out by Venus upon a bed of lettuces. After this a sacrifice was
offered, and the following day spent in expressing their joy, that Proserpine,
at the solicitation of Venus, had consented to allow Adonis to return from the
shades to the regions above.

Ceremonies and customs, even though they are of a religious nature, like all
other things, are frequently obliterated by devouring time; such, however, is
not the fate of that we have been now describing. It is said that it still
exists in some places of the Levant, with little variation from the manner in
which it was practiced by the ancient Greeks.

Deities, whether they were supposed to be of the masculine or feminine gender,
were generally worshipped indiscriminately by both sexes; but to this rule
there were some few exceptions. Among the Syrians there was a female deity
called the great Syrian goddess, who seems chiefly to have been worshipped by
priests, who had emasculated themselves, to render them fit for her service,
and by frantic women. In spite of every pretension to the contrary, we must all
be sometimes sensible of a natural partiality to that sex to which we belong,
and feel ourselves prone to excuse its faults and pity its infirmities as
incidents to which we ourselves are more liable. Among people, therefore, who
suppose that their deities like themselves, are of different sexes, it will be
impossible not to suppose them also susceptible of the different propensities
and feelings of those sexes; hence nothing could be more natural than for women
to address themselves to, and imagine they would be more readily heard by, a
female deity than a male; and hence arose among that sex, the peculiar worship
and adoration they paid to some of the goddesses. Juno, otherwise called
Luci^^, who had herself felt the pains of childbearing, and was on that
account supposed to be more susceptible of feeling for those in a like
condition, was constituted the patroness of lying-in women, and by them
constantly invoked to procure a safe and easy delivery. Vesta, because she had
always retained her virginity, was on that account supposed to be a proper
patroness for chastity, and therefore worshipped in a temple at Rome, and in
some other countries by virgins only. But of all the kinds of adoration paid by
women to a female deity that of the Roman ladies to the good goddess, seems the
most unaccountable and extraordinary, as it originated, so far as we know, from
no particular cause, and tended to no particular purpose, as it was conducted
with the utmost secrecy, and scrupulously concealed from the eyes of every
thing of the masculine gender.

As early as the birth of the Roman republic, it had been customary for the
women at the expiration of every consular year, to celebrate, in the house of
the consul or praetor, certain religious rites and ceremonies in honor of the
good goddess; but what these ceremonies were, or how conducted, we can give no
account, as no man was ever allowed to be present at them, and no man was ever
made acquainted with their nature and tendency. All we can say is, that when
the time appointed for celebrating these rites came, the Vestal virgins
repaired to the house appointed for that purpose, and offered sacrifices to the
good goddess; but the sacrifices offered, and the manner of offering them, were
secrets which to this day remain impenetrable, and strongly contradict the
common opinion, that no secret is safe in the breast of a woman.

Our own times fu^^ish us with an instance of a ceremony from which all women
are carefully excluded; Masonry.
but the Roman ladies, in performing the rites sacred to the good goddess, were
even more afraid of the men than our masons are of women; for we are told by
some authors, that so cautious were they of concealment, that even the statues
and pictures of men and other male animals were hoodwinked with a thick veil.
The house of the consul, though commonly so large that they might have been
perfectly secured against all intrusion in some remote apartment of it, was
obliged to be evacuated by all male animals, and even the consul himself was
not suffered to remain in it. Before they began their ceremonies, every corner
and lurking-place in the house was carefully searched, and no caution omitted
to prevent all possibility of being discovered by impertinent curiosity, or
disturbed by presumptive intrusion. But these cautions were not all the guard
that was placed around them; the laws of the Romans made it death for any man
to be present at the solemnity.

Such being the precautions, and such the penalties for insuring the secrecy of
this ceremony, it was only once attempted to be violated, though it existed
from the foundation of the Roman empire till the introduction of Christianity*
and this attempt was made, not so much perhaps with a view to be present at the
ceremony, as to fulfill an assignation with a mistress. Pompeia, the wife of
Caesar, having been suspected of a criminal correspondence with Claudius, and
so closely watched that she could find no opportunity of gratifying her
passion, at last, by the means of a female slave, settled an assignation with
him at the celebration of the rites of the good goddess. Claudius was directed
to come in the habit of a singing-girl, a character he could easily personate,
being young and of a fair complexion. As soon as the slave saw him enter, she
ran to inform her mistress. The mistress eager to meet her lover, immediately
left the company, and threw herself into his arms, but could not be prevailed
upon by him to return so soon as he thought necessary for their mutual safety;
upon which he left her, and began to take a walk through the rooms, always
avoiding the light as much as possible. While he was thus walking by himself, a
maidservant accosted him, and desired him to sing; he took no notice of her,
but she followed and urged him so closely, that at last he was obliged to
speak. His voice betrayed his sex; the maidservant shrieked, and running into
the room where the rites were performing, told that a man was in the house. The
women, in the utmost consternation, threw a veil over the mysteries, ordered
the doors to be secured, and with lights in their hands, ran about the house
searching for the sacrilegious intruder. They found him in the apartment of the
slave who had admitted him, drove him out with ignominy, and, though it was the
middle of the night, immediately dispersed, to give an account to their
husbands of what had happened. Claudius was soon after accused of having
profaned the holy rites; but the populace declaring in his favor, the judges,
fearing an insurrection, were obliged to acquit him.

In a country where the women were less regarded than at Rome, and where less
confidence was reposed in their probity and honor, the men would probably have
supposed, that ceremonies so carefully concealed from their knowledge, were
either inimical to virtue, or to the state. But that no such suspicions were
entertained by the Romans, we learn from Cicero, who speaking of these
mysteries, says, What sacrifice is there so ancient, as that which has been
handed down to us from our first kings, and is coeval with Rome herself? What
sacrifice is there so private and secret, as that which is concealed, not only
from the eye of the curious and inquisitive, but from the sight of all men, and
where neither the most profligate wickedness nor impudence ever yet presumed to
enter? This sacrifice no man except Claudius was ever so impious as to violate;
no man but Claudius ever thought, without the utmost horror, of assisting at
it. This sacrifice, which is performed by the Vestal virgins, which is
performed for the prosperity of the Roman people, which is performed in the
house of the chief magistrate, celebrated with unknown ceremonies, and in
honor of a goddess, whose very name to know is sacrilege; this sacrifice
Claudius profaned.

In subsequent periods, it has been alleged by some, that whatever opinion the
Romans themselves entertained of the rites and ceremonies performed in honor
of this good goddess, they must have been at least of an indelicate nature;
else why all this care and solicitude of the women to conceal them from the
men? But we think it is more natural, as well as charitable, to suppose, that
as the Romans had a deity to preside almost over every particular circumstance
and action, this good goddess must either have been considered as the patroness
of the sex in general, or the particular patroness of some of their affairs and
concerns; and that on this account the women imagined nothing could be so
acceptable to her, as rites and ceremonies performed only by that sex, and for
the prosperity of those affairs which she patronised.

This being probably the case, we have the strongest reason to suppose, that
the worship of this goddess was not in the least inconsistent with decency of
manners, or modesty of character. But this was not the case every where; in
other countries, there were rites performed by the women incompatible with
either; such were those of the women in the temple of Venus, those of the
priests and priestesses of Cybele. Such were the mad and licentious revelries
in honor of Bacchus; such are the frantic gesticulations and howlings of the
women of California, while sacrificing to their idols; and such also are the
dances of the women of modern Egypt, and of some other places which we have
already described.

In the religion of the modern Jews, there are some ceremonies peculiar to
their women, at the commencement of their sabbath, which is on the Friday
evening at half an hour before the sun sets. Every conscientious Jew must have
a lamp lighted in his house, even though he should borrow the oil of his
neighbor. The lighting of these lamps is a kind of religious rite, invariably
assigned to the women, in order to recall to their memory the crime by which
their original mother first extinguished the lamp of righteousness, and to
teach them, that they ought to do every thing in their power to atone for that
crime, by rekindling it. Instead of the scapegoat, which this people formerly
loaded with their s^ns, and sent into the wilderness, they now substitute a
fowl. Every father of a family takes a white cock, and the mother of the family
a white hen, which she strikes upon the head, repeating at every stroke, Let
this hen atone for my sins; she shall die, but I shall live. This done, she
twists her neck, and cuts her throat, to signify, that without shedding of
blood there is no remission of sin. If a woman, however, happens to be pregnant
at the time of this ceremony, as she cannot ascertain whether the infant is a
male or a female, that its sins, of whatever gender it be, may not be
unexpiated, she takes both a hen and a cock, that she may be assured of having
performed the ceremony as required by their law.

In the religions of the present times, and particularly that of christianity,
which teaches us, that the Supreme Being is the common and impartial father and
governor of both sexes, there are but few ceremonies peculiar either to the men
or to the women; we shall therefore only take notice of one more, which is
practiced by the women of Chinese Tartary, assisted by their Bonzes, or
priests, who turn the credulity of their sex to their own emolument. In many
places of this country, there are assemblies of women, who, to the number of
ten or fifteen, meet together at stated times, and out of this number annually
elect a directress of their society. An aged Bonze presides at the meeting, and
sings anthems in praise of the God Fo. On their more solemn days, they adorn
the house where they meet with many images and grotesque paintings,
representing the miseries and torments of the damned. These meetings continue
for seven days, during which they employ themselves in laying up treasure for
the world to come: this consists in a little paper house, which having painted
and gilded, they fill with a great number of paper boxes, varnished and
painted; in these they deposit pieces of paper formed into the shape of ingots,
and done over with gold or silver leaf; of which several hundreds are supposed
necessary to redeem the soul from the cruelties and tortures which Gen-vang,
the king of hell, inflicts on those who have nothing to bribe him into lenity.
The rest, as well as the house which contains them, are designed to procure the
soul a comfortable lodging, with such victuals and drink as are necessary in
the other world.

Every thing thus prepared, to the doors of these paper houses, the women
fasten paper padlocks, and lock them with paper keys; and when the lady who was
at the expense of building that destined for herself dies, the survivors meet,
and with great solemnity burn the whole; imagining in the next world she shall
find, that from its ashes her house has arisen with every thing in it for her
use; only the paper ingots, instead of remaining what they were, turned into
gold or silver, according to the metal with which they were gilded.

Wherever politeness has stamped a real value upon beauty of features and
elegance of person, there is hardly any circumstance powerful enough to induce
the fair sex to injure, ^or even for a time to submit to have the luster of
either the one or the other eclipsed: but where these natural advantages
scarcely entitle the possessor to any superior attention or regard, they are of
consequence cultivated with less assiduity, and preserved with less solicitude.
Women, in the politer countries of Europe, even when obliged to dress
themselves in the weeds of sorrow and affliction, never lose sight of the idea
of appearing lovely, and usually contrive matters so as that even their weeds
may add something to their charms, by giving them a languishing and melancholy
air; circumstances which often render beauty more irresistible, than when it is
arrayed in all the tinsel glare of show, and frippery of fashion. The women in
the ruder ages of antiquity, and those of many modern nations, into whose plan
of life elegance and politeness have not yet entered, in the melancholy moments
dedicated to mourning, regardless of every thing but the custom of their
country, or rather, perhaps, of the impulses of their heart, not only eclipse
the present luster of their charms, but, by the wounds and slashes which they
make upon their bodies, cruelly deface them forever.

It was throughout all antiquity a prevailing opinion, that no offended deity
would grant forgiveness without blood; hence almost every people upon earth
stained the altars of their gods with the blood of human or of more ignoble
victims. But blood was not only necessary to appease a god when offended, it
was also the most effectual means of rendering him propitious, and procuring
from him any favor; and hence, almost in every nation, those who approached a
deity to ask any particular favor of him, mangled and tore their own flesh, as
the surest method of obtaining their request. Nor was it their deities alone,
which the ancients supposed were delighted with blood; the ghosts, also of
their deceased relations approaching in their separate state nearer to the
nature of these deities, likewise resembled them in this particular. It is
therefore not improbable, that the custom of wounding and tearing the flesh in
mourning, was first introduced to appease the ghosts of deceased friends; to
supplicate them for some particular favor; to show them how much they were
loved and lamented by those whom they had left behind them on earth; or to
feast them with human blood, upon which they were supposed by the Greeks and
some of the neighboring nations to regale themselves with a peculiar pleasure.
But from whatever cause this custom proceeded, we are well assured that the
women of Egypt, Syria, Phoenicia, Greece, and perhaps of many other nations,
mangled and disfigured themselves by wounds, on the death of their friends and
relations.

But this custom was not peculiar to antiquity; it has been handed down even to
our times. In Otaheite, and in several of the other islands around it, the
women, either in compliance with the custom of their country, or rather,
perhaps, when the idea of some departed friend stole into their memory, though
in the height of a fit of jollity and mirth, immediately assumed the appearance
of the deepest sorrow, wounded their heads with the tooth of a shark, till the
blood ran down their faces; and as soon as the ceremony was ended, or perhaps
the idea of the departed friend drove out by another of a more pleasurable
nature, the transition from sorrow to joy was as instantaneous as it had before
been from joy to sorrow.

This ceremony, however, of our modern savages, although cruel in its nature,
and unavailing in its consequences, is only of a short duration, and gives but
little interruption to the more cheerful sensations. But the mourning of the
Grecian women was long, and, while it lasted, struck out of existence every
thing that could be called joyous or amusing. They not only beat their breasts,
and tore their faces with their nails, but also divested themselves of all
their gold, and whatever was rich and precious in apparel, sequestered
themselves from company, and refused all the comforts and conveniences of life,
shunned the light as odious, and courted dark shades and melancholy retirement;
they also tore or cut off their hair, and either cast it into the funeral pile,
to be consumed along with the body of the person for whom they mourned, or into
the tomb, to be buried along with it. Cutting off the hair was not, however, an
invariable custom. Some ran about with it dishevelled, clothing themselves in
the coarsest garments, throwing dust upon their heads and faces, and even
sometimes prostrating themselves upon the earth, and rolling in the dust;
customs which seem to have been practiced from the earliest antiquity, as
expressive of the deepest sorrow and affliction.

Besides the ceremonies already mentioned, the women in ancient times, as
directed by fancy or instigated by regard, decked the tombs of their deceased
friends; they hung lamps upon them, and adorned them with a variety of herbs
and flowers; a custom at this time observed by the inhabitants of
Constantinople and its neighborhood, who not only adorn the tombs of their
dead, but plant their burying-grounds with rosemary, cypress, and other
odoriferous shrubs and flowers; but whether with a view to please the manes of
the dead, or preserve the health of the living, is uncertain. There were other
ornaments besides these we have now mentioned, used by the women of antiquity
to deck the tombs. Among the Greeks, the tomb of a deceased lover was
frequently hung round with locks of the hair of his mistress. They likewise
made offerings, and poured out libations to the ghosts, whom they supposed to
smell, to eat, and to drink as they did while upon earth. This was not only a
prevailing opinion among the ancients, but has not as yet been totally
obliterated. It is still believed by the Chiriguanes; and at Narva, one of the
principal towns of Livonia, they celebrate a remarkable festival sacred to the
manes of the dead. On the eve of Whitsun-tide, the women assemble in the
churchyard, and spreading napkins on the graves and tombstones, cover them with
a variety of dishes of broiled and fried fish, custards, and painted eggs; and
to render them more agreeable to the ghosts, the priest while he is praying
over them, perfumes them with frankincense, the women all the time howling and
lamenting in the most dismal manner, and the intelligent clerk not less
assiduously employed in defrauding the ghosts, by gathering up all the viands
for the use of the priest.

There are few, if any, customs that have been more generally diffused among
mankind, than that of mourning for the dead; and there are few nations where
the women have not, either from custom or the tenderness of their nature, acted
a principal part in these mournings. There are however, some nations, who,
instead of reckoning death a subject of lamentation, rejoice at it, as a happy
deliverance from pain and adversity; and others, who, though they commonly
mourn at the death of their friends and relations, rejoice at it whenever
attended with particular circumstances. Thus the Greek and Roman fathers, and
what is more extraordinary, even the mothers rejoiced when their sons fell in
defense of their country; and thus the Christians, in several periods and
countries, rejoiced when their friends, being put to death by persecutors, were
numbered among those who were reckoned worthy of the crown of martyrdom. Thus
also the women of modern Egypt, though on other occasions they lament over the
dead with the most dismal outcries, when a Sheick departs this life,
demonstrate the most extravagant joy and satisfaction, because, they say, a
Sheick must, at death, infallibly enter into the paradise of the blessed.

Besides these ceremonies of religion and of mourning, which the women have
appropriated to themselves, there are others observed by them, which, arising
from their nature, and the circumstances attending it may, for that reason, be
denominated sexual. In Chirigua, when a girl arrives at a certain age, her
female relations enclose her in a hammoc, and suspend it at the end of her
cottage. Having remained in this hammoc for one month, they let it down half
way, and at the end of another month, the neighboring women assemble, and
having armed themselves with clubs and staves, enter the cottage in a frantic
manner, striking furiously upon every thing within it. Having acted this farce
for some time, one of them declares that she has killed the serpent which had
stung the girl; upon which she is liberated from her confinement, the women
rejoice for some time together, and then depart every one to her own home.
Among some of the Tartarian tribes, when a girl arrives at the same period of
life, they shut her up for some days, and afterward hang a signal on the top of
her tent, to let the young men know that she is become marriageable. Among
others of these tribes, the parents of the girl make a feast on this occasion,
and having invited their neighbors, and treated them with ^ilk and horse
flesh, they declare their daughter is ^ecome marriageable, and that they are
ready to dispose of her as soon as a proper opportunity shall offer. In
Circassia and Georgia, where parents are sometimes obliged to marry their
daughters while infants, to prevent their being violently taken from them by
the rich and powerful, the circumstance of a girl being arrived at the time of
puberty, is frequently concealed for some time, as the husband has then a right
to demand her, and the parents perhaps think her too young for the matrimonial
state.

Among the circumstances which gave rise to these customs which we have called
sexual, childbearing is one of the most particular. As in childbearing some
little assistance has generally been necessary in almost all countries; to
afford this assistance, the women have commonly employed midwives of their own
sex. The Athenians were the only people of antiquity who did otherwise. They
had a law which prohibited women and slaves from practicing physic; as
midwifery was accounted one of the branches of this art, many lives had been
lost, because the delicacy of the women would not submit to be delivered by a
man. A woman called Agnodice, in order to rescue her country-women from this
difficulty, dressed herself in the habit of a man, and having studied the art
of physic, revealed herself to the women, who all agreed to employ no other.
Upon this the rest of the physicians, enraged that she should monopolize all
the business, arraigned her before the court of Areopagus, as only having
obtained the preference to them by corrupting the chastity of the wives whom
she delivered. This obliging her to discover her sex, the pysicians then
prosecuted her for violating the laws of her country. The principal matrons of
the city, now finding her in such danger, assembled together, came into the
court, and petitioned the judges in her favor. The petition of the matrons was
so powerful, and the reasons which they urged for having employed her, so
conducive to the preservation of female delicacy, that a law was made, allowing
women to practice midwifery. The sex availed themselves of this law, and the
assistance of the men soon became quite unfashionable.

Among the Romans, and the Arabians, who after them cultivated the science of
medicine with great assiduity, the women, in cases of difficulty, sometimes
submitted to be delivered by a man; but this was far from being a matter of
choice or a general practice: nor was it till the latter end of the last
century, and beginning of this, when excess of politeness in France and Italy
had begun to eradicate delicacy, that the sex began to give so much into the
mode of being delivered by male practitioners; a mode which now so commonly
prevails, that there is scarcely to be found in Europe, a woman so
unfashionable as to be delivered by one of her own sex, if she can afford to
pay for the assistance of a man. -- How far the women may be safer in this
fashionable way than in the other, we shall not take upon us to determine, but
of this we are assured, that the custom is less consistent with delicacy.

In ages unenlightened by science and philosophy, in moments so perilous to the
sex as those of childbearing, we are not surprised to find them using several
ridiculous and unavailing methods to secure themselves from danger; but our
astonishment is excited when we find that, in our own times, they are still the
dupes of others not less inconsistent with reason and experience.

The Greek and Roman women imagined that the palm tree possessed a power of
easing pain and facilitating labor; they therefore at these times grasped pa^m
branches in their hands, and devoutly supplicated the goddess Lucina. The
ancient Germans, destitute of more rational methods, placed all their hopes in
magical girdles, which they tied about their women, and which, according to
them, had the virtues of procuring immediate ease, and promoting a speedy
delivery. But the power of these girdles did not terminate here, it extended
even to the child as well as to the mother; and a son born by their assistance,
was undoubtedly to be brave and a daughter to be chaste: hence such girdles
were ca^efully kept in the repositories of kings and of other great personages.
Till within these few years some of them were to be met with, in the families
of the chieftains in Scotland. They were marked with many mystical figures, and
the ceremony of binding them about the women in labor, attended with certain
mystical words and gestures, which only some particular women were supposed to
understand; a circumstance by which it appeared that their pretended utility
depended more upon magic, than on their intrinsic virtues. Every age and
country has its peculiar follies and absurdities; ours has many nostrums to
prevent the pain necessarily attendant on childbearing, and they are just as
well calculated to perform an impossibility, as the methods we have been now
describing.

In some climates, where the constitution is relaxed by the heat, and at the
same time not vitiated by those habits which in politer nations destroy
mankind, women are said to be delivered with but little pain, and frequently
without any assistance; nor is this singularity altogether peculiar to warm
countries but seems to depend more on living agreeably to nature, than on
climate, or any other circumstance; for we have heard it asserted by several
people who have be^^ in Canada, that a savage woman, when she feels the
symptoms of labor coming on her, steals silently to the woo^s, lays herself
down in a coppice, and is delivered alone; which done, she goes to the nearest
river or pool, washes herself and the child, and then returns home to her hut.

While ignorance and superstition disturbed the human mind with groundless
terrors and apprehensions, it was a prevailing opinion over all Europe, that
^^ing-in women were more subject to the power of (...) and witches than people
in any other (...), and that newborn infants, if not carefully watched* and
secured by ceremonies and spells, were frequently carried away by them: on this
account various ceremonies and spells were commonly made use of; and even so
lately as our times, we remember to have seen in the west of Scotland, a
horse-shoe nailed upon the door, in an inverted manner, to secure a lying-in
woman from the power of witchcraft. But this opinion was not confined to
Europe; it pervaded at least half the globe. The Nogais Tartars are the
particular dupes of it; when one of their women is in labor, the relations of
the family assemble at her door, and make a prodigious noise by beating on pots
and kettles, in order to fright away the devil, who, they suppose would, if he
did not find them on their guard, do some mischief to the mother or child, or
to both.

But the time of laying-in is not the only period of human life in which evil
spirits are supposed to have a more than ordinary power; they are imagined by
many nations to have the same at the time of marriage. The Livonians make the
sign of the cross with a naked sword upon the door of the bride-groom's house,
and afterward stick it in a beam over his head, as a charm to prevent the
power of malignant spirits; and the bride on the same account, scatters red
rags along the highways, and upon the graves of unbaptized infants.

In countries where the virtue of the sex is supposed to be secured by their
sense of moral rectitude, married women are under no particular restraint in
the absence of their husbands; but in Hindostan, when the husband is from home,
the wife must appear cheerful, must not eat delicate victuals, nor dress
herself in fine clothes, nor sit at the window of her apartment, nor in short
do any thing but such as indicates sorrow and subjection. In France and Italy,
the case is almost in every particular the reverse, and in England the ladies
are too fast following the fashionable example.

In Poland the women of middling condition are not allowed to marry, till they
have wrought with their own hands three basketsful of clothes, which they are
obliged to present to the guests who attend them on their wedding day. In
Wallachia, the bride wears a veil on the day before, and on that of her
marriage; whoever unveils her is entitled to a kiss; but to prevent too much
impertinence, the bride may in return demand a present, and the request must be
complied with. The ancient Germans had, and their descendants continue to this
day, a ceremony called Morgengabe, or morning-gift, which the husband is
obliged to present to the bride on the morning after their marriage, and which
becomes her sole and absolute property, and she may dispose of it in her
lifetime or at her death. Some traces of a like custom are to be met with among
us, but it is here only voluntary, there it is enforced by a law. Formerly
among the peasants of Britain, when a bride was brought to the door of the
bride-groom's house, a cake was broken over her head, for the fragments of
which the attendants scrambled: these fragments were laid under the pillows of
the young men and maidens, and supposed to be endowed with a power of making
them dream of their future wives and husbands.

In Adrianople and the neighboring cities, the women have public baths, which
are a part of their religion and of their amusement, and a bride, the first
time she appears there after her marriage, is received in a particular manner.
The matrons and widows being seated round the room, the virgins immediately put
themselves into the original state of Eve. The bride comes to the door richly
dressed and adorned with jewels; two of the virgins meet her, and soon put her
in the same condition with themselves; then filling some silver pots with
perfume, they make a procession round the rooms, singing an epithalamium, in
which all the virgins join in chorus; the procession ended, the bride is led up
to every matron, who bestows on her some trifling presents, and to each she
returns thanks, till she has been led round the whole. We could add many more
ceremonies arising from marriage* but as they are for the most part such as
make a part of the ^arriage ceremony itself, we shall have occasion to mention
them with more propriety afterward.

Of all the passions which subvert reason and deform the mind, jealousy is the
most credulously ridiculous, and in order to clear themselves from its
suspicions, has subjected the fair sex to some of the most unaccountable
expurgatory ceremonies. Such was that of the waters of jealousy of the ancient
Jews, and such also was another of a similar nature practiced by the Greeks,
among whom, when a woman was accused of unchastity, a tablet with the form of
an oath, which she was to take, written upon it, was hung about her neck;
bearing it in this manner, she went into the water till it reached the calf of
her leg, then she stood and solemnly repeated the oath, which, if false, the
water, we are told, as if agitated with rage at her perfidy, swelled till it
rose over the tablet, that it might cover from the sun the perpetration of so
foul a deed; if true, it remained quiet, and the woman was cleared from all
suspicion. Might not the ordeal trial, which was used for so many ages, and for
the discovery of so many crimes, be a relic of this? But be that as it will, it
was not founded upon more rational principles.

To trials of this kind the single as well as the married women were subject;
but of the chastity of the latter there were other circumstances, which the
Greeks reckoned the most convincing proofs. Pain and difficulty in bringing
forth their young, are unavoidable evils, to which the females of all
viviparous animals are more or less subject. But it was supposed by this
people, that their gods, in commiseration of the case of a woman who was
unjustly suspected of infidelity to her husband, wrought a miracle in her
favor, by exempting her from those peculiar evils annexed to the lot of female
life; and she who brought forth a child without a sigh or a groan, and declared
that she felt no pain, was in consequence accounted as chaste as Vesta. Hence
it is obvious, that it only required a tolerable degree of fortitude in the
wife, and a large share of credulity in the husband, to adjust all matrimonial
differences of this kind to the satisfaction of both. But this was not the only
proof the Greeks had of the conjugal fidelity of their wives: a numerous
offspring was among the ancients reckoned one of the greatest of blessings; and
to have it increased by two children a birth, was considered as one of those
favors, which the gods only bestow upon superior virtue and chastity. The
wife, therefore, who brought forth twins, was by that circumstance fully
cleared of every foul aspersion. So little, however, is the consistency among
mankind, that this very circumstance, which the Greeks reckoned the strongest
proof of the chastity of their wives, is, by the Hottentots of the present
time, reckoned the most infallible proof of the contrary. We have given the
reason of the Greeks for their opinion, but that of the Hottentots is rather
too indelicate to be related.

On St. Valentine's day, it is customary, in many parts of Italy, for an
unmarried lady to choose, from among the young gentlemen of her acquaintance,
one to be her guardian or gallant; who, in return for the honor of this
appointment, presents to her some nosegays, or other trifles, and thereby
obliges himself to attend her in the most obsequious manner in all her parties
of pleasure, and to all her public amusements, for the space of one year, when
he may retire, and the lady may choose another in his place. But in the course
^f this connection it frequently happens, that they contract such an
inclination to each other, as prompts them to be coupled for life. In the times
of chivalry we have seen, that the men gloried in protecting the women, and the
women thought themselves safe and happy when they obtained that protection. It
is probable, therefore, that this custom, though now more an affair of
gallantry than of protection, is a relic of chivalry still subsisting among
that romantic and sentimental people.

But the observation of some peculiar customs on St. Valentine's day is not
confined to Italy; almost all Europe has joined in distinguishing it by some
particular ceremony. As it always happens about that time of the year, when the
genial influences of the spring begin to operate, it has been believed by the
vulgar, that upon it the birds invariably choose their mates for the ensuing
season. In imitation, therefore, of their example, the vulgar of both sexes, in
many parts of Britain, meet together; and having upon slips of paper wrote down
the names of all their acquaintances, and put them into two different bags, the
men drew the female names by lot, and the women the male; the man makes the
woman who drew his name some trifling present, and in the rural gambol becomes
her partner; and she considers him as her sweetheart, till he is otherwise
disposed of, or till next Valentine's day provide her with another.

From shedding the blood, or taking away the life of any animal, both sexes of
the Hindoos are strictly prohibited by their religion. Foreigners, in a
sneering manner, frequently take notice, that, in England, gentlemen of
property are only allowed by law to butcher hares, patridges, and pheasants. --
Among the Wallachians, though there is no positive institution to the contrary,
yet the women never destroy the life of any creature. Whether this custom was
founded by some of their ancient legislators, or whether it originated from
incidental circumstances, is uncertain; but however that be, nothing can be
more suitable to the gentleness and timidity, which forms the most beautiful
and engaging part of the female character, and which, if imitated in other
countries, might take away some of that masculine ferocity, which distinguishes
many of the lower classes of women in Britain, and which they perhaps, in a
great measure, contract from being constituted butchers of all the lesser
animals used in our kitchens. How different is this custom of the Wallachian
women from that observed by some of those in America, who assist in taking away
the lives of their aged parents, when they are become of no further use to the
community; and from that of the Moxes in particular, who, when delivered of
twins, are said to bury one of them alive, from an ill-founded opinion, that it
is impossible for one woman to nurse two children at the same time!

Feasting upon particular occasions is of the greatest antiquity, and, among
every rude and uncultivated people, longed for with the utmost avidity, as it
calls together their friends and acquaintances, whom at other times they have
but few opportunities of seeing and gives a stimulus to their torpid natures,
by the intoxicating liquors then made use of. In Egypt, when, upon some
particular occasion, a banquet is given, the guests are invited by a company of
women hired for that purpose. The company, commonly about ten or twelve in
number, is preceded by some eunuchs, and on each side guarded by several Moors
with long staffs: in going along, they frequently amuse themselves and the
spectators with a song adapted to the occasion, and expressive of their
satisfaction at the approaching feast. As the Egyptian women are in general
confined, it seems probable, that those employed in this manner are like their
strooling dancers, under regulations less severe. But though this confinement
is as scrupulous as jealousy can dictate, or eunuchs practice, such is the
veneration shown to their great prophet Mahomet, that at Cairo even the doors
of harams, which are all the rest of the year watched by eunuchs, and fastened
by bolts and chains, fly open on his birthday, and allow the joyful prisoners
to sally out, in order to celebrate a festival to the founder of their
religion, and the destroyer of their liberty.

It has generally been observed, that those human beings who enjoy the smallest
share of liberty, manage even that scanty portion which they have, with the
least degree of prudence and discretion; because, fond of crowding too many
incidents into the duration of their limited freedom, they have neither time to
arrange them into any order, nor to relish them as they pass. Such is the case
with the women of Cairo. On this festival, they fly from one amusement to
another, and in the evening, disgusted with the whole, retire to their harams
less impatient of their confinement, and with a less extravagant idea of the
pleasures of liberty, than they entertained in the morning.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.
A Temple built at Rome to the fortune of women 151 Adonis, to lament his death
an early custom among women 350 some account who he was ibid. institution of
the ceremonies sacred to his memory 352 how they were celebrated ibid. mourned
by the women of Israel 353 by the Greeks and several others 354
Africans, their women totally neglected in their education 61 their flagitious
character 279 were not always so abandoned ibid. their own account of the
causes of their villainy 280
Agriculture among unpolished people commonly the province of women 195
Alexandrian library not totally burnt, as supposed 61 Americans, their women
little distinguished from the men 62 are enslaved and oppressed 63 in some
districts vested with the legislative power ibid. had no historical records,
unless their Quipos could be called such 64 effects arising from the trade
carried on there and to the East Indies 53 never correct their children 62 have
only one wife 181
Amestris, queen of Persia, her cruelty 242 Amusements and methods of killing
time in Europe 107 Ancients had some skill in chymestry and the other arts 33
Ancient inhabitants of the east, their education 76 Grecian women employed in
embroidery and weaving 77 retained this custom till after the time of Alexander
78 had probably few private amusements, their public ones not known ibid. at
religious festivals acted as singers, dancers, priestesses, etc. 80
Angels said to cohabit with women 30 Arabs, how they enslave their women 184
Asiatic women, their condition not such as it is described in romances 203
their general character 285 impossible they can be good wives 287 strangers to
the joys of friendship ibid. debarred from the public exercise of their
religion 288
Assyrian and Babylonian women, their early consequence 121 women not confined,
unless they belonged to the great 122
Assyrian women sold by auction for wives, to the highest bidder 123 Ausi,
their manner of finding fathers to their children 243
B.
Babylonian women, their consequence in society 125 the care taken of their
persons a proof of this ibid. admitted to convivial meetings 126 prostituted by
their fathers and husbands in the decline of the empire ibid. obliged by law to
prostitute themselves once in their lives in the temple of Venus 234 the rules
they observed in this prostitution ibid. these rules and the prostitution
sometimes dispensed with 235 their complying with (...) is said to have
rendered their chastity invio^able ibid. such supposition not founded on nature
236 their licentious character 237 were probably employed in weaving and
embroidery 76 their amusements not known ibid.
Bacchanalian mysteries introduced into Rome 261 Bactrians, their women
incorrigibly licentious 244 Balliarderes, or dancing girls, description of
their persons and performances 90 Bards, their extravagance in the praise of
women xiv it becomes fashionable for all people to praise them xv
Bathing, an amusement of the women of the east 94 part of their religious
system in almost every warm country ibid. place of the women a sacred asylum,
where no man dare enter 95 how practiced at Adrianople ibid.
Behavior, what kind of it makes the women be well treated by the men 209
Boasted heroism of the Roman women belied by their conduct 48 Bramins, their
wives better treated than the other women of Asia 288 Brazilian women supply
the place of beasts of burden 181 give stimulating potions to their men 274
British women how treated in ancient times 157 cannot, by our laws, inherit
entailed estates, while any of the heirs male are alive 209 may be raised by
marriage from the lowest to the highest rank ibid. cannot ennoble their
husbands, but have sometimes a power to ennoble their children 210
Burial, of what consequence it was among the ancients 233
C.
Caesar repudiates his wife on mere suspicion 257 Cairo, women allowed their
liberty there on the birth day of Mahomet 377 Card-playing, a fashionable
amusement 108 reflections on it ibid.
Carthage, its origin 129 Carthaginians shelter the Tyrian women 131 Causes
that increase the importance of women 155 that divest them of property 159 of
the good and ill treatment they receive from the men 161 these causes arise not
^^om nature but from education 163
Charon, the origin of the fable concerning him 233 Chivalry, the objects of
its institution 163 is extended beyond its orginal intention 164 the most
honorable of all professions while in vogue ibid.
Chivalry, what qualifications are required of those who obtained it 165 its
effects on the manners 166 and on the treatment of women ibid. had no effect on
the lower ranks of mankind 167 its effects in making the fair sex emulous of
praise and actions that deserved it 50 lost these effects when its honors
became prostituted 51, 52
Children, and other young animals, thrive as well on the milk of another, as
on that of their own mothers 101 are preserved from many dangers by being
nursed by their mothers 104
Chinese bestow no education on their women 59 teach them only the ceremonies
of their country 60 importance of their womon 201 give no fortunes to women 202
why they act in this manner ibid. modesty of their women 60
Church Livings and revenues of abbeys formerly given as marriage portions 170
Complaints against the fair sex 28 whence they arise ibid. Condition of the
Egyptian women more eligible than that of their neighbors 116 cause of this
ibid. proofs of it 118 of women in the patriarchal ages 112 among people
advanced a few degrees beyond savage barbarity 192
Confession, in what cases it was made to women 170 Confinement of women a
proof, that a people are advanced beyond the savage state 196 Confinement,
different ideas of it in different countries ibid. Considerations on dancing,
as practiced by savage and civilized nations 72 Court of Charles II. debauched
the morals of the women xvii Courtezans of antiquity were commonly strangers
249, 263 Cruelty, women of the patriarchal ages addicted to it 228 proved by
several anecdotes 229 of the Romans to their captives 118
Custom, its power in inducing the men of polite countries to treat the women
with propriety 16 Cyrus, remarkable story of his perverting the education of
the Lydians 40
D.
Dancing, supposed to be an amusement of the women of antiquity 71 girls in the
temple of Hindostan 90 how brought up ibid. their privileges ibid.
men and women in the island of Ulietea described 92 prostitutes in the temples
of the east 292
Daughters, not sons, obliged to provide for their aged parents in Egypt 36
Debauchery of the race of Cain 29 Deference paid to women greater in France,
Italy, and Spain, than in England 217 Deities of the ancient pagans, favored
debauchery and intrigue 237, 238, 243 Description of some of the ridiculous
ceremonies of the Greek women at their religious festivals 80 Diana, the
children of Sparta annually whipped in honor of her 251 Dido escapes from
Pygmalion with all the effects of her murdered husband 129 founds the city of
Carthage ibid. the account of her by Virgil only poetical fiction 130 her death
ibid.
Diversions and amusements the result of idleness and affluence 68, 79
Ducking-stool, an ancient punishment for a scold in England 16
E
Easterns approach their women like divinities, and use them like slaves 61
their women considered as an article of luxury and pleasure 87, 88 their women
have no public amusements ibid. their paivate ones consist in bathing,
perfuming, and dressing themselves 87 are brought in to divert the men at
feasts 88
Education, how it came to be necessary 32 of the ancient Medes and Persians
committed to their women 39 of the Asiatics, Africans, and Americans 58 makes a
woman beloved and regarded when youth and beauty are no more 41 of the Greek
women perverted or neglected in the early ages 42 tends only to corrupt the
minds of the women, and fit them for slavery ibid. that of the American women
tends to fit them for every fatigue and hardship 62
Effects of female learning 756 of European education 57
Egyptians, the inventors of the arts and sciences 34 were the first people
governed by laws founded on equity 35
Egyptian women, their employments not agreed upon by historians 73 their
amusements consisted in religious festivals, and celebrating their birth-days
74 were not confined 18 the respect paid by Solomon to Pharaoh's daughter a
proof of their consequence 119 succeeded to the inheritance of their fathers 20
their incontinence 29 women, various proofs of their incontinence 230, 231
Egyptians, the only people who abused the bodies of women after death 231
their laws calculated to preserve chastity ibid. were not allowed burial till
their conduct while living was examined 238
Empresses of Rome generally took the lead in debauchery 259 Employments of the
lower class of women described 99 English follow the example of the French in
libertinism and folly 54 the wealth they have brought from India how acquired
53 some of their women of fashion laugh at character and defy scandal 314
Europe, its anceint state 52 condition of its women 162, 165
European manner of educating women, its tendency 57 women, general sketches of
their character 301 the good offices they perform 272, 273 some of them
consider chastity as an atonement for wanting all other virtues 15 are
sometimes outrageously virtuous 16

European women treat every one with cruelt^ who has slipped aside from chastity
16 effects of their follies, ^oibles, and vices 317
Europeans have contributed nothing to the reformation of any people they have
conquered or traded with 201
F.
Fabulous stories concerning the creation of the first man and women 27 --
note. Fakiers, a religious sect in India, which corrupts the morals of the
women 289 wear no clothes 290 have access to women at all times ibid. carry
women to their temples, and pretend to marry them to the gods there worshipped
291
Fathers in Rome taught their children to read, write, etc. 48 Faults of women
generally originate from the men 29 Favorable change in the condition of the
far sex xiii Female infants, how educated in America 63, 64 deities a proof
that women are not without consequence 160 savages, their character 273 have no
idea of chastity 2^3, 274 their cruel disposition 275 how they torment their
prisoners ibid. their cruelty equalled by the ancients 277 whence their cruelty
arises ibid. their good qualities 278 character in different parts of Africa
281 in Egypt ibid. on the banks of the Niger 28^ in the east and west parts
ibid* on the banks of the Gambia 283 on the Gold Coast ibid. about Zaara 284

Female society, its influence 323 makes men effeminate, if too much in it, and
clownish if too much out of it ibid. effects of want of it in sailors and
mariners 24 its advantages 31 makes us ambitious to please ibid. sober and
tempera^e ibid. prevents quarrels ibid. makes us humble and submissive 332
gives the highest polish to behavior ibid. infuses more than half the sweets
into society 334 and is the cause of almost every improvement in manners and in
arts 337, 338
the disadvantages arising from it ibid. is said to soften and enervate the
mind ibid. induces men to squander away their fortunes 339 proved not to be the
source of these evils 340 lose not their native softness when excluded from the
men 324 but contract a masculine air when continually with them 325 why they
addressed in a particular manner female divinities 354

Fidelity to the marriage bed, what the Greeks reckoned proofs of it 363
Fighting in the cause of women, instances of it 163 171 Formosa, daughters
there of more consequence than sons 194 reason of this ibid.
French first contaminated the manners of European women 54 first introduced
the fantastic manners which now prevail in Europe ibid. education, the effects
of it ibid.
French ladies do not altogether neglect learning 55 reckon every thing insipid
without a mixture of the sexes 240
women, their character 303 not distinguished by modesty ibid. are active and
restless 304 but indifferent wives ibid. are above the censure of the world 305
the patrons of learning, and give the ton to new books 306 are easy and
sprightly in their behavior ibid. their volubility of tongue ibid. their
levity and inconstancy 307 their power over their gallants ibid. reckon
themselves the only polite women in the world ibid. are atheists in youth, and
devotees in old age 308 too fond of pleasure to take care of their children
ibid.


G.
Games of chance not known in the early ages 73 strictly prohibited among the
Jews ibid.
General observations on the condition of the fair sex 202 on the women of
Europe 270
German husbands, their power over adulterous wives 159 Germans were anciently
rude and illiterate 49 had no idea of war, hunting, and drinking ibid. their
women possessed of any little knowledge that was found among them 50 women on
that account acquired the esteem and veneration paid to them ibid. laid the
foundation of that politeness, which now prevails over Europe ibid.
Germans, their women perpetually minors 158 were not allowed to avenge
themselves on those who had murdered their relations ibid. their women could
not be noble by birth or marriage 210
Giaga, the abject condition of women there 181 Good Goddess worshipped
secretly by the Roman women 354 from the very foundation of Rome 355 her
mysteries celebrated by the vestal virgins and other ladies 356 in the house of
the consul ibid. every thing masculine turned out of the house, and every male
picture covered, during the celebration of her mysteries ibid. intruded on by
Claudius 357 account of these mysteries by Cicero 358 her worship had nothing
indecent in it 359
Goths obliged him who debauched a woman to marry her, or give her a portion
156 their idea of the Romans 268
Greek women all ignorant, except common courtezans 65 Greeks behaved in a
rough and unpolished manner to their women 136 in what light they viewed the
sex 139 borrowed and lent their wives 140 their young and handsome men might
demand admittance to the wives of the old and infirm ibid. send a deputation
from the army to enjoy the wives of all who were absent 141 considered their
wives as of no other value than the portions they brought with them 142
frequently exposed female infants ibid. general idea of their character 245
their gods and men highly licentious 246
Greeks, greatest part of their princes, who returned from the siege of Troy,
murdered by their wives 247 their laws favorable to debauchery ibid. of Sparta
obliged both sexes to appear naked on the stage ibid. ill effects of this ibid.
held their courtezans in great esteem, visited them publicly, and sometimes
carried their wives along with them 248 their reasons for so doing 249 of
Sparta condemned weakly children to be put to death, as unworthy of being
reared up 252
Greek women confined to their apartments 137 their husbands only allowed to
visit them at certain times ibid. their wretched dwellings ibid. were not
allowed to pass from one part of the house to another without leave 138 allowed
when married to go to the door ibid. causes of their confinement ibid. women,
other hardships and restraints they suffered 139 did all the slavish business
140 some (...) privileges 142 we (...) the tenderness of the sex 252 an^ (...)
^runkenness 253
Grinding (...) ancient and modern employment (...) 69
H.
Harams, how managed at Hindostan 198 Harlots, that profession not unknown in
the patriarchal ages 227 Hindoo women in some parts not rigidly confined 196
how educated 86 remarkable for cleanness ibid.
Hindoo women employed in drawing and coloring their cotton stuffs 86 not
destitute of taste ibid.
History, silent on the education of women for many of the ages of antiquity 64
Hottentots, their boys allowed to beat and abuse their mothers 180 Hurons,
their chief must descend from the female line 188 their council of state chosen
by women ibid. reckon it no crime for a girl to prostitute heself 244

I.
Iapanese women, their condition 202 Iealousy, one of the causes of the ill
treatment of women 223 Ignorance of the 14th, 15th, and 16th centuries 85
Improvements stationary in the middle ages 161 Inconsistency of the actions and
character of the middle ages 155 Influence of the women over the men always
most powerful when attempted by softness and insinuation 324 this evinced by
several instances 327 greatest when they seem not to show it openly 336 is much
augmented by having Nature on their side 337
Inhabitants of the north famous for the regard to and good usage of their
women 158 of the south, for rapturous love and ill treatment 161
Instances of superstition having obliterated maternal affection 229 Israelites
maltreated their women and captives Israelitish women obliged to draw water for
their flocks 113 Israelitish women, their low condition, and the other mean
offices they performed 114 some of their particular ceremonies 353
Italian women not more chaste than the French 308 artful in decoying and
plundering their gallants ibid. are not ashamed of intriguing 309 not
scrupulous observers of the laws of matrimony ibid. are allowed by custom to
have each a gallant after marriage ibid. are remarkable for family pride 310
Iuvenal accuses the Roman ladies of pedantry 46
K.
Knowledge not altogether hidden from the ancient Greek women 44 Knowledge and
good sense necessary in the choice of a husband 202 Knowledge and learning of
some Greek ladies 6^
L.
Lacedaemonians, their rude and uncultivated manners 327 Ladies of rank and
fashion, their want of employment 97 of middling fortunes too fond of copying
their superiors ibid. amuse themselves sometimes with the fine arts 99
Laws formed to regulate the conduct of the vulgar 170 of Solon to prevent the
debauchery of the Greek women 253 of Lycurgus, strictures on them 254 of the
Romans to restrain public prostitution 259 did not answer the purpose 260
of the ancient northerns regulating the behavior of the sexes to each other
269
Learned women in France and England 65 Learning of the Phoenician women 75, 37
Lesser Asia, employment of their women 77 Little inclination of savage women
for diversions 79 Love of our offspring diminished by the progress of
politeness 114 prompts the men to behave properly to the other sex 204
Lucretia, her conduct and tragical end 255 Lybian women employed in war and
hunting 75 have an annual combat in honor of Minerva ibid.
Lycurgus considered the sex as below his notice, because they were not fit to
become heroes 43 Lydians, their debauchery 236 prostituted their daughters for
hire 238

M.
Mahometism unfavourable to chastity 187 Making of bread an employment of the
women of antiquity 70 Mamood, emperor of Hindostan, obliges his wife to cook
his victuals 181 refuses her a Maid to assist her ibid.
Man little different in a savage state from the beasts of the field 179 almost
destitute of all the finer feelings, and of humanity 180
Manlius, a Roman senator, degraded for having saluted his wife in presence of
his daughter 257 Manners and customs peculiar to women 347 is a subject
involved in much obscurity ibid. whence the obscurity arises ibid. a subject of
the greatest delicacy 349
Marriage portions ^n ancient custom 210 Married women of Hindostan, how they
are to behave in the absence of their husbands 371 Massagetae, their
promiscuous use of women 238 sacrificed and eat their old or diseased relations
ibid.
Matronalia, a festival instituted in honor of the Sabine women 147 Matrons of
the Iroquois, dispose of the prisoners of war 188 Megabysis makes too free with
the women of Macedon 133 is murdered with his whole retinue for his temerity
134
Men, what they become when secluded from women 324, 325 equally the dupes of
fashion and custom as the other sex 348
Middle ages, sketches of them 271 the men romantic and superstitious, their
women haughty and indelicate, and their clergy debauched and illiterate 272
Modesty and gentleness, two distinguished virtues in the female character 226
was not among the virtues of the early ages 227 instances to prove it was not
then much practiced ibid.
Modern Greeks as dissolute as the ancient 153 marry for any given time ibid.
Mogul emperors make their women dance to divert them, and the grandees follow
their example 89 Morgengabe of the ancient Germans defined 371 Motives of women
in adorning themselves 178 Mourning, some customs of it peculiar to women 361
the dress they use in it, conduces to make them seem more engaging 362 why it
induces the sex to wound themselves ibid. how observed in Otaheite 363 how in
ancient Greece ibid.

N.
Narva, a remarkable ceremony there 365 Natural to women to dress and ornament
themselves, unless oppressed by slavery 86 weakness of the sex among savages
has subjected them to slavery 110 in civil life, entitles them to protection
and indulgence 111
Na^ches, their woman-chief equal to their man-chief 188 the husband and
retinue of this woman-chief obliged to follow her into the other world to serve
her there 189 lend their wives to each other 273
New-married people supposed to be in danger of witches and evil spirits 371
Niger, the women who inhabit its banks described 194 Nitocris, queen of
Nabonadius, takes the management of the kingdom into her hands 126 gives great
satisfaction to her people ibid.
Northern women anciently had the care of every thing but war and hunting 85
when they behaved properly were thanked in their public assemblies ibid.
sometimes enjoyed the royal dignity 155 were supposed to be endowed with more
than human wisdom ibid. were given as hostages in their treaties with other
nations ibid. were present in the field of battle, sometimes rallied the men,
and returned with them to the charge 156 were admitted to the councils of the
men ibid. were not suffered to eat with their husbands 158
Northern women not to be gained but by valor and assiduity 163 Nursing of
children one of the most common employments of women 100 by women hired for the
purpose, its inconvenience 104

O.
Of the eastern women 39 Omphale, queen of Lydia, her revenge on the people for
endeavoring to debauch her 238 Origin of amusements and diversions 76, 77 of
the confinement of the women in the middle age 162 of chivalry 163
Original state of mankind in the early ages 24, 36 Otaheite, condition of the
women there 204 their women never eat with nor in the presence of men ibid.
their chiefs will not feed themselves, but must be fed like children ibid.
Otaheiteans hardly consider chastity as a virtue 294 their women appear naked
or clothed with equal indifference ibid. their infamous society called Arreoy
ibid.

P.
Pageantry and show most relished by people but little refined ^04 Patan, the
women there said to be exceedingly immodest 293 Petriarchs, not remarkable for
continence 227 Persians jealous to madness of their women 132 grandeur of their
monarchs ibid. number of beautiful women in their seraglios ibid. kings first
carried their wives and concubines to the field ibid.
Persians, their reasons for doing so 132 their laws made it death to offer
violence to a woman ibid. their monarchs, though the most absolute in the
world, could (...) alter the laws concerning women ibid. their voluptuousness
240 their incestuous marriages 241 the delicacy of some of their women 243
Peculiar opinion of the Africans on the Gold coast 284 Peruvians did not choose
to marry a virgin 273 Phoenicians, their women employed in writing and keeping
accounts 75 were not allowed to wear the Tyrian purple 127
Pholeys, a people in Africa, who treat their women with indulgence 195 Picture
of German simplicity by Tacitus 268 Poetess lately crowned with laurel at Rome
65 Politeness and culture, their effects on the behavior of the men to the
women 217 Polygamy and concubinage proofs of the wretched condition of women
119 neither of them allowed in ancient Egypt ibid. unfavourable to chastity 187
Portuguese, their ill behavior in India 297 the speech of a savage to them
ibid. are succeeded in many of their settlements by the Spaniards, who behave
still worse 298
Power of husbands over their wives among the ancient Israelites 114 of fathers
over their daughters among them 115
Present mode of female education, its absurdity 57 Progress of general
education among mankind 52, 58 Proper education induces the men to treat the
women with indulgence 131 Property, in what cases enjoyed by the women of
antiquity 210 allowed to be held by the Egyptian women 211 by the Hebrew (...)
the Greeks allowed to women 212 not originally vested in the Roman women, but
vested in them afterward ibid.
Prophecy of Enoch, an imposition 30 -- note. Punishment for committing a rape
in Egypt 119 Purification of lying-in women, longer when they brought forth a
female than a male 115 Putting children out to wet-nurses increases the
children of the rich, and diminishes those of the poor 104 Pygmalion murders
the husband of his sister Dido 129
R.
Reasons why men of inferior genius associate with women, and women of superior
genius with men 131 Rebecca, the humble manner in which she approaches Isaac
113 Reflections on the education of the African women 62 on the European
character of the Africans 296
Rejoicings at death, instances of it 365 Religion of Mahomet made little
change in the condition of the eastern women 61, 164 Remarks on the general
tendency of female education 66 Revolutions of manners in the reign of
Elizabeth, of James II. and William xx Roman women, the first after those of
Egypt, who attained to any consequence 44 their education 45 their virtues
ibid. their virtues how contaminated ibid.
Roman women, their quarrel with the triumvirs 47 their eloquence ibid. were
employed in spinning and manufacturing clothes for their families 82 not
ashamed of doing what was useful and necessary ibid. their diversions the same
as those of the men 33 spent much time at the public baths, into which both
sexes went promiscuously ibid. forbid to do so by Adrian and Aurelian, allowed
to do it by Heliogabalus, and prevented finally from it by Constantine ibid. of
opulence gave out all their children to nurse 105 were under perpetual
guardianship 148 much cramped by sumptuary laws ibid. not allowed to taste wine
ibid. liable to be divorced at the pleasure of their husbands ibid. sometimes
ill treated by slaves 150 the honors conferred on them by the senate 151 had
funeral orations pronounced in their praise ibid. were allowed to minister at
the altar of their gods 152 were deified after death ibid. were buried in the
field of Mars 153 were admitted to convivial meetings, but seem to have been
more esteemed than loved ibid. rigidly virtuous in the early ages of the
republic 254
Roman empire being overturned, mothers began to nurse their own children, and
again left off doing so, as they became more fond of pleasure 106 Romans, the
early part of their history only fable 144 Romans, at first only a few banditti
144 increased by the rape of the Sabine virgins 145 the first who gave the sex
public liberty, and cultivated their understandings ibid. were rude and austere
in their manners 148 introduced the custom of saluting women, to know if they
had drank any wine 149
Russian women, their disadvantages 207 bride said to have presented her
husband with a whip, in old time ibid. empress, and the ladies of her court,
divert themselves with shooting 208 women addicted to drunkenness ibid. the
advantages of their education ibid.

S.
Sabines demand restitution of their daughters from the Romans 146 are refused
ibid. have a conference with the Romans, which ends in a peace 146 make a
second demand of their daughters, and are refused ibid. overcome the Romans,
but consent to peace at the request of the women 147
Sabine women, the privileges conferred on them for this office ibid. first
infused politeness into the Romans 327
Salique lands in France could not be held by women 218 law, though it debars
the fair sex from swaying the scepter of France, cannot hinder them from ruling
the monarch who sways it ibid.
Sardanapalus, his effeminacy 122 employs himself in spinning 123
Satirists who have declaimed against women 46 Savages, their ideas of dancing
different from those in civil life 93 Savages reckon strength and courage the
only qualities that entitle preference 94 despise and enslave their women
because they are weak 179 women, their disadvantages 178 how affected by these
179 enjoy personal liberty 190 are seldom troubled with the jealousy of their
husbands ibid. have little or no property 191 do not share the honors of their
husbands ibid. are the physicians, surgeons, and magicians of the country 192
in Canada, are delivered alone in the woods 370
Scythian women regarded for their supposed skill in divination 126 their
superior privileges 127 take the slaves of their husbands to their beds 239
Semiramis, some account of her 121 plans the attack of Bactria ibid. is
married to Ninus, king of Assyria ibid. obtains the royal authority for some
days, murders her husband, and usurps his throne ibid. in one year builds the
city of Babylon 122 is worshipped among the gods 124
Sentiments of the present inhabitants of the east, concerning their women 34,
73, 78 Shopping, an amusement of both sexes, which is wantonly practiced only
to give trouble 108 Singing and dancing girls of the Medes and Persians brought
in to divert company 77 Sketches of the education instituted by Solon 42
Society, the state of it in the east 328 in Europe 329
Society of women, its influence on the French and Italians 330 Solon, his plan
of education more calculated to improve the body than the mind 42 Songs,
religious and martial, a part of the amusement of the women of antiquity 71
were accompanied with instruments 72
Sons and daughters of men, why the antedeluvians were so called 31 Sons of
God, why so called 30 -- note. Spaniards massacred the Peruvians, because they
would not receive a religion they did not understand 298 hunted the people of
Hispaniola with dogs, and massacred them in honor of the apostles 299 their
country and customs but little known 311 allow their women more liberty than
formerly ibid. have a native honor and fidelity above other nations ibid.
indulgent to their women in some cases 312 privileges they allow to a kept
mistress ibid. to a breeding woman ibid.

Spartan women, their public diversions were some of them masculine, others
highly indecent 79 Speech of Hortensia to the Triumvirs 46 of a female savage,
describing the wretched condition of her sex 182
Spinning and weaving the common employments of the women of antiquity 78
Succession to an inheritance denied to women by the Lombards 212 and also by
the Burgundians ibid.
Superstition sometimes exalts women to the supreme dignity 122 Syberites,
their effeminacy 134 the splendor and magnificence of their women ibid.
effeminated by the constant company of their women 135

T.
Tartarian women, a particular religious ceremony observed by them 360 assisted
by the Bonzes in it ibid.
Tamaradee, an indecent dance at Otaheite 91 Times, the past and present
compared 318 how the past are extolled by some people as all excellence, and
the present how condemned as all vice and imperfection 319 of the patriarchs
not better than the present 320
To tend the flocks in the field, one of the employments of the women of
antiquity 70 Treatment and condition of Women 110 mark the point in the scale
of civil society to which a people have arrived 111 in middle ages, what 161
Turkish women are humane and benevolent 374 Tygranes, story of him 243
V.
Valentine's day, its customs 374 View of the disadvantages of women in the
middle ages, -- they were considered as polluted 173, 174 to abstain from them
was imagined to be the surest road to heaven ibid. spent their time in a
solitary manner, and had few of the conveniences of life 175
Venetians restrained by sumptuary laws, which their courtezans only can break
with impunity 250 Vestal virgins, some of them debauched 257 Virgin^a, her
tragical story and death ibid. Virgins of the Sun in Peru, how educated 63
Virtue of the Romans contaminated by their intercourse with the Asiatics 258
Virtues of the ancient inhabitants of the north 267 Visigoths bound by a law
not to give more than a tenth of their substance to a wife 159 Voluminous books
written in praise of women 33
W.
Wallachian women never take away the life of any animal 375 Want of
sensibility in the men one cause of the improper treatment of women 220 of
proper education in another ibid. of care to make themselves agreeable a third
221
Weakness of the sex a fourth 222 Why women are commonly greater pedants than
men 53, 56 Witches, their supposed power over lying-in women 370 Wives killed
by some Tartarian tribes with impunity 186 Women of antiquity, their amusements
but little known 76 of Adrianople, how they receive a bride at the bagnio 372
of the Moors how enslaved 184 the methods used in detecting them in adultery
373 not excluded from the learning of the Egyptians 35 forbidden to learn music
in Egypt 36 obliged to change their manners with those of the men 50 applied
themselves to letters and the sciences, and became adepts in them 51 obliged
again to change their system, and for what reason 52
Women became as famous for ignorance as they had been before for learning 52
betake themselves to embroidery and other kinds of needle work 53
Women ought neither to be pedantically learned, nor insipidly ignorant 66
slumber away their time in the east in relaxation of body and mind 68 of
antiquity how employed 69 are so fond of amusements that they sometimes do not
consider whether they can afford them or not 99 were intended by nature to
nurse their own children 100 of the Balearic isles more valued than the men 128
of Lycia were the fountain of honor ibid. of Carthage enjoyed their freedom
130 of the middle ages were possessed of all the knowledge of the times 170
while gaining importance in Eorope, were losing it in Asia 172 were not obliged
to sight nor undergo the ordeal trial 170 their condition regulated by the
opinion entertained of them by the men 193 of Madura, their despicable state
184 why treated so ill by the men there 185 of Guinea, how subjected ibid. of
Hindostan not allowed to give evidence ibid. of Potany kept to be hired out to
public prostitution ibid. of Circassia sold in the public market ibid. effects
of their ill treatment 186 in some places meet with more indulgence 187 their
power of sending the men out to war in America 188
Women, their persons sacred in Hindostan 199 the honor of their husbands
concerned in their good behavior there ibid. are without power, and without
political consequence 200 their consequence in Ethiopia 201 their disadvantages
in Lapland, Norway and Poland 209 cannot dispose of estates in Denmark ibid. of
Rome contended against each other for the personal favors of a player 258
danced naked on the stage 259 joined in a conspiracy to poison their husbands
ibid. were hard-hearted and cruel 264 the proofs they gave of this disposition
ibid. were not much addicted to religion 266 when secluded from men are less
chaste on that account 302 grow cheap by showing themselves too much 302
bewailing virginity, an ancient custom among them 349 why they observed this
custom 350 account of some of their sexual ceremonies 366 of Greece, the only
ones of antiquity who employed men-midwives 367 began to use men-midwives about
the end of the last century 368 the methods they practiced to ease the pains of
childbearing ibid.
Wounds and injuries done to women rated higher than to men by the ancient
northerns 159
Z.
Zaara, women of rank there keep their husbands in great subjection 189 Zaara
not peculiar in this custom as it is practiced by the sisters of the grand
signior 190 Zaffa Ibraims, their character 282 their great men only allowed to
kill their cattle ibid. their children, when born on certain days, exposed in
the woods, and frequently relieved by the women 283

SOLITUDE
FRIEND of VIRTUE and reclaimer from ERROR.



THE HISTORY OF WOMEN, FROM THE EARLIEST ANTIQUITY, TO THE PRESENT TIME; GIVING
AN ACCOUNT OF ALMOST EVERY INTERESTING PARTICULAR CONCERNING THAT SEX, AMONG
ALL NATIONS, ANCIENT AND MODERN.

WITH A COMPLETE INDEX.

By William Alexander, M. D.

IN TWO VOLUMES. VOLUME SECOND.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY J. H. DOBELBOWER, 1796.

CONTENTS OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
CHAPTER XVI. Of Delicacy and Chastity 5 CHAPTER XVII. The same Subject
continued 20 CHAPTER XVIII. Of the various Opinions entertained by different
Nations concerning Women 35 CHAPTER XIX. The same Subject continued 51 CHAPTER
XX. Of Dress, Ornament, and the various other Methods whereby Women endeavor
to render themselves agreeable to the Men. 83 CHAPTER XXI. The same Subject
continued 98 CHAPTER XXII. The same Subject continued 121 CHAPTER XXIII. Of
Courtship 144 CHAPTER XXIV. The same Subject continued 165 CHAPTER XXV. Of
Matrimony 186 CHAPTER XXVI. The same Subject continued 197 CHAPTER XXVII. The
same Subject continued 216 CHAPTER XXVIII. The same Subject continued 241
CHAPTER XXIX. The same Subject continued 266 CHAPTER XXX. Of Widowhood 289
CHAPTER XXXI. Of the Rights, Privileges, and Immunities of the Women of Great
Britain; the Punishments to which they are liable by Law; and the Restrictions
they are laid under by Law and Custom 315
THE History of Women.
CHAPTER XVI. Of Delicacy and Chastity.
OF all the virtues which adorn the female character, and enable the sex to
steal imperceptibly into the heart, none are more conspicuous than that
unaffected simplicity and shyness of manners which we distinguish by the name
of delicacy. In the most rude and savage states of mankind, however, delicacy
has no existence; in those where politeness and the various refinements
connected with it are carried to excess, delicacy is discarded, as a vulgar and
unfashionable restraint on the freedom of good breeding.

To illustrate these observations, we shall adduce a few facts from the history
of mankind. Where the human race have little other culture than what they
receive from nature, and hardly any other ideas but such as she dictates; the
two sexes live together, unconscious of almost any restraint on their words or
on their actions: Diodorus Siculus mentions several nations among the ancients,
as the Hylophagi, and Icthiophagi, who had scarcely any clothing, whose
language was exceedingly imperfect, and whose manners were hardly
distinguishable from those of the brutes which surrounded them. The Greeks, in
the heroic ages, as appears from the whole history of their conduct, delineated
by Homer and their other poets and historians, were totally unacquainted with
delicacy. The Romans, in the infancy of their empire, were the same. Tacitus
informs us, that the ancient Germans had not separate beds for the two sexes,
but that they lay promiscuously on reeds or on heath along the walls of their
houses; a custom still prevailing in Lapland, among the peasants of Norway,
Poland, and Russia; and not altogether obliterated in some parts of the
Highlands of Scotland and of Wales. In Terra del Fuego, on several places of
the Gold Coast, in the Brazils, and a variety of other parts, the inhabitants
have hardly any thing to cover their bodies, and scarcely the least inclination
to canceal any natural action from the eyes of the public. In Otaheite, to
appear naked, or in clothes, are circumstances equally indifferent to both
sexes: nor does any word in their language, nor any action to which they have
an inclination, seem more indelicate or reprehensible than another. Such are
the effects of a total want of culture: and effects not very dissimilar are in
France and Italy produced from a redundance of it; delicacy is laughed out of
existence as a silly and unfashionable weakness.

Among people holding a middling degree, or rather perhaps something below a
middle degree, between the most uncultivated rus^city, and the most refined
politeness, we find female delicacy in its highest perfection. The Japanese are
but just emerged some degrees above savage barbarity, and in their history we
are presented by Kempfer, with an instance of the effect of delicacy, which
perhaps has not a parallel in any other country. A lady being at table in a
promiscuous company, in reaching for something that she wanted, accidentally
broke wind b^ckwards, by which her delicacy was so much wounded, that she
immediately arose, laid hold on her breasts with her teeth, and tore them till
she expired on the spot. In Scotland, and a few other parts of the north of
Europe, where the inhabitants are some degrees farther advanced in politeness
than the Japanese; a woman would be almost as much ashamed to be detected going
to the temple of Cloacina, as to that of Venus. In England, to go in the most
open manner to that of the former, hardly occasions a blush on the most
delicate cheek. At Paris, we are told that a gallant frequently accompanies his
mistress to the shrine of the goddess, stands sentinel at the door, and
entertains her with bon mots, and protestations of love all the time she is
worshipping there; and that a lady when in a carriage, whatever company be
along with her, if called upon to exonerate nature, pulls the cord, orders the
driver to stop, steps out, and having performed what nature required, resumes
her seat without the least ceremony or discomposure. The Parisian women, as
well as those in many of the other large towns of France, even in the most
public companies make no scruple of talking concerning those secrets of their
sex, which almost in every other country are reckoned indelicate in the ears of
the men: nay, so little is their reserve on this head, that a young lady on
being asked by her lover to dance, will without blush or hesitation, excuse
herself on account of the impropriety of doing so in her present circumstances.
The Italians, it is said, carry their indelicacy still farther: women even of
character and fashion, when asked a favor of another kind, will with the
utmost composure decline the proposal on account of being at present under a
course of medicine for the cure of a certain disorder. When a people have
arrived at that point in the scale of politeness, which entirely discards
delicacy, the chastity of their women must be at a low ebb; for delicacy is the
sentinel that is placed over female virtue, and that sentinel once overcome,
chastity is more than half conquered.

From these observations, a question of the most difficult determination
arises. Is the female delicacy natural or artificial? if natural, it should be
found in the highest perfection in those states where mankind approach the
nearest to nature; if artificial, it should be most conspicuous in states the
most artificially polished, But notwithstanding what we related in the last
section, it appears to be regulated by no general or fixed law in either. The
inhabitants of the coast of New Zealand are perhaps as little cultivated as any
on the globe, and yet their women were ashamed to be seen naked even at a
distance by the English. In Otaheite, where they are considerably more
polished, we have already seen that they are conscious of no such shame. With
the most innocent look, says Hawkesworth, Oberea their queen and several
others, on going to meet another chief of the island, first uncovered their
heads, and then their bodies as low as the waist. Nor can privacy,' adds he, be
much wanted among a people who have not even an idea of indecency, and who
gratify every appetite and passion before witnesses, with no more sense of
impropriety than we feel when we satisfy 'our hunger at the social board. We
have seen that in France and Italy, which are reckoned the politest couniries
in Europe, women set themselves above shame and despise delicacy; but in China,
one of the politest countries in Asia, and perhaps not even in this respect
behind France or Italy, the case is quite otherwise: no being can be so
delicate as a women, in her dress, in her behavior, and conversation; and
should she ever happen to be exposed in any unbecoming manner, she feels with
the greatest poignancy the aukwardness of her situation, and if possible covers
her face that she may not be known. In the midst of so many discordant
appearances, the mind is perplexed, and hardly can fix upon any cause to which
delicacy, that chiefest ornament of the fair sex, can be ascribed: should we
ascribe it to custom only, we would do violence to our own inclinations, as we
would willingly trace it to a nobler source. In prosecuting this attempt, let
us attend to the whole of the animal creation; let us consider it attentively,
and wherever it falls under our observation, it will discover to us that in the
female there is a greater degree of delicacy or coy reserve than in the male:
is not this a proof that through the wide extent of the creation, the seeds of
delicacy are more liberally bestowed upon females than on males? And do not the
facts which we have mentioned prove, that in the human genius these seeds
require some culture to expand, and still more to bring them to perfection;
whereas, on the other hand, too much culture actually destroys them altogether;
as plants may be destroyed in a hot bed by too much heat, which by a moderate
degree of it would have arrived to the highest perfection.

Allowing then, that delicacy is a virtue planted by the hand of nature in the
female mind, let us take a view of the progress of this virtue, which makes so
distinguishing a part of the character of that sex whose history we are
endeavoring to elucidate.

In the remotest periods of which we have any historical account, we find that
the women had a delicacy to which the other sex were strangers. Rebecca veiled
herself when she first approached to Isaac her future husband, and in those
ages it would seem that even prostitution was too delicate to show itself
openly, for Tamar, when she personated an harlot, covered herself with a veil,
which appears from the story to have been a part of the dress worn in those
days by women of that profession. Many of the fables of antiquity, while they
paint in the most striking colors the profligacy of manners, point out at the
same time that delicacy was a latent principle in the female mind, which often
showed itself in spite of manners, customs, and every other disadvantage under
which it labored. Of this kind is the fable of Actaeon and Diana. Actaeon
being a famous hunter, was in the woods with his hounds beating for some game,
when accidentally spying Diana and her nymphs bathing in a river, he stole
silently into a neighboring thicket that he might have a nearer view of them;
when the goddess discovering him, was so affronted at his audacity, and so much
ashamed to have been seen naked, that she is revenge immediately transformed
him into a stag, and set his own hounds upon him, who soon overtook and
devoured him.

Even among the Lydians, a people who were highly debauched, it appears that
female delicacy was far from being totally extinguished; Candaules, one of
their kings, being married to a lady of exquisite beauty, was perpetually
boasting of her charms to his courtiers, and at last, to satisfy his favorite
Gyges that he had not exaggerated the description, he took the dangerous and
indelicate resolution of giving him an opportunity of seeing her naked. To
accomplish this, Gyges was conveyed by the king into a secret place, where he
might see the queen dress and undress, from whence, however, as he retired, she
accidentally spied him, but taking no notice of him for the present, she only
set herself to consider the most proper method of revenging her injured
modesty, and punishing her indelicate husband; having resolved how to proceed,
she s^nt for Gyges, and told him that as she could not ^amely submit to the
stain which had been offered to her honor, she insisted that he should expiate
his crime either by his own death or that of the king, that two men might not
be living at the same time who had thus seen her in a state of nature. Gyges,
after some fruitless remonstrances, performed the latter, married the queen,
and mounted the throne of Lydia. Besides the fables and historical anecdotes of
antiqu^^y, their poets seldom exhibited a female character in its loveliest
form, without adorning it with the graces of modesty and delicacy; hence we may
infer, that these qualities have not only been always essential to virtuous
women in civilized countries, but have been also constantly praised and
esteemed by men of sensibility.

Plutarch, in his treatise, entitled, The virtuous Actions of Women, mentions
several anecdotes which strongly favor our idea of delicacy being an innate
principle in the female mind; the most striking is that of the young women of
Milesia, many of whom, about that time of life, when nature giving birth to
restless and turbulent desires inflames the imagination, and astonishes the
heart at the sensation of wants which virtue forbids to gratify, to free
themselves from the conflict between nature and virtue, laid violent hands on
themselves; the contagion becoming every day more general, to put a stop to it,
a law was made, ordaining that every one who committed that crime should be
brought naked to the market place and publicly exposed to the people; and so
powerfully did the idea of this idelicate exposure, even after death, operate
on their minds, that from thenceforth not one of them ever made an attempt on
her own life.

There are so many evils attending the loss of virtue in women, and so greatly
are minds of that sex depraved when they have deviated from the path of
rectitude, that their being generally contaminated may be considered one of the
greatest misfortunes that can befall a state, as it in time destroys almost
every public virtue of the men. Hence all wise legislators, especially of
republics, have strictly enforced upon the sex a particular purity of manners;
and not satisfied that they should abstain from vice only, have required them
even to shun every appearance of it. Such, in some periods, were the effects of
the laws of the Romans, and such were the effects of these laws, that if ever
female delicacy shone forth in a conspicuous manner, we are of opinion it was
among those people, after they had worn off much of the barbarity of their
first ages, and before they become contaminated by the wealth and manners of
the na^ions which they plundered and subjected: then it was that we find many
of their women surpassing in modesty almost every thing related by fable; and
then it was that their ideas of delicacy were so highly refined, that they
could not even bear the secret consciousness of an involuntary crime, and far
less of having even tacitly consented to it. Of this nothing can be a stronger
proof than the custom mentioned by Moses, of exposing to public view the tokens
of a bride's virginity on the morning after her wedding night, to which we
shall only add, that the price demanded by Saul for his daughter, when he gave
her to David in marriage; a price the most highly characteristic of the
indelicate manners of the times. The G^eeks themselves, who considered all the
rest of the world as barbarians, were in delicacy hardly a few ^egrees above
the in^tances just now mentioned; one can scarcely determine whether the
comedies of Aristophanes or of Euripides are the most shocking to a modest ear.
Martial, and even Horace, among the Romans were scarcely less indelicate, but
they flourished at Rome during these periods when false refinement of manners
had banished delicacy as a silly and unprofitable virtue, and when even law was
so repugnant to decency, that a women taken in adultery was prostituted in the
public street to all comers, who were invited by the ringing of a bell to the
abominable ceremony.

After the subversion of the Roman Empire, there arose among the barbarians an
institution, which, as it was in a great measure directed to the defense and
protection of women, created in them a dignity and delicacy unknown to any
other age or people, and which perhaps will ever remain unparalleled in the
history of mankind, unless chivalry or some similar institution be again
revived; but as chivalry began to decline, delicacy declined also along with
it, till at last both sexes assumed a rudeness of manners and of dress, which
for several centuries disgraced Europe, and required a series of ages and of
efforts to rub off and polish to any decent degree of refinement.

Such as we have now seen was the state of delicacy among the ancients, and
among the inhabitants of Europe; when we leave Europe, and colonies settled by
Europeans, we find it a virtue in most other places hardly taken notice of or
cultivated; we shall therefore turn our attention from delicacy, which we
consider only as an out-work to chastity, and make a few observations on
chastity itself. But as we have already shown the state and situation of this
virtue among the greater part both of the ancients and moderns, we shall not
again enter upon that subject, but confine ourselves to pointing out the
various methods which in diverse places and periods have been, and still are
made use of to preserve, encourage, and defend that virtue.

Such has always been the constitution of human nature, and mode of governing,
that the legislators of every country, except China, have constantly held out
terrors to hinder from the commission of vice, but seldom or never offered
rewards for the practice of virtue; the reason may be, that the vicious are few
in number, and punishments cheap; whereas the virtuous are many, and premiums
so costly, that no government could afford to bestow a reward on each of them;
and, besides the moral virtues, not only reward us themselves with peace of
mind in this world; but have annexed to them the promises of a still more ample
reward in that which is to come. When we consider these reasons, it is not
surprising to find that chastity, upon which all polished states have set the
hig^est value, has never been encouraged by any positive institution in its
favor; while its opposite vice has, by every well regulated government, been
branded with a greater or less degree of infamy, according to the ideas which
such government had, of the duties of religion and morality* and to the love
which it entertained of rectitude and order. Wherever good laws are
established, tending to enforce a decent propriety of manners, every woman, who
deviates from chastity, forfeits almost entirely the society of her own sex,
and of the most worthy and regular part of ours; and, what is of infinitely
greater consequence, she forfeits almost all chance of entering into that
state, which women have so many natural, as well as political reasons, to
determine them to wish for more than the men; and if she has any small degree
of chance left of entering into it, she must do it with a partner below her
rank and station in life; and even thus matched, she is liable to have the
follies and frailties of her former conduct thrown up to her on every occasion,
which gives birth even to the slightest matrimonial difference.

These and others of the same nature, are the punishments which every wise
legislature has inflicted on the breach of chastity in unmarried women. We
shall see afterward, that almost every people, whether civilized or savage,
have treated this crime in married women with much greater severity; subjecting
them not only to several kinds of public shame and indignity, but even to a
variety of corporal, and often to capital punishments. But as every severity
and every punishment, has been found too weak to prevail against the vice of
incontinence; especially among people of soft and voluptuous manners, under the
influence of a warm sun, and professing a religion, which lays no restraint
upon the passions; the Easterns, where these causes most powerfully operate,
have time immemorial endeavored to secure the chastity of their women, by
eunuchs and confinement.

At what period, or in what part of the world, some of the males of our species
were first emasculated, in order to qualify them for guarding the objects of
pleasures of the rest, is not perfectly known. The institution of a custom so
barbarously unnatural, has, by some, been attributed to the infamous Semiramis;
but we are of opinion, that it was more likely to originate from the men than
the women; and, besides, we have reason to believe, that it was invented long
before the time of Semiramis; for Moses, in his code of legislation, expressly
prohibits eunuchs from entering into the congregation; and Manetho says, that
the father of Sesostris, who lived near two hundred years before Moses, was
assassinated by his eunuchs. In the days of Samuel, it seems to have been a
general custom for the kings of the nations, who lived in the neighborhood of
the Israelites, to have eunuchs; for we find this prophet, among the other
reasons that he made use of to dissuade his people from choosing a king, telling
them, that he would take their ennuchs to guard his women. The nature of our
undertaking does not permit us to enquire, how it was first discovered that
emasculation would fit men for the despicable employments to which such
mutilated beings have generally been destined: it is sufficient for us to
observe, that all the voluptuous nations of the East have constantly considered
such beings, as so envious of the joys, which themselves were incapable of
tasting, that they would exert every power to hinder others from tasting them
also; and hence have fixed upon them as the most proper guardians of female
chastity: nor has their choice been improperly made; for these wretches, losing
every tender feeling for the other sex, along with the power of enjoying them,
to ingratiate themselves with their jealous masters, not only debar them from
every species of pleasure, under pretense of hindering them from that which is
unlawful; but treat them too often with the utmost severity.

While the empires and kingdoms of the East have been the most unsettled, and
subject to the most frequent and s^dden revolutions, the manners and customs,
like the mountains and rocks of the country, have been, time immemorial,
permanent and unchangeable; and, at this day, exhibit nearly the same
appearance that they did in the patriarchal ages; nor have these customs in any
thing remained more fixed and unalterable, than in the use of eunuchs: every
Eastern potentate, and every other person who can defray the expense, employs a
number of those ^retches to superintend his seraglio, and guard the chastity of
his women; not only from every rude invader, but also from the effects of
female association and intrigue: nor need we wonder at this, when we consider
that into the women of this country are instilled no virtuous principles to
enable them to defend themselves; that the men are taught by fashion and
prompted by restraint to attack them as often as they have opportunity; that
the women may therefore be considered in the same situation with regard to the
men, as the defenseless animals of the field are to the beasts of prey which
prowl around them; and that on these accounts, while the present constitution
of the country remains unaltered, to guard the sex by this species of neutral
beings, may not be so unnecessary as we in this country are apt to consider it.

There is in the human mind, a reluctance at sharing with another what we think
necessary for ourselves, or what we greatly love and admire; hence, perhaps,
arose the custom of fencing a field round with a ditch or a wall; and hence
also, that of securing women by confinement, and guarding them by eunuchs. At
what period of the world, or in what part of it, women were first put under
confinement, is uncertain; we have, however, some reasons to believe, they were
so used among the Philistines as early as the patriarchal ages; and even among
the patriarchs themselves, we are told that the women had apartments in the
back parts of the tents, into which it would seem that the men, or at least
strangers, (...) allowed to enter, and to which the women (...) when any
stranger approached. But though th^^e might be some restraint upon the sex in
these ages, it did certainly not amount to absolute confinement; for we are
informed, that all ranks and conditions of them were employed in the fields,
and went out of the cities in the evenings to draw water; and though separate
apartments were contrived in the back parts of the tents for the women, as we
have no accounts of their being confined to them, it is probable, that they
served rather as retreats for decency, than as places of imprisonment.

Such was the state of women among the Israelites; nor do they seem to have
wanted their liberty at this time among the Egyptians, as appears from the
story of the wife of Potiphar; and in a subsequent period from that of
Pharaoh's daughter, who was going with her train of attending nymphs to bathe
in the Nile, when she found Moses among the reeds.

Were we to reason from principles only, on the origin of female confinement,
we would most naturally derive it from jealousy; if we reason from facts, it
may have arisen from experience of the little security there was for the
chastity of a weak and helpless woman, in the ages of rudeness and lawless
barbarity; thus many are of opinion, that the rape of Jacob's daughter by the
Sechemites induced that patriarch to cause all his own women and those of his
dependents to be shut up, lest another accident of the same nature should befall
any of them. The rapes of Io, and of Proserpine, gave birth perhaps to the
confinement of women among the Greeks, and similar misfortunes might be
followed by similar consequences among other nations. But whether the
confinement of women originated from the rape of Dinah, we pretend not to
determine; of this, however, we are certain, that in length of time it became a
custom among the Jews as well as their neighbors. King David had his wives
confined; for we are told that they went up to the housetop to see him march
out against his son Absalom, which at this day is all the liberty allowed the
women of the East, when they wish to be indulged with the sight of any public
procession or show.

But though the women of Kings were at this period generally shut up, it would
seem that those of private persons enjoyed more liberty; for the same David
sent and brought the wife of Uriah to his house, which all the authority with
which he was invested could not have done without a tumult, had she been as
strictly guarded, and the persons of women as sacred and inviolable as they are
now in the East. When we come to the history of Solomon, we have plain accounts
of a seraglio for the confinement of his women; and in that of Ahasuerus, king
of Persia, we learn that his seraglio was constituted not only on a plan of the
severest confinement, but also of the most voluptuous sensuality. It would be
needless to trace this custom downward to later periods, as it is well known
that it became the common practice of almost all nations to the time of the
Romans, who perhaps, were the first people who totally discarded it.

CHAPTER XVII. The same Subject continued.
THE same causes which at first introduced particular manners and customs, are
not always the only ones which continue or augment them; thus though seraglios
and harams for the confinement of women probably originated from jealousy, or
from the danger of exposing weak and defenseless beauty to men heated with lust
and unrestrained by law, yet they soon after became an article of luxury and
osentation. The Asiatic monarchs and grandees vied with each other in having
the most numerous and beautiful set of women, which conferred upon their master
a luster and dignity of the same nature as in modern times we suppose we obtain
by a splendid equipage and a numerous retinue; but the Asiatics carried this
matter still farther, and not content with having such a number of women in
their possession, they made use of them to add to the long list of
high-sounding titles, of which the Easterns are so exceedingly fond. The king
of Bisnagar among the rest of his pompous titles, is styled the husband of a
thousand wives. In this country where we are accustomed to make a show and
parade of every thing which we imagine gives a luster to our rank, or an
addition to our fame, we cannot conceive what dignity an Eastern can derive
from a number of beauties, while they are secluded from every mortal eye but
his own; it is not, however, the displaying of these in all their charms that
gives him this dignity; it is only necessary to have it known that they are in
his seraglio, as it is in this country not requisite that a miser should show
his store to acquire the reputation of being rich, but only that it be known
that he has it in his possession.

In justification of seraglios and harams it has been by some alleged, that
they are not so much places of confinement as of voluntary retreat from the
rudeness and indecorum of the men; but those who argue in this manner must be
but ill acquainted with the history of the East, and less with human nature;
for we cannot suppose it consistent with those ideas and feelings with which we
are endowed, that women should voluntarily shut up and seclude themselves from
all the pleasures of liberty, and of social life, from the hope and joy of
public admiration, without any other recompense than a small share of the
favors of one man. Every human being has by nature an equal right to personal
liberty, and none seem more tenacious of this right than the rude and
uncultivated; it is probable, therefore, that the first efforts to confine
women were resisted with all their strength and cunning; but the struggle
proving ineffectual, custom at last stamped the sanction of justice upon what
was at first only an illegal exertion of power; and now the sex, almost over
half the world, tamely submit to be imprisoned like criminals, only because
force and custom have barbarously combined against their liberty.

If jealousy was the original source of female confinement, when a wife really
gave her husband cause to be jealous, he had at least a tolerable pretense for
shutting her up; but to imprison wives in general, because some of them were
found unfaithful, or young women in general, because upon some few individuals
a rape had been committed, was a strange and unlawful exertion of power. The
learned Montesquieu, in endeavoring to justify this exertion, says, That such
is the force of climate in subliming the passions to an ungovernable height in
countries where women are confined, that were they allowed their liberty, the
attack upon them would always be certain, and the resistance nothing. Allowing
to this reasoning all its force, does not justice demand that the attacker
rather than the attacked should be confined? But we venture to affirm, though
in contradiction to so celebrated a genius, that such reasoning is not founded
on nature; for this so much dreaded attack, and this feeble resistance, are
neither of them the effect of climate only, but of restraint also, and would
take place nearly in the same manner in Lapland as in Asia, were the sexes
there as carefully kept asunder, and were there no other security for virtue
but want of opportunity to be vicious; for such plainly is the disposition of
human nature, that the greater obstacles thrown in the way of gratification,
the greater are the efforts to overcome them; hence a woman who is masked or
veiled more strongly attracts our attention, than one who is clothed in the
ordinary manner, because, in the former case, we only see a small part of her
charms, and creative fancy forms the most extravagant idea of all that is hid:
hence, also men and women perpetually kept asunder, are for ever brooding over
the joys which they would have tasted in the company of each other, and on this
account, a man who perhaps in his whole life never has an opportunity of being
alone with one of the other sex, if such an opportunity should perchance
happen, never fails to make use of it by attacking her virtue; whereas were he
to have frequent opportunities of this nature, his fancy would be less heated,
he would set less value upon them, and use them with more moderation. These
inferences are much strengthened by the following facts: a native of China, who
lately resided some years in England, acknowledged, that, for some time after
he arrived here, he had much difficulty in restraining himself from attacking
every woman with whom he was left alone; and a Nun, who had esaped from a
convent, imagined that every man who had an opportunity would assault her
virtue, and though she had no inclination to have yielded, even sometimes felt
a secret chagrin that she was disappointed.

In civilized nations, where the principles of morality are cultivated, when a
mutual compact has been entered into between a man and a woman to abide by each
other, the faith of this woman, and the sense of the obligation she has laid
herself under, are considered as the securities of her virtue, without the use
of any restrictive methods. This compact, however, is commonly a mutual one;
whereas in countries where women are confined, the compact entered into between
husband and wife, if it can be called a compact, is only an act of power on the
part of the husband and parents of the bride, and of passive obedience on her
part. The husband, therefore, has no great reason to expect that she will pay
the same regard to this compact, as if it had been made by the voluntary
agreement of all parties; sensible on this account, that her mind may be
differently disposed of from her body, he secures the latter by perpetual
confinement; which is all he can do. But this mode of treating women is the
vilest indignity that can be offered to human beings, as it presupposes them
neither endowed with virtue nor free agency, and places them in the same point
of view with an unoccupied field, which yields itself indifferently to the
possession of any one, who will be at the pains to secure and fence it. It
likewise presupposes the men to be with regard to the women, what they are to
the wild b^asts of the field, absolutely masters of every one whom they can lay
hold of and detain in their custody. Idea^ which we reprobate as inconsistent
with human nature, when not warped by custom, or led astray by art.

It is natural to imagine, that we love and admire, and what, on these
accounts, we cannot suffer to see in the company of others, we should be as
much as possible in company with ourselves; but the reverse is the case with
the Asiatics; though they will not allow their women the company of other men,
they are seldom with them themselves: such conduct is, doubtless, one of those
inconsistencies which too frequently mark the character of man; nor is it less
inconsistent, that one of the principal enjoyments of the paradise promised by
Mahomet, should consist in the company of beautiful women; while, in this
world, the mussulmen scarcely ever keep any company with the sex. But we are to
consider, that where women are, from their infancy, confined as prisoners, they
must be ignorant almost of every thing* and, consequently, but illy qualified
for the pleasures of conversation and of company; and hence they are never
treated as rational companions, nor as equals; but as inferiors and children.
The Persian women, according to Sir John Chardin, are not even consulted in the
choice of their own clothes, nor in the propriety of their having new ones; but
are furnished with such as are thought necessary for them, in the same manner
as we treat children.

In Turkey, Persia, and several other parts of Asia and Africa, the monarchs,
having an absolute power, generally take from their subjects by force, such
women as they find handsome, without any regard to their rank, or their being
married or single. The Grand Signior has a tribute of young girls annually paid
to him by the Greeks, and some other of his tributary provinces; these are
placed in apartments of the palace, which are separated from all intercourse
with the rest, and are called the Seraglio; where they are guarded in the
strictest manner by eunuchs. The gardens of this seraglio, which are fenced
with high walls, and planted with rows of trees, to obstruct the sight, are the
utmost limits to which they are allowed to go; except when some of them are
carried along with their master, if he makes any excursion, or goes to war
against an enemy; in which case, they are placed in close machines, on the
backs of camels, and as much hid as if in the inmost recesses of the seraglio.

Besides the seraglio of the sultan, private persons have apartments in their
houses, where they confine their women, called Harams. The Haram is in Turkey,
as it was in ancient Greece; always in the back part of the house, and all the
windows of it look into the garden. The apartments of the ladies, when the
husband can afford it, are always elegantly furnished after their manner; and
they want nothing to make life comfortable but society: they have numbers of
beautiful female slav^s to attend them, who divert them with vocal and
instrumental music, dancing, and other amusements. (...) these Harams, women
are not so closely confined as in the seraglio; they are sometimes suffered to
go out; but then they must always be veiled and covered from head to foot with
a long robe, called a forigee; which no woman of any rank is allowed to appear
in the street without; and which is so exactly alike in all, that it is
absolutely impossible to distinguish the features or person of one woman from
another. The most jealous husband cannot know even his own wife; and no man
dare touch, or follow a woman in the street; so that the confinement of the
women at Constantinople is not so rigid as some of our travelers would make us
believe.

In a variety of parts of the Mogul empire, when the women are carried abroad,
they are put into a kind of machine, like a chariot, and placed on the backs of
camels, or in covered sedan chairs, and surrounded by a guard of eunuchs, and
armed men, in such a manner, that a stranger would rather suppose the cavalcade
to be carrying some desperate villain to execution, than employed to prevent
the intrigues or escape of a defenseless woman. At home, the sex are covered
with gauze veils, which they dare not take off in the presence of any man,
except their husband, or some near relation. Over the greatest part of Asia,
and in some places of Africa, women are guarded by eunuchs, made incapable of
violating their chastity. In Spain, where the natives are the descendants of
the Africans, and whose jealousy is not less strong than that of their
ancestors, they, for many centuries, made use of padlocks to secur^ the
chastity of their women* but finding these ineffectual, they frequently had
recourse to old women, called Gouvernantes. It had been discovered, that men
deprived of their virility, did not sometimes guard female virtue so strictly,
as to be incapable of bring bribed to allow another a taste of those pleasures
they themselves were incapable of enjoying. The Spaniards, sensible of this,
imagined, that vindictive old women were more likely to be incorruptible; as
envy would stimulate them to prevent the young from enjoying those pleasures,
which they themselves had no longer any chance for; but all powerful gold soon
overcame even this obstacle; and the Spaniards, at present, seem to give up all
restrictive methods, and to trust the virtue of their women to good principles,
instead of rigor and hard usage.

Where there is no public virtue to confide in, besides the methods of Duennas,
locks, eunuchs, and confinement, several others have been, and still are,
practiced in different countries, to preserve female chastity. Mr. More relates
a singular method used for this purpose in the interior parts of Africa; it is
a figure to which they give the name of Mumbo Jumbo, in the shape of a man, and
dressed in a long coat, made of the bark of a tree, and on its head a large
tuft of straw: into this figure, which is usually about nine feet high, a man
is introduced, who makes it walk along, speak what he pleases, or make such a
horrid and frightful noise, as he thinks will best answer his purpose. This
figure is kept carefully concealed by the men, and never comes abroad but in
the night, when they want to settle some dispute with, or frighten the women
into chastity and obedience. They persuade the women that it knows every thing;
they refer every thing to its decision, and it always decides in favor of the
men; but this is not all, it has a power of inflicting punishments on female
delinquents, which it frequently does, by ordering them to be whipped. They are
taught to believe, that it is particularly offended with them when they violate
their chastity; a crime which it will certainly discover, and as certainly
punish. As soon as they hear it coming, they generally run away and hide
themselves; but are obliged by their husbands to return, though in fear and
trembling, to its presence, and to do or suffer whatever it pleases to order
them. How despicable must the understanding of these women be, if they are
really thus deceived by so bungling a trick.

In almost all countries, where female chastity has been an object much
regarded, some methods have been contrived to awaken the fears of the
incontinent, as well as to flatter and reward the hopes of those who persevered
in virtue; even the Jewish legislator, not thinking that the positive laws he
had enacted against unchastity, and the punishments he had annexed to them,
were fully strong to overcome every vicious inclination, instituted a mode of
alarming their fears of a discovery, even when such discovery was above the
power of mortal agency: this was the waters of jealousy, which a husband, who
suspected the fidelity of his wife, obliged her, with some solemn ceremonies,
to drink; and which she firmly believed would make her belly to swell and her
thigh to rot, if she was guilty. When such was her belief, and when the husband
had it constantly in his power to put her to the dreadful trial, a barrier was
thereby formed against unchastity, stronger than all the other laws human and
divine; and yet not so strong, but it was frequently by these daring women
overleaped and disregarded.

Where jealousy is the ruling passion, and the men have no ideas that the
incontinence of their women can be restrained by principle, by the hope of
reward or the fear of punishment; and where the unsettled manner in which they
live, does not allow them an opportunity of putting the sex under confinement;
they practice other methods of a most despicable and odious nature, to secure
the body, regardless perhaps how much the mind be contaminated. As soon as a
female child is born, they unite by a kind of suture those parts which nature
has separated, leaving just space enough for the natural discharges; as the
child grows, the parts adhere so closely, that at marriage they are obliged to
be separated by an incision. Sometimes they only make use of a ring, and the
married women as well as the virgins are subject to this outrage; with this
difference only, that the ring worn by the young women cannot be taken off,
whereas that of the married women has a kind of padlock, of which the husband
keeps the key. This custom obtains almost in every part of Arabia, but is most
generally practiced in that part of it known by the name of Petraea. The
ancient Germans, and several other northern nations, sensible that chastity was
most likely to be preserved inviolate by a decency of behavior between the two
sexes; and supposing that this decency could not be properly maintained where
familiarity was allowed, prohibited the men even from touching the women, and
laid a fine upon them according to the part touched; and in Great Britain, we
find that there were laws of this nature even so late as the ninth century.

It is not a little curious to survey the various methods made use of in
different parts of the world to accomplish the same end. In Poland, the
chastity of young girls is endeavored to be secured by a contrivance hardly
less singular, though not so humiliating as some of those we have now
mentioned: most of the young women belonging to the peasants have little bells
fastened to various parts of their clothes, to give notice to their mothers and
other female gurdians where they go, that those may always have it in their
power to detect them should they attempt to intrigue or secret themselves from
their view. Where women are no farther regarded than as the means of gratifying
animal love, methods like the forgoing may be necessary, or at least attended
with little mischief to society or the peace of individuals; but where they are
intended for the more exalted purposes of being friends and companions, they
should be managed in a very different manner. Locks, spies, and bodily
restrictions then become highly improper, as they tend only to debase their
minds, corrupt their morals, and render them despicable; circumstances which
ought to be guarded against with the utmost attention, as, where the mind is
debased and contaminated, the body is not worth the trouble of preserving.

In all countries where the religion of Rome is established, chastity, and
every female virtue which has any relation to it, are endeavored to be
preserved by the artifice of auricular confession; the institutors of which
probably imagined, that unchastity was a crime which female delicacy would
never allow any woman to divulge; and as damnation was infallibly annexed to
the concealing any crime from the father confessor, it was consequently a crime
which no woman would ever commit. But however well contrived this plan may
appear, experience has fully demonstrated its futility, and that the professors
of the catholic religion, notwithstanding this additional impediment in the way
of incontinence, are in that respect nearly on a footing with the rest of their
neighbors, who have no such stumbling block in their way.

This institution of auricular confession, in the light which we have just now
considered it, lays an obstacle in the way of unchastity, by exposing it to
public shame, which in all civilized countries is one of the strongest passions
which mark the female character. But women are now become too cunning to fall
into the snare; and while their actions of this kind remain private, it is
presumable they seldom confess them. But as the exposure to public shame is one
of the most powerful methods of laying hold of the minds of the sex, the laws
of society, as well as those of religious institutions, have availed themselves
of it, and made it, among every polished people, one of the severest parts of
the punishment to which the female delinquent, who has departed from the path
of rectitude, is exposed; and consequently one of the great^^^ obstacles which
can be thrown in the road to unchastity. This appears from the conduct of the
women of Iceland, when the public shame attending incontinency was suspended on
the following occasion. In the year one thousand seven hundred and seven, a
great part of the inhabitants of Iceland having died of a contagious distemper,
the king of Denmark, in order to repeople the country in a more expeditious
manner than the common rules of procreation admit^ed of* made a law,
authorizing all young women to have each six bastards, without being exposed to
any shame, or suffering the loss of reputation. This succeeded beyond the
expectation of the monarch; and the young women employed themselves so
sedulously in the affair of population, that, in a few years, it was thought
necessary to abrogate the law, lest the country should be overstocked with
inhabitants, and that sense of shame annexed to unchastity, so much obliterated
from the female breast, that neither law nor custom would be able afterward to
revive it. Were it not almost self-evident to every one, that this public shame
attending female indiscretion, is one of the strongest motives to secure their
chastity, we might prove it more fully from other circumstances. Nothing can be
more certain, than that in those countries where no shame is fixed to any
action, there is no public chastity; and that this virtue flourishes the most,
where its contrary vices are branded with the very greatest degree of infamy.

But this public shame is only one of the many methods which we in this country
make use of to secure the chastity of the sex. We call religion and morality to
our aid; religion holds out in the one hand rewards of the most glorious
nature, and punishments not less dreadful in the other. Morality points out how
much the order, peace, and good government of society are influenced by female
chastity; and how each of them are unhinged and destroyed by incontinence.
Honor, likewise, comes in as an auxiliary, and holds up to their view the
luster and reputation which themselves and their families derive from their
decency and regulatity of conduct, and the stain and infamy which they bring
upon both by lewdness and debauchery. Thus terrified by shame, by the loss of
society, and by the forfeiting all chance of a husband suitable to their rank,
and encouraged by religion, by morality, and honor, we trust such women as
have arrived at the years of discretion to themselves, and experience fully
demonstrates, that we place not our trust improperly; and that those methods
are far more prevalent than locks, bars, eunuchs, and all the other barbarous
expedients that have been fallen upon, by nations who have not attained to
sensibility enough to clap the padlock on the female mind instead of the body.
But though we suffer women of experience to be the guardians of their own
virtue, over the young and the giddy who have not attained to that degree of
reason requisite for governing their passions, nor to that experience
sufficient to direct them in the choice of a husband, custom has placed
mothers, and other female relations, who by time and observation have acquired
more knowledge of the world, whereby they are enabled to steer their young
pupils with safety over the dangerous rocks of youthful passion and
inexperience.

The inhabitants of the southern and northern regions of the globe are in
nothing more distinguishable from each other than the different methods of
securing the chastity of their women. In the south, while every possible
restriction is laid on the body, they have hardly made use of one single
precept to bind the mind. In the north, while they have laid every possible
restriction on the mind, the body is left entirely at liberty; and it is
remarkable, that none of the religious systems of the south either offer
rewards to encourage female chastity, or threaten punishments to deter them
from incontinence. -- While almost every religious system of the north has
issued the most positive precepts against the indiscretion of the sex, and to a
disobedience of these precepts annexed the most dreadful punishment; even
Mahomedism, which is a compound of the religions of both hemispheres, terrifies
not the female sinner with hell, or any future state where she shall suffer for
her levities; all that she has to fear on this head, is the displeasure and
correction of her husband. While in the Edda, or sacred records of the ancient
Scandinavians, future punishments of the most tremendous nature are held over
the head of the delinquent, there is a place, says that book, remote from the
sun, the gates of which face the north; poison rains there through a thousand
openings; this place is all composed of the carcases of serpents. There run
certain torrents, in which are plunged the bodies of the perjurers, assassins,
and those who seduce married women. A black-winged dragon flies incessantly
round, and devours the bodies of the wretched who are there imprisoned. So far
their religion; the laws of almost all the northerns constantly breathed the
same spirit, and not satisfied that their women should refrain from real
unchastity only, they would not even allow of any thing that had the slightest
appearance of indecorum, or that might raise improper ideas in the mind.

It would be an endless task to enumerate the laws which in every
well-regulated country have the same tendency; suffice it to say, that in all
such, every violent attempt on the virtue of women is punishable either by
death, corporal punishment, or loss of money. It would be needless, we presume,
to enumerate to our fair readers, the various interdictions against unchastity
almost every where to be met with in the rules of the Christian religion,
interdictions which none of them, we hope, are unacquainted with, and to which
few only do not pay a proper regard, both from duty and inclination. When we
therefore consider that almost all laws human and divine have so strongly
inculcated this virtue, when the ingenuity of every nation has been so strongly
exerted in preserving it, we hope we need not join our feeble efforts in
recommending it to our countrymen in particular, and to the sex in general, as
the greatest ornament of their character.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of the various opinions entertained by different Nations
concerning Women.
IN every age and country, have started up men distinguished by the
singularity, and not unfrequently by the absurdity, of their opinions. The
present times have given birth to some philosophers, who have degraded human
nature to the lowest pitch of insipidity, and placed it below the birds of the
air and the beasts of the field. According to them, man was at first endowed
with nothing but an imitative faculty, and was obliged to employ it in learning
articulate sounds, and afterward music from the birds, industry from the ants
and bees, architecture from the beaver, and almost all the other arts from some
of the animals which he saw at work around him. By which scheme they have dropped
a man at first from the hands of his Creator, by far the most unfinished of all
his works; and have gradually traced his advancement to the exalted rank which
he at present holds in the scale of beings, through a long series of exertions
and improvements of his own. -- What an extraordinary animal has their fancy
thus formed? while the condition of all the other animals is so stationary,
that they remain at this day nearly the same as at the creation, they have
given to man a power of forming his own intellectual powers, and of fabricating
his own fortunes.

When such are the general ideas that some have entertained of our species, and
when such, as we sometimes see it, is the pride and arrogance of male nature,
we need not wonder at the mean and despicable opinions we shall find in the
prosecution of this subject, entertained of a sex, whom satirical witlings and
morose philosophers have employed every talent to vilify and abuse.

The human genus has, with no small degree of probability, been divided by
naturalists into several distinct species, each marked with corporal
differences, which could hardly arise from custom or from climate, and with
intellectual powers scarcely less indicative of this division than the marks of
their bodies. These species, like those of most other animals are again divided
into sexes, with different sentiments and faculties, adapted to the different
purposes for which they were intended. So far the distinctions are plain; but
although we find in general through the whole of animated nature the males of
every species endowed with a degree of bodily strength, superior to the
females, yet we have no plain indication of any superiority conferred upon
these males in the powers, faculties, and instincts with which their minds are
furnished. Among the brute animals we do not recollect that any one has been
hardy enough to contend for this male superiority; among human beings, however,
it has been, and is still so strongly contended for, that we shall give a short
view of this contention, as the history of one of the most material
peculiarities of opinion that has been entertained concerning the sex.

Whether this supposed superiority is, in civil life, owing to any arrogance
inherent in male nature, or to the pride of more numerous acquisitions, we
shall not at present examine; in savage life we may account for it upon another
principle. We have already seen, that among the rudest savages, and in the
earlier ages of antiquity, when the bulk of mankind were only a few degrees
removed from that state, that bodily strength was the only thing held in
particular estimation; and women having rather a less portion of this than men,
were on that account never so much esteemed, nor rated at so high a value from
the body it was easy to make a transition to the mind, and suppose its powers
less extensible, because for want of opportunities they were less extended,
hence an inferiority, which arose only from circumstances, was supposed to have
arisen from nature, and the sex were accordingly treated as beings of an
inferior order. But in savage life the difference of bodily strength between
the two sexes is less visible than in civil life. Captain Wallis informs us
that Obereah, queen of Otaheite, lifted him over a marsh, when she gallanted
him to her house, with as much ease as he could have done a little girl; and it
is probable that there is still less difference in the faculties of the mind,
and if there is any, it arises not so much from nature as from want of exertion.

Whether the idea of female inferiority arose solely from the causes we have
now mentioned is not altogether certain, but from whatever source it arose, we
have the most undoubted proofs of its being so widely disseminated, that except
among the Egyptians, and a few other nations which borrowed their customs and
culture from Egypt, it was from the most remote antiquity firmly established
among every people; for women were almost by all the ancients bought and sold,
by some of them borrowed, lent, or given away at pleasure, and constantly
treated as the private property of the men; circumstances which could not have
happened had not the ideas entertained of them given rise to such indignant
treatment.

This indignant treatment of the females of our own species is a singularity of
behavior peculiar to man and has not originated from any thing he could
observe around him; for the males of the brute animals do not, so far as we can
discover, ever pretend to govern, direct, or dispose of their females; nor,
unless in the strength of their bodies, can we discern that they are any way
superior to them. The female of those animals that hunt for prey, are as
segacious in discovering and catching it as the males. The mare and the
greyhound bitch are as swift as the horse or the dog, of their species. The
females of the feathered kind seem to be universally more intelligent than the
males, particularly in rearing and taking care of their young. Hence it
appears, that we cannot have learned from analogy to consider women as so much
our inferiors; and if we examine our claim of superiority with impartiality, we
shall perhaps find, that unless with respect to the corporeal powers it is but
ill-founded. But partiality and self-love in this examination generally give a
bias to our judgments, and a fondness for the pursuits and studies in which we
are engaged makes us under-value all such as are directed to different ends and
purposes, though in themselves not less useful: thus men set the greatest value
upon the martial abilities which distinguish them in the field, or upon the
literary ones which make them conspicuous as statesmen and orators, while they
hardly ever consider the excellence of female sprightliness and vivacity,
qualities which diffuse gaiety and cheerfulness around them; nor those pains
which the sex patiently suffer, and powers they exert, in raising up a
generation to succeed us when we shall be no more. Are these less useful than
the desolating arts of war, or even than the speculations of the statesman and
improvements of the philosopher; or are the women less distinguished in them
than the men are in the other?

But let us take a still clearer view of the matter, and we shall find that
this boasted pre-eminence of the men is at least as much the work of art as of
nature, and that women in those savage states, where both sexes are alike
unadorned by culture, are, perhaps, not at all inferior in mind to the other
sex, and even scarcely inferior to them in strength of body. This subject is,
however, of the most difficult nature; to investigate with precision the powers
and propensities of women, it is necessary to be a woman; to investigate those
of men, it is necessary to be a man; to compare them impartially, to be
something different from either.

In order, however, to obtain the most clear and comprehensive view of the
corporeal and mental difference of the two sexes that our faculties will admit
of, we shall begin by considering them in those states where they approach the
nearest to nature. In such states, the difference is much less than in civil
society, where, nourished by art, and formed by culture, both sexes assume
appearances which are entirely the offspring of that culture; and especially
the men, upon whom a far greater share of it is bestowed. -- And in such states
we find the female endowed with the same patient endurance of hunger, thirst,
cold, and fatigue, as the male; inured from their infancy to toil, hardship,
and an inclement sky, their bodies acquire nearly the same hard and robust
appearance, and they are capable of efforts nearly as great as the men; nor are
the faculties of their minds visibly different. Hunting and fishing are the
chief employment of the men, and in these arts, when we consider the materials
they have to work with, we cannot help owning that they show no despicable
share of ingenuity; proofs of which are every where to be met with among them;
such proofs, are the fishing-nets that our late discoverers found they employed
in the South Sea, which were much larger and better contrived than any other
hitherto made in Europe. Such are fish-hooks which they make of shells and
other materials, which in the hand of an European artist, would be useless; and
such are the various methods of decoying and snaring wild beasts. Proofs of
their genius may likewise be drawn from the manner in which they discover on
the ground the tracks of these wild beasts, or of their enemies whom they are
pursuing; from their sagacity in finding their way across long and pathless
deserts, covered with wood, and from a variety of other circumstances: but this
ingenuity extends itself only to the narrow circle of hunting, fishing, and
war, beyond which their ideas have hardly ever reached; in many places not even
so far as to shelter themselves from the weather by clothes and by houses, or
to save any of the provisions of a present hour, for a time of future scarcity.

Such are men in savage life. In considering women, we shall see, that in the
province to which they are confined, they at least equal their men in art and
ingenuity. In some countries they have carried the art of dyeing certain
colors to no inconsiderable degree of perfection; in others, that of making
trinkets and ornaments of such materials as in Europe we could not ^^rn to any
possible use; and their method of bringing up children is almost every where
more agreeable to nature, and consequently preferable to that of the more
polished nations; but here their progress is at an end; and like the men, their
little span of knowledge and invention is confined within a narrow circle,
which from the beginning of time, like the sea, has had its 'hitherto shall
thou come, but no farther.'

On comparing the aggregate of the corporeal and intellectual powers of the two
sexes in savage life, the difference will appear much less than it generally
does on a superficial view. Though in the hunting, fishing, and warlike
excursions of the men, there appears a considerable share of art and ingenuity;
yet these arts have among them been time immemorial in a stationary condition,
and time immemorial have also been taught by fathers to their sons, without the
sons ever having deviated from the road chalked out by their fathers, or
thinking of adding any improvements to what they perhaps considered as already
perfect. Though, in the dyeing and making of trinkets as practiced by the
women, there is also an appearance of art, we have not the least doubt, that
they are rather customary operations, which they have for many ages performed
without the smallest improvement or variation, this we the more readily
believe, when we consider, that in many places the domestic employments and
economy of savages, is nearly the same as in the patriarchal ages.

When, from savage life, we proceed to consider the share that each sex has had
in the progress of those improvements, which lead to civilization, it appears,
that each, in its proper sphere, has contributed nearly, in an equal
proportion, to this great and valuable purpose. The art of spinning, one of the
most useful that ever was invented, is, by all antiquity, ascribed to women:
the Egyptians give the honor of it to (...)* the Chinese, to the consort of
their (...) This, and the art of sewing, an art hardly less necessary, the
fables and traditions of almost all nations ascribe to the fair sex. The
Lydians ascribed them to Arachne; the Greeks to Minerva; the ancient Peruvians
to Mama-Oella, wife to Manco-capac, their first sovereign; and the Romans gave
the invention, not only of spinning and sewing, but also of weaving, to their
women. Such, and perhaps many many others of a similar nature, were the
contributions of female genius toward the utility and convenience of life;
contributions which at least equal, if not rival, whatever has been done by the
boasted ingenuity of man.

When we survey the vast continent of Africa and America, where almost every
thing but fishing and hunting devolves on the women, we there find pasturage
and agriculture, with the other arts which contribute to the convenience of
life, in the same rude state in which they were in the days of Homer; the arts
and sciences hardly known, letters totally disregarded, and domestic economy
extremely rude and imperfect; and such, in general, is the conditions of all
countries, where almost every thing is left to the management of their women.
But even this is no absolute sign of their inferiority, or want of genius; they
are here taken out of that sphere, which nature marked out for them, and
introduced into another, to which she neither adapted their talents nor
abilities; and we may with equal reason blame the men for not improving the
arts of spinning and of nursing; as the women for not improving agriculture and
the other arts, to which male talents and abilities only are adapted.

When from these countries we turn toward Europe, where almost every thing is
(...) and directed by the men, a different scene presents itself: there we not
only find a great variety of improvements already far advanced, but also a
laudable spirit of emulation, and a thirst after new discoveries, universally
prevailing; and frequently producing fresh acquisitions to the stock of
knowledge, and to the conveniences of life. These, at first view, seem plain
indications, that the genius of men in leading the human species from an
uncultivated to a cultivated state, is superior to that of women; but, on more
deliberate consideration, they prove no more than that each sex has its
particular qualities, and is fitted by the Author of nature for accomplishing
different purposes.

What we have now advanced, points out to us the reason, why women have seldom
or never contributed to the improvement of the abstract sciences: but there is
still another reason; the sex are almost every where neglected in their
education, and in some degree slaves; and it is well known, that slavery throws
a damp on the genius, clouds the spirits, and takes more than half the worth
away from every human being. The history of every period, and of evey people,
presents us with some extraordinary women, who have soared above all these
disadvantages, and shone in all the different characters, which render men
eminent and conspicuous. Syria furnishes us with a Semiramis, Af^^ca with a
Zenobia; both famous for their heroism and skill in government. Greece and
Rome, wit^ many who set public examples of courage and forti^^de; Germany and
England have exhibited queens, whose talents in the field, and in the cabinet,
would have done honor to any sex; but it was reserved for Russia, in the
person of the present Empress, to join both talents, and to add to them, what
is still more noble, an inclination to favor the sciences, and restore the
natural rights of mankind; rights which almost every other sovereign has
endeavored to destroy. Upon the whole, we may conclude, that though in the
progress of mankind from ignorance to knowledge, women have, for the reasons
already assigned, seldom taken the lead. Yet they have not been backward to
follow the path to utility or improvement, when pointed out to them.

We have just now seen, that, in savage life, the sexual difference, as far as
it regards strength and activity of body, is not very considerable; as society
advances, this difference becomes more perceptible; and in countries the most
polished, is so conspicuous as to appear even to the slightest observer. In
such countries, the women are, in general, weak and delicate; but these
qualities are only the result of art, otherwise they would uniformly mark the
sex, however circumstanced; but as this is not the case, we may attribute them
to a sedentary life, a low abstemious diet, and exclusion from the fresh air;
but these causes do not stop here; their influence reachs farther, and is
productive of that laxity of the female fibers, and sensibility of nerves,
which while it gives birth to half their foibles, is the source also of many of
the finer feelings, for which we value and admire them; and of which bodies of
a firmer texture, and of stronger nerves, are entirely destitute. However
paradoxical this may appear to those who have not attended to the subject, we
scruple not to affirm, that such is the effect of want of exercise, confined
air, and low diet, that they will soon reduce, not only the robust body, but
the most resolute mind, to a set of weaknesses and feelings similar to these of
the most delicate and timorous female. -- This being granted, we lay it down as
a general rule, that to the difference of education, and the different manner
of living which the sexes have adop^^^, is owing a great part of their
corporeal difference, as well as the difference of their intellectual faculties
and feelings; and we persuade ourselves that nature, in forming the bodies and
minds of both sexes, has been nearly alike liberal to each; and that any
apparent difference in the exertions of the strength of the one, or the
reasonings of the other, are much more the work of art than of nature.

We know it is a generally established opinion, that in strength of mind, as
well as of body, men are greatly superior to women; an opinion into which we
have been led, by not duly considering the proper propensities and paths
chalked out to each by the Author of their nature, and the powers given them to
follow these paths and propensities. Men are endowed with boldness and courage,
and women are not; the reason is plain, these are beauties in our character, in
theirs they would be defects. Our genius often leads us to the great and the
arduous; theirs to the soft and the pleasing: we bend our thoughts to make life
convenient; they turn theirs to make it easy and agreeable. Would it be
difficult for women to acquire the endowments allotted to us by nature? It
would be as much so for us to acquire those peculiarly allotted to them. Are we
superior to them in what belongs to the male character? they are no less so to
us in what belongs to the female. But whether are male or female endowments
most useful in life? This we shall not pretend to determine; and till it be
determined, we cannot decide the claim which men or women have to superior
excellence. But to pursue this idea a little further; Would it not be highly
ridiculous to find fault with the snail, because she cannot run as fast as the
hare, or with the lamb, because he is not so bold as the lion? Would it not be
requiring from each an exertion of powers that nature had not given, and
deciding of their excellence, by comparing them to a wrong standard? would it
not appear rather ludicrous to say, that a man was endowed only with inferior
abilities, because he was not expert in the nursing of children, and practicing
the various effeminacies, which we reckon lovely in a woman? Would it be
reasonable to condemn him on these accounts? Just as reasonable is it, to
reckon women inferior to men, because their talents are in general not adapted
to tread the horrid path of war, nor to trace the mazes and intricacies of
science. Horace, who is by all allowed to have been an adept in the knowledge
of mankind, says, In vain do we endeavor to expel what nature has planted. And
we may add, In vain do we endeavor to cultivate what she has not planted.
Equally absurd is it to compare women to men, and to pronounce them inferior,
because they have not the same qualities, and in the same perfection.

We shall finish this subject, by observing, that if women are inferior to men,
they are the most so in nations highly polished and refined; there, in point of
bodily strength, for the reasons already assigned, they are certainly inferior;
and such is the influence of body upon mind, that to this laxity of body we may
fairly trace many, if not all the weaknesses of mind, which we are apt to
reckon blemishes in the female character. Those who have been constantly
blessed with a robust constitution, and a mind not delicately susceptible, may
laugh at this assertion as ridiculous; but to those, in whom accidental
weakness of body has given birth to nervous feelings, with which they were
never before acquainted, it will appear in another light. But there is a
further reason for the greater difference between the sexes in civil, than in
savage life, which is the difference of education; while the intellectual
powers of the males are gradually opened and expanded by culture, in a variety
of forms: those of females are commonly either left to nature, or, which is
worse, warped and biassed by frippery and folly, under the name of education.

This idea of the inferiority of female nature, has drawn after it several
others the most humiliating to the sex, as well as absurd and unreasonable.
Such is the pride of man, that wherever the doctrine of immortality has
obtained footing, he has confined that immortality entirely to his own genus,
and considered it as a prerogative much too exalted for any other beings. And
in some countries, not stopping here, he has also considered it as a
distinction too glorious to be expected by women, whom he looks upon in too low
and diminutive a light to deserve it. And thus degrading the fair partners of
his nature, he places them on a level with the beasts that perish. When, or
where this oppinion first began, is uncertain: it could not, however, be of
very ancient date; as the b^lief of immortality never obtained much footing
till it was revealed by the Gospel. As the Asiatics have time immemorial
regarded women only as instruments of animal pleasure, and in every other
respect treated them as beings beneath their notice, it probably originated
among them, which we the more firmly believe, when we consider, that the
Mahometans, both in Asia and in Europe, are said, by a great variety of
writers, to entertain this opinion. Lady Montague, in her letters, has opposed
this general assertion of the writers concerning the Mahometans, and says, that
they do not absolutely deny the existence of female souls, but only hold them
to be of a nature inferior to those of men, and that they enter not into the
same, but into an inferior paradise prepared for them on purpose. We pretend
not to decide the dispute between Lady Montague and the other writers, whom she
has contradicted, but think it possible that both may be right; as the former
might be the opinion of Turks brought with them from Asia; the latter, as a
refinement upon it, they may have adopted by their intercourse with the
Europeans. Or it may be the effect of the dawning of human reason, which at
present seems to be expanding itself with greater vigor than it has done for
many centuries past.

This opinion, that women were a sort of mechanical beings, only created for
the pleasures of the men, whatever votaries it may have had in the East, has
had but few in Europe; a few, however, have even here maintained it, and
assigned various and sometimes laughable reasons for so doing: among these, a
story we have heard of a Scots clergyman is not the least particular. This
peaceable son of Levi, whose wife was, it seems, a descendant of the famous
Xantippe, Xantippe was the wife of Socrates, and the most famous scold of
antiquity.
in going through a course of lectures on the Revelations of St. John, first
took up the opinion, that the sex had no souls, and were incapable of future
rewards and punishments. It was no sooner known in the country that he
maintained such a doctrine, than he was summoned before a presbytery of his
brethren, to be dealt with according to his delinquency. When he appeared at
their bar they asked him, If he really held so heretical an opinion? He told
them plainly, that he did. On desiring to be informed of his reasons for so
doing, In the Revelations of St. John the Divine, said he, 'you will find this
passage; And there was silence in heaven for about the space of half ^n hour:
And I appeal to all of you, to tell me, whether that could possibly have
happened had there been any women there? And since there are none there,
charity forbids us to imagine that they are all in a worse place; therefore it
follows, that they have no immortal part; and happy is it for them, as they are
thereby exempted from being accountable for all the noise and disturbance they
have raised in this world.

Some tribes of the Asiatic Tartars are of the same opinion with this reverend
gentleman. Women, say they, were sent into the world only to be our servants,
and propagate the species, the only purposes to which their natures are
adapted; on this account their women are no sooner past childbearing, than
believing that they have accomplished the design of their creation, the men no
farther cohabit with, or regard them. The ancient Chinese carried this idea
still farther; women, according to some of them, were the most wicked and
malevolent of all the beings which had been created; and a few of their ancient
philosophers advised, that on this account they ought always to be put to death
as soon as past childbearing, as they could then be of no farther use, and
only contributed to the disturbance of society. Ideas of a similar nature seem
to have been at this time generally diffused over the East; for we find
Solomon, almost every where in his writings, exclaiming against the wickedness
of women; and in the Apocrypha, the author of the Ecclesiasticus, is still more
illiberal in his reflections: From garments, says he, comes a moth, and from
women wickedness. Both these authors, it is true, join in the most enraptured
manner to praise a virtuous woman, but take care at the same time to let us
know, that she is so great a rarity as to be very seldom met with.

Nor have the Asiatics alone been addicted to this illiberality of thinking
concerning the sex. Satirists of all ages and countries, while they flattered
them to their faces, have from their closets most profusely scattered their
spleen and ill nature against them. Of this the Greek and Roman poets afford a
variety of instances; but they must nevertheless yield the palm to our doughty
moderns. In the following lines, Pope has outdone every one of them. "Men some
to pleasure, some to business take,
"But every woman is at heart a rake."
Swift and Dr. Young have hardly been behind this celebrated splenetic in
illiberality. They perhaps were not favorites of the fair, and in revenge
vented all their envy and spleen against them. But a more modern and
accomplished writer, who, by his rank in life, by his natural and acquired
graces was undoubtedly a favorite, has repaid their kindness by taking every
opportunity of exhibiting them in the most contemptible light. Almost every
man, says he, may be gained some way; almost every woman any way. Can any thing
exhibit a stronger caution to the women! It is fraught with information, and we
hope they will use it accordingly.

CHAPTER XIX. The same Subject continued.
BESIDES the opinions which have been entertained of women, in consequence of
their supposed inferiority, there is one scarcely less ancient or less
universal, which has originated from a very different source; and which
supposes the sex always to have been peculiarly addicted to hold a
communication with invisible beings, who endowed them with powers superior to
human nature; the exercise of which has been distinguished by the name of
witchcraft.

That a notion of this kind prevailed in an early period of the world, we learn
from the story of Saul the first king of Israel, who went to consult the witch
of Endor concerning his own fate, and the fate of the war in which he was
engaged; and from that time downward, both sacred and profane history make it
plainly appear, that this belief of witches, or dealers with familiar spirits,
as they are called, was almost universally disseminated over the whole world;
insomuch that we are hardly acquainted with the history of any people, either
ancient or modern, among whom it has not gained some degree of credit. Even the
inhabitants of the sequestered islands in the South Sea, who have not, perhaps,
from the beginning of time, had any communication with the rest of mankind,
have imbibed the general opinion; for we are told, that the making of their
mahie, or common beverage, is generally the work of old women, who observe
several superstitious ceremonies, which they reckon absolutely necessary to the
success of their operation, and guard against several things which they suppose
would as absolutely spoil it; among which none can be more fatal than the touch
of any person not actually concerned in the work.

In our times this superstitious idea of witchcraft is the most prevalent among
nations the most ignorant and uncultivated. In some periods, at least, of
antiquity, it appears to have been the reverse; for the Greeks, even in their
most flourishing and enlightened periods, were almost in every circumstance the
dupes of it; and the Romans following their example were, perhaps, still more
so. Nothing either sportive or serious, trifling or consequential, was
undertaken in Greece or Rome, without the performance of some superstitious
ceremonies, reckoned absolutely necessary to insure its success.

All the ancient inhabitants of the North paid the greatest regard both to the
persons and dictates of such women as were reckoned witches, and their opinion
of the existence of such beings was transmitted down to their posterity, who*
after the conquest of the Roman empire, had now peopled all Europe; but the
doctrines of christianity, which many of these began by degrees to embrace,
changed their former veneration for witches into the utmost hatred and
detestation; and instead of the honors that were formerly heaped upon them,
such unhappy beings as were now suspected of that crime, became subject to the
most horrid barbarities that a blinded legislature and a furiously enthusiastic
populace could inflict.

Though this suspicion of having intercourse with invisible beings has in most
ages and countries fallen chiefly, it has not fallen ^ltogether, on the women.
The Egyptians had their magicians, the Babylonians their soothsayers, and the
Persians their magi, who were all of the masculine gender; among almost all
other nations the females have been for the most part consulted as witches, or
dealers in the secrets of futurity. How the original idea of witches was at
first suggested to mankind, is not easily accounted for; it is still more
difficult to assign a reason, why this idea was in all ages so intimately
connected with women, and particularly with old women. The witch of Endor is
introduced as an old woman, and in every subsequent period historians,
painters, and poets, have all exhibited their witches as old women; nor can we
without pain relate, that a majority of those unhappy creatures condemned a few
centuries ago in all the criminal courts of Europe, were old women. Might we
hazard a conjecture on this subject, we would suppose that in the earlier ages
of the world, while women were only kept as instruments of animal pleasure, and
only valued while they had youth and beauty, as soon as these were over, they
(...) deserted by society and left to languish in solitude; a situation which
is of all others that in which the human mind is most susceptible of wisdom,
which wisdom soon making them more conspicuous than the ignorant crowd from
which they had been exiled, might give birth to a notion, that they were
assisted by invisible agents.

This may in some measure explain to us the origin of the idea of witches, so
far as it relates to old women, but leaves the origin of the general idea still
involved in the same obscurity. We flatter ourselves, however, that some light
may be thrown even on the general idea by the following observations: we are
told in scripture, that in the earlier periods of the world, a communication
between celestial and human beings, was not uncommon. -- God appeared to our
first parents in the garden of Eden; the angels came to Lot, to warn him of the
destruction of Sodom; to Abraham, to intimate to him the birth of a son in his
old age; and Moses is said to have seen God face to face, when he received from
him the tables upon the mount. Nor was this opinion peculiar to the Israelites,
the gods of the other nations were said almost constantly to live with them, to
appear in a familiar manner and communicate their orders to them, and even to
beget children with their women. Bacchus taught mankind the use of the grape,
and Ceres, a female divinity, instructed them in the use of corn; even Jupiter,
their supreme deity, frequently came down to the earth, and cohabited with
their women; when such were the ideas generally disseminated, that good beings
of all denominations frequently appeared to, and communicated some of their
knowledge and their power to mortals, it was but carrying them one step
farther, and supposing that evil beings, likewise, did the same thing for the
purposes of mischief; and hence those who were supposed to communicate with
good beings probably were called prophets, and those who communicated with evil
ones, witches, wizzards, etc.; nor does this seem altogether conjecture, for
mention is made in the sacred writings of evil spirits, who had their false
prophets, to whom they dictated lies, in order to lead to destruction those who
listened to them.

Such possibly might be the origin of witchcraft; and such the reasons why old
women were most commonly suspected of it. But i^ still remains to be considered
why the sex in general were thought to have been more addicted to it than the
men* the reasons of this also may, perhaps, be discovered in the different
habitudes and ways of life of the two sexes. From the remotest antiquity the
men inured to hunting, fishing, and pasturage, were constantly abroad in the
open air; they were consequently healthful and robust, and not subject to these
nervous weaknesses and spasmodic fits which so strongly characterise modern
ages, and have often been supposed the effect of witchcraft. The women on the
contrary, of a more delicate frame, more confined by their domestic and
sedentary employments, and the jealousy of their husbands and relations, and
perhaps, even more simple than the men in their diet, would be much more
subject to nervous weaknesses, and all the uncommon appearances that sometimes
attend them; in the paroxysms of these nervous disorders, they would frequently
utter the most strange and incoherent language, and as the ancient manner of
conveying instruction and predicting future events was commonly in this
unconnected allegorical strain, accompanied with extraordinary gestures and
contorsions of the body, such rhapsodical effusions, the mere effect of nervous
irritability, might be easily mistaken for the inspiration either of good or
evil beings, and therefore women, being more subject to such fits than men,
might be more commonly denominated prophetesses, or witches, according to the
nature of the spirit with which it was supposed they were agitated.

That this appears at least no improbable account of the matter, we have reason
to believe, from the ancient manner of initiating men into the mysteries of
prophesying, and women into the trade of delivering, oracles. Men were of old
initiated into the number of prophets by long and severe watchings, fas^ings,
and by every species of mortification. The Bramins of the East, at this day
admit none to their religious mysteries, till they have prepared themselves by
many years of discipline, abstinence, and mortification; and even the Angekots,
or priests of Greenland, when they pretend to go to visit the land of souls for
the purpose of revealing what they are doing or suffering, prepare themselves
by fasting for their journey, and set out on it by dancing and howling
themselves into a temportry frenzy. It were easy to give more instances, but we
rather proceed to the effects of such a conduct on the body and mind; effects
which every one who has been reduced to we^kness by similar causes, will more
readily conceive from his own feelings than from any description; we shall,
therefore, only observe in general, that they are those diseases of the
vapourish kind, which are constantly accompanied with a train of the most
indigested and tumultuary ideas. Women were likewise initiated into the mystery
of delivering oracles, by methods similar to those we have now related, and
when they actually delivered them, were wrought up into a state of convulsive
enthusiasm; the Pythoness, who gave the answers of the Delphian oracle, the
most famous of all antiquity, washed herself and ate some laurel leaves, a
plant well known for its intoxicating powers, before she ascended the tripod.
Thus prepared and seated, a prodigious noise was made in the hollow body of the
tripod beneath her, which added to the effect of the laurel, and an empty
stomach, soon threw her into convulsions and a temporary madness; when, from
the ambiguous rhapsodies that she uttered, the deluded consultors were obliged
either to deduct some meaning, or depart in the same ignorance in which they
came.

As the sacred writings so frequently mention witches, wizzards, and dealers
with familiar spirits, we might from thence imagine that such ideas existed
among the Jews only; were not the other writings of antiquity every where as
full of them, a circumstance we cannot wonder at, when we consider that such
ideas were much more favored by the polytheism of the Gentiles, than by the
belief of one Supreme Almighty Being, as taught among the Jews. Among the
Gentiles also as well as among the Jews, it is probable there were female
enchantresses, though we do not recollect to have met with any account of them
till we come to the Greeks, who exhibit them every where in their fables and
mythology, as beings possessed of the most astonishing and supernatural powers.
Medea is said to have taught Jason to tame the brazen-footed bulls, and the
dragons which guarded the golden fleece. Hecate, and several others are said to
have been so skilful in spells and incantations, that among their other feats,
they could turn the most obdurate hearts to love, as we shall have occasion to
mention afterward in our history of courtship. Circe, we are told, detained
even the sage Ulysses in her enchanted island, and transformed his sailors into
swine. Besides these, there were many others who, like the witches of our
modern times, could bring on diseases, raise tempests in the air, and ride on
the clouds from one country to another. Nor were the Romans less the dupes of
this pretended art than the Greeks; the whole of their historians and poets are
full of the follies and absurdities to which it reduced them; Horace frequently
mentions a Canidia, who was reckoned a most powerful enchantress; and Virgil
makes one of his shepherds declare, that such was the power of charms, that
they could draw down the moon from the sky. But the Romans were not the only
people of antiquity who carried their ideas thus far; the Babylonians boasted
that all the contingencies of fate were in their hands, (...) that they were
able to avert every evil, and proc^^e every good by their magical ceremonies.
And doctrines of a nature not much dissimilar appear to have been spread over
other countries in the East; for about Calcutta they formerly consulted
sorcerers concerning the destiny of their children, and if the prediction
promised happiness they were spared to live, but if the contrary, they were put
to death as soon as born. The Japanese at this day pay the most unlimited
credit to sorceries, incantations, lucky and unlucky days, and publish every
year the almanac, pointing them out to the public, lest upon the unlucky ones
they should transact any business, which they imagine in that case could not
possibly prosper.

Almost every ignorant people are the dupes of superstition, which in nothing
displays itself more than in fruitless attempts to become acquainted with the
secrets of futurity; hence the Greeks and Romans, and perhaps all antiquity,
from the number of oracles every where resorted to, were much given to
divination; but the northern nations still much exceeded all others, and
carried this spirit to the most unaccountable lengths. The Scandinavians,
Germans, Gauls, Britons, etc. were of all people perhaps the most ignorant, and
of all, the greatest slaves to superstition; their druids and druidesses
exercised an authority over them which even the most absolute monarch of the
present times would not dare to attempt, but not to those only did they yield
an implicit obedience, they obeyed, esteemed, and even venerated every female
who pretended to deal in charms and incantations, and the dictates of such, as
they were supposed to come from the invisible powers, were more regarded than
the laws of nature, of humanity, or of their country. The life of their
warriors was such as secured them a firmness of nerves, and freedom from
nervous hypochondriac disorders; their women being more subject to them by
nature, and by their manner of life, were, in all their fits, considered as
inspired by some divinity, and regarded accordingly. -- Women in the North have
almost solely appropriated to themselves the trade of divination, men have had
the largest share of it in the South; the reason is, men in the South are by
the climate and their low diet of rice and fruit, subject to all the diseases
of women, and women are precluded from all communication with the public.

Among the ancient inhabitants of the North, nothing was held in so much
estimation as poetry and divination. A troop of poets, called Bards, commonly
attended on the great; not to grace their train but in the effusions of frantic
doggerel, to celebrate exploits, and praise their victories. Besides these,
there was generally in the train of the rich and powerful some venerable
prophetesses, who directed their councils, and to whom they paid a deference
and respect, at present almost incredible; as will appear from the story of
Thorbiorga, a Danish enchantress, reckoned famous for her knowledge of
futurity. The kingdom of Denmark, being much distressed by a famine, Earl
Thorchil, who had the greatest authority in that country, and was most desirous
to know when the famine and sickness, which then raged, would come to an end,
sent messengers to invite Thorbiorga to his house. -- After he had made all the
preparations which were usual for the reception of such an honorable guest, in
particular, a seat was prepared for the prophetess, raised some steps above the
other seats, and covered with a cushion, stuffed with hen-feathers: when she
arrived, on an evening, she was dressed in a gown of green cloth, buttoned from
top to bottom, had a string of glass beads about her neck, and her head covered
with the skin of a black lamb, lined with the skin of a white cat; her shoes
were made of calf-skin, with the hair on it, tied with thongs, and fastened
with brass buttons; on her hands she had a pair of gloves of a white cat-skin,
with the fur inward; about her waist, she wore an Hunlandic girdle, at which
hung a bag containing her magical instruments; and she supported her feeble
limbs, by leaning on a staff, adorned with many knobs of brass. As soon as she
entered the hall, the whole company rose, as it became them, and saluted her in
the most respectful manner, which she returned as she thought proper. Earl
Thorchil then advanced, and taking her by the hand, conducted her to a seat
prepared for her; after some time spent in conversation, a table was set before
her covered with many dishes; but she ate only a pottage of goat's milk, and of
a dish which consisted of the hearts of various animals. When the table was
removed, Thorchil humbly approached the prophetess, and asked her, What she
thought of his house, and of his family? And when she would be pleased to tell
him what they desired to know? To this she replied, That she would tell them
nothing that evening, but would satisfy them fully next day. Accordingly the
day after, when she had put all her implements of divination in proper order,
she commanded a maiden, named Godreda, to sing the magical song called
Wardlokur; which she did with so clear and sweet a voice, that the whole
company were ravished with her music, and none so much as the Prophetess; who
cried out, Now I know many things concerning this famine and sickness, which I
did not know before. This famine will be of short continuance, and plenty will
return next season; which will be favorable, and the sickness also will very
shortly fly away. After this the whole company approached the goddess, one by
one, and asked her what questions they pleased, and she told them every thing
they desired to know. A variety of instances of this kind might be adduced, to
show the veneration in which dealers in futurity were held amongst the ancient
northerns. We shall only mention another: There was a certain old woman, named
Heida, famous for her skill in divination, and the art of magic; who frequented
public entertainments, predicted what sort of weather would be the year after,
and told men and women their fortunes; she was constantly attended by thirty
men-se^vants, and waited upon by fifteen maidens. Such was the veneration of
our ancestors for beings, whom their descendants, in a few centuries
afterward, began to execrate, to condemn to the flames, to whips, to tortures,
horse-ponds, and every other species of cruel indignity. Upon a change so
important in sentiment and behavior, the following considerations will, we
hope, throw some light.

Every system of theology, from the beginning of time, had been filled with the
doctrine of a communication between celestial and terrestrial beings. -- The
Jewish religion was remarkably full of it: the Jews, therefore, greatly
venerated such human beings as they thought were thus dignified with the
correspondence of spiritual essences. The polytheism of the Gentiles, their
different ranks and degrees of gods, and the few degrees of distinction between
their gods and their heroes, made it no great wonder, that this communication
among them was still supposed to be more common. Among the Jews it would seem,
that some small degree of inferiority was affixed to those who were supposed to
draw their knowledge of future events from evil spirits; but among most of the
neighboring nations, they had hardly any such distinction as evil and good
spirits; they had indeed Dii Infernales, or infernal gods; but they made so
little difference between these infernal gods and their celestial ones, that
they paid to each of them almost an equal share of worship and adoration; hence
those who foretold events by a communication with the one kind, were hardly
less esteemed, than those who foretold them by a communication with the other.
But when the Christian religion was introduced, which taught that all future
events were only known to God, or to such only of his creatures as he chose to
discover them to; and that in all others, it was impious to endeavor to find
out what he had concealed: such as still pretended to deal in them, instead of
being accounted false imposters, as they ought to have been, were supposed to
have drawn their information from evil spirits: hence the trade of predicting,
which before was thought the most honorable, while its knowledge was derived
from an honorable source; now, when that knowledge came from a dishonorable
one, likewise became not only dishonorable, but criminal. Every one who
pretended to that trade, was denominated witch or wizzard; and against all
such, the obsolete Jewish law, which says, Thou shall not suffer a witch to
live, was revived; and the same profession, which we have before seen raising
prophets and prophetesses to the highest veneration and dignity, now subjected
them to the flames.

From the twel^th to the sixteeth century, almost all Europe was one scene of
highly ridiculous opinions; to maintain which, kings led forth their armies,
piously to cut the throats of their neighbors; and priests condemned to flames
in this world, and threatened eternal fire in the world to come. Many of those
opinions were, however, but local; and many sunk into oblivion with the
authors, who first broached them; but the notion of females being addicted to
witchcraft had taken deep root, and spread itself all over Europe. It had been
gathering strength from the days of Moses; and it subsisted till the enquiring
spirit of philosophy, demonstrated by the plainest experiments, that many of
those things which had always been supposed the effect of supernatural, were
really the effect of natural causes. No sex, no rank, no age, was exempted from
the suspicion^ of, and punishments inflicted on the perpetrators of this
supposed crime; but old women were, of all other beings, the most liable to be
suspected of it. Poets had delineated, and painters had drawn all their witches
as old women, with haggard and wrinkled countenances, withered hands and
tottering limbs; these, which were only characteristic symptoms of old age,
had, by an unhappy assemblage of unconnected ideas, become also the
characteristic symptoms of witchcraft. And hence every old woman, bowed down
with age and infirmity, was commonly dubbed with the appellation of witch; and
when any event happened in her neighborhood; for which the ignorance of the
times was not able to account, she was immediately suspected as the cause; and
in consequence committed to jail by an ignorant magistrate, and condemned by as
ignorant a judge, or what, perhaps was worse than either, made the sport of a
ruffian multitude, heated by enthusiasm, and led on by folly; which a few
centuries ago ran to such a pitch of extravagance, that Livonia, and some other
parts of the North, it is said, that not many women who had arrived at old age
were suffered to die peaceably in their beds, but were either hurried to an
untimely execution, or so much abused by a licentious populace, that death was
frequently the consequence.

But the suspicions of witchcraft were neither altogether confined to age nor
to poverty; the bloom of youth and beauty, and the dignity of rank could afford
no safety. In France, England, and Germany, ladies of the highest quality were
condemned to the stake for crimes of which it was impossible they could be
guilty; but when crimes are either highly improbable or altogether impossible,
the proof required to be brought against those who are supposed to have
committed them, is on that account generally sustained as valid, though much
less clear than in other cases. Thus it was with witchcraft, while the fixing
of every other crime required some degree of rational and consistent evidence,
this was fixed by idle and ridiculous tales, or, in short, by any shadow of
evidence whatever. Such being the case, statesmen often availed themselves of
witchcraft as a pretense to take off persons who were obnoxious to them, and
against whom no other crime could be proved: this was the pretense made use of
for condemning the Maid of Orleans, well known in the history of England and of
France; who, by her personal courage, and the power she assumed over the minds
of a superstitious people, by persuading them that Heaven was on their side,
delivered her country from the most formidable invasion which had ever
threatened its subversion. Such was the pretense for destroying the Duchess de
Conchini; who, being asked by her judges, What methods she had practiced to
fascinate the Queen of France? boldly replied, Only by that ascendency which
great minds have over little ones. Nothing was too absurd in these times to
gain credit; and proofs only became the more valid as they were the more
ridiculous. Under Manuel Comnenus, one of the Greek emperors at Constantinople,
an officer of high rank was condemned for parctising secrets that rendered men
invisible. And another had like to have shared the same fate, because he was
caught reading a book of Solomon's, the bare perusal of which, they said, was
sufficient to conjure up whole legions of devils. The Duchess of Gloucester,
with Mary Gurdemain, and a priest, were accused of having made a figure of
Henry VI. in wax, and roasted it before the fire; though the action itself was
ridiculous, and though there was no proof of it nor possibility of the
consequences which they imagined were to arise from it, they were all three
found guilty; the priest was hanged, Gurdemain was burnt in Smithfield, and the
Duchess condemned to penance and perpetual imprisonment. The Duke of
Gloucester, who was regent to Edward V. showed an emaciated arm in the
council chamger; and his really having an arm withered, was deemed a sufficient
proof, not only that it was done by sorcery, but that the sorcerers were the
wife of his brother, and Jane Shore. To what a low ebb was human reason
reduced, when from such premises it could draw such conclusions?

Such was the condition of women in Europe for several centuries, constantly
liable to be accused of and punished for, crimes which had no existence; till
philosophy at last came to rescue them from their danger, by dissipating the
gloom of ignorance which had for ages enveloped the human mind; and teaching
men to prefer reason to opinion, however the latter might be sanctified by
time, or strengthened by the celebrated names from which it had originated. But
the struggle between reason and opinion was not the struggle of a day or a
year, it lasted for several ages, and is not at this hour completely decided;
as there are some people still to be found, who have more faith in in ancient
sayings and opinions, than in the fullest demonstration of which reason is
capable.

What reason and philosophy had achieved in Europe, was accomplished in
America by shame and remorse. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, some of
the most gloomy bigots of several nations, and particularly of England, to
avoid the persecutions to which their own tenets, and the intolerant spirit of
the times subjected them, had emigrated to the inhospitable deserts of America;
these carried along with them into that New World, the same ideas of sorcery
which they had imbibed in Europe, and the same intolerant spirit from which
they had fled. Though they had accounted it exceedingly hard, that in Europe
they should have been persecuted for religious opinions, yet they soon imposed
the same hardships upon others, from which they themselves had fled with so
much horror and reluctance; and had but just begun to breath from a cruel
persecution against the Quakers and Anabaptists, when a new suppositious danger
alarmed their fears, and set the whole country of New England in a ferment. A
minister in Salem had two daughters, one of whom falling into a hysteric
disorder, attended with convulsions, the father concluded she was bewitched. An
Indian maidservant was suspected of the crime; and so often beat and otherwise
cruelly treated by her wrong-headed master, that she at last confessed herself
guilty, and was committed to prison; from whence, after a long confinement, she
was at last released to be sold for a slave.

The idea, however, was now started; nor was it so easy a matter to lay it
again to rest. Every similar complaint was supposed to proceed from a similar
cause, and the affected naturally cast their eyes upon such as either were in
reality, or were supposed to be their enemies; and those they accused as the
causes of the evils they suffered. Every evil that befell the human body, was in
a little time asserted to be the effect of witchcraft; and every enemy to the
afflicted was accused, and every accusation certainly proved. In default of
rational proof, an evidence called by them spectral, and never before heard of,
was admitted; on the validity of which, many were condemned to suffer death.
The most common and innocent actions, were now construed to be magical
ceremonies, and every one filled with horror, and diffident of his neighbors,
was forward to accuse all around him: neither age, sex, nor charaster, afforded
the least protection. Women were stripped in the most shameful manner to search
for magical teats. Scorbutic or other stains on the skin, were called the
devil's pinches; and these pinches afforded the most undeniable evidence
against those upon whom they were discovered. But if any thing was wanting in
evidence, it was amply supplied by the confession extorted by tortures, of so
cruel a nature, and so long continuance, that they forced the unhappy sufferers
to acknowledge themselves guilty of whatever their tormentors chose to lay to
their charge. Women owned various and ridiculous correspondencies with infernal
spirits, and even that such had frequently cohabited with them. No^ were the
wretches under torture more pressed to discover their own guilt than that of
others; when it ^^^quently happened that, unable to give any account of real
criminals, they were forced by torture to name people at random, who being
imme^iately taken up, were treated in the same manner, and obliged, in their
turn, to name others, not more guilty than themselves.

The phrenzy was now become universal, the nearest ties of blood, and the most
sacred friendships, were no more regarded, the gibbets every where exhibited to
the people their friends and their neighbors hanging as malefactors, the
cities were filled with terror and amazement, and the prisons so crowded that
executions were obliged to be made ^very day, in order to make room for more of
the supposed criminals. Magistrates who refused to commit to jail, and juries
which brought in a verdict for acquittance, were on that account suspected and
accused; accusations were also at last brought against the judges themselves,
and the torrent had reached even to the palace of the governor, when a general
pause ensued; conscious of his dangerous situation, every man trembled on
looking around him, and every man resolved to cease from prosecuting his
neighbor, as the only method of procuring his own safety. Shame and remorse
arose from reflection, reason resumed the rein, and the storm that had
threatened a total depopulation of the country subsided at once into peace. In
this paroxysm expired a spirit which for time immemorial had been a scourge to
the human race, and particularly to that fair part of it whose history we are
now delineating.

Another opinion nearly related to that which we have now been discussing, and
scarcely, perhaps, less ancient, is the possession by devils. This through a
long succession of ages had been considered as common to both sexes, and
consequently not falling properly within our plan. But as the priests of the
Romish church have adopted, and still maintain it now, when it is nearly
exploded by every other set of men, and as they almost entirely confine it to
women, we shall give a short account of it.

So delicate is the sensibility, or rather irritability, of the female
constitution, that they are thereby subjected to several diseases, whose
symptoms and appearances are more extraordinary than those with which the men
are commonly afflicted. Such, it is highly probable, were those diseases which
in the New Testament are called the possession of devils, and from persons thus
affected, when they were healed by our Savior, devils were said to be cast out.

Every one who has had an opportunity of seeing diseases of the spasmodic kind,
must have been sensible that persons so affected, frequently exerted a force
which at other times they were totally incapable of. Hence, in ages of
ignorance and superstition, it is no great wonder that such exertions, and such
symptoms of torture as accompanied them, were attributed to the agency or
possession of evil spirits. But medical philosophers, beginning to throw aside
every prejudice, and attach themselves only to truth, at last discovered, that
symptoms which had formerly been supposed to arise from the agency of
malevolent s^irits which had entered into the human body, in reality arose from
natural causes; and this doctrine, as being more consonant to reason, as well
as confirmed by observation, was at last pretty generally received. But as
every improvement of the human understanding is attended with inconveniency to
such as fatten upon human ignorance, the priests of the Romish religion,
arrogating to themselves the same powers as the author of Christianity; had
always pretended to cast out devils; and finding that if there were no devils
for them to cast out, their revenue and reputation would not only be
diminished, but an instrument of managing the people and supporting their own
power, would also be wrested out of their hands, strongly opposed this new
doctrine as impious and discordant to the scripture; and to carry on the farce
with the greater probability, they carefully sought out such women as were
endowed with a cunning, superior to the rest of their sex, and bribed them to
declare themselves possessed, that they might have the credit of dispossessing
them, and thereby showing to the world, that it had been misled by a belief of
natural causes, and that they had actually derived from their great master, a
power over the legions of darkness. That their scheme might be the more
complete, they labored to instill a notion into mankind, that as evil spirits
were no doubt so intelligent as to understand every language, those possessed
by them were also endowed with the same gift. Women, therefore, who feigned
this possession, were, by the priests appointed to exorcise them, taught by
rote, answers to such questions in several languages, as they should ask them.
The multitude, when they thus observed women whom they knew to be without
education speaking a variety of languages, were convinced that it was really
the devil who spoke out of them.

Though the populace were deluded by this trick, yet the sensible part of
mankind still silently despised the authors of such an imposition on human
credulity; but as in Catholic countries nothing is more dangerous than
contradicting or finding fault with the church, it was long before any one had
the hardiness openly to attack this palpable absurdity; such an attack was,
however, at last successfully made by a physician in Sardinia. A young girl in
Turin being troubled with hysteric fits, which threw her body into such
postures and agitations as seemed supernatural, the Jesuits, who are always
attentive to every thing that has a tendency to promote themselves, or turn to
their advantage, soon flocked about her, attended by a physician in their
interest, who alleged that she was actually possessed, and consequently not to
be cured by medicine. Accordingly the exorcists were assembled, and the girl
previously instructed for the better carrying on the imposture; the affair made
a great noise, people came from all parts, and the old tales of witchcraft and
sorceries were revived. Dr. R. nobly opposed these proeeddings, and declared
the girl's case was entirely owing to natural causes, supporting his opinion by
reasons and instances which he had heard of in Holland and England, where he
had resided many years. The Jesuits furiously attacked him as an infidel, whom
they would infallibly confute from the testimony of his own senses. The Doctor
consented to attend them, and while they were performing their prayers and
exorcisms appeared devout; when they had finished, he desired the two
ecclesiastics who were entrusted with the managemement of the affair, that they
would order their patient to answer him a few questions, which they granted, on
condition he asked nothing unlawful, and commanded the devil to answer.
Accordingly the Doctor said to her in English, What is my name? This being a
language to which both the girl and the Jesuits were strangers she answered in
plain Piedmontese, that she did not understand the question; but according to
the received opinion, as well as the ritual, the knowledge of all languages,
the supernatural strength of body, and foretelling things to come, are the
proper criteria of a real satanical possession, the devil therefore ought to
understand all languages, and it is easily conjectured that this ignorance did
not a little mortify the Jesuits; they, however, did all in their power to
elude the consequence, by pretending that the Doctor had put an unlawful
question to the evil spirit, and they had forbid him to answer any of that
kind; but he soon confuted their allegations by explaining the question he had
asked, and immediately repeated it in Piedmontese; but the possessed, to whom
he was unknown, could say as little to this as before, when the same question
was proposed in English. The Doctor highly pleased at his success, ran to court
in triumph, where he ridiculed the ignorance of their devil; the king and the
prince of Piedmont joined in the laugh, and the latter for the more effectuall^
silencing this Jesuitical devil, fetched a Chinese psalter from his closet,
sent him by the cardinal Tournon as a curiosity; this psalter has, indeed, a
Latin translation, but the Chinese leaves could be taken out separately from
those containing the translation; with one of these leaves Dr. R. was again
dispatched to ask the devil the contents, and in what language it was written.
The fathers, who did not desire any more of Dr. R.'s visits, were for keeping
out of his way, and the devil threatened if he came again, to expose the
minutest transactions of his life. A Theatine, who was an accomplice of the
Jesuits, acquainted the Doctor's sister with this circumstance; and she, from
an implicit veneration for the clergy, was very urgent with her brother not to
have any further concern with this devil, but to no purpose. The Doctor,
however, had no great opinion of the devil's omniscience, and told the king,
that if the devil knew all things present or absent, there would be no
necessity for princes being at such immense expenses in envoys, agents, and
spies* they need only maintain a possessed person or two, from whom they might
constantly have immediate intelligence of every transaction. After this remark,
the Doctor hastened to the house of the possessed, where he found the Jesuits
with the girl. On entering the room, after the usual compliments, he acquainted
them, that having been informed that a detail was to be given of every
transaction of his life, he was desirous of hearing it himself; and began to
defy and challenge the devil to begin his story; adding, that if he did not, he
would brand him and all who favored his pretended possession, as knaves and
fools. This resolute speech thunderstruck both the patient and the Jesuits;
but the latter pretending to show the Doctor the nearest way out of the house,
he soon silenced them, by producing the commission; and insisted, in the name
of the prince, that the possessed should declare what was written on the leaf
he exhibited, and what language it was written in? The two Jesuits, who were,
doubtless, not the most artful of their order, pretended, that the characters
might be diabolical, and therefore refused to answer the questions. D. R.
answered, that it did not become them to violate the respect due to their
prince by such a scandalous suspicion; and insisted, in the name of the king
and prince, that they should no longer amuse him with such weak subterfuges.
The two Jesuits, after whispering to themselves, answered, That an affair of
this kind must be introduced by prayer, and a long series of devotion*
wherefore it was necessary to defer it to a more convenient opportunity. The
Doctor replied, There was now time sufficient for the purpose, and that he
would pray with them. So that they were at last, notwithstanding their
evasions, obliged to begin their ceremonies. During the exorcism, the girl
threw her body into strange contortions, and hideous looks which the Jesuits
insisted upon were supernatural; but the Doctor promising to mimic her actions,
in a manner still more horrible, orders were given her to answer truly to all
the various interrogatories. Accordingly, the leaf was laid before her, with
the above mentioned questions: upon this she screamed in a terrible manner,
desiring it might be taken away, for she could not bear it. At last, after the
most pressing arguments, she said it was Hebrew; and that it was a blasphemous
writing against the Holy Trinity. This was sufficient for the Doctor; who,
after showing them plainly how ignorant their devil was, returned to court to
give an account of his proceedings. The two Jesuits were banished; the two
physicians recanted in public; and the parents and relations were enjoined, on
pain of being sent to the galleys, never to mention this affair as a diabolical
possession; with regard to the girl, she was soon cured by proper medicines.
Thus ended this imposture* and with it all notions of sorceries, witchcrafts,
and satanical possessions, with which the minds of the people were infected.

As this triumph over priestcraft was, however, only local; and as the
multitude are still prone to believe what they do not understand; the clergy,
in some places, still continue to propagate the doctrine of evil spirits
entering into female bodies, and keeping possession of them till properly
exorcised by the church; an opinion, long since, totally eradicated in
Protestant countries, and only laughed at in secret by the sensible of the
Romish faith.

Before we take our leave of this subject, it may not be improper to observe,
that the notions of witchcraft, and of possession, have not only been almost
universal among mankind, but have had almost the same ideas every where annexed
to them. In Hindostan, an old woman, who had taken upon her the name and
character of a witch, raised a rebellion against her sovereign; and to draw the
multitude to her standard, she circulated a report, which was eagerly credited,
That on a certain day of the moon, she used to cook, in the skull of an enemy,
a (...), composed of owls, bats, snakes, lizards, human f^esh, and other horrid
ingredients, which she distributed to her followers; and which, it was believed
by the rabble, had a power not only of rendering them void of fear, but also of
making them invisible in the day of battle, and transfusing terror into their
enemies. Would not one suppose she had read the histories of Greece and Rome,
and the plays of Shakespeare? Voyages and travels present us with several
histories of uncommon diseases among savages, whose appearances they attributed
to the agency of evil spirits; but from what source they derived these ideas,
would be foreign to our purpose to endeavor to determine.

Besides the opinions which have been already mentioned, it has been alleged
against women, that they are either incapable of attending to, or at least deaf
to reason and conviction. This, however, we venture to affirm, is an error of
partiality, or inattention; for the generality of women can reason in a cool
and candid manner on any subject, where none of their interests or passions are
concerned* but such appears to be the acuteness of the female feelings, that
wherever passion is opposed to reason, it operates so strongly, that every
reasoning power and faculty is, for a time, totall^ suspended: the same thing,
in a lesser degree, happens to men; and the only difference between the (...)
in this particular, arises from the different degree^ of feeling and
sensibility.

Women have likewise been charged by the men with inconstancy and a love of
change. However justly this may characterise the sex in their pursuit of the
fashions and follies of the times, we are of opinion, that in their attachments
to the men, it is false. The fair sex are, in general, formed for love; and
seem impelled by nature, to fix that passion on some particular object; as a
lover, husband, or children; and for want of these, on some darling animal: and
this attachment, instead of being changeable, commonly gains strength by time
and possession. So strong is this peculiarity of female nature, that many
instances have been known, where nuns, for want of any other object, have
attached themselves to a particular sister, with a passion little inferior to
love; and history affords many instances of women, who, in spite of reason,
reflection and revenge, have been inviolably attached to the person of their
first ravisher, though they hated, and had been ruined by his conduct.

Among all the signatures of female inferiority, few have been more insisted
on, than their want of that courage and resolution so conspicuous in the men.
We have already given it as our opinion, that this is no defect in their
character; as the Author of nature has, for the most part, placed them in
circumstances which do not demand these qualities; and when he has placed them
otherwise, he has not withheld them.

Such are the circumstances* of the generality of women in savage life, where
the countries are thinly inhabited, and commonly infested with wild beasts; and
the men, for days and weeks together, abroad on their hunting excursions; in
which intervals the women, liable to be attacked by the beasts of prey, and by
their enemies, would be in a miserable situation, were they the same weak and
timid animals they are in polished society.

Among the Esquimaux, and several other savage people, the women go out to hunt
and fish along with the men. In these excursions, it is necessary for them not
only to have courage to attack whatever comes in their way, but to encounter
the storms of a tempestuous climate, and endure the hardships of famine, and
every other evil, incident to such a mode of life, in so inhospitable a
country. In some places, where the woods afford little game for the subsistence
of the natives, and they are consequently obliged to procure it from the stormy
seas which surround them, women hardly show less courage, or less dexterity, in
encountering the waves, than the men. In Greenland, they will put off to sea in
a vessel; and in a storm, which would make the most hardy European tremble. In
many of the islands of the South Sea, they will plunge into the waves, and swim
through a surf, which no European dare attempt. In Himia, one of the Greek
islands, young girls, before they be permitted to marry, are obliged to fish up
a certain quantity of pearls, and dive for them at a certain depth. Many of the
other pearl-fisheries are carried on by women, who, besides the danger of
diving, are exposed to attacks of the voracious shark, and other ravenous
sea-animals, who frequently watch to devour them.

Should it be objected here, that this kind of courage is only mechanical or
customary, we would ask such objectors, Whether almost all courage is not of
the same nature? Take the most undaunted mortal out of the path which he has
constantly trod, and he will not show the same resolution. A sailor, who
unconcernedly steers his bark through the most tremenduous waves, would be
terrified at following a pack of hounds over hedge and ditch upon a spirited
horse, which the well-accustomed jockey would mount with pleasure, and ride
with ease. A soldier, who is daily accustomed to face death, when armed with
all the horrors of gunpowder and steel, would shrink back with reluctance from
the trade of gathering eider down as practiced by the simple peasants of
Norway, who, for this purpose, let themselves down the most dreadful precipices
by the means of a rope. A thousand other instances might be adduced to prove
this truth; but as many of them must have fallen under the observation of every
one, we shall not enlarge upon them.

That savage women are more generally endowed with courage than those in civil
life, appears from what we have now mentioned, as well as from the whole
history of mankind; yet it does not from thence follow, that those in civil
life are less conspicuous for it, when it is required by the circumstances in
which they are placed. And though it is not our intention to give a minute
history of every female, who, throwing aside the softness of the sex, has
signalized herself in scenes of devastation and fields of blood, we think it
incumbent on us to give a few instances, to show how far the sex have been
enabled to exert courage when it became necessary.

In ancient and modern history, we are frequently presented with accounts of
women, who, preferring death to slavery or prostitution, sacrificed their lives
with the most undaunted courage to avoid them. Apollodorus tells us, that
Herculus having taken the city of Troy, prior to the famous siege of it
celebrated by Homer, carried away captive the daughters of Laomedon then king.
One of these, named Euthira, being left with several other Trojan captives on
board the Grecian fleet, while the sailors went on shore to take in fresh
provisions, had the resolution to propose, and the power to persuade her
companions, to set the ships on fire, and to perish themselves amid the
devouring flames. The women of Phoenicia met together before an engagement
which was to decide the fate of their city, and having agreed to bury
themselves in the flames, if their husbands and relations were defeated, in the
enthusiasm of their courage and resolution, they crowned her with flowers who
first made the proposal. Many instances occur in the history of the Romans, of
the Gauls and Germans, and of other nations in subsequent periods; where women
being driven to despair by their enemies, have bravely defended their walls, or
waded through fields of blood to assist their countrymen, and free themselves
from slavery or from ravishment. Such heroic efforts are beauties, even in the
character of the softer sex, when they proceed from necessity: when from
choice, they are blemishes of the most unnatural kind, indicating a heart of
cruelty, lodged in a form which has the appearance of gentleness and peace.

It has been alleged by some of the writers on human nature, that to the fair
sex the loss of beauty is more alarming and insupportable than the loss of
life; but even this loss, however opposite to the feelings of their nature,
they have voluntarily consented to sustain, that they might not be ^he objects
of temptation to the lawless ravisher. The nuns of a convent in France, fearing
they should be violated by a ruffian army, which had taken by storm the town in
which their convent was situated, at the recommendation of their abbess,
mutually agreed to cut off all their noses, that they might save their chastity
by becoming objects of disgust instead of desire. Were we to descend to
particulars, we could give innumerable instances of women, who, from Semiramis
down to the present time, have distinguished themselves by their courage. Such
was Penthesilea, who, if we may credit ancient story, led her army of viragoes
to the assistance of Priam king of Troy; Thomyris, who encountered Cyrus king
of Persia; and Thalestris, famous for her fighting, as well as for her amors
with Alexander the Great. Such was Boadicea, queen of the Britons, who led on
that people to revenge the wrongs done to herself and her country by the
Romans. And in later periods, such was the Maid of Orleans, and Margaret of
Anjou; which last, according to several historians, commanded at no less than
twelve pitched battles. But we do not choose to multiply instances of this
nature, as we have already said enough to show, that the sex are not destitute
of courage when that virtue becomes necessary; and were they possessed of it,
when unnecessary, it would divest them of one of the principal qualities for
which we love, and for which we value them. No woman was ever held up as a
pattern to her sex, because she was intrepid and brave; no woman ever
conciliated the affections of the men, by rivalling them in what they reckon
the peculiar excellencies of their own character.

Although it appears, from what we have related, that an opinion has been
pretty generally diffused among mankind that the female sex are in body and in
mind greatly inferior to the male; yet that opinion has not been so universal
as to exclude every exception; for whole nations, in some periods, and some
individuals in every period, have held a contrary one. We have already given
some account of the veneration in which the ancient Egyptians held their women;
a veneration which seems at least to have continued to the days of Cleopatra.
We have seen other nations placing the fountain of honor in the sex, and
others again valuing every single woman at the rate of six men. We have seen
the Germans admitting them to be present at, and to direct their councils. The
Greeks, Romans, and ancient Britons, consecrating them to the sacred function
of ministering at the altars of their gods. We have seen the institution of
chivalry raising them almost above the level of mortality. But in Italy, even
in a period when chivalry had nearly expired, we find them risen in the opinion
of the men to a height, at which they had never arrived before. In Rome, when
it became so venal, that every thing could be purchased for money, it was no
uncommon thing for the wives or mistresses of the rich and opulent to be
deified after their death. In modern Italy, this ridiculous dignity was
conferred, while living, upon Joan of Arragon, who was one of the most
extraordinary women of the sixteenth century, in consequence of a decree passed
at Venice, in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, in the academy
of the Dubbiosi. Upon her sister, the Marchioness de Guast, they conferred the
title of a divinity; and proposed building a temple, in which they should both
be worshipped together. But some of the academicians observing, that two
divinities, especially of the feminine gender, would probably not agree
together in the same temple; it was at last resolved, that the Marchioness
should be worshipped by herself, and that to her sister, Joan of Arragon,
should be erected a temple, of which she should have the sole possession. It
was accordingly raised, and stood for some time the most demonstrative proof of
human folly that history has any where recorded.

CHAPTER XX. Of Dress, Ornament, and the various other Methods whereby Women
endeavor to render themselves agreeable to the Men.
THE mutual inclination of the sexes to each other, is the source of many of
the useful arts, and perhaps of all the elegant refinements; by constantly
exerting itself in strenuous endeavors to please; to be agreeable, and even to
be necessary, it gives an additional flavor to the rational pleasures, and
multiplies even the conveniences of life.

In the articles of convenience and necessity, we have greatly the advantage
over the women, who, weak and helpless in themselves, naturally rely on us for
whatever is useful and whatever is necessary. In the articles of pleasure and
of refinement, they have as much the advantage of us, and we as naturally look
up to them as the source of our pleasures, as they do to us as the source of
their sustenance and their fortunes; but besides the advantages of being so
necessary to the women on account of procuring them convenience and
subsistence, men, by nature bold and intrepid, have a thousand ways of
ingratiating themselves into the favor of the sex, and may practice them all
with openness and freedom; whereas, women must endeavor to work themselves
into our affections by methods silent and disguised; for, should the mask be
thrown off, their intentions would not only be frustrated, but the very attempt
would fix upon them the character of forwardness, and want of that modesty
which custom has made so essential a part of female excellence. Nothing appears
more evident, than that we all wish women to be agreeable, and to insinuate
themselves into our favor, but then we wish them to do so only by nature, and
not by art, or at least that the little art they employ, should look as like
nature as possible.

Compelled to act under these disadvantages, the sex are obliged to lay a
perpetual restraint on their behavior, and often to disclaim by their words,
and even their actions, such honest and virtuous attachments as they approve in
their hearts. When they, however, direct their attacks upon no particular
individual, but only strive to cultivate their minds and adorn their bodies,
that they may become the more worthy of being honorably attacked by us, we not
only pardon, but love them for those arts, which, by embellishing nature,
render her still more agreeable.

Nature has given to men strength, and to women beauty; our strength endears us
to them, not only by affording them protection, but by its laborious efforts
for their maintenance; their beauty endears them to us, not only by the delight
it offers to our senses, but also by that power it has of softening and
composing our more rugged passions. Every animal is conscious of its own
strength, and of the proper mode of employing it; women, abundantly conscious
that theirs lies in their beauty, endeavor with the utmost care to heighten
and improve it. To give some account of the many and various methods which have
been and still are made use of for this purpose, is the subject upon which we
would wish at present to turn the attention of our fair readers.

Next to the procuring of daily food for the sustenance of our bodies, that of
clothing them seems the most essentially necessary, and there are few
inventions in which more ingenuity has been displayed, or more honor done to
the human understanding. The art of clothing ourselves with decent propriety,
is one of those improvements which strongly distinguish us from the brutes;
that of clothing ourselves with elegance, is one of those which perpetually
whet the invention, and distinguish the man of taste from the mere imitator.

Though the use of clothes may appear essentially necessary to us who inhabit
the northern extremities of the globe, yet as they could not be so in the
warmer climates where they were first invented, some other cause than merely
that of securing the body from the injuries of the air must have given birth to
them. There are in Asia, which we suppose to have been first inhabited, a
variety of places where clothes would not only have been altogether useless,
but also burdensome; yet over all this extensive country and in every other
part of the world, except among a few of the most savage nations, all mankind
have been, and still are, accustomed to use some kind of covering for their
bodies. Had clothes been originally intended only for defending the body
against cold, it would naturally follow, that they must have been invented and
brought to the greatest perfection in the coldest regions, and that the
inhabitants of every cold country, impelled by necessity, must at least have
discovered the use of them long before the present time; but neither of these
is the case, for the art of making garments was invented before any of the
colder countries were inhabited, and the inhabitants of some of the most
inhospitable regions of the globe, particularly about the streights of
Magellan, are at this day naked.

From these instances it seems plain, that necessity was not the sole cause
which first induced men to cover their bodies; some other reason at least must
have co-operated with it, to make the custom so universal; shame has been
alleged as this other reason, and by some said to have been the only cause of
the original invention of clothing; but this opinion is not supported by facts,
for shame does not seem natural to mankind; it is the child of art, and the
nearer we approach to nature, the less we are acquainted with it. We have
already seen that the natives of Otaheite have no such feelings, or at least if
they have, that it is not called forth into action by the same circumstances
and situations as among us. It would be endless to enumerate the various
countries in which both sexes are entirely naked, and consequently insensible
on that account of shame; or which is still a stronger proof of our assertion,
to enumerate those, in which, though clothes are commonly made use of, yet no
shame is annexed to u^^covering any part of the body. But that we may not build
our hypothesis entirely upon the customs of savage life, let us consider the
state of infancy and youth in the most polished society. There nothing is more
obvious, than that neither of the sexes have any shame on account of being
naked when several years old, and that even at the age of seven or eight,
exposing those parts of the body that are not usually exposed, is a
circumstance to which they pay so little regard, that mothers, and other people
who have the care of them, often find great difficulty in teaching them to
conform in this particular to the customs of their country, and are frequently
obliged even to make use of correction before they can obtain their purpose. To
this teaching, and to this correction, we owe the first sensations of shame, on
exposing ourselves otherwise than the mode of our country prescribes, and
custom keeps up the sensation ever after; for shame is not excited upon
deviating from custom by doing things only which have a real turpitude in their
nature, but also by deviating from it in those things that are innocent or
indifferent.

If from the foregoing reasons it should appear, that the origin of clothing
was neither altogether owing to necessity, nor to shame, then the cause still
remains to be discovered; and this cause we suppose to have been a kind of
innate principle, especially in the fair sex, prompting them to improve by art
those charms bestowed on them by nature. The reasons which induce us to be of
this opinion are, because, as we observed above, clothes were invented in a
climate where they were but little wanted to defend from the cold, and in a
period when the human race were too innocent, as well as too rude and
uncultivated, to have acquired the sense of shame; because, also, in looking
over the history of mankind it appears, that an appetite for ornament, if we
may so call it, is universally diffused among them, wherever they have the
least leisure from the indispensable duty of procuring daily food, or are not
depressed with the most absolute slavery; every savage people, even though
totally naked, show their love of ornament by marks, stains, and paintings of
various kinds upon their bodies, and these frequently of the most shining and
gaudy colors. Every people, whose country affords any materials, and who have
acquired any art in fabricating them, show all the ingenuity they can in
decking and adorning themselves to the best advantage, with what they have thus
fabricated. These circumstances strongly demonstrate, that the love of ornament
is a natural principle, which shows itself in every climate, and in every
country, almost without one single exception. But further, were clothes
intended only to defend from the cold, or to cover shame, the most plain and
simple would serve these purposes; at least as well, if not better, than the
most gay and ornamental; but the plain and the simple, every where give way to
the gay and the ornamental. Ornament, therefore, must have been one of the
causes which gave birth to the origin of clothing.

As there is in human nature a strong propensity to the love of variety, this
might likewise contribute to the use of clothing: absolute nakedness is the
most destructive of variety, having nothing to present but the same object, in
the same shape and color, and without any other variations of circumstances
than what arise from change of attitude: such uniform and unvaried objects, as
they make no new impressions on the senses, are not likely to excite, and still
less likely to continue the passion of love; to do either of which, it is
necessary that our senses should be struck with a variety of appearances. In
countries where women are constantly in the original dress of nature, they are
much less objects of desire, than where they are enabled by dress to vary their
figure and their shape, constantly to strike us with some new appearance, and
to show, or conceal from us, a part of their charms, as it shall best answer
their purpose. It is probable that women became early acquainted with all the
disadvantages of appearing perpetually the same; and that to remedy them, they
contrived, by degrees, to alter themselves by the assistance of dress and
ornament.

Because savage life is the state that approaches the nearest to nature; and
because, in this state, women sometimes neglect every kind of dress and
ornament, it has therefore been concluded, that to dress* and to ornament
themselves, is a passion not natural to the sex: but this conclusion will be
found to be improperly drawn, by considering, that wherever women totally
neglect ornament and dress, it is either where they have no materials for these
purposes, as in the Streights of Magellan; or where they are so depressed with
slavery and ill usage, as on the banks of the Oroonoko, that even a passion so
natural, is totally suppressed by the severity of their fate; for even in the
most savage states of mankind, if the women are not depressed with abject
slavery, they make every effort, and strain every nerve to get materials of
finery and of dress. On the coast of Patagonia, where the natives of both sexes
are almost entirely naked, the women, in point of ornament, were much on an
equality with the men, and painted nearly in the same manner; and one of them,
finer than any of her male or female companions, had not only bracelets on her
arms, but strings of beads also interwoven with her hair. -- Among many of the
tribes of wandering Tartars, who are almost as rude and uncultivated as
imagination can paint them, the women, even though in a great measure confined,
are loaded with a profusion of the richest ornaments their husbands or
relations can procure for them. But it would be needless to adduce any more
proofs in support of our opinion; the whole history of mankind, ancient and
modern, is so full of them, that unless we draw general conclusions from
particular instances, we cannot entertain a doubt, that the love of finery is
more natural to the other sex than to ours.

Taking it then for granted, that the love of dress is a natural appetite, we
may reasonably conclude, that it began to show itself in a very early period of
antiquity; but in what manner it was first exerted, and what materials
originally offered themselves for its gratification, are subjects of which we
know but little: the first garment mentioned by history, was composed of leaves
sewed together, but with what they were sewed, we have no occount; from this
hint, it is reasonable to presume, that mankind, in the first ages, made use of
such materials for dress as nature presented, and needed the least preparation.
Strabo tells us, that some nations made use of the bark of trees, others of
herbs or reeds, rudely woven together: but of all other materials, the skins of
animals seem to have been the most universally used in the ages we are
considering: but being then ignorant of the method of making these skins
flexible by the art of tanning, or of separating the hair from them, they wore
them in the same state in which they came from the bodies of the animals:
finding them, however, cumbersome and inconvenient in this condition, it is
natural to suppose, that they soon applied themselves to discover some method
of rendering them more pliable, and better adapted to their purposes; but when,
or where they discovered this method is uncertain. The ancient annals of China
inform us, that Tchifang, one of their first kings, taught them to prepare the
skins of animals for garments, by taking off the hair with a wooden roller; but
even after the skins of animals were, by the various methods practiced in
different countries, rendered something more convenient, they were not
naturally adapted to form a neat and commodious covering for the human body;
many of them were too little, others too large; those that were too large, it
was an easy matter to make less at pleasure; but those that were too little,
could not be enlarged without the art of sewing them together; an art, which a
great part of mankind were long in discovering. Thread does not appear to have
been among the most early inventions, as we may suppose from finding many
savage nations at this day without it, and without thread they could do
nothing. Hesiod tells us, That, instead of thread, the ancients used the sinews
of animals dried, and split into small fibers. Thorns, sharp bones, and the
like, supplied the place of needles; and of those rude materials, and in this
rude manner were the clothes, or rather coverings, of the first ages made; but
we must observe, that they were not fitted to the body as at present; but all
loose, and nearly of an equal size; a circumstance strongly proved by the many
changes of raiment which were in the possession of the great, and of which they
made presents to such as they were inclined to honor, and in which they used
to clothe the guests who came to visit them; purposes which they never could
have answered, had they been all exactly fitted to the body of the original
owner; but this circumstance is also further proved from the clothing of those
nations which retain still the strongest traces of antiquity. The garments of
the Welsh, and Scotch Highlandders, are, at this day, so wide and loose, that
they may easily be applied to the use of any wearer.

As society began to improve, and the sexes became more ambitious of rendering
themselves agreeable to each other, they endeavored to discover such materials
as could be made into garments of a more commodious and agreeable nature than
the leaves or bark of trees, or the skins of animals; and their first efforts
were probably made upon camel's hair; a material which they still work into
clothing in the East. From camel's hair the transition to wool was easy and
natural; and it would soon be found, that either of them formed a covering, not
only more pliable, warm, and substantial; but also more elegant, than any thing
they had before been accustomed to. At what period they first invented the art
of converting these materials into garments is uncertain: all we know is, that
it was very early; for in the patriarchal ages, we are told of the great care
taken by the inhabitants of Palestine and Mesopotamia, in sheering there sheep;
the wool of which they, no doubt, had the art of making into covering and to
ornament. The uses which were now made of wool and of camel's hair, might
possibly suggest the first ideas of separating into distinct threads the fibers
of plants, so as to convert them into the same uses: however that be, it is
certain, that this art was early cultivated. In the plagues which were sent to
distress Egypt, on account of the Israelites, we read of the destruction of the
flax; and in periods a little posterior, we have frequent mention made of the
fine linen of Egypt. Such were the materials in which men clothed themselves in
the first ages. We shall now take a short view of what they had for ornament
and show.

In the days of Abraham, the art of ornamenting the body with various materials
was far from being unknown to many of the Asiatic nations; they had then jewels
of several kinds, as well as vessels of gold and silver. Eliezar, Abraham's
servant, when he went to court Rebecca, for Isaac his master's son, carried
along with him jewels of gold, and silver, and bracelets, and rings, as
presents to procure him a favorable reception. We find the same Rebecca
afterward in possession of perfumed garments, which she put on her son Jacob,
to enable him to cheat his father, by passing himself upon him for his brother
Esau. Perfumes and odours must then have been introduced; and when they had
arrived at the luxury of perfuming their apparel, we may conclude, that the
modes of dressing in those days were not so plain and simple as some would
endeavor to persuade us. Jacob gave his beloved son Joseph a coat of diverse
colors supposed to be made of cotton, and finer than those of his brethren;
which was the cause of their selling him for a slave into Egypt. But
notwithstanding all this finery, the people of the primative ages were not
acquainted with the art of dressing gracefully; their upper garment was only a
piece of cloth, in which they wrapped themselves; nor had they any other
contrivance to keep these firm about them, than by holding them round their
bodies. Many uncultivated nations at this time exhibit the same rude
appearance. We have a striking instance of it in Otaheite, where the people
wrap themselves in pieces of cloth of a length almost incredible; and the
higher the rank of the wearer, so much the more is the length of his cloth
augmented. In the patriarchal ages, the Israelites had advanced a few steps
beyond the simplicity we have now described; they had garments made with
sleeves, and cloaks which they threw over all; but their shoes were like those
of the neighboring nations, only composed of pieces of leather, to defend the
soles of their feet, and fastened on with thongs. So slightly defended, they
never could travel on ^oot, nor hardly stir abroad, without having their feet
much defiled; it was therefore always necessary to wash them when they got
home, a ceremony often mentioned in the scripture, which the servant generally
performed to his master, and the master often to his visitors and guests.

Amid all these anecdotes of the dress of the first ages, it is not a little
surprising, that we have no account of what was worn by the women, except the
few ornaments we have already mentioned being given to Rebecca. But though we
connot now conjecture what was their dress, we are assured, that it differed on
account of different circumstances. -- For Tamar, when she went to sit by the
way-side, to impose herself upon Judah for an harlot, was habited in the
garments peculiar to a widow, which she put off, and dressed herself in such as
were peculiar to an harlot. Whence it appears, that not only widows and
harlots, but perhaps several other conditions were distinguished from one
another by particular dresses; a strong proof that dress was in these periods a
circumstance of no small importance, and greatly attended to; for, where dress
is only in its infancy, it is not made use of as a badge to distinguish one
person from another; but in polished nations, it is not only made use of to
distinguish rank, but even professions and circumstances are marked out by it.

Some of the neighboring nations, and particularly the Midianites, had, in the
primitive ages, carried their attention to dress still farther than the
Israelites; for we read in the book of Judges, of their gold chains, bracelets,
rings, tablets, purple ornaments of their kings, and even gold chains or
collars for the necks of their camels. Though the dress of the common people of
Egypt seems to have been simple, yet the great made use of a variety of
decorations. They had changes of raiment. Joseph gave changes of raiment to
each of his brethren. They wore garments made of cotton, and costly chains
about their necks. As to the dress of the women, all we know of it is, that
they had only one kind, whereas the men had more; whether by one kind of dress
only, is meant, that all their variety of changes were made in one fashion, or
of the same sort of materials, is uncertain; but however this be, they had,
besides their clothes, a variety of ornaments; for Moses tells us, that when
the Israelites finally departed from Egypt, they were ordered to borrow jewels
of gold and jewels of silver, to put them on their sons and daughters, and to
spoil the Egyptians. Nor need we wonder, that they were possessed of these
things at the period when the Israelites went out from them, for even in the
days of Joseph, luxury and magnificence were carried to a great height; they
had, besides their jewels, vessels of gold and silver, rich stuffs and
perfumes; were waited upon by a great number of slaves, and drawn in chariots,
of which they had several sorts; they had embroideries of various kinds which
were also used among the neighboring nations; for Moses mentions works of
embroidery, with an agreeable variety; and Pliny tells us, that they painted
linen by laying certain drugs upon it. -- From all these anecdotes, as well as
from the immense sums which we have already taken notice of being allotted to
the toilette of the queens of Egypt, we may conclude, that the dress of their
women was at least costly, if not elegant. We shall finish what we had to say
on this subject by observing, that what most particularly distinguished this
people, was their attention to cleanliness; they not only kept their garments
exceedingly neat, but the opulent had them washed every time they put them on.

That beauty was in all ages the subject of praise and of flattery, we may
infer from the nature of man as well as learn from the songs of the ancient
bar^s. When women were praised, when they were flattered on this subject, it
was natural for them to wish to see those charms of which they had heard so
much; but what all their ingenuity could not discover, they were directed to by
chance. Some person, looking on the clear surface of a smooth pool, saw his own
image in the water; whether this furnished the first hint that every polished
surface would have the same effect, or whether chance directed to that
discovery also, is uncertain, but we find the use of mirrors in a very early
period in Egypt; and from them, probably, the Israelites first borrowed that
art; for mirrors were common among them in their passage through the
wilderness, as appears from Moses having made his laver of brass, of the
mirrors offered by the women who attended at the door of the tabernacle. The
art of making mirrors of glass was not known in these days. The first and best
are said to have been made long after, of a sand found on the coasts of the
Tyrian sea; those then in use were made of highly polished metal. In Egypt, and
in Palestine, they were of brass. When the ancient Peruvians were first
discovered, their mirrors were of brass: and, at this day, in the East, they
are commonly made of that, or some other metal, capable of receiving a fine
polish.

The use of mirrors, among the Egyptians and Israelites, is a proof that the
ages under review, were not so rude and simple as some would insinuate. Many
nations at this period have not arrived to the knowledge of mirrors. The people
of New Zealand were surprised at this mode of viewing their own faces, and
behaved on the occasion with a mixture of the most ridiculous grimace and
merriment. Almost every writer of voyages into savage countries, presents us
with histories of a similar nature. How rapid is the progress of human genius
in some countries? How slow in othrs? Whence arises this diversity? Is it from
climate, from necessity, or from a difference in the original powers and
faculties of the mind? Is it possible that savages never have seen themselves
in the water? If they have, why should they be so surprised at seeing
themselves in a looking-glass?

The face is the part of the body where female charms and graces are most
conspicuously placed; but as none could see her own face without the assistance
of art; before the use of mirrors, a woman must have entirely depended on the
relation of others, whether she was beautiful or otherwise; on her own
dexterity, or the word of her handmaid, she must have rested the important
affair of having her head-dress properly adjusted, and the color suited to her
complexion; points in which she might often be deceived, but which the use of a
mirror put in her own power to discover. Mirrors, therefore, with regard to
their utility in female life, may be justly reckoned among the most valuable of
human inventions. What kind of dress was used for the head in the primitive
ages we know not; all that we have any account of concerning it is, that on
some occasions the women used veils. If the dress of the head was however as
simple in its construction, as that of the body, the adjusting of it would
require but little time, and still less ingenuity.

CHAPTER XXI. The same Subject continued.
IN periods so remote as these we are now considering, it is as impossible for
us to give any distinct detail of the various dresses used for the body, as of
those used for the head; we have neither descriptions nor monuments left to
elucidate so dark a subject; nor, if we had, is it our intention to give a
minute and circumstantial detail of every article used at the female toilette:
we only mean to point out how far dress has been an object of general
attention, and in what manner this attention has exerted itself; and we shall
leave our readers to make their own reflections, how far a knowledge of the
care bestowed on this article may elucidate the manners of the times, and how
these manners might influence the modes of dressing.

Among other subjects of popular declamation, the present luxury of dress
affords a constant opportunity of endeavoring to persuade us, that our own
times surpass in this article every thing that has gone before us; and that our
own country surpasses all the world. But this is no more than mere declamation;
for if we look back even to very remote periods of antiquity, we shall find
that the same thing was then the subject of declamation as well as at present.
The third chapter of Isaiah presents us with an account of the finery of the
daughters of Babylon, which no modern extravagance has hitherto equalled. Homer
dresses several of his heroes and heroines with a magnificence to which we are
strangers; and Cleopatra exhibited an extravagance in her dress and
entertainments, which in our times would beggar the most wealthy potentate on
the globe. Even in the days of Moses, they were acquainted with the art of
polishing precious stones; and not only knew how to set, but what appears more
extraordinary, were also acquainted with the art of engraving them. The ephod
of Aaron was adorned with two onyxes set in gold, on each of which the names of
six tribes of Israel were engraved. The breast plate of judgment, shone with
twelve precious stones of different colors, upon every one of which was the
name of one of the twelve tribes. We might easily multiply instances to show
the splendor and magnificence of the ancients; but those already given are
sufficient to teach us how little reason there is for declaimers to vilify the
present times, nor have they more reason to exclaim against this country;
whoever has seen the splendor and magnificence of the East, must laugh at
every satire on that of Europe.

Notwithstanding all the precious stones made use of by the ancients, it is
probable, that they were unacquainted with the diamond, which modern refinement
has stamped with such an immense value; some have imagined, that Homer and
Hesiod have mentioned this stone by the name of Adamas and Adamantinos; but it
has been more judiciously supposed that these Greek terms have not the least
relation to it; and Pliny, who has taken much pains to investigate the
discovery of precious stones, can find no mention of this till a period near
the beginning of the Christian era. But long after the discovery of diamonds,
they did not, for want of being properly polished, display half the luster they
do at present; the art of giving them this luster by polishing them with their
own dust, is but a late invention, and ascribed to Lewis de Berquen, a native
of Bruges, who lived only about three hundred years ago.

A desire of attracting the public attention, naturally first prompted the
human race to ornament themselves with the most shining and brilliant things
which nature could supply. Among all these, the diamond, after it was
discovered, held the first rank; it was, therefore, natural, that the mines
which produce it should be sought after with avidity, and preserved with care.
The oldest diamond mine that we know of, is in the river Gouel, which is one of
those that empty themselves into the Ganges. The chain of mountains which runs
between Cape Comori^ and Bengal has yielded a large quantity of diamonds; they
are there found in clusters, lying at from six to twelve feet below the surface
of the ground. The isle of Borneo, according to some travelers, produces a few
diamonds; more are found in Visapour and Golconda; the mines of Visapour have
been known about three hundred years, and those of Golconda not above half that
time. About the beginning of the present century some slaves, who were
condemned to look for gold at Sierra-do-frio in Brazil, used to find some
little bright stones, which they threw away as of no consequence; a few of
these, however, being preserved, and shown to the governor-general of the
mines, he had them examined by able artists, who declared that they were fine
diamonds. Soon after this, search was made for them with such success, that in
a few years the Rio-Jan^iro fleet brought to Lisbon eleven hundred and
forty-six ounces of them. This produced such a plenty, that their price was
considerably diminished; but the Portuguese ministry, in order to reinstate
them in their origin^^ value, conferred on a company the exclusive privilege of
searching for and selling them; and lest the avidity of the company should
frustrate the intention of the ministry, it was stipulated, that no more than
six hundred slaves should be employed in the mines, and that all diamonds
exceeding a certain weight should be the property of the king. Avarice tramples
upon every right human and divine. It was not thought sufficient that death
should be the consequence of encroaching on this privilege of the company; but,
as a further security, it was thought necessary to depopulate all the places
that lay in the neighborhood of the mines, and turn the whole into a solitary
waste, inaccessible to human foot. This waste at present comprehends a space of
three hundred miles, in which there is only one large village, inhabited
entirely by the slaves of the company. So short an account of this the most
important of all bagatelles, we hope our readers will not consider as foreign
to our subject, especially as it is now not only such an article of commerce
and luxury, but also the ornament which, of all others, is most eagerly sought
after by the fair sex, and the badge which distinguishes opulence and quality
from the lower and more humble ranks of life.

Individuals of the human species, like those of all others, grow old, and
suffer by decay; but the species itself, always the same, is constantly
dististinguished by the same propensities, and actuated by the same passions;
it treads in the same path that it did five thousand years ago; dignity and
power were then, as well as now, in many places conferred by opulence, and
distinguished by ornament and dress; and beauty was fond of adding to nature by
all the decorations and embellishments of art. Aaron, as we have already seen,
was distinguished by a great profusion of ornaments; the greatest part of the
heroes of Homer were distinguished by the richness and brilliancy of their
armor; and the kings of the ancient Medes and Persians, and of many of the
neighboring nations, had golden scepters, as ensigns of their power and
authority.

But to return from the subject of badges of distinction, to the dress and
ornament of common life. In ancient Babylon, the men wore stuffs wrought with
gold and silver, ornamented with costly embroidery, and enriched with rubies,
emeralds, saphires, pearls, and other jewels, of which the East has always been
remarkably productive; collars of gold were also a part of their finery* such
was the dress of their men; that of their women has not been so particularly
described; but when we consider the rank which women held among them, and the
natural propensity of the sex to dress and ornament, we have reason to believe
it was still more costly and magnificent, especially as we so frequently find
the prophets reproving the daughters of Babylon for their pride, and the vanity
which they displayed in the variety and splendor of their attire. To the
costliness of the materials of their garments, the Babylonish women frequently
added the expense of the most precious perfumes, with which they perfumed not
only their apparel, but also their bodies; and as it is well known that the
perfumes of Babylon where every where famous for their superior excellence, and
bore an exceeding high price, this luxurious article must have added greatly to
the expense of the female toilette.

Dress and ornament did not less excite the attention of the Medes and Persians
than of the Babylonians; the women of their kings were habited in all the pomp
of Eastern magnificence, and the revenues of whole provinces were frequently
employed in decorating her who happened to be the greatest favorite. The
queens had certain districts set apart for maintaining their toilette and
wardrobe, one for the veil, and another for the girdle, etc. and these
districts took their names from the different parts of the dress to which they
were appropriated, as the queen's (...), the queen's mantle, etc. The Medes,
when a distinct nation, appear to have paid the greatest attention to dress,
for the luxury and magnificence of which, they are very frequently exclaimed
against by the writers of antiquity. They wore long flowing robes with large
hanging sleeves; these robes were interwoven with a variety of different
colors, all of the most gaudy and shining nature: and besides, they were
richly embroidered with gold and silver. They were likewise loaded with
bracelets, gold chains, and necklaces adorned with precious stones, and wore
upon the head a kind of tiara or high pointed cap, exceedingly magnificent;
nay, so far had they carried their attention to every species of decoration,
that they even tinged their eyes and eyebrows, painted their faces, and
mingled artificial with their natural hair. Such, in the articles of dress and
ornament, was the care and attention of the men; antiquity has left us in the
dark concerning that of their women, and has only informed us in general, that
they were exceedingly beautiful. We may, therefore, reasonably suppose, that in
a country where dress was so much cultivated, they did not leave those charms
of nature unassisted, but strove to improve them by every ornament of art.

Notwithstanding what we have now mentioned, in looking over the history of
antiquity, we are apt at first view to imagine, that the ancient heroes
despised dress, as an effeminacy in which it was below their notice to indulge
themselves. Hercules had only a lion's skin flung over his shoulders, and a
variety of the heroes of Homer, and the other ancient writers, are wrapped in
those of the different animals they had destroyed; but this seems only to have
been the mode in which they clothed themselves in ordinary life, or perhaps
rather when they went to war, or to hunting, in order to make them appear more
terrible; for on public occasions, when ceremony was thought necessary, they
had other garments of a very different nature. The mantle of Ulysses is
described by Homer as an extraordinary piece of finery, and several of the rest
of his heroes are now and then introduced in the utmost magnificence of dress
that gods and men could fabricate for them; even in the heroic ages, the Greeks
wore clothes adorned with gold and silver, and ladies of distinction had long
flowing robes fastened with clasps of gold, and bracelets of the same metal,
adorned with ambe^; nor were they then inconscious that nature might be
improved by art, for they endeavored to improve their complexions by several
sorts of paint, in composing and laying on of which, they were scarcely less
dexterous than the ladies of the first rank and fashion at Versailles. But with
all these loads of finery, the ancients were strangers to elegance, and even to
convenience, in their dress. In the times we are speaking of, the Greeks had no
shoes, but only a kind of sandals, which they put on when they went out;
neither did they know the use of breeches, stockings, nor drawers, nor pins,
nor buckles, nor buttons, nor pockets; they had not invented the art of lining
clothes, and when cold, were obliged to supply the defect of lining, by
throwing one garment over another.

As the Greeks emerged from the barbarity of the heroic ages, among other
articles of culture, they began to bestow more attention on the convenience and
elegance of dress. At Athens, the ladies commonly employed the whole morning in
dressing themselves in a decent and becoming manner; their toilette consisted
in paints and washes, of such a nature as to clean and beautify the skin, and
they took great care to clean their teeth, an article too much neglected: some
also blackened their eyebrows, and, if necessary, supplied the deficiency of
the vermillion on their lips, by a paint said to have been exceedingly
beautiful. At this time the women in the Greek islands make much use of a paint
which they call Sulama, which imparts a beautiful redness to the cheeks, and
gives the skin a remarkable gloss. Possibly this may be the same with that made
use of in the times we are considering; but however that be, some of the Greek
ladies at present gild their faces all over on the day of their marriage, and
consider this coating as an irresistible charm; and in the island of Scios,
their dress does not a little resemble that of ancient Sparta, for they go with
their bosoms uncovered, and with gowns which only reach to the calf of their
leg, in order to show their fine garters, which are commonly red ribbons
curiously embroidered. But to return to ancient Greece, the ladies spent
likewise a part of their time in composing head-dresses, and though we have
reason to suppose that they were not then so preposterously fantastic as those
presently composed by a Parisian milliner, yet they were probably objects of no
small industry and attention, especially as we find that they then dyed their
hair, perfumed it with the most costly essences, and by the means of hot irons
disposed of it in curls, as fancy or fashion directed. Their clothes were made
of stuffs so extremely light and fine as to show their shapes, without
offending against the rules of decency. At Sparta, the case was widely
different; we shall not describe the dress of the women, it is sufficient to
say, that it has been loudly complained of by almost every ancient author who
has treated on the subject.

From what has now been related it appears, that the women of antiquity were
not less solicitous about their persons than the moderns, and that the
materials for decorating them, were neither so few, nor so simple, as has been
by some imagined; facts which, in the review of the Romans, will appear still
more conspicuous. In the more early periods of that great republic, the Romans,
in their persons as well as in their manners, were simple and unadorned; we
shall, therefore, pass over the attire of these times, and confine our
observations to those when the wealth of the whole world centered within the
walls of Rome.

The Roman ladies went to bathe in the morning, and from thence returned to the
toilette, where women of rank and fortune had a number of slaves to attend on
and do every thing for them, while themselves, looking constantly in their
glasses, practiced various attitudes, studied the airs of negligence, the
smiles that best became them, and directed the placing of every lock of the
hair, and every part of the head-dress. Coquettes, ladies of morose temper, and
those whose charms had not attracted so much notice as they expected, often
blamed the slaves who dressed them for this want of success; and if we may
believe Juvenal, sometimes chastised them for it with the most unfeeling
severity. At first, the maids who attended the toilette were to assist in
adjusting every part of the dress, but afterward each had her proper task
assigned her; one had the combing, curling, and dressing of the hair; another
managed the perfumes; a third disposed of the jewels, as fancy or fashion
directed; a fourth laid on the paint and cosmetics: all these, and several
others, had names expressive of their different employments: but besides these,
whose business it was to put their hands to the labor of the toilette, there
were others, who, acting in a station more exalted, only attended to give their
opinion and advice, to declare what colors most suited the complexion, and
what method of dressing gave the greatest additional luster to the charms of
nature. To this important council of the toilette we have no account of the
male sex being ever admitted: this useful, though perhaps indelicate invention
was reserved for the ladies of Paris, who wisely considering, that as they
dress only for the men, the men must be the best judges of what will please
themselves.

As the loves and the graces more particularly reside in the face, the Roman
ladies were hardly more attentive to the face itself, than to the decorations
that surrounded it; they had combs of box and of ivory for the hair, the curls
of which they fastened with gold and silver pins; besides these, they commonly
stuck into their hair, pins set with pearl, and plaited it with chains and
rings of gold, or with purple or white ribbons, shining with jewels and
precious stones; they had also in their ears, rings of gold, loaded with pearl,
or other jewels. The modern gigantic head-dress of the present time, with all
its combs, and wool, and curls, is not the invention of this age; it is at
least as old as the times we are delineating: the Roman ladies, by the
assistance of borrowed hair or wool, decorated their heads with tresses, knots,
and curls, all so variously disposed, and in so many different stories one
above another, that the whole looked like a regular piece of architecture: nor
was it always necessary that a lady should spend her precious time in sitting
to have her upper apartments built upon in this manner; the Romans, as well as
the moderns, knew how to mingle convenience with folly, they could purchase in
the shops, as at present, a head-dress ready built, which they had only the
trouble to clap on. It would be tedious to mention the various forms in which
these voluminous head-dresses were constructed; suffice it to say, that there
were some modes of dressing the head which were considered as distinguishing
marks of modesty and virtue, while others were as strong indications of
lewdness and debauchery.

But the disposing of the hair in various forms and figures; the interweaving
it with ribbons, jewels, and gold; were not the only methods they made use of
to make it agreeable to taste; light-coloured hair had the preference of all
others; both men and women therefore dyed their hair of this color, then
perfumed it with sweet-scented essences, and powdered it with gold dust; a
custom of the highest extravagance, which the Romans brought from Asia, and
which, according to Josephus, was practiced among the Jews. White hair-powder
was not then invented, nor did the use of it come into fashion till toward the
end of the sixteenth century; the first writer who mentions it is L'Etoile, who
relates, that in the year 1593, the Nuns walked the streets of Paris curled and
powdered; from that time the custom of powdering has become so common, that in
most places of Europe, but especially in France, it is used by both sexes, and
by people of all ages, ranks and conditions.

Such were the ornaments with which the Roman ladies surrounded the face; those
of the face itself consisted of cosmetics, paints, and even pastes; of the
cosmetics, it would be superfluous to give any account, as it is presumed
modern invention has furnished the present times with such as are much
preferable. Chalk and white lead were then used as paints, for we are told by
Martial, that Fabula was afraid of the rain, on account of the chalk on her
face; and Sabella of the Sun, because of the ceruse with which she was painted:
the famous Poppaea, who was first the mistress, and afterward the wife of
Nero, made use of an unctuous paint which hardened upon the face, and was left
there till she chose to take it off by warm milk; its effects were to soften
the skin, and improve the complexion; and as it originated from an empress, it
soon became so fashionable at Rome, that it was used almost by every woman when
at home, and, in the common phrase of the times, was called the domestic face,
and if we may credit Juvenal, the only one which frequently was known to the
husband, the natural, or more charming one which it covered, being reserved for
occasional lovers. In order also to rectify what they supposed nature had made
amiss, they had depilatory plasters to take off superfluous hairs from the
eyebrows, or other parts of the face, where they judged that they were
imperfections; nor was the art of painting, and otherwise making artificial
eyebrows, unknown to them. The teeth, we may readily believe, were also an
object of much attention; they were not only cleaned and whitened by a variety
of methods, but artificial ones were placed in the room of such as age or
accident had destroyed; but the materials of which they were made seem not to
have been judiciously chosen. Thou have only three teeth, says Martial to
Maxima, and these are of box, varnished over. But with all this art, there were
some defects for which they were not provided with any remedy: 'If,' says the
same poet to Laelia, 'thou art not ashamed to make use of borrowed teeth and
hair, yet still thou must be embarrassed; What will thou do for an eye, there
are none to be bought? Had the unfortunate Laelia lived in our more inventive
days, even this defect might have been supplied; though perhaps an eye made by
the Baron de Wensel, is not altogether so killing as one fabricated by nature.
To sum up all, the Roman ladies took great care that their skins should be kept
perfectly clean and sweet, by a constant practice of bathing; and some of them,
not contented with cammon water for this purpose, used to mix it with a variety
of detergent or sweet-scented ingredients: Poppaea, whom we have before
mentioned, had every day the milk of five hundred asses made into a bath, which
she supposed gave her skin a softness and polish beyond that of any other woman.

In the earlier periods of the Roman republic, as among every uncultivated
people, there was but little difference between the dress of the men and the
women, the toga being the common garment of both; at length, however, a
difference was introduced, and the garment called Stola became the distinction
of the women, as the toga was of the men. It would be dry and insipid to give a
minute detail of the form and fashion of these and several other kinds of dress
used by the Romans, a much more adequate idea of which can be formed by a
single glance at a bust or drawing, than by the most accurate description. We
shall, therefore, only observe, that the most common materials of which their
clothes were composed, were wool and flax; materials less fine indeed than
those we have at present, but to supply that defect, they were richly
embroidered, and frequently loaded with different kinds of jewels. Linen only
became known to the Romans in the time of the Emperors; and, perhaps, nearly
about the same time, the use of silk was introduced among them; but it was long
so scarce and expensive* that a small quantity of it was only mixed with wool
or flax in the composition of their finest stuffs. Heliogabalus is the first on
record who had a robe made entirely of silk. At that time it must have been
exceedingly dear, for even more than fifty years afterward it was sold for its
weight in gold; as we learn from the answer of Aurelian to his wife, when she
desired him to let her have a silk mantle, I shall take care, said he, not to
buy threads for their weight in gold.

As silk is the most beautiful and elegant material which has ever been made
use of to adorn their fair forms whose history we are writing, we hope our
readers will not consider a short account of it as foreign to our purpose. Silk
is said to have been brought from Persia into Greece three hundred and
twenty-three years before Christ, and from India to Rome in the year two
hundred and seventy-four after Christ. During the reign of Tiberius, a law was
made in the senate, forbidding men to debase themselves by wearing silk, which
was fit only for women. It was in these days supposed to grow like cotton upon
trees. In the year five hundred and fifty-five, two monks brought from Cerinda,
in the East Indies, to Constantinople, the eggs of some silkworms, which
having hatched in a dunghill, they fed the young insects with mulberry leaves,
and by this management they soon multiplied to such a degree, that manufactures
of silk were erected at Constantionple, at Athens, at Thebes, and at Borinth.
In the year eleven hundred and thirty, Roger, king of Scicily, brought
manufacturers of silk from Greece, and settled them at Palermo, where they
taught the Sicilians the art of breeding the silk worms, and of spinning and
weaving the silk. From Sicily, the art was carried into Italy, from thence to
Spain: and a little before the time of Francis the first, it was brought to the
south of France. Henry the Fourth of France was at great pains to introduce
manufactures of silk into his kingdom, contrary to the advice of his favorite
minister the Duke de Sully, and by his perseverance, at last brought them to a
tolerable perfection. In the year twelve hundred and eighty-six, the ladies of
some noblemen first appeared in silk mantles in England, at a ball in
Kennelworth Castle in Warwickshire. In the year sixteen hundred and twenty, the
art of weaving silk was first introduced into England, and in the year
seventeen hundred and nineteen, Lombe's machine for throwing silk was erected
at Derby, a piece of mechanism which well deserves the attention and applause
of every beholder; it contains twenty-six thousand five hundred and eighty-six
wheels, the whole of which receive their motion from one wheel that is turned
by water. Such was the introduction of silk, but it continued long too scarce
and dear to be applied to common use. Henry the Second of France was the first
in Europe who wore silk stockings; in the reign of Henry the Seventh, no silk
stockings had ever appeared in England; Edward the Sixth, his son and
successor, was presented by Sir Thomas Gresham with the first pair that ever
were worn in this country; and the present was at that time much talked of as
valuable and uncommon. Queen Elizabeth was also presented with a pair of black
silk stockings by her silk-woman, and was so fond of them, that we are told by
Holwell, she never wore any other kind afterward. -- From these times,
however, silk has, in every shape, become so uncommon in this country, that it
is now no longer, as formerly, the distinguishing badge of rank and op^lence,
but to be found among people of every station, from the throne to the dunghill.

But to return to our subject. The most common, as well as most honorable
color among the Romans, except the purple, only allotted to their emperors,
was white. It was long before the fashion of wearing garments of various
colors was introduced among them; white was not only the common color of the
garments worn by the ladies, but also of their shoes, during the time of the
republic. Aurelian granted them a power of wearing red ones; and, at the same
time, prohibited all the men from that privilege, except himself and successors
in the empire.

Shoes, with high heels, were first invented at Rome; Augustus wore them, in
order to make himself appear taller; the priests put them on at their solemn
sacrifices, and ladies of distinction at balls and public meetings. The shoes
of great men were adorned with gold, and we have reason to believe, though it
is not recorded, that the ladies copied their example. Heliogabalus adorned his
shoes with precious stones, finely engraved by the greatest artists: the
succeeding emperors, imitating the pattern he had shown them, loaded their
shoes with a variety of ornaments; and had the Roman eagle, for the most part,
embroidered on them, studded round with pearls and diamonds; but we shall cease
to wonder at this foolish extravagance of the emperors, when we are told, that
even private citizens of Rome, besides the ornaments on the upper parts of
their shoes, had the soles of them sometimes made of gold.

We have already seen, that the ancient inhabitants of the North had a much
greater regard for their women than any other people, who were equally rude and
uncultivated: it would, therefore, be offering an indignity to these women, to
suppose, that they, in their turn, did not endeavor to please and become
agreeable to the men, by such arts of dress and ornament as were then known
among them, as well as by the virtues of chastity and obedience, for which they
were so remarkably distinguished. We are not, however, to suppose, that in
these articles we shall find them equal to many of the ancient nations we have
hitherto mentioned. The countries they inhabited, in themselves barren and
unhospitable, hardly afforded any thing to pamper luxury: all the necessary
arts were either totally unknown, or only in a state of infancy; of the elegant
ones, the northerns were entirely ignorant. They were constantly, it is true,
at war; but these wars were not, like those of Rome, undertaken to subdue
neighboring nations; and by plundering them, to accumulate the means of
splendor and magnificence; but generally either to revenge private quarrels,
or carry home with them a load of provisions to be wasted in riotous festivity.
From all these causes, the materials which furnished the female toilette must
have been but few and inelegant. The hair, which when properly managed is,
without any ornament, one of the greatest beauties of the sex, seems to have
been the object of their chief attention. It was sometimes tied and knotted on
the crown of their heads, from whence falling down, it hung negligently on
their backs and shoulders. Among some tribes, they had acquired the art of
curling it; but among the greatest part, it flowed loose and carelessly in the
wind. A linen shift, without any sleeves, and over this a cloak of the skins of
such animals as their husbands had killed in hunting, seems to have been their
most magnificent finery. Where nature has been liberal, she requires but little
assistance from art. Such was the case with the women of the nations we are now
considering; they were generally beautiful, having lively blue eyes, large but
regular features, a fine complexion, and a skin, which, for whiteness, equalled
the snow upon their mountains. Their stature was tall, their shape easy and
majestic; and, to crown the whole, this majesty was blended with all that
softness which so peculiarly characterises the sex, and which renders them at
once the objects of our admiration and our love. So accomplished, they had
little occasion for the toilette, and they made as little use of it; where
nature had done so much, art would only have spoiled the work.

We shall not endeavor to develope the various modes of dress, which were the
offspring of fancy, fashion, or necessity, among the descendants of these
northern nations, of whom we have now been speaking, in those periods, called
the Middle Ages, or after they had overturned the Roman Empire, and made
themselves masters of the greatest part of Europe. In the history of France we
have the following sketches of it, after enumerating the various changes which
the dress of the men had undergone. The dress of the ladies, it may be
supposed, says the Author, had likewise its revolutions. They seem, for near
nine hundred years, not to have been much taken up with ornaments; nothing
could require less time or nicety than their headdress, and the disposition of
their hair. Every part of their linen was quite plain, but at the same time,
extremely fine. Laces were long unknown. Their gowns, on the right side of
which was embroidered their husbands' coat of arms, and on the left that of
their own family, were so close, as to show all the delicacy of their shape,
and came up so high, as to cover their whole breast up to the neck. The habit
of widows had very much that of our nuns. It was not until Charles the sixth
that they began to expose their shoulders. -- The gallantry of Charles the
Seventh's court bro'^ in the use of bracelets, necklaces, and rings. -- Queen
Ann de Bretagne despised those trinkets, and Catherine de Medicis made it her
whole business to invent new. Caprice, luxury, and vanity, have at length
brought them to their present enormity.

To this account we shall add some remarks on the dress of the Anglo-Saxons and
Danes. They considered their hair as one of their greatest personal beauties,
and took great care to dress it to the utmost advantage. Young ladies wore it
loose, and flowing in ringlets over their shoulders; but after marriage they
cut it shorter, tied it up, and covered it with a head-dress, according to the
fashion of the times; but to have the hair cut entirely off, was a disgrace of
such a nature, that it was even thought a punishment not in adequate to the
crime of adultery: so great, in the Middle Ages, was the value set upon the
hair by both sexes, that, as a piece of the most peculiar mortification, it was
ordered by the canons of the church, that the clergy should keep their hair
short, and shave the crown of their head; and that they should not, upon any
pretense whatever, endeavor to keep the part so shaved from the public view.
Many of the clergy of these times, finding themselves so peculiarly mortified,
and perhaps so easily distinguished from all other people by this
particularity, as to be readily detected when they committed any of the follies
or crimes to which human nature is in every situation sometimes liable,
endeavored to persuade mankind, that long hair was criminal, in order to
reduce the whole to a similarity with themselves. Amongst these, St. Wulstan
eminently distinguished himself; He rebuked, says William of Malmsbury, the
wicked of all ranks with great boldness; but was particularly severe upon those
who were proud of their long hair. When any of these vain people bowed their
heads before him, to receive his blessing; before he gave it he cut a lock from
their hair, with a sharp penknife, which he carried about him for that purpose;
and commanded them, by way of penance for their sins, to cut all the rest in
the same manner: if any of them refused to comply with his command, he
reproached them for their effeminacy, and denounced the most dreadful judgments
against them. Such, however, was the value of the hair in those days, that many
rather submitted to his censures, than part with it; and such was the folly of
the church, and of this saint in particular, that the most solemn judgments
were denounced against multiudes, for no other crime than not making use of
penknives and scissars, to cut off an ornament bestowed by nature.

We have already seen, that the French ladies, in the time of Charlemagne, were
acquainted with the use of linen; nor were the Anglo-Saxons strangers to it, as
appears from several anecdotes of their history; and particularly from this,
That the clergy frequently ordered the most obstinate sinners to wear woollen
shirts next to their bodies, as an extraordinary penance; it would seem,
however, that stockings, and other kinds of covering for the legs, were then
but little used; as the clergy, who had the wealth, as well as power of these
times in their hands, frequently, with naked legs approached the altar, and
celebrated mass; till the year 785, when a canon was made in these terms: Let
no minister of the altar presume to approach it, to celebrate mass, with naked
legs, lest his filthiness appear, and God be offended. Some persons of
condition, however, had, in these times, a kind of covering for their legs,
which was fastened on with bandages, wrapped about the leg, from the foot to
the knee, as appears from the figures of Edward the Confessor, Guido, count of
Ponthieu, and some others, in the famous tapestry of Bayeux; one of the most
valuable monuments of the times we are considering. But though many of the
figures of this tapestry are without stockings; yet neither in this, nor any
other of the monuments, which represent the dress of these times, are there any
without shoes; though it would seem, that mankind were then so little
acquainted with the proper materials for this purpose, that they generally made
them of wood. That the common people should not be able to afford any other
than wooden shoes, in periods so distant, does not surprise us; but we are
rather astonished, when we are told, that in the ninth and tenth centuries,
some of the greatest princes in Europe, were only equipped in this manner; sure
indications, that the invention of the times had not then discovered any thing
that was more proper for the purpose.

The distinguishing the two sexes from each other, by the materials and fashion
of their dress, is a certain sign, that cultivation is arrived at no
inconsiderable length: among the ancient Germans there was, in this article,
but little difference. Among the Anglo-Saxons, it consisted only of a few
particulars; the most material of which was, that the mantles of the women
flowed down almost to the ground, whereas those of the men were considerably
shorter. Those people, as well as the Danes, seem to have been fond of every
kind of ornament, and particularly of gold chains and bracelets: gold chains
were worn by officers of high rank as well civil as military, and being given
by the sovereigns, these sovereigns were on that account frequently called by
the poets, givers of gold chains. Bracelets of gold, or other precious
materials, are an ornament now solely appropriated to women. Among the Danes,
however, they were indiscriminately the ornaments of either sex; Earl Goodwin
presented king Hardicanute with gold bracelets for his arms, and so sacred were
ornaments of this kind then estemeed, that they frequently swore by them, and
are said to have held an oath of this nature as tremenduous and inviolable, as
the gods of the pagans did that which was sworn by the Styx.

In the Middle Ages there prevailed among mankind such an universal distrust of
each other, owing to the frequency of crimes and the weakness of laws, that
there was but little mutual intercourse or social communication among the
inhabitants of Europe. Neighbors were frequently as much afraid of each other
as the people of different nations are at present when engaged in a war. On
this account there were none of those social meetings which have since called
great numbers of both sexes together; hence neither sex had then any other
motive to induce them to dress than the love of cleanliness, and the innate
desire of finery. When the institution of chivalry started up, it gave a happy
turn to this rudeness of manners; it a^forded more protection to the women, and
consequently enabled them to see more company; it introduced numerous meetings
at tilts and tournaments, where the ladies were constituted the judges of
valor and rewarders of the valiant, where their charms were supposed to add
courage to the hearts, and great strength to the arms of their admirers, and
where they were consequently furnished with the very strongest motives to
decorate and embellish their persons. But besides tilts tournaments, in the
Middle Ages, there arose also in Europe another kind of public meetings, called
Fairs, to which both sexes, and all ranks resorted. -- While a mutual
diffidence and the greatest distrust diffused their baleful influence, and
there was hardly any security from rapine and murder, but in the castles and
strong holds of the barons, trade and commerce were of consequence in the most
languid state; to revive them in some measure, fairs were first instituted,
where merchants and traders brought their commodities and exposed them to sale;
but a bare sale of goods for which there was but little demand, and still less
money to purchase with, did not at first answer the end of drawing many people
together* the venders in time, to allure the multitude, besides the exposure of
their goods, entertained them with a variety of public shows and diversions,
and from that time their fairs became the fashionable places of rendezvous, and
were not only another motive for the sex to dress and endeavor to appear to
advantage, but also afforded them the materials for that important purpose.

CHAPTER XXII. The same Subject continued.
WE have already, in treating on the subject of dress, had occasion to give
some account of the ancient splendor and magnificence of the Easterns; let us
now take a short view of their present condition, which we shall see is still
governed by the same customs, and influenced by the same principles; for we
find them at this day fond of that supine indolence, and of that pageantry and
show, which so strongly marked their character from the earliest periods in
which history gives an account of them.

Such is the constitution of the two sexes, that the whole of their actions are
guided and influenced by each other. The women dress and use every means to
appear beautiful and engaging in order to please the men, and the men assume
bravery and every masculine accomplishment in their power in order to please
and render themselves acceptable to the women. In countries where the sexes are
allowed in a free and unrestrained manner to keep company with each other, such
mutual efforts on both sides, as they appear to be the effects of that company,
pass without, exciting any wonder; but when we consider that in the East women
should take the trouble to decorate and adorn themselves, when they are certain
that these decorations and ornaments cannot be seen by the other sex, we are
astonished. That women, however, do so, is an incontestible fact; and so
powerful in the female breast is the passion of being admired, that should a
woman, as it frequently happens in Asia, have only once in twenty years a
chance of being seen and exciting that passion, she would every day during that
time, use every possible endeavor to put herself in a condition to do so. The
Abbe Lambert, in his account of the manners and customs of the East, observes
of the Chinese women, that though they are certain that they can be seen by
none but their female domestics, yet they every morning pass several hours in
dressing and adorning themselves.

Though the Chinese are perhaps the most regularly oeconomical people on the
globe, yet the dress of their women, and particularly the ornaments of their
heads, are strong instances of that love of finery and show which has ever
prevailed in the East. The head-dress of their ladies commonly consists of
several ringlets of hair variously disposed, and every where ornamented with
small bunches of gold or silver flowers. Some of them adorn their heads with
the figure of a fabulous bird made of gold or silver, according to the quality
of the person, which has a grotesque though magnificent appearance. Ladies of
the first rank sometimes have several of those birds fastened together so as to
form the figure of a crown, the workmanship of which is exquisitely curious. --
Young ladies generally wear a kind of crown made of pasteboard, covered with
silk, and ornamented with pearls, diamonds, and other jewels; and on the top of
the head a bunch of flowers, either natural or artificial, in the middle of
which is stuck small wires with sparkling jewels fastened on their points. Such
is the attention these women pay to the dress of their heads, though secluded
from all communication with the greater part of that sex whom they would
naturally wish to please by it. The dress of their bodies is of all others the
most clumsy and inelegant, though often made of the richest materials, and
decorated, or rather loaded, with the most costly ornaments; our readers,
however, will form a better idea of it, by looking at a Chinese figure, than we
could convey by the most labored description.

In that extensive part of the East Indies formerly subject to the Moguls,
though women are, perhaps, more rigidly confined than in China, yet we find the
same passion for ornament; their garments are made of the finest silks, richly
flowered with gold and silver, and fitted to the shape with a degree of ease
and elegance, which shows, that while they have taken nature for their model,
their taste in imitating her is far from being contemptible. About the middle
they wear a girdle exquisitely embroidered, at the end of which, where it is
fastened before, there hangs a globe of gold, or a large pearl; but their
greatest attention seems to be paid to their hair, which they dress in a
variety of forms, as pyramids, triangles, crescents, or in the figure of some
favorite flower or shrub; this is done by gold buckles and wires intermixed
with diamonds, and is a work of much time and no less dexterity, though after
all, more easily demolished than an head-dress of any other fashion. Besides
these tedious and expensive methods, they have a less difficult and more common
way of dividing their hair into tresses, which flow with careless ease upon
their shoulders, and to which they tie precious stones, and little plates of
gold; when thus dressed, to be able to move the head in such a manner as to
show to the best advantage all its splendor and magnificence, is a female art
not less difficultly attained, than the proper management of the fan was
formerly in Europe, or the taking snuff with such an air as to display in the
most enchanting manner a fine hand, and a finer diamond ring.

It has been a custom time immemorial, for women over the greatest part of the
world to pierce their ears, in order to hang to them some trinket, which either
gratified their vanity, or was supposed to add some additional luster to their
charms; but this custom of giving torture by a ridiculous incision, and adding
a superfluous load to nature, has not been confined to the ears only, the
ancient inhabitants of the East had nose as well as ear jewels, and in several
parts of the world we find the custom continued to this day. In some parts of
the Indies they pierce one nostril, and put into it a gold ring, in which is
set the largest and finest diamond they can procure. Our late adventurers in
quest of discoveries to the South Sea, met a few instances of men who had
something like a feather stuck across through both nostrils; and in New South
Wales it was almost common for the men to thrust the bone of some animal, five
or six inches long, and nearly as thick as one's finger, through their noses,
which so filled the nostrils, that they not only snuffled disagreeably, but
were also obliged constantly to keep their mouths open for breath.

To us Europeans, who have hardly left any part of the body except the nose
without its particular ornaments and decorations, a nose embellished with
jewels, or other trinkets, has an exceedingly grotesque appearance; but this is
only the effect of custom, from which the mind generally imbibes the ideas of
beauty, elegance, and even of utility and necessity. Thus the Hottentot is
persuaded that beauty is greatly augmented by a proper quantity of grease and
urine. At Smyrna, the women imagine it consists in a large plump fat body, with
prominent breasts; to obtain all which, they take a variety of medicines, and
use a variety of superstitious ceremonies. The Dutchman finds elegance in a
large pair of trunk breeches, the ^iser utility in that hoarded store which,
even though starving, he dares not make use of, and the man of fashion thinks
his coach almost as necessary as the porter does his legs and shoulders. That
these things really happen, we need but reflect on what we feel, on any
remarkable change of fashion; how uncouth, how unbecoming does the new one
commonly appear, till it is familiarized by custom, and as soon as that
happens, should even the fashion we thought so much preferable to it return, we
should stand in need of the aid of custom to revive our former opinion of it.

But though both sexes in some parts of the East Indies adorn their noses, the
ladies do not forget their ears also, which they generally pierce as in Europe,
and load with gold and jewels; they likewise wear various kinds of necklaces,
bracelets, and rings, many of which are of immense value there, and would be
still more so among us; nor are they content with such kinds of dress and
ornament as cannot be mistake^ for nature, they apply themselves likewise to
such as nearly resemble her, and may easily be taken (...) her work. They have
a variety of paints, which they mix and lay on with such dexterity, that it is
exceedingly difficult to discover them; these they ^ommonly apply to their
cheeks, and to their eyes; they likewise paint the extremities of their nails,
but in this instance, departing entirely from nature, they lay on a fine red so
thick that on the slightest view it appears to be the work of art. But besides
the arts of ornament and dress, they have here, as in all other parts of the
world, various other methods of rendering themselves agreeable, and attracting
attention. In Europe, a fine lady sometimes draws the eye upon her by the
brilliancy of her snuff box; in Asia, she frequently accomplishes the same end
by a most liberal use of betel, which is a root chewed by all ranks and
conditions, as in Europe we do tobacco, and with which the more highly a lady
is scented, the more agreeable she becomes to her admirers.

But betel is not the only thing which the ladies depend on to render
themselves grateful to the senses, they use for this purpose also a great
variety of the most costly essences and perfumes, whose aromatic flavor is
brought^ to the highest perfection by an indulgent climate and vertical sun. Of
these they are so exceedingly fond, that the expense of perfumes often exceeds
that of clothes and jewels; for they are seldom without some perfumed flower,
or fruit, in their hands; when they have none of these, they hold a phial of
precious essence, which they, from time to time, sprinkle on their garments,
although they are perfumed afresh every time they put them on. They have
likewise in the East a particular mode of attracting our sex by the
voluptuousness of their figures, by their manners, and by their conversation;
all of which are calculated to excite passion and desire. Among the
Balliaderes, or dancing girls of the East, we meet with a piece of dress or
ornament, of a very particular nature. To prevent their breasts from growing to
large, or ill-shaped, they enclose them in cases made of exceeding light wood,
which are joined together, and buckled behind; these cases are so smooth and
pliable, that they yield to the various attitudes of the body without being
flattened, or injuring the delicacy of the skin; the outside of them is covered
with gold leaf, and studded with diamonds. This ornament is well calculated to
prevent the laxity induced by a hot climate, and while it thus preserves the
beauties of nature, it does not so much conceal them as to hinder the heavings
and palpitations of the bosom from being perceived.

Were we to survey all Asia, almost the whole of it would afford the strongest
proofs of Eastern splendor and magnificence; but we shall finish what we had
to say of it by a relation of the state in which the Portuguese originally
found Ormus, when they first sailed into the Gulf of Persia. The streets were
covered with mats, and in some places with carpets; and the linen awnings,
which were suspended from the tops of the houses, prevented any inconvenience
from the heat of the sun. Indian cabinets, ornamented with gilded vases, or
china filled with flowering shaubs, or aromatic plants, adorned their
apartments; camels, laden with water, were stationed in the public squares;
Persian wines, perfumes, and all the delicacies of the table, were furnished in
the greatest abundance, and they had the music of the East in its highest
perfection. Ormus was crowded with beautiful women from all parts of Asia, who
were instructed from their infancy in all the arts of varying and heightening
the pleasures of voluptuous love: universal opulence, an extensive commerce, a
refined luxury, politeness in the men, and gallantry in the women, united all
their attractions to make this city the seat of pleasure.

Striking as this picture of Asiatic magnificence may appear, in that part of
it which relates to female dress and ornament, it may be equalled, if not
surpassed, by the inhabitants of Constantinople; who, being originally Asiatic,
brought with them from that country the manners and customs which at present
prevail among them. The Turkish dress of Lady Montague, which we shall not
describe, as we presume the generality of our fair readers have read her
Letters, shows, that the ladies of Constantinople are far from being destitute
of taste, and that they know how to join the elegant with the splendid and
useful; a circumstance which appears still more plain in the description of the
dress of the fair Fatima. But in that which she gives of the habit of the
Sultana, who had formerly been the favorite mistress of the Grand Signior,
while we are struck with the most costly magnificence, we rather form an idea
of a woman loaded with the pageantry of state, than dressed with ease or
propriety.

Though we have now mentioned the Turks who inhabit a part of Europe, yet
before we proceed to that continent in general, it will be necessary to take a
short view of the article of dress in America. Of all the people with which we
are as yet acquainted, the inhabitants of this extensive continent seem to be
in general the least favored by nature, and to have made themselves the least
assistance by art. In many places, seemingly but a little raised in the
faculties of their minds above the beasts of their forests, they have scarcely
as yet become acquainted with the use of fire, of houses, or of clothing; and
where they are acquainted with them, it is only in so imperfect a manner, that
they do not derive from them half the advantages they do in other countries. In
such a condition, and situated in regions inhospitably barren, they have few
materials for dress, and still less ingenuity to make use of them with
propriety; as the appetite for dress, however, is visible among them, it
frequently exerts itself in forming the most grotesque appearances; even the
women of Terra del Fuego, though content to be naked, are ambitious to be fine,
and for this purpose paint their faces with a variety of colors; a circle of
white commonly surrounds the eyes, and the rest of the face is streaked with
red and black, so variously disposed, that scarcely any two are to be found
alike; and besides this, they wear bracelets of shells and bones upon their
wrists and ankles. Either content with these unavailing trifles, or unconscious
of the use of any thing else, they seemed, says Lieutenant Cook, to have no
wish for any thing more than they possessed; nor did any thing which we offered
appear acceptable, but beads, as an ornament of superfluity.

As the Americans are more the children of untutored nature, and consequently
have a greater similarity in their dress and ornaments than any other people,
we shall only give a short and general description of them, without descending
into the differences which distinguish the various tribes and nations from each
other. There are few American ornaments in more esteem than garters; these the
women make of buffaloe's hair, and adorn them as highly as they can with beads
and shells, taking care at the same time to dispose their other garments so as
to show them to the best advantage; besides these, they wear also pieces of
deerskin, which they tie to the outsides of their legs, and hang to them
tortoise-shells, pebbles, and beads of various colors and sizes. But the legs
are not the only parts of the body decorated with this kind of finery; both
sexes are frequently seen so loaded with shells from head to foot, as to excite
the laughter of an European. This custom of adorning themselves with beads and
shells may, however, not be altogether the effect of ostentation and love of
finery; beads and shells are their current money, and a person thus adorned,
perhaps, carries his whole property about him, the better to secure it from
being stolen or plundered.

Before they were supplied with other ornaments from Europe, the Americans of
both sexes used such shining stones as were the produce of their own country,
tying them to their hair, to their noses and ears, with the fibers of a deer's
sinew; but since our intercourse with them, they have used brass and silver
rings for their ears and their fingers; besides which, they fasten large
buttons and knobs of brass to various parts of their attire, so as to make a
tinkling when they walk or run. Both sexes esteem these ornaments of the most
distinguishing nature, and load themselves with them in the utmost proportion
of their rank and ability; so that our European traders judge of the fortune of
an American by the trinkets on the crown of his head, at his ears, wrists,
fingers, etc.; by the quantity of red paint daubed on his face, and by the
finery at the collar of his shirt, if he happens to have one, which is far from
being always the case.

Although the same attire and the same ornaments are indiscrimi^a^ely used both
by the male and female savages, yet they are not without their sexual
distinctions of dress, as well as the inhabitants of civilized nations. The
women bore small holes in the lobes of the ears for their earrings as in
Europe; the hole which the men make extends almost from one extremity of the
external ear to the other. The men are frequently decorated with plumes of
feathers and ensigns of war on their heads; the women, though they sometimes
make use of feathers, seldom or never wear them in this manner. The men are not
frequently seen without some of their warlike weapons, or the trophies of their
victory fastened to various parts of their bodies; the women scarcely ever
appear armed but in cases of necessity, and as rarely wear any of the spoils of
the hain.

Some nations of savages, not contented with such ornaments as are loose and
easily detached from the body, have contrived to ornament, or rather to
disfigure, the body itself by incisions, stainings, and paint. In several of
the islands lately discovered in the Great Southern Ocean, a variety of
indelible stains are made in different parts of the body, by certain materials
which sink into small punctures made in the skin. In Otaheite, this operation
is called tattowing, and reckoned so essentially necessary, that none of either
sex must be without it, especially the women, who are generally marked in the
form of a Z on every part of their toes and fingers. But the part on which
these ornaments are lavished with the greatest profusion, is the breech, which,
in both sexes is stained with a deep black; and above that, as high as the
short rib, are drawn arches which take a lighter shade as they arise, and seem
to be distinguishing marks of honor, as they are shown by both sexes with an
ostentatious pleasure.

Such is almost the only mode of ornamenting in this formerly unknown part of
the globe; as to the dress, it differs little in the two sexes, and consists
mostly of loose garments, such as we have already seen were used by almost all
nations in their rude and unpolished state. People of condition, however, in
Otaheite are distinguished, not as among the ancients, by their great variety
of changes of raiment, but by the quantity which they wear at once; some of
them having around them several webs of their cloth, each of eight or ten yards
long, and two broad, and throwing a large piece loosely over all, by way of a
cloak, or even two of these pieces, if they wish to appear in an extraordinary
state. Thus the magnificence of unpolished nations seems always to have exerted
itself in quantity only. Abraham dressed a whole calf, and served it up at an
entertainment to two angels. Joseph helped his brother Benjamin to five times
as much victuals as his brethren; and the same idea of quantity only, seems to
have been regarded in all the feastings of the heroes of Homer, and some other
of the ancients. As these distinctions of rank by the quantity of dress only,
must be exceedingly troublesome in hot countries, the ladies of Otaheite always
uncovered themselves as low as the waist in the evening, throwing off every
thing with the same ease and freedom as our ladies would lay aside a glove,
cloak, or supernumerary handkerchief.

Singular as this mode of dressing and of undressing may appear to us, that of
decorating their heads is hardly less so. They sometimes wear upon them little
turbans, but their more common dress, and what they chiefly pride themselves
in, is long threads of human hair plaited so as hardly to be thicker than
sewing silk, and often a mile or more in length, without a single knot: these
they wind round their heads in a manner that shows they are neither void of
taste nor elegance, sticking flowers and sprigs of evergreen among them, to
give them the greater variety. European satirists are apt to declaim against
our ladies for the time they spend under the operation of a French
hair-dresser, while even these un-tutored people cannot be supposed to employ
much less in twisting so many yards of rope round their heads, and giving it
the necessary decorations.

We left our ske^ches of the dress of Europe at those periods of time, called
the Middle Ages; and shall now resume them at these ages, which have only a
little preceded our own. Were we to endeavor a minute description of the
present dress of Europe, the attempt would be like painting the color of a
camelion, or the shape of a Proteus; both of which would be changed long before
we could finish our task. We shall, therefore, content ourselves with a few
general observations on the subject.

As women never were slaves, nor had their spirits broken by ill usage and
oppression in Europe, as in several other parts of the world, that love of
finery, so natural to the sex, must have constantly operated in inducing them
to decorate themselves in the best manner that the circumstances of the times
could afford, or the fashion of them dictate. But when the revival of arts and
sciences began to polish the minds of our ancestors, and to give birth to new
ideas; when trade and commerce began to furnish new materials, for the more
elegant modes of decoration, the passions of the sex for dress began also to
assume new and unrestrainable powers, and often hurried them to such
unjustifiable lengths, deaf to reason, the embellishments which they thought
were wanting, in order to make the same brilliant appearance as their
neighbors, could not be dispensed with; though purchased at the price of
reputation, and the ruin of fortune. Greece and Rome had often suffered by the
same evil; and had often enacted sumptuary laws to restrain it: such laws now
became absolutely necessary in Europe, and several of them were published by
Henry Fourth of France; who saw, with regret, the women of his exhausted
kingdom, exhausting themselves still more in the love of finery and emulation
of their superiors. He was not, however, the first potentate who had recourse
to this method; several, both before and after him, had published edicts,
ascertaining the utmost limits of finery to which every rank and condition of
life might proceed; and beyond which they were not to go, without subjecting
themselves to a severe penalty.

When we consider, how much greater the value of money was in the times we are
speaking of, than at present, it will appear, that women were then much more
costly in their dress than at this period, so much declaimed against. In the
fifteenth century Laura, the celebrated mistress of the no less celebrated
Petrarch, wore on her head a silver coronet, and tied up her hair with knots of
jewels. Her dress, says the Author of the life of Petrarch, was magnificent;
but, in particular, she had silk gloves brocaded with gold; though at this time
silk was so scarce, that a pound of it sold for near four pounds sterling, and
none but the nobility were allowed to wear it. Women of inferior rank wore
crowns of flowers, and otherwise dressed themselves with all the magnificence
which circumstances and sumptuary laws would allow.

A most extensive acquisition to the materials of the toilette, as well as to
the cleanness and convenience of the men, had now been introduced; this was
linen, which had been known in Europe before, only as a curiosity; or at most
as a decoration of the most elevated and opulent, but now was coming into
general use: cambrics and lawns soon followed, as an improvement; and after
these, fine laces were invented, of which women, almost ever since, have so
much availed themselves. The art of weaving silk, so as to make garments, had,
for some time, been known; but that of making it into ribands, seems not to
have been yet invented; they have since, however, become so general, that they
make an indispensable part of the dress of every female, from the highest to
the lowest station. Diamonds had long been known in the East, and some
centuries before this, had been introduced into Europe; but they had not
attained the art of polishing them; and in their natural state, or with the
little skill they had in dressing them, they did not show half their luster.
They preserve, in the treasury of St. Denis, a clasp of the mantle which the
kings of France used to wear on the day of their coronation: this piece is very
ancient; and has what is called, four natural points. There is likewise in the
same treasury, a relic almost as ancient, and adorned with eight natural
points; but all these stones are small, black, and no way agreeable to the eye.
These, and some others, preserved in the cabinets of the curious, in various
parts of Europe, fully demonstrate, that even the diamond, before the art of
giving it a proper polish was discovered, was far from being that brilliant,
and almost inestimable jewel, which it is at present, when properly improved by
the art of the lapidary.
It was not long after, however, that the art of polishing them, by means of
their own dust, and so giving them all their distinguishing brilliancy, was
discovered. All these, and some others of less importance, were acquisitions to
the stock of female ornament, and rendered the business of the toilette a
matter that required more time, as well as more taste, than it had ever done
before. From the fifteenth century, to the present time, the variations of
female dress and ornament have been more owing to the inconstancy of manners,
and the instability of fashion, than to the addition of any new materials. From
America, scarcely any thing has been added, but feathers and furs; the last of
which, as one of the best defenses from the cold, have been used in all
northern countries time immemorial. Though, in milder climates, they are now
introduced as an article of luxury; and a value set upon some of them as
imaginary as that of the diamond or the pearl.

Though it is not our intention to give an account of all the changes that have
happened in dress, from the fifteenth to the present century; yet there was one
revolution which happened to it, under the protectorship of Oliver Cromwell,
that we cannot pass by. Almost every religion, which had been promulgated,
previous to that of Christianity, had interwoven, in its very essence, a number
of ceremonies, where grandeur and magnificence were ostentatiously displayed.
These religions, therefore, instead of discouraging, rather encouraged ornament
and finery. But the Author of the Christian system having taught by his
example, as well as his doctrine, the utmost plainness and simplicity, it, in
time, became fashionable for such of the members of that system, as had more
zeal than understanding, to exclaim, in the bitterest terms, against every
species of dress that had any other object in view than to cover shame, and
defend them from the cold. This rage of turning all things into the most
primitive simplicity, seemed rising to the zenith of its glory, about the time
that the Protector began to make some figure in England. During his
administration, it triumphed over sense, reason, and even decency. Women were
then in so much disgrace, that they were denied all kinds of ornament; and even
the beauties bestowed by nature, were considered as criminal disadvantages to
the fair possessors, and sufficient motives to induce every Christian to shun
their company; because it was impossible to be in it without ^inning.

The pulpits often echoed the following sentiments, that man being conceived in
sin, and brought forth in iniquity, is a slave to the flesh, till regenerated
by the spirit; that it was his complaisance for woman that first wrought his
debasement, that he ought not therefore to glory in his shame, nor love the
fountain of his corruption; that he should not marry on account of love,
affection, or the social joys of wedlock, but purely to increase the number of
the saints, which he should never occupy himself in doing without prayer and
humiliation, that his offspring might thereby avoid the curse. Such being the
notions instilled into the people, the most virtuous emotions of nature were
considered as arising from original guilt, and beauty avoided as an instrument
in the hands of Satan, to seduce the hearts of the faithful; even the women
themselves caught with the unnatural contagion, laid aside the ornaments of
their sex, and endeavored to make themselves appear disgusting by humiliation
and fasting; nay, some of them were so much afraid of ornaments, that they even
considered clothes of any kind as tending to that purpose, and one, full of
that idea, came into the church where Cromwell sat, in the condition of our
original mother before she plucked the fig-leaf, that she might be, as she
said, a sign to the people.

But as the human passions, like springs, fly the more violently in the
opposite direction, the more forcibly they have been bent, the restoration was
no sooner brought about, than all this public enthusiasm vanished, and elegance
of dress and levity of manners soon became more the fashion than slovenliness
and puritanism had been before. Pleasure became the universal object, and the
pleasure of love took the lead of all others; but beauty unconnected with
virtue was the object of this love, it was therefore void of honor or
morality, in consequence of which, female virtue, robbed of its reward, became
less inflexible, and a total degeneracy of manners ensued.

In every country where dress is under the direction of taste and judgment, it
is so contrived as neither altogether to conceal, nor altogether to discover,
the beauties of the female form. This general rule, however, has not been
without exceptions; in every country enthusiastic priests, antiquated prudes,
and women outrageously virtuous, have muffled themselves like Egyptian mummies,
and exclaimed in the bitterness of their hearts against the nakedness of the
rest of the world; In the latter end of the fourteenth century, a monk of the
order of St. Augustine, who had acquired great reputation for piety, declaimed
so successfully at Pavia, against the ornaments of the times, that many ladies
renouncing their finery, appeared in all the simplicity which this supposedly
inspired monk dictated to them.
while on the other hand, women of less rigid principles, and those abandoned
to prostitution, throwing aside all decency, seem to wish that the whole female
toilette were reduced to the original fig-leaf: some nations too are less
delicate in this respect than others; the Italians and French have ever been
remarkably so, while the Spanish have fallen into the opposite extreme. At
Venice, the ladies in the beginning of the last century dressed in such light
thin stuffs, that not only the shape of the body, but even the color of the
skin might easily be seen through them; and at this day, perhaps owing to the
heat of their climate, the dress of their modest women is hardly more decent
than that of our common prostitutes. The French ladies are but little less
distinguished for their looseness of dress than their neighbors the Italians;
almost the only difference is, that more light and fantastic, they have flown
with greater rapidity from one fashion to another. In the fourteenth century,
they appeared half naked at public assemblies, and in the public walks dressed
so much like the men, that they could hardly be distinguished from them but by
the voice and complexion; such have long been the modes of dressing in Italy
and France, as to endeavor to show every charm which can with any tolerable
degree of decency be displayed. While in Spain, where the spirit of chivalry is
hardly yet extinguished, and where the women consequently still retain a little
of the romantic dignity which was annexed to it, so far from showing their
nakedness, they have hardly as yet condescended even to show their faces to the
other sex.

Though the French have now taken the lead of the Italians in all the fantastic
fripperies of fashion, it would seem that the Italians were formerly not less
noted for it. Petrarch describing their dress in his time says, who can behold
the shoes with pointed toes, so long that they will reach to the knee,
head-dresses with wings to them, the hair put into a tail, the foreheads of the
men furrowed with those ivory needles, with which the women fastened their
hair, and their stomachs squeezed by machines of iron. The pointed shoes and
machines of iron were more unnatural, and consequently more ridiculous, than
any fantastic fashion which has appeared in this fantastic age.

As the ornamental part of dress is evidently meant to heighten the beauties of
nature, nothing can be more evident than that it should always coincide with
her designs, wherever she is not defective or luxuriant. Such, we presume, are
the ideas of true taste; but such, however, have not always been those adopted
by the leaders of fashions. Toward the beginning of the present century, it
seems to have been the prevailing opinion, that nature had made the female
waist greatly too large; to remedy which the stiffest stays were laced on in
the tightest manner, lest the young ladies should become clumsy, or grow
crooked. Toward the middle of the century, it began to be discovered, that
besides the uneasiness of such a situation, it frequently produced the very
effects it was intended to prevent; physicians and philosophers now declaimed
against stays, and they were by many laid aside with such abhorrence, that the
fashion took quite a different turn. We discovered that our mothers had been
all in the wrong, and that nature had not made the female waist nearly so large
as it ought to have been; but the ladies supplied this defect so well with
clothes that about the years 1759 and 1760 every woman, old and young, had the
appearance of being big with child. In ten or twelve years the fashion began to
take the opposite direction again, and small waists are now esteemed so great a
beauty, that, in endeavoring to procure them, women have outdone all the
efforts of their grandmothers in the beginning of the century. Such have been
the revolutions of the waist within these fifty years, those of the form in
general we pretend not to delineate; we cannot help, however, observing, that
were we to copy nature, we should think the gentle tapering and uprightness of
a female, contributed not a little to the beauty and elegance of her figure;
but as nature, it seems, has erred here also, our ladies endeavor as much as
they can, to destroy this kind of elegance, by whale-bone and cork.

The revolutions of the breasts and shoulders have not been less conspicuous
than those of the waist: about the beginning of the century, it was highly
indecent to be naked two inches below the neck; about the middle of it, she was
dressed in the highest taste who showed the greatest part of her breasts and
shoulders; some years afterward, every female of whatever condition was muffled
up to the chin; at present that mode is discarded, and the naked breasts and
shoulders begin again to appear. As we have already seen, that in all countries
women have been particularly solicitous about the ornament and dress of their
heads, so in ours these have been an object of so much attention, that the
materials employed, and the variations produced by them, are beyond our power
to describe; we shall only, therefore, observe in general, that the head-dress
of the present times has a near resemblance to that which we have already
delineated as used by the ladies of ancient Rome, and consists of so much wool,
false hair, pomatum, paste, quilts, combs, pins, curls, ribbons, laces, and
other materials, that the head of a modern lady in full dress is, when
standing, commonly something more than one-third of the length of her whole
figure; we must, however, observe, in justice to the sex, that such
preposterous modes of dressing are not peculiar to them alone; the men have not
been less rapid in their changes, nor have these changes been proofs of a more
elegant taste, or a more solid judgment.

We shall conclude these observations on dress and ornament with one of the
most extraordinary instances of legislative superstition that ever contributed
to demonstrate human absurdity. We have already seen that long hair was
frequently declaimed against from the pulpit, and that it was in the days of
Cromwell considered as a subject of disgrace. The gloomy emigrants who fled
from England and other parts about that period, to seek in the wilds of America
a retreat where they might worship God according to their consciences, among
other whimsical tenets, carried to their new settlements an antipathy against
long hair, and when they became strong enough to publish a code of laws, we
find the following article as a part of it: It is a circumstance universally
acknowledged, that the custom of wearing long hair, after the manner of immoral
persons, and of the savage Indians, can only have been introduced into England,
but in sacrilegious contempt of the express command of God, who declares, that
it is a shameful practice for any man who has the least care for his soul to
wear long hair: as this abomination excites the indignation of all pious
persons, we the magistrates, in our zeal for the purity of the faith, do
expressly and authentically declare, that we condemn the impious custom of
letting the hair grow, a custom which we look upon to be very indecent and
dishonest, which horribly disguises men, and is offensive to modest and sober
persons, in as much as it corrupts good manners; we, therefore, being justly
incensed against this scandalous custom, do desire, advise, and earnestly
request all the elders of our continent zealously to show their aversion from
this odious practice, to exert all their power to put a stop to it, and
especially to take care that the members of their churches be not infected with
it; in order that those persons who, notwithstanding these rigorous
prohibitions, and the means of correction that shall be used on this account,
shall still persist in this custom, shall have both God and man at the same
time against them.

But besides the methods of ornament and dress common almost to all nations,
the women of Europe have a variety of other^* by which they endeavor to
attract the attention and attach the heart. Among these we may reckon every
genteel and polite female accomplishment, such as music drawing, dancing, to
all which we may add that correspondent softness of body and of mind, the
radiance that sparkles in their eyes, and the melody that flows from their
tongue, their unaffected modesty, and the nameless other qualities which so
eminently distinguish them from all the women who are educated only to become
slaves, and ministers of pleasure, to the tyrant man.

CHAPTER XXIII. Of Courtship.
OF all that variety of passions which so differently agitate the human breast,
none work a greater change on the sentiments, none more dulcify and expand the
feelings, than love; while anger transforms us into furies, and revenge
metamorphoses us into fiends, love awakes the most opposite sensations. While
benevolence warms our hearts, and charity stretches out our hands, love, being
compounded of all the tender, of all the humane and disinterested virtues,
calls forth at once all their soft ideas, and exerts all their good offices.
The reverend Mr. Stern, author of Tristram Shandy, used to say, That he never
felt the vibrations of his heart so much in unison with virtue, as when he was
in love; and that whenever he did a mean or unworthy action, on examining
himself strictly, he found that at that time he was loose from every
sentimental attachment to the fair sex.
The declaration of this social and benevolent passion to the object that
inspires it, is what we commonly call courtship, and the time of this
courtship, notwithstanding the many embarrassments and uneasinesses which
attend it, is generally considered as one of the happiest periods of human
life, at least so long as it is supported by hope, that pleasant delirium of
the soul.

Though the declaration of a passion so virtuous, so benign and gentle, as that
which we have now described, seems to reflect so much honor on the breast in
which it is harbored, that neither sex can possibly have any occasion to be
ashamed of it; yet the great Author of Nature, throughout the wide extent of
his animated works, appears to have placed the privilege of asking in the male,
and that of refusing in the female. Nor, when we except man, has it ever been
known among the most savage and ferocious animals, that a rape has been
committed on the female, or that she has been attempted by any other methods
than such as were gentle and soothing. Man, however, that imperious lord of the
creation, has often departed from this rule, and forced a reluctant female to
his hated embrace; and though he has not any where by law, deprived women from
resisting such illicit attempts, yet he has gone very near to it; he has in
many nations, from the earliest antiquity, deprived them of the power of
refusing such a husband as their fathers or other relations chose for them;
thereby taking from them what the Creator of all things had given them, as a
common right with the females of all other animals, and dashing, at once,
courtship, and all the delicate feelings and pleasures attending it, out of
existence.

Though it is presumable, that the mutual inclination of the sexes to each
other, is, in each, nearly equal; yet, as we constantly see the declaration of
that inclination made by the men, let us enquire, whether this is the effect of
custom, or of nature? If what we have just now observed be a general fact, that
only the males of all animals first discover their passion to the females, then
it will follow, that this is the effect of nature: but if, on the other hand,
it be true, as some travelers affirm, that, in several savage countries, the
female sex not only declare their passions with as much ease and freedom as the
male, but also frequently endeavor to force the male to their embraces, th^n
it will seem to be the effect of custom. Custom, however, that whimsical and
capricious tyrant of the mind, seldom arises out of nothing; and in cases where
nature is concerned, frequently has nature for her basis. Allowing then, that
it is custom, which in Europe, and many other parts of the world, has placed
the right of asking in men, by a long and uninterrupted possession; yet that
very custom, in our opinion, may be fairly traced; for nature, it is plain, has
made man more bold and intrepid than woman, less susceptible of shame, and
devolved upon him almost all the more active scenes of life; it is, therefore,
highly probable, that, conscious of these qualities, he at first assumed the
right of asking; a right to which custom has at last given him a kind of
exclusive privilege.

Taking it for granted then, that the declaration of the sentiment of love, is
a privilege of the men, founded on nature, and sanctified by custom, the
various modes of making that declaration by them, and of accepting or refusing
it by the women, were we able to give a perfect account of it, would make one
of the most curious and entertaining parts of this history, and equally furnish
matter of speculation for the fine lady and the philosopher. We can, however,
exhibit but little of this entertainment, while we treat of the ancient
inhabitants of the East; who, strangers to sentiment and delicacy of feeling,
bought a bride with the same dispassionate coolness and deliberation, as they
would have done an ox or an ass; and even in the review of the other nations,
historical information does not enable us to make it so complete as we could
wish.

When Abraham sent Eliezer, his servant, to court a bride for his son Isaac, it
appears from the story, that sentiment was entirely excluded; that Abraham had
never seen Rebecca, knew not whether her person and temper were agreeable, nor
whethe young couple would be pleased with each other; and that the only motive
which determined his choice was, because she was his relation. We do not so
much as hear, that Isaac was consulted in the matter; nor is there even a
suspicion, that he might refuse or dislike the wife which his father had
selected for him; circumstances which afford the strongest proof that, in those
days, love and regard had little or no existence: they likewise teach us, that
the liberty of choice in matrimony was more restricted among the Israelites
than the neighboring nations; for Laban, the brother of Rebecca, did not seem
to choose for his sister, as Abraham had done for his son; but asked her, after
Eliezer had made his proposal, Whether she would go with the man? And the
manner in which she consented, shows us, that it is to art and refinement we
owe the seeming reserve of modern times; and not to honest and untutored
nature, which is never ashamed to speak the sentiments of virtue. I will go,
answered she.

From this story, of the manner in which Rebecca was solicited, we learn two
things, which throw much light on the courtship of antiquity: the first is,
that women were not courted in person by their lovers, but by a proxy; whom he,
or his parents, deputed in his stead: the second, that these proxies did not,
as in modern times, endeavor to gain the affections of the ladies they were
sent to, by enlarging on the personal properties, and mental qualifications of
their lovers; but by the richness and magnificence of the presents made to them
and their relations. Presents have been from the earliest ages, and are to this
day the mode of transacting all kinds of business in the East. If you go before
a superior, to ask any favor, or even to require what is your due, you must
carry a present with you, if you wish to succeed; so that courtship having been
anciently negociated in this manner, it is plain, that it was only considered
in the same light as any other negociable business, and not as a matter of
sentiment, and of the heart.

It appears, however, that Jacob did not, according to the custom of the times,
and after the example of Isaac his father, court a bride by proxy: he went to
visit her in person, and their first meeting has in it something very
remarkable. Lovers, generally, either are cheerful, or endeavor to assume that
appearance; but Jacob drew near, and kissed Rachel, and lift up his voice and
wept. How a behavior of this kind suited the temper of an Israelitish virgin,
in the times of primitive simplicity, we know not; but may venture to affirm,
that a blubbering lover would make but a ridiculous and unengaging figure in
the eyes of a modern lady of the ton. In the courtship, however, or rather
purchase of a wife by Jacob, we meet with something like ^entiment; for when he
found that he was not possessed of money or goods, equal to the price which was
probably set upon her, he not only condescended to purchase her by labor and
servitude, but even seemed much disappointed, when the tender-eyed Leah was
faithlessly imposed upon him, instead of the beautiful Rachel; for whom he
again submitted to the same term of servitude he had done before. In the
courtship of Sechem also, we find that his choice was strongly determined by
love; but then his passion did not, as one would have thought the most natural,
effuse itself into the bosom of the object beloved. He applied to the brethren
of Dinah, making them advantageous offers for the possession of the person of
their sister, regardless, to all appearance, of her heart. Ask me never so much
dowry, said he, and I will give according as you shall say unto me. But when we
consider, that in the times we are delineating, wives were only looked upon as
a kind of superior slaves, and not as the social companions of life, and the
equal sharers of good and bad fortune; we shall easily perceive, that sentiment
in the choice, and reciprocal affection in the bargain, were not so necessary
as in our times, when the case is happily reversed.

We laid it down before as a general rule, that the declaration of love was at
all times, and in all countries, the peculiar privilege of the men; but as all
general rules are liable to some exceptions, there are also a few to this. An
Israelitish widow had, by law, a power of claiming in marriage the brother of
her deceased husband; in which case, as the privelege of the male was
transferred to the female, so likewise that of the female was transferred to
the male, he had the power of refusing; the refusal, however, was accampanied
with some mortifying circumstances, the woman whom he had thus slighted was to
come unto him in the presence of the elders of the city, and to loose the shoe
from his foot, and spit in his face. To man, by nature bold and intrepid, and
invested with unlimited power of asking, a refusal was of little consequence;
but to woman, more timid and modest, and whose power of asking was limited to
the brethren of her deceased husband, it was not only an affront, but a real
injury, as every one would conclude, that the refusal arose from some
well-grounded cause, and every one would therefore so neglect and despise the
woman, that she could have but little chance for a future husband; hence,
perhaps, it was thought necessary to fix some public stigma on the dastard who
was so ungallant as not to comply with the addresses of a woman. A custom
something similar to this obtains at present among the Hurons and Iriquois;
when a wife dies, the husband is obliged to marry the sister, or, in her stead,
the woman whom the family of his deceased wife shall choose for him: a widow is
also obliged to marry one of the brothers of her deceased husband, if he has
died without children, and she is still of an age to have any. Exactly the same
thing takes place in the Caroline islands; and there, as well as among the
Hurons, the women may demand such brother to marry her, though we are not
informed whether they ever exercised that power.

In the Isthmus of Darien, we are told that the right of asking is lodged in,
and promiscuously exerted by both sexes; who each, when they feel the passion
of love, declare it without the least hesitation or embarrassment; and in the
Ukrain, the same thing is said to be carried still farther, and the women more
generally to court than the men. When a young woman falls in love with a man,
she is not in the least ashamed to go to his father's house, and reveal her
passion in the most tender and pathetic manner, and to promise the most
submissive obedience, if he will accept of her for a wife. Should the
insensible man pretend any excuse, she tells him she is resolved never to go
out of the house till he gives his consent, and accordingly taking up her
lodging, remains there; if he still obstinately refuses her, his case becomes
exceedingly distressing; the church is commonly on her side, and to turn her
out would provoke all her kindred to revenge her honor: so that he has no
method left but to betake himself to flight till she is otherwise disposed of.

From the story of Sampson and Delilah, it would seem that the power of asking
a female in marriage was even denied to the young men of Israel; Sampson saw in
Timnah a woman of the daughters of the Philistines who was beautiful, and he
came and told his father and mother, and said, I have seen a woman of the
daughters of the Philistines; ^ow, therefore, get her for me to wife. Upon his
father and mother starting some objections, he did not say, I will make use of
the power lodged in my own hands to obtain her, but repeated, Get her for me,
for she pleases me well. Had it been a custom for their young men in those
days to have courted for themselves, it is highly probable, that on their first
objection, he would have applied to Delilah in person, instead of applying
again to his father and mother after a refusal; nor was his application to his
parents for their advice and consent only, otherwise he would not have said,
Get her for me, but allow me to get her for myself.

From the ages we have now been delineating, where the sacred records have
afforded us these few hints concerning courtship, we have scarcely any thing
more on the subject, till we come to the history of the Greeks. Among the
ancient inhabitants of the East, women were so little seen by the men, that
they had but few opportunities of raising in their bosoms that composed
sentimental feeling which we moderns denominate love, and which cannot properly
arise from a transient glance; when they were accidentally seen, they only
raised that animal appetite, which naturally rages so strongly where it is
inflamed by the climate, and whetted by a thousand obstacles, and which, in
such circumstances, scarcely has any choice in its object; hence all the
obliging offices of gallantry, and the tender sensations of courtship, were in
those periods entirely unknown; and as marriage was for the most part an act of
bargain and sale, where the woman, in consideration of a price paid for her to
her relations, was made a slave to her husband, the men did not study to
please, but to command and enjoy. If, in the periods we are now considering, we
meet with any thing like sentiment between the two sexes, it was in those
illicit amors which depended solely on the parties themselves; in such cases,
they sometimes attempted little flights of gallantry, and used mutual
endeavors to please, because neither party was a slave to the other, and their
connection was the result of their own choice, and not of a bargain made for
them without their consent, and perhaps without their knowledge.

Although scarcely any of the brute animals will fight in order to force their
females to their embrace, yet all of them, even the most weak and timid, will
exert every nerve in order to drive away or destroy a successful rival. Whether
this is properly the passion of revenge, or of self-love, is not our province
here to enquire; we only observe that it seems to be a principle so universally
diffused through animated nature, and so peculiarly ingrafted in man, that the
history of all ages bears the most ample testimony of its existence.

During the rude and uncultivated state of society in the early ages, property
was hardly to be gained but by fighting to acquire, or kept but by fighting to
maintain it; and a woman being considered as property, it was no uncommon mode
of courtship, when there was a plurality of lovers, to fight for the possession
of her also. As society began to improve* and fighting became less fashionable,
this barbarity began to decline, and, instead of one lover being ^bliged to
fight all his rivals before he could get possession of his mistress, it became
the custom for the competitors to give a public testimony of their powers and
qualifications in the games and spectacles instituted for that purpose; a
custom which, as we shall have occasion to see afterward, continued long to
govern the manners of uncivilized nations; and in compliance with which, it was
common for kings and other great people, when they had a daughter to dispose
of, to give notice to all such young men of quality, as designed to be
competitors, that they might repair to their courts and castles, to show their
skill and dexterity in exercises and in arms; when the prize of beauty was
generally awarded to him who had excelled all the others. But as this method
was frequently productive of feuds and animosities, which ended not with the
lives of those between whom they first began, but were handed down from one
generation to another, stained with murder and with blood, treaties of marriage
by bargain and sale, agreed to by the relations of the parties, marked the
further progress of civil society; many revolving ages saw the social partners
of our joys and sorrows trafficked for in this cool and dispassionate manner,
and many parts of the world, yet strangers to friendship and to love, still
retain the despicable method; and it is only where the joys of liberty and of
freedom shed their benign influence, that courtship is an act of inclination
and of choice, ending in the joining together the hearts as well as the hands
of the contracting parties.

What we have now observed concerning the manner of courtship, was too much the
case with the Greeks. In the earlier periods of their history, their love, if
we may call it so, was only the animal appetite, impetuous and unrestrained
either by cultivation of manners, or precepts of morality; and almost every
opportunity which fell in their way prompted them to satisfy that appetite by
force, and to revenge the obstruction of it by murder. When they became a more
civilized people, they shone much more illustriously in arts and in arms, than
in delicacy of sentiment and elegance of manners: hence we shall find, that
their method of making love was more directed to compel the fair sex to a
compliance with their wishes by charms and philtres, than to win them by the
nameless assiduities and good offices of a lover.

As the two sexes in Greece had but little communication with each other, and a
lover was seldom favored with an opportunity of telling his passion to his
mistress, he used to discover it by inscribing her name on the walls of his
house, on the bark of the trees of a public walk, or the leaves of his his
books; it was customary for him also to deck the door of the house, where his
fair one lived, with garlands and flowers, to make libations of wine before it,
and to sprinkle the entrance with the same liquor, in the manner that was
practiced at the temple of Cupid. Garlands were of great use among the Greeks
in love affairs; when a man untied his garland, it was a declaration of his
having been subdued by that passion; and when a woman composed a garland, it
was a tacit confession of the same thing: and though we are not informed of it,
we may presume that both sexes had methods of discovering by these garlands,
not only that they were in love, but the object also upon whom it was directed.

Such were the common methods of discovering the passion of love, the methods
of prosecuting it were still more extraordinary, and less reconcilable to
civilization and to good principles; when a love affair did not prosper in the
hands of a Grecian, he did not endeavor to become more engaging in his manners
and person, he did not lavish his fortune in presents, or become more obliging
and assiduous in his addresses, but immediately had recourse to incantations
and philtres; in composing and dispensing of which, the women of Thessaly were
reckoned the most famous, and drove a traffic in them of no inconsiderable
advantage. These potions were given by the women to the men, as well as by the
men to the women, and were generally so violent in their operation as for some
time to deprive the person who took them, of sense, and not uncommonly of life:
their composition was a variety of herbs of the most strong and virulent
nature, which we shall not mention; but herbs were not the only things they
relied on for their purpose, they called the productions of the animal and
mineral kingdoms to their assistance; when these failed, they roasted an image
of wax before the fire, representing the object of their love, and as this
became warm, they flattered themselves that the person represented by it would
be proportionally warmed with love. When a lover could obtain any thing
belonging to his mistress, he imagined it of singular advantage, and deposited
it in the earth beneath the threshold of her door. Besides these, they had a
variety of other methods equally ridiculous and unavailing, and of which it
would be trifling to give a minute detail; we shall, therefore, just take
notice as we go along, that such of either sex as believed themselves forced
into love by the power of philtres and charms, commonly had recourse to the
same methods to disengage themselves, and break the power of these
enchantments, which they supposed operated involuntarily on their inclinations;
and thus the old women of Greece, like the lawyers of modern times, were
employed to defeat the schemes and operations of each other, and like them too,
it is presumable, laughed in their sleeves, while they hugged the gains that
arose from vulgar credulity.

In this manner were the affairs of love and gallantry carried on among the
Greeks, but we have great reason to apprehend that this was the manner in which
unlawful amors only were conducted, for the Greek women, as we have already
seen, had not a power of refusing such matches as were provided for them by
their fathers and guardians; and consequently a lover who could secure these on
his side, was always sure of obtaining the person of his mistress; and from the
complexion of the times, we have little reason to suppose that he was
solicitous about her esteem and affection. This being the case, courtship
between the parties themselves could have little existence; and the methods we
have now described, with a variety of others too tedious to mention, must have
been those by which they courted the unwary female to her shame and disgrace,
and not those by which they solicited the chaste bride to their marriage bed.

The Romans, who borrowed most of their customs from the Greeks, also followed
them in that of endeavoring to conciliate love by the power of philtres and of
charms; a fact of which we have not the least room to doubt, as there are in
Virgil and some other of the Latin poets so many instances that prove it. But
it depends not altogether on the testimony of the poets; Plutarch tells us,
that Lucullus, a Roman general, lost his senses, by a love potion; As the
notion of love potions and powders is at this day not altogether eradicated, we
take this opportunity of assuring our readers, that there is no potion, powder,
or medicine known to mankind, that has any specific power of raising or
determining the affections to any certain object, and that all pretensions to
such are not only vain and illusive, but illegal, and to the last degree
dangerous.
and Caius Caligula, according to Suetonius, was thrown into a fit of madness
by one which was given him by his wife Caesonia; Lucretius too, according to
some authors, fell a sacrifice to the same folly. The Romans, like the Greeks,
made use of these methods mostly in their affairs of gallantry and unlawful
love; but in what manner they addressed themselves to a lady they intended to
marry has not been handed down to us, and the reason as we suppose is, that
little or no courtship was practiced among them; women had no disposing power
of themselves, to what purpose was it then to apply to them for their consent?
They were under perpetual guardianship, and the guardian having the sole power
of disposing of them, it was only necessary to apply to him. In the Roman
authors, we frequently read of a father, a brother, or a guardian, giving his
daughter, his sister, or his ward, in marriage, but we do not recollect one
single instance of being told that the intended bridegroom applied to the lady
for her consent; a circumstance the more extraordinary, as women in the decline
of the Roman empire had arisen to a dignity, and even to a freedom, hardly
equalled in modern times.

Though wives were not purchased among the Celtes, Gauls, Germans, and
neighboring nations of the North as they are in the East, they were
nevertheless a kind of slaves to their husbands; but this slavery was become so
familiar by custom, that the women neither lost their dignity by submitting,
nor (...) men their regard by subjecting them to it; an^ as they often received
portions with their wives, and had so much veneration for the sex in general,
we shall be the less surprised to find, that in courtship they behaved with a
spirit of gallantry, and showed a degree of sentiment to which the Greeks and
Romans, who called them Barbarians, never arrived; not contented with getting
possession of the person of his mistress, a northern lover was never satisfied
without the sincere affection of her heart, nor was his mistress ever to be
gained but by such methods as plainly indicated to her, the tenderest
attachment from the most respectable man.

The ancient Scandinavian women were naturally chaste, proud, and scarcely less
emulous of glory than the men, being constantly taught to despise such as spent
their youth in peaceful obscurity, they were not to be courted but by the most
assiduous attendance, seconded by such warlike achievements as the custom of
the country had rendered necessary to make a man deserving of his mistress. On
these accounts, we frequently find a lover accosting the object of his passion
by a minute and circumstantial detail of all his exploits, and all his
accomplishments. King Regner Lodbrog, in a beautiful ode composed by himself,
in memory of the deeds of his former days, gives a strong proof of this.

"We fought with swords, says he, that day, wherein I saw ten thousand of my
foes rolling in the dust near a pro^^^tary of England. A dew of blood distilled
from our swords, the arrows which flew in search of the helmets, bellowed
through the air. The pleasure of that day, w^ equal to that of clasping a fair
virgin in my arms.

"We fought with swords: a young man should march early to the conflict of
arms, man should attack man, or bravely resist him; in this has always
consisted the nobility of the warrior. He who aspires to the love of his
mistress, ought to be dauntless in the clash of swords.

We fought with swords in fifty and one battles under my floating banners. From
my early youth I have learned to dye the steel of my lance with blood, but it
is time to cease. Odin has sent his goddesses to conduct me to his palace, I
am going to be placed on the highest seat, there to quaff goblets of beer with
the gods; the hours of my life are rolled away.

Such, and many of the same kind, are the exploits sung by king Regner. In
another ode of Harold the valiant, of a later date, we find an enumeration of
his exploits and accomplishments joined together, in order to give his mistress
a favorable idea of him, but from the chorus of his song we learn that he did
not succeed.

"My ships have made the tour of Sicily; there were we all magnificent and
splendid: my brown vessel, full of mariners, rapidly rowed to the utmost of my
wishes; wholly taken up with war, I thought my course would never s^acken, and
yet a Russian maiden scorns me.

"In my youth, I fought with the people of Drontheim, their troops exceeded
ours in number. It was a terrible conflict, I left their young king dead on the
field, and yet a Russian maiden scorns me.

"One day, we were but sixteen in a vessel, a storm arose and swelled the sea,
it filled the loaded ship, but we diligently cleared it out; thence I formed
hopes of the happiest success, and yet a Russian maiden scorns me.

"I know how to perform eight exercises, I fight valiantly, I sit firmly on
horseback, I am innured to swimming, I know how to run along the skates, I dart
the lance, and am skilful at the oar, and yet a Russian maiden scorns me.

"Can she deny, that young and lovely maiden, that on that day, when posted
near a city in the southern land, I joined battle; that then I valiantly
handled my arms, and left behind me lasting monuments of my exploits, and yet a
Russian maiden scorns me.

I was born in the high country of Norway, where the inhabitants handle their
bows so well; but I preferred guiding my ships, the dread of peasants, among
the rocks of the ocean, and far from the habitations of men. I have run through
all the seas with my vessels, and yet a Russian maiden scorns me.

Besides these methods of courting, or aspiring to the good graces of the fair,
by arms and by arts, the ancient Northerns had several others; and among these
it would seem charms and incantations were reckoned not the least powerful.
Odin, who first taught them their mythology, and whom they afterward
worshipped as their supreme deity, says, in one of his discourses:

"If I aspire to the love and the favor of the chastest virgin, I can bend the
mind of the snowy armed maiden, and make her yield wholly to my desires.

"I know a secret which I will never lose, it is to render myself always
beloved of my mistress.

But I know one which I will never impart to any female except my own sister,
or to her whom I hold in my arms. Whatever is known only to one's self is
always of great value.

In the Hava-Maal, or sublime discourses of Odin, we have some sketches of
directions how to proceed in courtship, so as to be successful without the
assistance of any charm or secret:

He who would make himself beloved of a maiden, must entertain her with fine
discourses, and offer her engaging presen^s; he must also incessantly praise
her beauty. It requires good sense to be a skilful lover -- If you would bend
your mistress to your passion, you must only go by night to see her; when a
thing is known to a third person, it never succeeds.

The young women of the nations we are considering, not relying upon what fame
had reported concerning the acquisitions of their lovers, frequently desired to
be themselves the witnesses of them, and the young men were not less eager in
seizing every opportunity to gratify their desires. This is abundantly proved
by an anecdote in the history of Charles and Grymer, two kings of Sweden:

Grymer, a youth early distinguished in arms, who well knew how to dye his
sword in the blood of his enemies, to run over the craggy mountains, to
wrestle, to play at chess, trace the motions of the stars, and throw far from
him heavy weights, frequently showed his skill in the chamber of the damsels,
before the king's lovely daughter; desirous of acquiring her regard, he
displayed his dexterity in handling his weapons, and the knowledge he had
attained in the sciences he had learned; at length he ventured to make this
demand: Will thou, O fair princess, if I may obtain the king's consent, accept
of me for a husband? To which she prudently replied, I must not make that
choice myself, but go thou and offer the same proposal to my father.

The sequel of the story informs us, that Grymer accordingly made his proposal
to the king, who answered him in a rage, that though he had learned indeed to
handle his arms, yet as he had never gained a signal victory, nor given a
banquet to the beasts of the field, he had no pretentions to his daughter, and
concluded by pointing out to him, in a neighboring kingdom, a hero renowned in
arms, whom, if he could conquer, the princess should be given him: that on
waiting on the princess to tell her what had passed, she was greatly agitated,
and felt in the most sensible manner for the safety of her lover, whom she was
afraid her father had devoted to death for his presumption; that she provided
him with a suit of impenetrable armor and a trusty sword, with which he went,
and having slain his adversary, and the most part of his warriors, returned
victorious, and received her as the reward of his valor. Singular as this
method of obtaining a fair lady by a price paid in blood may appear, it was not
peculiar to the northerns: we have already taken notice of the price which
David paid for the daughter of Saul, and shall add, that among the Sacae, a
people of ancient Scythia, a custom something of this kind, but still more
extraordinary, obtained; every young man who made his addresses to a lady, was
obliged to engage her in single combat; if he vanquished* he led her off in
triumph, and became her husband and sovereign; if he was conquered, she led him
off in the same manner, and made him her husband and her slave.

From the preceding observations, it appears, that the ancient northerns placed
their principal felicity in the enjoyments of courtship and of love, as they
compared even the pleasures of vanquishing their enemies to this last, as to
the highest possible standard of pleasure. It likewise appears, that,
instigated by sentiment, and actuated by freedom, they made application first
to the object of their wishes, to know whether they would be agreeable to her,
before they would proceed to solicit the consent of parents or relations;
sentiments which shone with no small degree of luster, even through that scene
of horrid barbarity in which they were constantly immersed.

As nothing could be more humble and complaisant than the men when they
presented their addresses to the fair, so nothing could be more haughty or
determined than the answers and behavior of such ladies as did not approve of
their suitors. Gida, the daughter of a rich Norwegian lord, when courted by
Harald Harfagre, sternly answered, that if he aspired to the merit of her love,
he must signalize himself by exploits of a more extraordinary nature than any
he had yet performed; nor was such a reception peculiar to her; it was the
custom of the times; and the manners, in a great measure, contributed to render
such a custom necessary; for ^esides the personal safety of a wife, dependin^
so much on the prowess of the man she married, valor was the only road to
riches and to honors, and even subsistence frequently depended in a great
measure upon the spoils taken in the excurs^ons of war. But their haughty
behavior was not entirely confined to words; it is supposed, though we do not
venture to affirm it, that when a suitor had gone through the exercise of his
arms before them, and when displeased with his performance, they wanted to put
a negative upon his wishes, instead of a verbal reply, they sometimes arose
hastily, snatched the arms from his hands, and showed him that they could
handle them with more dexterity than himself; a proof which not only mortified
all his vanity, but imposed eternal silence on his pretensions to love.

CHAPTER XXIV. The same Subject continued.
FROM this account of the courtship of the inhabitants of the North, it is easy
to see, that they were, in this respect at least, far advanced beyond the
savage barbarity of many nations now existing; among whom marriages are
commonly contracted with little previous attachment, and as little regard to
the mutual inclination of the parties for each other. Savages, in general, no^
being determined to marry for any attachment to a particular woman; but because
they find that state necessary to their comfortable subsistence, and
conformable to the fashion of their country, are not solicitous who shall
become their wives; and, therefore, commonly leave the choice of them to their
parents and relations; a method which excludes all the joys, and all the pains
of courtship, from their system. But as this is not universally the case in
savage life, we shall give a short account of the manner in which they address
the females, whom they have selected as the objects of their love.

The method of asking in courtship, as well as that of refusing, among some of
the tribes of American Indians, is the most simple that can possibly be
divised. When the lover goes to visit his mistress, he only begs leave to enter
her hut by signs; which having obtained, he goes in, and sits down by her in
the most respectful silence; if she suffers him to remain there without
interruption, her doing so is consenting to his suit; and they go to bed
together without further ceremony: but if the lover has any thing given him to
eat or drink, it is a refusal; though the woman is obliged to sit by him till
he has finished his repast; after which he retires in silence. In Canada,
courtship is a stranger to that coy reserve, and seeming secrecy, which
politeness has introduced among the inhabitants of civilized nations. When a
man and woman meet, though they never saw each other before, if he is
captivated with her charms, he declares his passion in the politest manner; and
she, with the same honest simplicity, answers, Yes, or No, without further
deliberation. It was formerly a custom, among the Brazilians, that as soon as a
man had slain an enemy, he had a right to court a bride; but that custom is now
abolished; and the suitor is now obliged to ask the consent of the girl's
parents; which he no sooner obtains, than he hastens to the bride, and forces
her to his embrace. In Formosa, they differ so much from the simplicity of the
Canadians, that it would be reckoned the greatest indecency in the man to
declare, or the woman to hear, a declaration of the passion of love. The lover
is therefore, obliged to depute his mother, sister, or some female relation;
and from any of them the soft ta^l may be heard, without offense to delicacy or
to custom.

Such are the customs which, among some savage nations, regulate the affairs of
courtship; customs which show, that, even in the most rude and uncultivated
state, men are hardly more uniform in their ideas and actions, than when
polished by civilization and society. The lower class of the people, who
inhabit Massachusetts Bay, and have borrowed their ideas, perhaps, from the
Indians, or brought them from some of those countries from which they
emigrated, have a remarkable method of Courtship. When a man falls in love with
a woman, he first proposes his conditions to her parents, without whose consent
no marriage in the colony can take place; if they approve of him, he repairs to
their house in the evening, in order to make his court to the young woman. At
their usual hour, the old people, and the rest of the family, go to bed,
leaving the lovers together also. Some time after, they go to bed together
also; but without stripping themselves naked, to avoid scandal: if they are
pleased with each other, the bans are published, and they are married without
dely; if not, they part, and perhaps never see one another more; unless, as it
sometimes happens, the woman should be with child; when the man is obliged to
marry her, under pain of excommunication. This has a great resemblance to a
custom used in some places by the savages, where a lover goes in the night to
the hut of his mistress, steals silently in, lights a match at the fire, and
cautiously approaches her bed, holding the m^tch before him; if she blows it
out, it is a sign of her approbation; and shows that she wishes the affair to
be transacted in darkness and secrecy: he takes the hint, and immediately lays
himself down by her side. If she suffers the light to remain burning, it is a
denial, and he is obliged to retire.

Before we take leave of the European colonies in America, we shall mention
another singularity in the behavior of lovers in Pennsylvania; which shows
that the women have not even that degree of delicacy, which we have just now
seen them possessed of in savage life: when two Pennsylvanian lovers meet with
any remarkable opposition from their friends, they go off together on
horseback; the lady riding before, and the man behind her. In this situation,
they present themselves before a magis^rate; to whom she declares, that she has
run away with her lover, and has brought him there to be married: so solemn an
avowal, the magistrate is not at liberty to reject, and they are married
accordingly.

It has long been a common observation among mankind, that love is the most
fruitful source of invention; and that in this case the imagination of a woman
is still more fruitful of invention and expedient than that of a man; agreeably
to this, we are told, that the women of the island of Amboyna, being closely
watched on all occasions, and destitute of the art of writing; by which, in
other places, the sentiments are conveyed at any distance, have methods of
making known their inclinations to their lovers, and of fixing assignations
with them, by means of nose-gays, and plates of fruit so disposed, as to convey
their sentiments in the most explicit manner: by these means their courtship is
generally carried on, and by altering the disposition of symbols made use of,
they contrive to signify their refusal, with the same explicitness as their
approbation. In some of the neighboring islands, when a young man has fixed
his affection, like the Italians, he goes from time to time to her door, and
plays upon some musical instrument; if she gives consent, she comes out to him,
and they settle the affair of matrimony between them: if, after a certain
number of these kind of visits, she does not appear, it is a denial; and the
disappointed lover is abliged to desist.

We shall see afterward, when we come to treat of the matrimonial compact,
that, in some places, the ceremony of marriage consists in tying the garments
of the young couple together, as an emblem of that union which ought to bind
their affections and interests. This ceremony has afforded a hint for lovers to
explain their passion to their mistresses, in the most intelligible manner,
without the help of speech, or the possibility of offending the nicest
delicacy. A lover in these parts, who is too modest to declare himself, seizes
the first opportunity he can find, of sitting down by his mistress, and tying
his garment to hers, in the manner that is practiced in the ceremony of
marriage: if she permits him to finish the knot, without any interruption, and
does not soon after cut or loose it, she thereby gives her consent; if she
looses it, he may tie it again on some other occasion, when she may prove more
propitious; but if she cuts it, his hopes are blasted forever.

Both these last mentioned customs are peculiar to the East; and they are
almost the only ones we can find in these extensive regions, concerning
courtship, that are worth relating; for where the two sexes are denied all
communication with each other, it is impossible there should be any courtship;
where the venal bride is bought from her still more venal parents to be the
slave not the companion, of her husband; neither are they possessed of feelings
necessary for the delicately sentimental prelude of the social state of wedlock.

It is observable in courtship, that wherever women are free and independent,
they are addressed by the men in the manner that is supposed will be most
pleasing to them; where they are not free, the only care of the men is to get
possession of their persons. The Author of Nature having made the female form
beautiful and engaging, man is frequently captivated with it at first sight:
but as man is a less comely and less ^ttractive animal, he does not so commonly
insinuate himself into the heart of a woman at his first appearance, but must
do it by a long train of little assiduities, and attention to promote her
happiness and pleasure. According to this observation, we find the courtship of
almost every people, in whatever degree they stand in the scale of civil
society, constantly tendering to the fair sex those objects and amusements in
which they take the greatest delight. In many of the politer countries of
Europe, and elsewhere, these are precedence, titles, pomp, and pageantry. In
America, they are beads, shells, and enormous quantities of red paint; and
among the frigid Laplanders, brandy supplies the place of all. A Lapland lover
is said to pay little regard to beauty, virtue, or accomplishments, but only to
the quantity of reindeer possessed by the object of his choice; and she and
her relations pay as little regard to any thing concerning him, but the
quantity of brandy with which he treats them during the courtship.

The delicacy of a Lapland lady, which is not in the least hurt by being drunk
as often as she can procure liquour, would be wounded in the most sensible
manner, should she deign at first to listen to the declaration of a lover; he
is therefore obliged to emply a match-maker to speak for him; and this
match-maker must never go empty-handed; and of all other presents, that which
most infallibly secures him a favorable reception, is brandy. Having, by the
eloquence of this, gained leave to bring the lover along with him, and being,
together with the lover's father or other nearest male relation, arrived at the
house where the lady resides, the father and match-maker are invited to walk
in, but the lover must wait patiently at the door till further solicited. The
parties, in the mean time, open their suit to the other ladies of the family,
not forgetting to employ in their favor their irresistible advocate brandy, a
liberal distribution of which is reckoned the strongest proof of the lover's
affection. When they have all been warmed by the lover's bounty, he is brought
into the house, pays his compliments to the family, and is desired to partake
of their cheer, though at this interview seldom indulged with a sight of his
mistress; but if he is, he salutes her, and offers her presents of reindeer
skins, tongues, etc.; all which, while surrounded with her friends, she
pretends to refuse; but, at the same time giving her lover a signal to go out,
she soon steals after him, and is no more that modest creature she affected to
appear in company. The lover now solicits for the completion of his wishes: if
she is silent, it is construed into consent; but if she throws his presents on
the ground with disdain, the match is broke off for ever.

It is generally observed, that women enter into matrimony with more
willingness, and less anxious care and solicitude, than men, for which many
reasons naturally suggest themselves to the intelligent reader. The women of
Greenland are, however, in many cases, an exception to this general rule. A
Greenlander, having fixed his affection, acquaints his parents with it; they
acquaint the parents of the girl; upon which two female negociators are sent to
her, who, lest they should shock her delicacy, do not enter directly on the
subject of their embassy, but launch out in praises of the lover they mean to
recommend, of his house, of his furniture, and whatever else belongs to him,
but dwell most particularly on his dexterity in catching of seals. She,
pretended to be affronted, runs away, tearing the ringlets of her hair as she
retires; after which the two females, having obtained a tacit consen^ from her
parents, search for her, and, on discovering her lurking-place, drag her by
force to the house of her lover, and there leave her. For some days she sits
with dishevelled hair, silent and dejected, refusing every kind of sustenance,
and at last, if kind entreaties cannot prevail upon her, is compelled by force,
and even by blows, to complete the marriage with her husband. It sometimes
happens, that when the female match-makers arrive to propose a lover to a
Greenland young woman, she either faints, or escapes to the uninhabited
mountains, where she remains till she is discovered and carried back by her
relations, or is forced to return by hunger and cold; in both which cases, she
previously cuts off her hair; a most infallible indication, that she is
determined never to marry.

This peculiar disposition of the Greenland women is not nature; her dictates
are every where nearly the same; it is the horror which arises at the slavish
and dependent state of the wives of that country, and the still more abject and
deserted state of its widows; for the wives, besides being obliged to do every
servile office, are frequently subjected to the merciless correction of their
husbands. The widows, when they have no longer a husband to hunt and fish for
them, are destitute of every resource, and frequently perish of hunger: hence
matrimony, which in most places makes the condition of women more independent
and comfortable, among them renders it truly wretched; and hence they enter
into it with so much reluctance and regret.

Women were formerly treated little better in some parts of Europe. In Spain,
they had scarcely any power in bestowing themselves on, or refusing the offers
of, a lover. As the empire of common sense began to extend itself, they began
to claim a privilege, at least of being consulted in the choice of the partners
of their lives. Many fathers and guardians, however, hurt by this female
innovation, and puffed up with Spanish pride, still insisted on forcing their
daughters to marry according to their pleasure, by means of duennas, locks,
hunger, and even sometimes poison and daggers: but as nature will revolt
against every species of oppression and injustice, the ladies have for some
time begun to triumph; the authority of fathers and guardians begins to
decline, and lovers find themselves obliged to apply to the affections of the
fair, as well as to the pride and avarice of her relations. As women of fashion
are, however, seldom allowed to go abroad, and never to receive male visitors
at home, unless with the consent of their relations, or by the contrivance of a
duenna, this application is commonly made in a manner almost peculiar to the
Spaniards themselves: the gallant sets himself to compose some love sonnets, as
expressive as he can, not only of the situation of his heart, but of every
particular circumstance between him and the lady, not forgeting to lard them
every here and there with the most extravagant encomiums on her beauty, and her
merit: these he sings in the night below her window, accompanied with his lute,
or sometimes with a whole band of music. The more piercingly cold the air, the
more the lady's heart is supposed to be thawed with the patient sufferance of
her lover, who, from night to night, frequently continues this exercise for
many hours, heaving the deepest sighs, and casting the most piteous looks
toward the window; at which, if his goddess at last deigns to appear, and drop
him a curtesy, he is superlatively paid for all his watching; but if she
blesses him with a smile, he is ready to run distracted.

In most of the countries we have hitherto mentioned, love, if we may call it
so, is carried on without sentiment or feeling: in Spain it is quite the
reverse; there, it flows in an uninterrupted course of intellectual sensations,
expressing almost in an infinite variety of different ways. A Spanish lover
hardly thinks, speaks, or even dreams, of any thing but his mistress; when he
speaks to her, it is with the utmost respect and deference; when he speaks of
her, it is in the most hyperbolically romantic style; and when he approaches
her, you would think that he was approaching a divinity. But all this deference
to her godship, all this patient sufferance under her window, is not enough;
and as none but the brave can deserve the fair, he is ready at all times, not
only to fight all her enemies, and his own rivals, but to seek every
opportunity of signalizing his courage, that he may show himself able to
protect her. Among all these opportunities, none are ^o eagerly courted as the
fighting with bulls; a horrid amusement, for which Spain is remarkable, where
the ladies sit as spectators, while the cavaliers encounter these furious
animals, previously exasperated, and turned loose upon them, and where,
according to the sarcastic phrase of Butler, " -- he obtains the noblest spouse,
"Who widows greatest herds of cows."


Some of the human passions are so nearly allied to each other, that the
transition from this to that, is hardly perceptible to the mind, and seems as
easy and natural as it is to step from the threshold into the house. Of this
kind is friendship with woman, which has been called sister to love; and we may
add, that to pity a woman, who is tolerably handsome and deserving, and at the
same time to guard against every softer sensation, is absolutely impossible.
The Spaniards, transposing the persons acted upon by this emotion, and finding
that the same causes must produce the same effects on the tender and
compassionate natures of women, endeavor, instead of attaching them by
pleasure, as in other countries, to secure them by exciting their pity and
compassion, not only through every part of the courtship we have now related,
but still more forcibly in a custom, which they practiced some time ago at
Madrid, and in other parts of Spain; when a company of people, who called
themselves discipliants or whippers, partly instigated by superstition, and
partly by love, paraded the streets every Good Friday, attended by all the
religious orders, several of the courts of judicature, all the companies of
trades, and sometimes the king and all his court. -- The whippers were arrayed
in long caps in the form of a sugar loaf, with white gloves, and shoes of the
same color; a waistcoat, the sleeves of which were tied with ribbons of such
colors as they thought most agreeable to the fancy of the ladies they adored;
and in their hands were whips made of small cords, ^o the ends of which were
cemented little bits of wax stuck with pieces of broken glass; with these they
whipped themselves as they went along, and he who showed the least mercy to his
carcass, was sure of the greatest pity from his dulcinea. When they happened to
meet a handsome woman in the street, some one of them took care to whip himself
so as to make his blood spurt upon her; an honor for which she never failed
humbly to thank him. When any of them came opposite to the window of his
mistress, he began to lay upon himself with redoubled fury, while she, from her
balcony, looked complacently on the horrid scene, and knowing it was acted in
honor of her charms, thought herself greatly obliged to her lover, and seldom
failed to reward him accordingly.

Not less singular, and much of the same nature, is a method of courtshi^ which
Lady Montague saw at a procession in Con^tantinople, when the Grand Signior was
going (...) to ^ake the command of an army.

The rear, says she, was closed by the volunteers, who came to beg the honor
of dying in his service; they were all naked to the middle, some had their arms
pierced through, with arrows left sticking in them, others had them sticking in
their heads, the blood trinkling down their faces: some slashed their arms with
sharp knives, making the blood spring out on the bye-standers; and this is
looked on as an expression of their zeal for glory. And I am told, that some
make use of it to advance their love; and when they came near the window where
their mistress stands, all the women being veiled to see this spectacle, they
stick another arrow for her sake, who gives some sign of approbation and
encouragement to this kind of gallantry.

We cannot help condemning customs so barbarous in the severest terms; but
while we condemn them, we have the strongest hopes that they no longer exist;
while in Scotland, one of a somewhat similar nature, scarcely less ridiculous,
or less dangerous, is not yet obliterated. At a concert annually held on St.
Cecilia's day in Edinburgh, most of the celebrated beauties are assembled; when
the concert is ended, their adorers retire to a tavern, when he that drinks the
largest quantity to the health of his mistress, according to the phrase they
make use of, saves her, and dubs her a public toast for the ensuing year; while
the hapless fair, who is beloved by one of a more irritable system and less
capacious stomach, according to the same cant, is damned, and degraded by the
bucks from being ranked among the number of beauties. In tracing general
principles, one often meets with many discordant and contradictory facts; it is
a general law of nature, that when the male makes love to the female, he
endeavors to put himself into the most agreeable postures and attitudes, and
to gain her affection by showing, if we may be allowed the expression, his best
side, and most agreeable accomplishments: but the instances we have now related
are exceptions to this general law; they tend, however, to establish this
truth, that the actions of men are more frequently directed by whim and
caprice, than by any fixed and permanent principles.

Among the various methods which we have in this inquiry seen practiced by the
men, of introducing themselves into the good g^aces of the fair, fighting has
not been the least common; and several tolerably good reasons may be assigned
why this should so successfully accomplish its purpose. Nothing, however, seems
less natural than to endeavor to engage the female heart by unavailing cruelty
to one's own flesh: this has in itself no merit, nor distinguishes the man for
any thing but a wrong head, and an insensibility of nerves. Whoever, therefore,
gets drunk, or commits any outrage upon himself for the sake of his mistress,
should be trusted by the women with caution, as the same causes which prompted
him to this folly, may prompt him to others in which his own person is less
likely to suffer.

Before we take our leave of the Spaniards, we must do them the justice to say,
that though their ideas of the ladies, and their manner of addressing them, is
strongly tinctured with the wild and the romantic, it is at the same time
directed by an honor and fidelity scarcely to be equalled by any other people.
In Italy, the manner of courtship pretty nearly resembles that of Spain; in one
circumstance, however, this people seem particular; they protract the time of
courtship for many months, and even sometimes for years, well knowing, that
this period, with all the little ills attending it, is one of the sweetest of
human life; while it lasts, the lady expects to see her lover at least once a
day.

To the difference of the climate of one country from another, philosophers
have generally attributed the different disposition of the inhabitants. But
France and Spain are kingdoms bordering on each other, and yet nothing can be
more dissimilar than a Frenchman and a Spaniard, especially in affairs of love.
A French lover, with the word sentiment perpetually in his mouth, seems by
every action, to have excluded it from his heart. He places his whole
confidence in his exterior air and appearance. He dresses for his mistress,
dances for her, flutters constantly about her, helps her to lay on her rouge,
and place her patches; attends her round the whole circle of amusements,
chatters to her perpetually, and by making her acquainted with his own
consequence and qualifications, every now and then drops a hint of the honor
he confers upon her; whatever be his station, every thing gaudy and glittering
within the sphere of it, is called in to his assistance, particularly splendid
carriages and taudry liveries; but if by the help of all these, he cannot make
an impression on the fair one's heart, it costs him nothing at last but a few
shrugs of his shoulders, and two or three silly exclamations; and, as it is
impossible for a Frenchman to live without an amor, he immediately betakes
himself to another.

Among people of fashion in France, courtship begins to be totally annihilated,
and marriages made by parents and guardians are become so common, that a bride
and bridegroom not unfrequently meet together for the second time on the day of
their marriage. In a country where complaisance and form seem so indispensable,
it may appear extraordinary, that a few weeks at least should not be allowed a
young couple to gain the affections of each other, and to enable them to judge
whether their tempers were formed for their mutual happiness; but this delay is
commonly thought unnecessary by the prudent parents, whose views extend no
farther than interest and convenience. In many countries, to be married in this
manner would be reckoned the greatest of misfortunes; in France, it is little
regarded, as in the fashionable world few people are greater strangers to, or
more indifferent about, each other, than husband and wife; and any appearance
of fondness between them, or their being seen frequently together, would
infallibly make them forfeit the reputation of the ton, and be laughed at by
all polite company. On this account, nothing is more common than to be
acquainted with a lady, without knowing her husband, or visiting the husband,
without ever seeing his wife.

An historian, who has read how the French have been, time immemorial, governed
by their women, and a traveller, who has seen the attention that every one pays
to them, will be apt to reckon all we have now said as falsehood and
misrepresentation: but to the first, we would recommend to consider, that the
women, who have commonly governed France, have been the mistresses of their
kings or other great men, who, trained up in every alluring mode of their
profession, have become artful beyond conception, in insinuating themselves by
all the avenues that lead to the male heart; the second, we would wish to
consider, that this constant attention is more the effect of fashion and custom
than of sentiment or regard; and that even the frequent duels which in France
are fought on account of women, are not a proof of the superior love or esteem
of the men for that sex, nor undertaken to defend their virtue or reputation;
they are only a mode of compliance with what is falsely called politeness, and
of supporting what is falsely esteemed honor.

Formerly, while the manners introduced by the spirit of chivalry were not
quite evaporated among the French, before the too great progress of politeness
had destroyed the virtues of honest simplicity, and tongue had learned by rote,
to make every day a thousand protestations of friendship, to which the heart
was a stranger; the behavior of this people, though mixed with romantic
extravagance, was nevertheless replete with feeling and with sentiment. During
the regency of Anne of Austria, fighting and religion were the most successful
ways by which a lover could recommend himself to his mistress; the bombastic
verses of the Duke of Rochefoucault show what a lover then promised with his
sword; To merit her heart, and to please her bright eyes,
I have fought against kings, and dare fight against the skies.

and the number of women of rank who turned Carmelites, in compliance with the
spirit of their gallants and of the times, point out what was expected from
devotion; but as politeness began to push forward beyond the standard of nature
and of utility, it dissipated not only all these romantic ideas, but also in
time thrust out sentiment and affection, and left the French in their present
situation -- the creatures of art. The avidity however of the other European
nations in copying their manners and customs is so great, that such as they now
are, all their neighbors will probably in less than a few centuries be.

As mankind advance in the principles of society, as interest, ambition, and
some of the other sordid passions begin to occupy the mind, nature is thrust
out. Nothing surely can be more natural than that love should direct us in the
choice of a partner for life, and that the parties contracting in wedlock,
should enter into that compact with the mutual approbation of each other. This
right of nature, however, begins to be wrested from her in every polite
country. The poor are the only class who still retain the liberty of acting
from inclination and from choice, while the rich, in proportion as they rise in
opulence and rank, ^^nk in the exertion of the natural rights of mankind, and
must sacrifice their love at the shrine of interest or ambition.

Such now begins to be the common practice in Britain; courtship, at least that
kind of it which proceeds from mutual inclination and affection is, among the
great, nearly annihilated, and the matrimonial bargain, not less sordid than
that of the East, is made between the relations of the two families, with all
the care and cunning that each is master of, to advance its own interest by
overreaching the other. Were we to descend to the middling and lower ranks of
life, where freedom of the mind still exists; were we to describe their various
modes of addressing and endeavoring to render themselves agreeable to the
fair, we should only relate what our readers are already acquainted with; we
shall therefore just observe, in general, that such is the power of love, that
it frequently prompts even an Englishman to lay aside some part of his natural
thoughtfulness, and appear more gay and sprightly in the presence of his
mistress; that on other occasions, when he is doubtful of success, it adds to
his natural peevishness and taciturnity, an air of melancholy and
embarrassment, which exposes him to the laughter of all his acquaintance, and
seldom or never contributes any thing to advance his suit. But this last is not
peculiar to the inhabitants of Britain; for, when a few singularities are
excepted, which arise from manners and customs, in every other respect the
courtship of all polished people is nearly the same, consists chiefly in the
lover's endeavoring, by every art, to make his person and temper appear as
agreeable to his mistress as possible; to persuade her, that his circumstances
are at least such as may enable him to indulge her in every thing becoming her
station, and that his inclinations to do so, are not in the least to be
doubted. These great points being gained, the lover has commonly little else
left to do, but to enter into the possession of his hopes, unless where each
party, urged by separate interests, proposes unreasonable conditions of
settlement, which frequently break off a match where every other article has
been agreed on.

In the course of this enquiry we have seen, that of all the methods practiced
by the men to insinuate themselves into the affections of the fair, none have
been more common than fighting. In ancient times, heroes encountered one
another to render themselves acceptable to the ladies they adored.
Saxo-Grammaticus gives an account of many duels that were fought between
private persons to determine which of them should be the successful lover, a
practice common among the Scandinavians before they became Christians: princes
then led their armies into the field, to fight with each other on the same
account; and so rude were the manners, that a king when he fell in love,
instead of endeavoring to gain the object by gentle and pacific methods,
frequently sent to demand her by threatening fire and sword on a refusal. The
Spaniards fight the most ferocious bulls to promote their love; and a few
centuries ago, the cavaliers of that and many other nations commenced
knights-errant, and rode about the country fighting every thing that opposed
them, for the honor of their mistresses. We have already seen, that in some
countries, the fairest and most noble virgins were allotted as a reward to the
greatest virtue, that in others they were basely sacrificed to the wretch who
was able to give the highest price for them. But among the ancient Saxons, at
Magdeburgh, they had an institution still more singular, the greatest beauties
were, at stated times, with a sum of money as the portion of each, deposited in
the hands of the magistrates, to be publicly fought for, and fell to the lot of
those who were most famous at tilting.

That the soft and compassionate temper of women, naturally averse to scenes of
horror and blood, should be the most easily gained by him who has most
distinguished himself in scenes of that nature; appears at first sight an
inexplicable paradox, but on a nearer inspection, the difficulty vanishes, when
we consider, that in rude and barbarous times, the wea^eness of the sex made
their property, and their beauty made their persons, a prey to every invader;
and that it was only by sheltering themselves in the arms of the hero, that
they could attain to any safety, or to any importance. Hence the hero naturally
became the object of their ambition, and their gratitude for the protection of
his power, obliterated the idea of his crimes, magnified all his virtues, and
held him up as an object of love. But besides, in the times of general rapine
and devastation, it was only valor and strength that could defend a man's
property from being lawlessly carried away, and his family ruined for want of
subsistence; and it was only by valor and martial achievements that ambition
could be gratified by rising to grandeur and to power. When we survey all these
reasons, our surprise that so many warriors in former times fought themselves
into the arms of their mistresses, will be much abated.

We have seen in the course of this work, that women have been by authority
exposed publicly to sale, we have seen that they have, by order of the
magistrates, been publicly fought for, and that, in the extensive regions of
the East, which compose almost half the globe, they are bought by a husband as
his ox or his ass, and in many respects treated by him worse than these
animals. Such a treatment of the objects which nature has taught us to love,
and politeness to respect, excites our astonishment and indignation, and we
exult in the happier state of our own country, when we consider it as not
degraded by any such instances of despotic power, exercised over a sex which
nature meant us to cherish and defend; but our exultation on this head is not
perhaps so well founded, as we imagine; the matrimonial bargains every day
concluded by all the cunning of relations, and chicanery of lawyers, are a
proof that we not only sell the fair sex, but dispose even of ourselves for the
sake of their fortunes. Such a spirit of venality in either sex, is a strong
symptom of the approaching ruin of the people among whom it is found. Let us
remember that wherever the women are the slaves of the men, the men themselves
are the slaves of a despot, and that wherever the men have become the slaves of
women, luxury and effeminacy have brought them to ruin.

CHAPTER XXV. Of Matrimony.
SOME regulation of the commerce between the sexes, or the joining of males and
females together by mutual ties and obligations, in order to preserve the peace
of society, and encourage population, seems either to have been an innate
principle in the human mind, or to have arisen early from necessity; as we find
it, in one shape or another, existing all over the habitable world.

Antiquarians, who have solicitously endeavored to trace the manners and
customs of past ages; and voyagers and travelers, who have depicted those of
the present, have indiscriminately given the name of marriage to every legal or
customary junction of the sexes, which they met with in the countries, whose
records they have searched or which they have visited in person; and European
readers, being accustomed only to one kind of marriage, have generally annexed
the same idea, which the word conveys in their own country, to the marriages of
the people of all other nations. Marriage, however, is so far from having been
an institution, fixed by permanent and unalterable laws, that it has been
continually varying in every period, and in every country; and its present
indissoluble nature among us, hardly bears the least resemblance to what it was
among many of the ancients, or to what it is at present in several parts of the
world.

It has long been the opinion of the learned, and many of the most respectable
authors are quoted to prove it, that several nations, during their most rude
and barbarous state, had not attained to any idea of matrimony, nor had any
regulation of the commerce between the sexes; if this is a fact, which,
notwithstanding what has been alleged to the contrary, by a learned author of
the present age, we have little reason to doubt, it is intimately connected
with another; which is, that the dawnings of civilization no sooner began to
appear, than these very people discovered the necessity of such a regulation,
and carried it into execution, upon the best plans which their limited
capacities were capable of inventing; and we scruple not to affirm, that,
without it, there could be no safety for the individual; the natural progress
of multiplication must be retarded, and no people could ever arrive at any
perfection in government or civilization.

Preservation of the individual, and propagation of the species, as they are
two of the great ends of our existence, are so intimately connected with our
nature, that in a very early period of the world, it must have been discovered,
that preservation could not properly be attained, unless individuals
appropriated to themselves the produce of their hunting, and certain parcels of
ground, from whence the means of that preservation might be derived; and if men
could not draw their subsistence so conveniently from the ground, while it was
in common, they must, by the same reasoning have discovered, that propagation
could not be so properly carried on, unless individuals also of the two sexes
were appropriated to each other by some tie or obligation, which should hinder
them from being considered as common to the whole species; but of what kind
these ties and obligations were, or how entered into, we can now only
conjecture; from the complexion of the times, however, we may suppose, that
they were simple, and not entered into with any remarkable pomp or ceremony.
This we the more readily believe, when we consider, that in the Mosaic history
of the creation, our original mother is introduced as the wife of Adam, without
taking notice of any ceremony performed to make her such: and that there was
none, appears plain from the circumstances of her case. Every marriage ceremony
is only a mutual agreement of the contracting parties, to be faithful to each
other, and the calling in of some persons to confirm, or to witness this
agreement -- But while only one man, and one woman existed, they had no third
person to witness their engagement, nor could they possibly prove unfaithful to
each other; consequently could have no use of any mutual engagement to
fidelity; unless we can suppose, that when their own posterity became of age,
such engagement should become necessary on their account; but here, if we
mistake not, nature has interposed her authority, by raising a horror at all
incestuous commerce.

In the primitive ages of the world, every thing was done in the most plain and
simple manner; a man set up a stone, or erected a pillar, to mark the spot of
ground he had appropriated to his own use; and he took unto himself a wife;
that is, carried her home to his house, and perhaps made her promise to adhere
to him only, and to assist him in bringing up the children they might have
together; which seems to be the only mode in which marriages were originally
contracted; at least it was the mode during the patriarchal ages. Lamech, one
of the sons of Adam, took unto himself two wives. Abraham took unto himself a
wife; the other patriarchs and people followed the example; and, for many ages,
the Israelitish women, and perhaps those of other nations, were appropriated to
their husbands in this simple manner.

But besides these marriages, by simple appropriation, there appear to have
been others of a nature still more simple. Accidental circumstances sometimes
brought a man and a woman together; and when any children were the produce of
their correspondence, natural affection excited them to remain together, and
unite their endeavors for the preservation and maintenance of their offspring.
A strong proof, that such marriages existed in ancient times, is, that they
were much in use among the Romans, and are to be found at this day among some
uncultivated people. The most ancient kind of marriage among the Romans, was
that in which a man and woman had come together without any previous bargain;
and having lived together for some time, became at last unwilling to part, as
they found themselves insensibly become necessary to each other: and, among the
Kalmuc Tartars, a young couple agreeing between themselves, retire for one year
as husband and wife; if, in that time, the woman brings forth a child, they
remain together; if not, they either make trial of another year, or agree to
part. In the island of Otaheite, the inhabitants pursue incontinent
gratifications, wherever inclination leads them; but when a woman becomes
pregnant, the father of her child thereby becomes her husband.

Before the laws of Moses were given to the Israelites, as the rule of their
conduct and manners, it is asserted by the Jewish rabbis, that a woman, who
was neither betrothed nor married, might bestow her favors either gratis, or
for reward, on any one she pleased, without incurring the least scandal, or
confining herself entirely to him, though she lived with him as his wife; but
the assertions of these people are far from deserving the greatest degree of
credit; for though it seems evident, from the sacred records, that little or no
ceremony was used in taking a wife previous to the patriarchal ages, they have
particularly described the ceremonies then made use of on that occasion, which
we shall take notice of afterward.

As the number of the human race increased, and the number of incitements to
conjugal infidelity were, consequently, increased also, the simple modes of
appropriating a woman, by carrying her home, or by having lived with her for
some time, were, perhaps, found insufficient, either to check her own
inclination to infidelity, or secure her from the attacks of the licentious;
hence methods of a more public and solemn nature were fallen upon, and the
marriage ceremony probably converted into a covenant, with similar ceremonies
to the covenants that were made at the establishing of peace, or securing of
property. Many and various were the contrivances made use of to establish and
perpetuate the memory of those covenants: Abraham presented Abimelech, king of
the Philistines, with sheep and oxen; which he desired him, before witnesses,
to accept of as a token, that he should have the property of a well which he
had dug. The Phoenicians set up a stone, or a pillar, or raised a heap of
stones, as a memorial of any public agreement; a practice which was followed by
many other nations. The Scythians, in their alliances and ceremonies, poured
wine into an earthen vessel; and having mixed it with the blood of the
contracting parties, they dipped a scymiter, some arrows, a bill, and a javelin
into the vessel; and after many imprecations on the party who should break the
agreement, they themselves first drank of the mixture, and the rest of the
company as witnesses followed their example. The ancient Arabians took an oath
by cutting the hands of the contracting parties with a sharp stone, then
pulling a tuft from the garment of each, dipped them in the blood which flowed
from the wounds, and sprinkled the blood upon seven stones set up between them,
invoking in the mean time Bacchus and Urania. The ancient Medes and Lycians, in
making public agreements, wounded themselves in the arm, and the parties
mutually sucked the blood of each other. The Nasamones, in pledging their faith
to each other, mutually presented a cup of liquor, and if they had none, they
took up dust and put it in their mouths. The Carians and Ionians, in the army
of Psamenitus, when they fought against Phanes, slew the sons of the latter,
and receiving their blood into a bowl, and mixing it with wine and water, drank
it as a pledge of their steady adherence to each other. The other Greeks, and
the Romans, in their public contracts joined their hands together, and swore by
their gods, by the tombs of their ancestors, or by any other object of awe and
reverence.

To these ancient methods of covenanting we shall add a similar one practiced
at this time at Madagascar. They put into a large vessel filled with brandy,
some gold, silver, gun flint in powder, and, if possible, some of the dust of
the tombs of their ancestors, to all which they add, blood from the arms of the
contracting parties; while this mixture is preparing, their weapons are laid on
the ground in form of a cross, soon after, both parties take them up, and with
the points of them in the vessel constantly keep stirring its contents till the
agreement is concluded, when the contracting parties, and all who are present,
drink till the cup is emptied; after which, they embrace each other and retire.
Such were the ceremonies attending covenants and alliances in the primitive
ages; and as marriage was an alliance not only between the two parties, but
their families and relations, it is probable that some of these ceremonies were
made use of to ratify and confirm it.

But though matrimonial agreements were not only made public, but solemnly
confirmed by some of the above ceremonies; such is the frailty of human nature,
that even these were found insufficient to secure female fidelity; and hence,
perhaps, arose the custom of purchasing a wife from her relations for a
stipulated price, and a few presents made to the bride herself; a custom also
of great antiquity, for we find that Jacob served seven years for Rachel, and
Sechem told the brethren of Dinah that he would give whatever dowry they should
ask for their sister. -- This method of marrying, as it augmented the power of
a husband over his wife, gave him greater security for her good behavior; for
by the purchase she became his slave, and on the least suspicion he could
confine her, or turn her away at pleasure, upon proof of her guilt.

But whatever were the ceremonies of marriage in the primitive ages, it appears
plain that the commerce between the sexes began early to be regulated, as all
the most ancient traditions agree in ascribing that regulation to their first
sovereigns and lawgiver. Menes, who is said to have been the first king of
Egypt, is also said to have been the first that introduced matrimony and fixed
the laws concerning it. The Greeks give the honor of this institution to
Cecrops; the Chinese to Fo Hi, their first sovereign; the Peruvians to
Manco-capac, and the Jews to God Almighty himself; nor does it only seem that
matrimony was early introduced, but that its first introduction among most
nations, was that of one woman only being destined to one men, as the fables of
antiquity when traced as far back as possible seem to hint; Jupiter had only
his Juno; Pluto his Proserpine; Osiris his Isis, and the stolen amors of the
gods and heroes of antiquity, and the conduct of their wives upon discovering
them, seem all plainly to evince that their legal right of commerce with the
sex extended only to one woman. The case, however, seems to have been otherwise
among the Jews, for as early as the days of Adam, Lamech, once of his sons,
introduced the practice of marrying a plurality of wives; a practice which was
imitated by the neighboring nations, till in time it became almost universal.

From the earliest ages of antiquity men were accustomed to feast and rejoice
together on memorable events, and on the acquisition of any thing they reckoned
valuable: setting aside the value stamped on a woman by love, which we have
reason to believe had not, in the times we are speaking of, arisen to any great
degree of refinement, she was a valuable acquisition, as she stood in the
quality of a servant as well as a wife; in which last quality she gave her
husband also a prospect of raising up children, to perpetuate his name, and
assist him in old age, circumstances greatly valued in the primitive ages: but
besides these, a wife was valuable on another account; while society was in its
infancy, almost every family supported feuds and animosities against, and was
at war with, its neighbors, about the distribution and defense of property,
and it was only by the alliance of several families together, that they could
sometimes be able to support themselves against their more powerful rivals;
such alliances, and such additional strength to families, came generally by
marrying, and on all these accounts, marriage was considered as an important
transaction, and feasts were early instituted at its celebration; which feasts,
we have reason to believe, were frequently the whole of the ceremony; served to
make the contract public, and also in place of those writings which in our
times ascertain the right and privileges of the parties. Laban gathered his
friends together and made a marriage feast, when he deceived Jacob by giving
him Leah instead of Rachel; but as this feast is not mentioned as any thing new
or uncommon, we have reason to suppose they had been used long before that
time. Sampson, when he married Delilah, made a feast which lasted seven days,
for so used the young men to do. The Babylonians carried marriage-feasts to
such an extravagant length, that many people having ruined their families by
the expense, a sumptuary law was made to restrain them. Among the ancient
Scandinavians, almost every public transaction was attended with a feast, and
that at the celebration of a marriage was a scene of revelry and drunkenness,
which was frequently productive of the most fatal effects. The Phrygians too
had sumptuous entertainments on these occasions; entertainments also of a like
nature were common among the Jews in the time of our Savior; and they are at
this day given almost by all nations, but more particularly by those among whom
the excess of politeness has not banished merriment and rustic hospitality.

In an early period of the world, the interest, or sometimes the inclination,
of parents, when they had lived in a friendly manner with, and contracted a
regard for, their neighbors, naturally prompted them to wish, that a marriage
between their children might take place to strengthen the alliance of the
families; and as this wish was frequently formed before the parties were of an
age proper for such a junction, they fell upon a method of securing them to
each other; by what is called in the sacred writings, betrothing, which was
agreeing on a price to be paid for the bride, the time when it should be paid,
and when she should be delivered into the hands of her husband. There were,
according to the Talmudists, three ways of betrothing: the first, by a written
contract; the second, by a verbal agreement, accompanied with a piece of money;
and the third, by the parties coming together and living as husband and wife;
which last they could not properly call betrothing, it was marriage itself. The
written contract was in the following words:

On such a day, month, and year, A. the son of B. has said to D. the daughter
of E. be thou my spouse according to the law of Moses and of the Israelites,
and I will give thee as a dowry for thy virginity the sum of two hundred
Suzims, as it is ordered by our law; and the said D. has promised to be his
spouse upon the conditions aforesaid, which the said A. does hereby bind
himself, and all that he has, to the very cloak upon his back; engages himself
to love, honor, feed, clothe, and protect her, and to perform all that is
generally implied in favor of the Israelitish wives.

The verbal agreement was made in the presence of a sufficient number of
witnesses, by the man, saying to the woman, Take this money as a pledge, that
at such a time, I will take thee to be my wife. A woman who was by any of these
methods betrothed or bargained for, was almost in every respect by the law
considered as already married, bound nearly by the same ties and obligations,
and enjoyed nearly the same privileges and immunities, as she who actually
lived and cohabited with her husband.

CHAPTER XXVI. The same Subject continued.
HITHERTO our observations on the origin and progress of the matrimonial
compact have, for the most part, been either general, or confined to periods
enveloped in the darkness of the remotest antiquity: we shall now endeavor to
trace the ceremonies and usages of that compact in a more particular manner, as
well as through periods which begin to be better known, and where, being
furnished with more historical facts, we shall have the less occasion to supply
their place by probability and conjecture.

Though, from what we have already observed, it is highly presumable, that the
Israelites had no marriage-ceremony before the legislation of Moses, except
sending a few presents, or feasting together, to make the affair public; yet
the Rabbis, ever fertile in imagination, have told us the contrary:

Marriages, say they, were even then agreed upon by the parents and relations
of both sides; which being done, the bridegroom was introduced to his bride,
presents were mutually exchanged, the contract sign^d before witnesses; and the
bride, having remained some time with her relations, was sent away to the
habitation of her husband in the night; with singing, dancing, and the sound of
musical instruments.

This ceremonial bears so strong a resemblance to that which the same Rabbis
tell us was instituted by Moses, that it is plain they have either taken it
from that, or Moses, if he really did institute any ceremony, must have taken
his pattern from the ancient usages and customs of his country; as we may see
by the following ceremonial, which they have ascribed to that legislator. When
the day appointed for celebrating the wedding was come, which was generally
Friday for a maid, and Thursday for a widow, the contract of marriage was read
in the presence of, and signed by at least ten witnesses, who were free and of
age. The bride who had taken care to bathe herself the night before, appeared
in all her splendor, but veiled, in imitation of Rebecca, who veiled herself
when she came in sight of Isaac; she was then given to the bridegroom by her
parents, in words to this purpose: Take her, according to the law of Moses; and
he received her, by saying, I take her according to that law. Some blessings
were then pronounced upon the young couple, both by the parents and the rest of
the company. The blessings or prayers generally ran in this style: Blessed art
thou, O Lord of heaven and earth, who have created man in thine own likeness,
and have appointed woman to be his partner and companion! Blessed art thou, who
filled Sion with joy for the multitude of her children! Blessed art thou, who
sendest gladness to the bridegroom and his bride! who have ordained for them
love, joy, tenderness, peace, and mutual affection. Be pleased to bless, not
only this couple, but Judah and Jerusalem with songs of joy, and praise for the
joy thou give them, by the multitude of their sons and of their daughters.
The virgins sung a marriage-song; the company then partook of a repast, the
most magnificent that the parties could afford; after which the parties began a
dance, the men round the bridegroom, the women round the bride; and this dance
they pretended, was of divine institution, and an essential part of the
ceremony. The bride was then carried to the nuptial bed, and the bridegroom
left in the chamber with her; when the company again returned to their feasting
and rejoicing, and the Rabbis inform us, that this feasting, when the bride
was a widow, lasted only three days, but seven if she was a virgin; a law,
which was so obligatory, that if a man married several wives in one day, he was
bound to allow a feast of seven days to each of them, exactly in the order in
which they were married.

In periods later than these we are now considering the ceremonies of marriage
were, according to the Rabbis, considerably changed. Both the man and woman
were led to the house of marriage by their nearest friends, where ten at least
were to be present; there the bill of dowry being publicly ratified, the man
spoke thus to the woman: Be thou a wife to me, according to the law of Moses,
and I will worship and honor thee, according to the word of God, and will feed
and govern thee, according to the custom of those who worship, honor, and
govern their wives faithfully. I give thee, for dowry of thy virginity, fifty
shekels.

Having given this account of the state of matrimony among the Israelites, let
us now turn to the other nations of antiquity, which flourished in the same
periods we have been reviewing. It has been already mentioned, that the
Egyptians attributed the introduction of matrimony, and the regulation of it by
laws, to Menes, said to have been the Cham of the scripture, who was one of the
sons of Noah, and their first sovereign. That matrimony was early instituted
among a people who took the lead in almost every thing that tended to improve
society, we have little room to doubt: but though, as will appear afterward, we
have some account of the several ties and obligations of the married state
among them, we are entirely ignorant of the manner in which their marriages
were solemnized. In this article, the history of the Philistines, Canaanites,
Carthaginians, and many other nations, is involved in the same obscurity. Of
the Philistines, however, we may observe, that their ideas of marriage must
have been exceedingly crude and indigested, as the father-in-law of Sampson
gave away his wife Delilah to another, upon his being some time absent from her.

The ancient Assyrians seem more thoroughly to have settled and digested the
affairs of marriage, than any of their contemporaries. Once in every year they
assembled together all the girls that were marriageable, when the public crier
put them up to sale, one after another. For her whose figure was agreeable, and
whose beauty was attracting, the rich strove against each other, who should
give the highest price; which price was put into a public stock, and
distributed in portions to those whom nature had less liberally accomplished,
and whom nobody would accept without a reward. After the most beautiful were
disposed of, these were also put up by the public crier, and a certain sum of
money offered with each, proportioned to what it was thought she stood in need
of to bribe a husband to accept her. When a man offered to accept of any of
them, on the terms upon which she was exposed to sale, the crier proclaimed,
that such a man had proposed to take such a woman, with such a sum of money
along with her, provided none could be found who would take her with less; and
in this manner the sale went on, till she was at last allotted to him who
offered to take her with the smallest portion. -- When this public sale was
over, the purchasers of those that were beautiful were not allowed to take them
away, till they had paid down the price agreed on, and given sufficient
security that they would marry them; nor, on the other hand, would those who
were to have a premium for accepting of such as were less beautiful, take a
delivery of them, till their portions were previously paid. It is probable,
that this sale brought together too great multitudes of people from
inconvenient distances, to the detriment, perhaps, of agriculture and commerce,
and that strangers could not give sufficient security to fulfill the bargains
they had made; for a law was afterward issued, prohibiting the inhabitants of
different districts from intermarrying with each other, and ordaining, that
husbands should not use their wives ill; a vague kind of ordonnance, which
shows how imperfectly legislation was understood among those people.

History has not, so far as we know, given us any account of what was meant
farther by marrying the woman, after having thus publicly bargained for her: if
we may judge, however, from the customs of the times, and of the neighboring
nations, we may suppose, that their further marriage consisted only in taking
home to their houses the wives they had bought, and calling their friends
together to feast with them, and be witnesses of their fulfilling the
engagement they had entered into. If, between the time of the sale and this
public solemnization, the parties happened to differ, or if they could not
agree afterward, the man was obliged to refund the money he had received, and
they parted with mutual consent. This being the case with those who received
money with their wives, it has likewise been supposed, that those who paid
money for them, had a power of demanding it again, on disagreement and
separation: but of such power we have no account, nor is it probable that it
existed; for the money so paid, being put into a public stock, and distributed
to such a variety of hands, became thereby totally irredeemable. These hints
concerning matrimony among the Assyrians plainly prove, that the proper
regulation of it was an object of their most serious attention; but another
circumstance proves this in a still stronger manner. The Assyrians had a court,
or tribunal, whose only business was to dispose of young women in marriage, and
to see the laws of that union properly executed. What these laws were, or how
the execution of them was enforced, are circumstances which have not been
handed down to us; but the erecting a court solely for the purpose of taking
cognizance of them, suggests an idea that they were many and various.

We have already seen the manner in which the ancient Scythians, so much famed
for natural affection and fidelity, ratified their covenants with each other,
and have reason to suppose, that marriage was one of the covenants so ratified:
when we turn to the other nations, in the times under review, we find no
account of their marriage-ceremonies till we come to the Greeks; and this
silence on the subject gives us reason to suppose, that in many countries they
really had no other than the simple mode of carrying home a bride, and making a
feast for her reception; which we are the more inclined to believe, when we
consider the circumstantial detail we have, of many of the public ceremonies of
Darius, of Cyrus, and of Alexander; that we are not only told of their being
married, but have also an account of the time when, and the persons to whom,
but not the least account of the manner how; which the historians of the times
would scarcely have omitted, had their marriages been celebrated with pomp and
public ceremony.

Though Cecrops, the first king of the Greeks, is supposed to have lived nearly
about the time of Moses, and to have instituted marriage among his people; yet
during the whole of the heroic ages, which lasted many centuries after Moses,
they appear to ha^^ been so rude and uncultivated, that we cannot suppose they
had brought this institution to any perfection, either in its ceremonies or its
laws. Whether Cecrops ordained that the Greeks should follow the customs of the
Egyptians in marrying, or went a step farther, and fixed new ceremonies o his
own invention, we know not: we are, however, informed, that at a marriage, even
in the heroic ages, there was a meeting of relations and of neighbors; who, in
order to recall to memory the times of simplicity, when their ancestors lived
almost entirely on the spontaneous productions of the earth, presented the
new-married couple with a basket of acorns mixed with bread; a custom, which,
perhaps, gave birth to the nuptial scattering of nuts among the Romans, who
borrowed almost every usage of the Greeks. At this meeting, the Greeks,
according to the hospitality of uncultivated people, had feastings and
rejoicings; as appears from Theseus being invited to the nuptials of Pirithous,
when he helped him to kill a great number of Centaurs, who in their cups had
offered violence to the female guests at the wedding; from the story of Attis,
the son of Cybele, who was by Midas to have been married to his daughter, had
not Cybele, prevented it by breaking into the city, and causing a frenzy to
f^ll upon all those who assisted at the ceremony of the nuptials. Some are of
opinion, that pledges and securities were, by the institution of Cecrops,
mutually interchanged between the parties; but this, and almost every other
circumstance relative to the mode of marrying in the heroic ages, is only
conjecture; we shall, therefore, proceed to give some account of that mode, in
periods when the history of the Greeks, being less involved in fable is more
distinctly known.

As soon as the consent of the parents and relations was obtained, the parties
were sometimes betrothed, in these words: I give you this my daughter to make
you the father of legitimate children. After which the young couple plighted
their faith to each other by a kiss, or joining together of their right hands,
a custom observed by the Grecians in all public agreements. The Thebans
plighted their faith to each other at the monument of Iolaus, who, after he had
been advanced to heaven was supposed to take care of the affairs of love. The
Athenian virgins, when marriageble, presented baskets of little curiosities to
Diana, to obtain leave to depart from her trains, she being esteemed the
peculiar patron of maidens; and before her shrine at Brauron, an Athenian
village, in order to appease her for intending to depart from the st^^e of
virginity in which she so much delighted. The Boeotians and Locrians of both
sexes offered, before their nuptials, a sacrifice to Euclia, or Diana, to avert
her resentment against them, for changing from a single to a married life.
These sacrifices consisted in consecrated wafers, cakes, and animals, which
were slain on her altars. Several other of the gods and goddesses had
sacrifices offered at their altars on this occasion, as Jupiter, Juno, Minerva,
and Venus, who was generally invoked with peculiar fervency, as being the
goddess of love. The Lacedaemonians had an ancient statue of this goddess, to
whom it was incumbent upon all mothers to offer sacrifices on the marriage of
their daughters. The multiplicity of male and female deities among the Greeks,
who were concerned in the affair of love, made the invocations and sacrifices
on this occasion a tedious affair. Even the Fates were by no means to be
forgot, but the favor of the Graces was purchased by the most ample offerings.

The time appointed for these ceremonies was commonly the day before marriage,
when the parties having cut off some of their hair, presented it to such
deities as they most regarded, or to whom they thought themselves under the
greatest obligations.

Besides these sacrifices preparatory to the marriages, other victims were
offered at the solemnization of it; and on this occasion, as soon as the
victims were slain, they were opened, the gall taken out, and thrown behind the
altar, to intimate that all gall and bitterness should be thrown behind the
parties, before they enter into the married state. The entrails were then
carefully inspected by the soothsayers, if they declared that any thing unlucky
appeared in them, the nuptials were either delayed or broke off; and the same
thing took place if any ill omen happened, during the celebration of them, as
was the case at the marriage of Clitophon with Calligone, where, an eagle
having snatched a piece of the flesh of the victim from the altar, the whole
company dismissed full of terror and consternation. Fortunate omens gave great
joy, and the most fortunate of all others, was a pair of turtles seen in the
air, as those birds were reckoned the truest emblem of conjugal love and
fidelity; but if one of them was seen alone, it infallibly denoted separation
and all the ills attending an unhappy marriage. We cannot help observing here,
to what a train of groundless fears and apprehensions superstition subjects her
votaries, and how easily they may be deceived, in taking for the denunciations
of heaven, the frauds and tricks of their enemies, as sometimes happened to the
Greeks; if what is reported be true, that such as were averse to marriage, or
wished the parties to be unhappy, sometimes took a single turtle along with
them, and letting it fly, either put an end to the ceremony, or filled the
hearts of the contracting parties with terror and astonishment; but we must
remark also, that those who wished well to the young couple, sometimes carried
a pair of turtles along with them, and by their flight diffused joy and
gladness into all the company, and particularly to those who were the most
interested in the fate of the marriage.

The bride and bridegroom were dressed, and adorned with garlands of herbs and
flowers, and cakes made of sesame, a plant remarkable for its fruitfulness,
were plentifully distributed among the company. The house of the bridegroom was
likewise adorned with garlands: a pestle was tied to the door of it, a maid
carried a sieve, and the bride an earthen vessel with barley, all of which were
emblems of her future employment. She was conducted in the evening to the house
of her husband in a chariot, seated between the husband and one of his
relations; servants carrying lighted torches immediately before, and singers
and dancers preceding the whole cavalcade: and when the bride alighted from the
chariot, the axle-tree of it was burnt, to signify that there was no method
left for her to return back. -- As soon as the young couple entered the house,
figs and other fruits were thrown upon their heads, to denote plenty; and a
sumptuous entertaiment was ready for them to partake of, to which all the
relations on both sides were invited; during the feast, the deities that
presided over marriage were invoked, and honored with music and dancing. The
chief intention of this feast, according to the Greek authors, was to make the
marriage publicly known, and on that account was an essential part of the
ceremony.

The dancing ended, the married couple were conveyed to their bed; previous to
which, the bride bathed her feet in water, always brought from the fountain
Callirhoe, on a superstitious opinion of some secret virtues it contained; this
done, she was lighted to bed, by a number of torches, according to her quality;
round one of these torches, the bride's mother tied her own hair-lace. All the
relations of both parties assisted at these ceremonies, and to be absent from
them was considered as the greatest misfortune. It was also the privilege of
the mother to light the torches, a privilege of which the Grecian matrons were
exceedingly tenacious. The young couple being now left together, were, by the
laws of Athens, obliged to eat a quince, after which the bridegroom proceeded
to loose the bride's girdle, the young men and maidens standing at the door
singing epithalamia, the men making a great noise with their feet and voices to
drown the cries of the bride. This done, the company retired, and returned in
the morning, to salute the new married couple, to sing epithalamia again at the
door of their bedchamber.

These ceremonies being finished, the bride presented to her husband a garment,
and presents were made both to the bridegroom and bride, by their relations,
which consisted in such kinds of household furniture as was then made use of,
and were carried in great state to their house by a company of women, preceded
by a boy in white apparel, with a lighted torch in his hand, and between him
and the women, a person with a basket of flowers, as customary at the Grecian
processions.

Such were the most material ceremonies at the celebration of a Greek marriage.
A variety of others are frequently alluded to in their authors; but as they
would be tedious to relate, and seemed to have been less essential, we shall
pass over them in silence, only remarking, that in some of their states, they
invoked the crow, to put them in mind of the affection they ought to bear to
each other, and it was a common proverb among them, when they heard that such a
woman was married to a man whom they presumed would not use her well, to say,
She will need to invoke the crow.

At Sparta, marriages were conducted in a very different manner. When the
preliminaries were settled by a female match-maker, she shaved the bride,
dressed her in men's clothes, and left her sitting upon a mattrass; the
bridegroom stole privately to her, and having staid a short time, stole as
privately away, a conduct which the laws of that republic obliged a married
couple to observe, in their intercourse with each other, through the whole of
their lives.

Having thus far traced the rites of marriage, we think it necessary to
observe, that the detail we have given has not been solely with a view to
exhibit the ceremonies with which it is in different countries celebrated, but
also with an intention to discover, whether it is of divine or human
institution.

In the course of our narration we have seen, that the Jews attributed the
institution of marriage to the Almighty himself, when he gave Adam a female for
his companion; but as the scriptures mention no such institution, we may with
equal reason suppose, that he instituted marriage among the other animals, when
he created them male and female. We have further seen, that the Rabbis
attributed the ceremonial to be observed at matrimonial engagements, to Moses,
who was divinely inspired; but Moses himself mentions no such thing, and has
only in his code of legislation promulgated a few laws for the better
regulation of the conduct of married people toward each other; and as no
legislator issues his laws to regulate what is properly regulated already, we
may suppose from the laws which Moses made upon this occasion, that, before his
time, marriage was in so imperfect a state, that we cannot reasonably conceive
it to have been the institution of an all-perfect Being.

In the prosecution of our enquiry among the other primitive nations, we have
scarcely discovered almost any of them even pretending, that marriage was the
institution of their gods; but of their first legislators, as Menes in Egypt,
and Cecrops in Greece; nor have we found, even among the Jews themselves, that
either prophet, or priest, were concerned in the celebration of marriage,
though they managed every thing that was considered as sacred, or of divine
institution: the same was the case among the other primitive nations; they had
priests, to whom the celebration of every holy rite was committed; but their
magistrates, and the relations of the contracting parties, were the only people
who concerned themselves about marriage; a strong presumption, that it was not
considered in any other light than as a civil compact.

Having premised thus much at present, on a subject which we shall have
occasion to discuss more fully afterward, before we proceed any farther in our
endeavors to investigate the ceremonies by which men and women were joined
together in matrimony, we shall take a veiw of the duties, obligations, and
customs of that state; and as the manner in which wives are acquired, often
determines the manner in which they are used by their husbands, let us inquire
into the former, before we proceed to the latter.

Wherever the rights of nature remain unviolated by oppression, women have a
power of disposing of themselves in matrimony; where these rights are a little
infringed, the consent of parents, relations, or guardians is necessary; where
they are totally obliterated, they are disposed of by their kindred, or even by
the magistrates, to the highest bidder. The legislature of almost every country
has interdicted such women as are not of age from disposing of themselves; and
it is only in Europe, where the rights of nature remain so far untouched, that
even such women as are of age enjoy this power. It is true, that a woman who is
more than fourteen, if she get married without the consent of her parents, is
so bound, that the parents cannot render the engagement void; but they may
hinder it from taking place, if they are informed of her intention, till she
has completed her twenty-first year, which they cannot do afterward, although
their consent is even then generally asked from paternal duty and affection.
Among the Greeks, Romans, and several other nations, a woman never obtained any
power of choosing for herself a partner in wedlock, but was through life
entirely at the disposal of her parents and guardians. When the Roman empire
was overturned, and the feudal system erected on its ruins, that system
ordained, that no daughter of a vassal could be given in marriage without the
consent of the liege lord, as well as of her own parents; and, at this day, the
daughters of the great, even in the politest countries of Europe, can scarcely
be said to enjoy any disposing power of themselves, being frequently stipulated
for in a treaty of peace, or courted and even married by proxy (...) a man whom
they never saw, and consequently cannot tell whether they shall approve of or
not.

But of all the modes of getting possession of a wife, after the first ages of
barbarity were over, that of purchasing her was the most common; it was the
practice of the East from time immemorial, and continues so to this day. We
have seen that Abraham bought Rebecca for his son; that Jacob, destitute of any
thing to give, served Laban fourteen years for his two daughters; and that
Sechem, when in love with Jacob's daughter, was determined not to break off the
match for whatever price her friends might fix upon her: and we now add, the
same custom is mentioned in a variety of places of Homer; that it was practiced
in Thrace, in India, Spain, Germany, and Gaul, and at this day in Hindostan,
China, Tartary, Tonquin, Pegu, Turkey; by the Moors of Africa, and the savages
in a variety of other parts of the world. In Gaul, during the fifth century,
the princess Clotilda, daughter of Gondebaud, king of the Burgundians, being
married to Clovis by proxy, the proxy presented her with a sol and a denier, as
the price of her virginity, a custom which existed among that people long
afterward. This custom, though under a different ^orm, maintained itself still
longer in England; in the time of Edward the Third, Richard de Neville gave
twenty palfreys to the king to obtain his request to Isola Bisset, that she
should take him for a husband; and Roger Fitz-Walter gave three good palfreys,
to have the king's letter to Roger Bertram's mother, that she should marry him.
In those times, when the kings of England exercised so unlimited a power over
their subjects, the king's request, or his letter, amounted to an absolute
command, and the money paid to obtain these, was as literally the purchase of a
wife, as if it had been paid for at a public sale.

In Timor, an island in the Indian Ocean, it is said, that parents sell their
children in order to purchase more wives. In Circassia, women are reared and
improved in beauty and every alluring art, only for the purpose of being sold.
The prince of the Circassians demanded from the prince of Mingrelia an hundred
slaves loaded with tapestry, an hundred cows, as many oxen, and the same number
of horses, as the price of his sister. In New Zealand, we meet with a custom
which may be called purchasing a wife for a night, and which is a proof that
those must also be purchased who are intended for a longer duration; and what
to us is a little surprising, this temporary wife, insisted upon being treated
with as much deference and respect, as if she had been married for life; but in
general, this is not the case in other countries, for the wife who is
purchased, is always trained up in the principles of slavery; and, being
innured to every indignity and mortification from her parents, she expects no
better treatment from her husband.

There is little difference in the condition of her who is put to sale by her
sordid parents, and her who is disposed of in the same manner by the
magistrates, as a part of the state's property. Besides those we have already
mentioned in this work, the Thracians put the fairest of their virgins up to
public sale, and the magistrates of Crete had the sole power of choosing
partners in marriage for their young men; and, in the execution of this power,
the affection and interest of the parties was totally overlooked, and the good
of the state the only object of attention; in pursuing which, they always
allotted the strongest and best made of the sex to one another, that they might
raise up a generation of warriors, or of women fit to be the mothers of
warriors.

In the primitive ages, when the number of the human race was but few, and when
every one might consequently appropriate to himself, and cultivate such grounds
as lay most convenient for his use; when his wife and children, as soon as they
were able, assisted in this and every other kind of labor; a wife was rather
an advantage than otherwise, and therefore she was bought, both as an
instrument of propagation, and an assistant in the occupations of life. But as
societies were formed, lands and goods of every kind appropriated, and women
became, perhaps, less industrious, every addition to a family became an
additional expense; hence, instead of a man paying a price for his wife, it was
necessary he should receive something along with her: marriage, therefore,
became a compact between a man and one or more women, according to the custom
of the country; to join their stocks, interests, and persons together, that
they might be the better enabled to bring up a family, and carry on the trade
or business by which they were to acqu^^e subsistence; and the stock or fortune
of a woman so married, was called her portion or dowry, and in pro^ess of time
came to be settled upon her as a security from want, if her husband should die
before her.

As the Egyptians were supposed to be the first people who arrived at any
degree of cultivation, among them we meet with the first account of portions.
Pharaoh gave the city of Gazer, as a portion with his daughter, to Solomon king
of Israel. We do not recollect any account of portions given by any other of
the ancients, till we come to the Greeks; when we find Phares of Chalcedon,
ordering, by a law, that the rich should give portions with their daughters to
the poor, but receive none with such wives as were married to their sons; a
law, which he had founded on the custom of his country; for Helen brought to
Menelaus the kingdom of Sparta, and afterward, in default, we suppose, of male
heirs, the daughters of several Grecian kings carried the kingdoms of their
fathers, as dowries to their husbands. But although this was the case with
regard to kingdoms, yet the contrary seems in other cases to have been the
general practice, as we learn from the story of Danaus, whose daughters having
rendered themselves infamous, their father caused a proclamation to be made,
that he would not demand any presents from those who should marry them; and
from the conduct of Agamemnon to Achilles, when he tells him, that he will give
him one of his daughters in marriage, without requiring any presents. The
presents here mentioned were of two kinds; the first was given to the father of
the lady, as a bribe or price to engage him to give his daughter to the suitor;
the second, to the lady herself, in order to gain her affection: and some
authors are of opinion, that the presents thus made to the father and the
daughter, were joined together to compose the fortune of the latter, which was
settled upon her as her dower; so that if the husband did not literally
purchase a bride, he bribed her to his arms, and to an independence, with his
own money.

As the principles of equity and of justice began to be understood, it was easy
to discover, that women who had assisted their fathers and husbands in
acquiring the goods of fortune, should not be given in marriage by the first
without portions, nor left by the last at death without settlements as an
equivalent for these portions; hence the custom of receiving a fortune with a
bride, and settling at least an equivalent upon her and her heirs, insinuated
itself into every country, in proportion as its inhabitants became civilized,
and acquainted with the natural rights of mankind.

CHAPTER XXVII. The same Subject continued.
BESIDES the methods of purchasing wives, and agreeing with them by a mutual
compact, polygamy and concubinage are circumstances which greatly influence the
conduct of a husband toward them. Polygamy, or the custom of marrying a
plurality of women, began in a very early period of the world. Lamech, one of
the sons of Adam, took two wives, and from that time forward it is probable,
that all the inhabitants of the East followed his example, and took as many as
their inclinations and circumstances would allow of. From the manners of the
primitive ages, we may suppose, that concubinage followed soon after polygamy,
though we have no distinct account of it till the time of Abraham, in whose
history we are presented with the ceremony of making a concubine; a ceremony
which to us at this period appears not less singular than unnatural. Sarai,
Abraham's wife, being barren, takes her handmaid Hagar, presents her to her
husband, and prays him to go in unto her, and raise up seed to Sarai. Although
we are not here told of any compulsion on the part of Abraham, it would,
nevertheless, seem that this was not altogether a voluntary act of his wife, as
it is so natural for women to submit with reluctance, to allow another to share
the embraces of their husbands, which even now in Hindostan, where the practice
has subsisted time immemorial, they are brought to with the greatest
difficulty; as we find by one of the laws of that people, which ordains, that
wherever a husband, on his contracting second marriage, may give his wife to
pacify her, is to be reckoned her own property.

Polygamy and concubinage having in process of time become fashionable vices,
the number of women kept by the great became at last more an article of
grandeur and state, than a mode of satisfying the animal appetite: Solomon had
threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins without number. Maimon
tells us, that among the Jews a man might have as many wives as he pleased,
even to the number of a hundred, and that it was not in their power to hinder
him, provided he could maintain, and pay them all the conjugal debt once a
week; but in this duty he was not to run in arrear to any of them above one
month, though with regard to concubines he might do as he pleased.

It would be an endless task to enumerate all the nations which practiced
polygamy; we shall, therefore, only mention a few, where the practice seemed to
vary something from the common method. The ancient Sabaeans are not only said
to have had a plurality, but even a community of wives; a thing strongly
inconsistent with that spirit of jealousy which prevails among the men in most
countries where polygamy is allowed. The ancient Germans were so strict
monogamists Monogamy is having only one wife.
, that they reckoned it a species of polygamy for a woman to marry a second
husband, even after the death of the first. A woman, say they, has but one
life, and one body, therefore should have but one husband; and besides, they
added, that she who knows she is never to have a second husband, will the more
value and endeavor to promote the happiness and preserve the life of the
first. Among the Heruli this idea was carried farther, a woman was obliged to
strangle herself at the death of her husband, lest she should afterward marry
another; so detestable was polygamy in the North, while in the East it is one
of these rights which they most of all others esteem, and maintain with such
inflexible firmness, that it will probably be one of the last of those that it
will wrest out of their hands.

The Egyptians, it is probable, did not allow of polygamy, and as the Greeks
borrowed their institutions from them, it was also forbid by the laws of
Cecrops, though concubinage seems either to have been allowed or overlooked;
for in the Odyssey of Homer we find Ulysses declaring himself to be the son of
a concubine, which he would probably not have done, had any great degree of
infamy been annexed to it. In some cases, however, polygamy was allowed in
Greece, from a mistaken notion that it would increase population. The
Athenians, once thinking the number of their citizens diminished, decreed that
it should be lawful for a man to have children by another woman as well as by
his wife; besides this, particular instances occur of some who transgressed the
law of monogamy. Euripides is said to have had two wives, who, by their
constant disagreement, gave him a dislike to the whole sex; a supposition which
receives some weight from these lines of his in Andromache: -- never will I
commend
More beds, more wives than one, nor children cursed
With double mothers, banes and plagues of life.
Socrates too had two wives, but the poor culprit had as much reason to repent
of his temerity as Euripides.

Polygamy seems not to have been entirely eradicated among the Christians in
the sixth century, as we find it then enacted in the canons of one of their
councils, that if any one is married to many wives he shall do penance. Even
the clergy themselves, in this period, practiced bigamy, He who marries two
wives commits bigamy; if more than two, it is polygamy.
as we find it ordained by another council held at Narbonne, that such
clergymen as were bigamists, should only be presbyters and deacons, and should
not be allowed to marry and consecrate. But our astonishment is still more
excited, to find instances of bigamy and polygamy so late as the sixteenth
century. The German reformers, though their declared intention was to conform
literally to the precepts of the gospel, were, nevertheless, inclined to
introduce bigamy as not inconsonant with these precepts. Philip, Landgrve of
Hesse Cassel, wanted, in the lifetime of his wife, to marry a young lady, named
Catharine Saal, and having some scruples of conscience, though in every other
respect a man of good sense, he seemed to believe, that, with the approbation
of Luther and his brethren, the moral turpitude, if there was any in marrying
two wives, might be set aside; he, therefore, represented to them his case, and
told them, that his wife, the princess of Savoy, was ugly, had bad smells about
her, and often got drunk; and that his constitution was such as laid him under
the frequent necessity of gratifying his appetite; and concluded with some
artful hints, that unless they granted him a dispensation to marry another
wife, he would ask it of the pope. Luther, upon this, convoked a synod of six
reformers, who found that polygamy had been practiced by a Roman emperor, and
by several of the kings of the Franks; that marriage was only a civil compact,
and that the gospel had no where in express terms commanded monogamy. They
therefore signed a permission for Philip to marry another wife, which he did
soon after, with the seeming consent of his first wife, the princess of Savoy;
and thus Luther exercised an authority which not even the most enterprising of
the popes, in the plenitude of their temporal and apostolic power, had ever
dared to attempt.

The famous Jack of Leyden, who is so well known in history, pretending himself
to be a prophet and a king, thought that in the article of women he had a right
to follow the example of the kings of Israel, by taking as many wives as he
thought proper, and actually proceeded so far as to marry seventeen, and had he
not been cut short in the career of his glory and fanaticism, would probably
have married twice that number.

As the men have almost in all countries arrogated to themselves the power of
making laws and of governing the women, they have in a great variety of places
indulged in a plurality of wives, but almost entirely debarred the women of a
plurality of husbands; there are, nevertheless, a few instances of their
enjoying this privilege, in places where their credit and influence seem equal,
if not superior to their husbands. We have already taken notice, that in some
provinces of ancient Media, the women had a plurality of husbands, as the men
in others had a plurality of wives. On the coast of Malabar, a woman may have
to the number of twelve husbands; and in some cantons of the Iroquois in North
America, she may have several. Father Tanchard reports, that in the
neighborhood of Calicut, the women of the superior casts may have a variety of
husbands, and that some of them actually have ten, all of whom they consider as
so many slaves subject to their charms. A gentleman who has lately visited the
kingdoms of Bautan and Thibet, observes, that all the males of a family are
frequently served by one wife. Such institutions, as they militate against the
jurisdiction of the men, and are deviations from the custom of almost all
countries, must have originated from extraordinary and uncommon circumstances;
but what these were, or when they took place, are among the desiderata of
history, which are lost in the abyss of antiquity.

It would only be treading the path, which hundreds have trod before us, should
we attempt here to recite all the arguments that have been used for and against
polygamy: the greatest part of those against it, have always turned upon this
hinge, that all men are by nature equal, and have consequently an equal right
to a wife; that the two sexes are nearly equal in number; and where one man
marries a variety of women, there can be none left for several others. We
pretend not to favor polygamy, as we think it far from being either natural or
political; but we cannot help observing one circumstance, which we do not
recollect to have met with, that in the countries where it is practiced, it
becomes in some degree necessary, on account of the great number of eunuchs,
which make the number of women greatly exceed that of the men; so that while
the infamous practice of making eunuchs is allowed, polygamy must be allowed
also, otherwise many women must for ever want husbands.

Wherever women are considered in so mean a light as to be purchased for money;
wherever they have not influence or power to prevent their husbands from the
practices of polygamy and concubinage, the treatment they receive from these
husbands is regulated by the methods of acquiring them. ^ man thinks it hard,
if he has not the liberty of disposing of what he purchased, when he is no
longer pleased with it: hence, wherever wives are bought, they are generally
divorced at pleasure; and what seems still less natural, they are sometimes
borrowed and lent, like a piece of money, or of furniture. The Spartans lent a
wife with as much indifference, as they would have done a horse, or an ass; and
the elder Cato is said to have philosophised himself into the same custom.
Where polygamy takes place, a husband is naturally deafened with the jealousies
and contentions of his wives; and on that account finds it necessary to rule
them more with the iron rod of a tyrant, than the love and affection of an
husband.

Matrimony, in all nations, being a compact between a male and female, for the
purpose of continuing the species, the first and most necessary obligation of
it has been thought fidelity; but, by various people, this fidelity has been
variously understood: almost all nations, however, ancient and modern, have
agreed in requiring the most absolute unconditional fidelity on the part of the
woman; while, on that of the man, greater latitude has been given. Thus we have
seen, that though among the Jews a woman was strictly confined to one man, the
man was allowed as many wives and concubines as inclination dictated, and
circumstances allowed: nor was this the case only among the Jews, but among the
Babylonians, Assyrians, Medes, Persians, and indeed among the greatest part of
the inhabitants of the East, where it continues to this day: but its present
existence is not confined to the East; it spreads itself over several other
parts of the globe, and is found even in North America; where the Moxes indulge
in polygamy and concubinage, and at the same time punish, with the most
exemplary severity, the least appearance of unchastity in their wives.
Civilians, who have endeavored to assign a reason for this difference, tell
us, that the hand of severity is held so closely over the incontinence of
married women, and so much latitude given to the men, because the men generally
have the care of providing for the offspring; and it would be hard that a man
should be obliged to provide for, and leave his estate to children, which he
could never with certainty call his own, were the same indulgence given to the
women as to the men. A shorter way of explaining the matter, would have been,
to have said, that men are generally the framers and explainers of the law.
Where women have shared in the legislations they have put their own sex on a
more equal footing with ours.

Where civil society has made little or no progress, the distinguishing
characteristic of power is to tyrannize over weakness, wherever it is found, or
however it is circumstanced; nature having given to men stronger bodies, and,
in some respects, perhaps, stronger minds than to women, till taught by
culture, and softened by politeness, they have always made use of that strength
to enslave them. Of the truth of this, the whole history of every savage period
and people is a proof; but we shall descend to some particular instances; and
the first is, the almost unlimited power vested in the Jewish husbands, of
divorcing their wives at pleasure, without assigning any tolerable reason for
so doing. Another proof, was the trial of jealousy, which we have already
mentioned; a ceremony, the most arbitrary and extraordinary that we are
presented with in the annals of history. When to these we add their power of
annulling the most solemn vows of their wives, and of turning them into menial
servants, there remains not the least shadow of a doubt, that their conduct was
unequitable and tyrannical. -- But we should be happy to have it in our power
to say, that they were the only people who behaved to their wives in this
manner; which, however, was far from being the case; wives are confined by all
the tyrants of the East, enslaved by all the savages of America and elsewhere;
and the reader need only turn back to the chapter on the rank and condition of
women, to have the most ample conviction of these, and many other illegal
practices, to which they were obliged to submit.

But besides the illegal advantages, which power is ever apt to assume, when
opposed to weakness; as men were almost every where the lawgivers, most of the
legal advantages of matrimony were also on their side. Whoever among the Jews
had married a wife, could, not, on any account, be forced to leave her for the
space of one year. Almost every where, to command and to rule, are powers
placed in the hands of the husband. Among the Romans, even in their most
polished state, in certain cases, the husband might proceed so far as to punish
his wife by death. Amongst almost every savage people, whipping, and even death
itself, are frequently inflicted by an enraged husband. In a council of the
Christian prelates and clergy, held in the year 400, it was decreed, that if
any clergyman's wife had sinned, her husband should keep her bound, and fasting
in his house; only he should not take away her life.

The Brazilians take as many wives as they think proper, dismiss them when they
find it convenient, and punish their incontinence with death. In Europe, the
power of a husband is considerably extended by the laws of the gospel, and of
the constitution, both over the person and property of his wife; but this power
is generally executed with so much lenity and indulgence that a stranger, on
seeing a spouse and his loving rib together, would be apt to imagine it was
placed on her side. This is owing, in some measure, to politeness, as well as
to fortune; for such is the power of fortune and property over the conduct of
the human species to each other, that they constantly command at least the
external appearance of deference to the possessor: wherever, therefore,
portions become fashionable, they obliterate the slavery of a wife to her
husband, put a stop to polygamy, and discountenance concubinage; for what woman
will volantarily purchase a tyrant, or give the whole of her fortune for the
share only of a husband; which share she must maintain against an unlimited
number of rivals. While an European wife, therefore, bringing an acquisition of
wealth along with her, is treated by her husband as his equal, and frequently
honored with superior notice, the wife o^ an Eastern, being purchased, is
considered as his s^^ve; is never allowed to eat with, or in the presence of
her husband; seldom to sit down in his company, and always obliged to him as to
a master and superior: and not even content with her paying him all these
testimonies of respect in his presence, she is obliged to submit to a variety
of mortifications in his absence.

If a man, says the Shaster, The Shaster is the Bible of the Hindoos.
goes on a journey, his wife shall not divert herself, nor play, nor shall she
see any public show, nor shall laugh, nor shall dress herself in jewels and
fine clothes, nor shall she see dancing, nor hear music, nor shall sit in the
window, nor shall ride out, nor shall behold any thing choice and rare; but
shall fasten well the house-door, and remain private, and shall not blacken her
eyes with eye-powder, and shall not view her face in a mirror; she shall never
exercise herself in any agreeable employment during the absence of her husband.

For all these mortifications, one would naturally expect some kind treatment
and indulgence from the husband, when he returns home: but the contrary is the
case; for we are also informed by the Shaster, that if she scolds him, he may
turn her away; that he may do the same, if she quarrels with any body else,
spoils his or her own property, or even if she presumes to eat before he has
finished his meal; and that he may cease from any further conjugal duty, if she
is barren, or always brings forth daughters.

Although the men have constantly assumed the power of making human, and
explaining divine, laws, yet they have not left such women as entered into the
state of matrimony entirely without privileges. Among the Jews, when a man
married an additional wife, the food, raiment, and duty of a husband, he was in
noways to diminish to those he had before. -- Mahomet, when he permitted every
man to have four wives, easily foreseeing that some of them would be neglected,
while others were greater favorites, positively instituted, that every thing,
as provisions, dress* and the duty of a husband, should be equally divided
among them. In the Maldivian isles, a man is allowed to marry three wives, and
is obliged to observe the same law. This law appears to have been among the
Jews, in order to prevent the increase of polygamy, which was every day
becoming more common; and it seems to have been well calculated for that
purpose, especially in the last clause, as it will readily be agreed, that no
husband was able to render the same duty of marriage to a plurality of wives,
that he had done to one. Among this people, also, a bond servant-maid was
liable at any time to be sold; but by being betrothed to the son of her master,
he could not afterward sell her, though he might turn her away, without
performing the promised marriage.

At what period, or by whom, the laws of the Egyptians were first promulgated,
is uncertain; but if what has been asserted by some ancient authors be true,
that the men, in their marriage-contracts, promised obedience to their wives,
we may suppose that the women had no inconsiderable share in their legislation,
otherwise they could hardly have obtained so singular a privilege. But,
singular as this privilege may appear, it is yet exceeded by the power of wives
in the Marian islands: there, a wife is absolutely mistress of every thing in
the house, not the smallest article of which can the husband dispose of without
her permission; and if he proves ill-humoured, obstinate, or irregular in his
conduct, the wife either corrects him, or leaves him altogether, carrying all
her movables, property, and children along with her. Should a husband surprise
his wife in adultery, he may kill her gallant, but by no means must use her
ill. But should a wife detect her husband in infidelity, she may inflict upon
him what punishment she pleases; to execute which, she never fails to assemble
all the women in the neighborhood, who, with their husband's caps on their
heads, and armed with lances, march to the house of the culprit, tear up all
his plants, destroy his grain, and having ruined every thing without doors,
fall like furies upon his house, and destroy it, together with the owner, if he
is not already fled. But besides this punishment inflicted on his incontinence,
if the wife does not like her husband, she complains that she cannot live with
him, and gathers together her relations, who, glad of the opportunity, plunder
his house, and appropriate to the wife and to themselves the spoil. Such
privileges, however, we cannot suppose to be legal, as the inhabitants of the
Marian islands are too rude to have many laws, and too little under the
subjection of their governors, to observe those they have.

Such of the officers of the Grand Signior as are married to his daughters or
sisters, are honored in public, but in private debased by the alliance; for
they are not allowed to come into the presence of their wives, nor to sit down
by them, without their permission, and almost in every particular are obliged
to act in a character little less subordinate than the meanest of their slaves.
Among the Natches, the daughters of noble families are by law obliged to marry
only into obscure families, that they may exert a governing and directing power
over their husbands; which they do so effectually, that they turn them away
when they please, and replace them by others of the same station. Such is their
punishment for the slighter offenses against the majesty of their wives; but
when any of them are unfaithful to the marriage bed, those wives have a power
of life or death over them. Wives who are of the blood of their great sun, or
chief, may have as many gallants as they please, nor must their dastardly
husbands so much as seem to see it. But this is not all: such husbands must,
while in the presence of their wives, stand in the most respectful posture,
accost them in the same submissive tone as their domestics, and are not allowed
to eat with them, nor derive any privilege from so exalted an alliance, but
exemption from labor, which is more than counterbalanced by every species of
debasement and mortification. The Moxes, a people also of North America, are
said to be obliged by law to yield a most obsequious obedience to their wives,
and to shift their habitations, and follow them, when, and to what place they
shall direct.

Among the ancient Germans, and other northern nations, we have seen that women
were in general honored and esteemed, but we have no account of their wives
being distinguished by any particular privilege. Among a few of their tribes,
however, who allowed of polygamy, one of the wives always claimed and exercised
a superiority over the rest; but her prerogative was dearly purchased, if she
survived her husband, for she was obliged to burn herself on his funeral pile.
In Turkey, where the most unlimited polygamy and concubinage are allowed, the
privilege of the lawful wives is, that they can claim the husbands every Friday
night; but every other night he may, if he pleases, dedicate to his concubines.
Even among the Hindoos, where women have little regard paid to them but as the
instruments of animal pleasure, the property of a wife is secured from her
husband; and we are told by their laws, that he may not take it without her
consent, unless on account of sickness, or to satisfy the demands of a
creditor, who has confined him without victuals; and that if, on any other
account, he should seize on it, he shall be obliged to repay it with interest.

As fidelity to the marriage bed, especially on the part of the woman, has
always been considered as one of the most essential duties of matrimony, all
wise legislators, in order to secure that fidelity, have annexed some
punishment to the breach of it; these punishments, however, have generally some
reference to the manner in which wives were acquired, and to the value stamped
upon women by civilization and politeness of manners. It is ordained by the
Mosaic code, that both the man and the woman taken in adultery shall be stoned
to death; whence it would seem, that no more latitude was given to the male
than to the female. But this was not the case; such an unlimited power of
concubinage was given to the men, that we may suppose him highly licentious
indeed, who could not be satisfied therewith, without committing adultery. The
Egyptians, among whom women were greatly esteemed, had a singular method of
punishing adulterers of both sexes; they cut off the privy parts of the man,
that he might never be able to debauch another woman; and the nose of the
woman, that she might never be the object of temptation to another man.

Punishments nearly of the same nature, and perhaps nearly about the same ti^^,
were instituted in the East Indies against adulterers; but while those of the
Egyptians originated from a love of virtue and of their women, those of the
Hindoos probably arose from jealousy and revenge. It is ordained by the
Shaster, that if a man commit adultery with a woman of a superior cast, he
shall be put to death; if by force he commit adultery with a woman of an equal
or inferior cast, the magistrate shall confiscate all his possessions, cut off
his genitals, and cause him to be carried round the city, mounted on an ass. If
by fraud he commit adultery with a woman of an equal or inferior cast, the
magistrate shall take his possessions, brand him in the forehead, and banish
him the kingdom. Such are the laws of the Shaster, so far as they regard all
the superior casts, except the Bramins; but if any of the most inferior casts
commit adultery with a woman of the casts greatly superior, he is not only to
be dismembered, but tied to a hot iron plate, and burnt to death; whereas the
highest casts may commit adultery with the very lowest, for the most trifling
fine; and a Bramin, or priest, can only suffer by having the hair of his head
cut off; and, like the clergy of Europe, while under the dominion of the Pope,
he cannot be put to death for any crime whatever. But the laws, of which he is
always the interpreter, are not so favorable to his wife; they inflict a
severe disgrace upon her, if she commit adultery with any of the higher cast;
but if with the lowest, the magistrate shall cut off her hair, anoint her body
with Ghee, and cause her to be carried through the whole city, naked, and
riding upon an ass; and shall cast her out on the north side of the city, or
cause her to be eaten by dogs. If a woman of any of the other casts goes to a
man, and entices him to have criminal correspondence with her, the magistrate
shall cut off her ears, lips and nose, mount her upon an ass, and drown her, or
throw her to the dogs. To the commission of adultery with a dancing-girl, or
prostitute, no punishment nor fine is annexed.

It is worth remarking here, that the word adultery, which among all other
nations is understood to mean an illicit correspondence between married people,
among the Hindoos is extended to every species of illicit commerce between the
sexes; nor is it less remarkable, that among this people, the passions are so
warm and ungovernable, that every opportunity of committing this crime, is
considered as an actual commission of it: thus they have three distinct species
of adultery; the first is, when in a place where there are no other men, a
person holds any conversation with a woman, and winks, and gallantries and
smiles pass on both sides; or the man and woman hold conversation together in
the morning, or in the evening, or at night, or the man dallies with the
woman's clothes; or when they are together in the garden, or an unfrequented
place, or bathe together in the same pool. The second is, when a man sends
sandal wood, or a string of beads, or victuals and drink, or clothes, or gold,
or jewels, to a woman. The third is, when a man and woman sleep and dally upon
the same carpet, or in some retired place, kiss and embrace, and play with each
other's hair; or when the man carries the woman into a retired place, and the
woman says nothing. Such are the definitions of adultery in the laws of the
Hindoos; but in the punishments annexed to them, it appears that their
legislature was not directed so much by the moral turpitude of the crime, as by
the dignity of the several casts, and by that revenge which so naturally
results from jealousy, in a climate where animal love is the predominant
passion.

By the laws of Moses, when a man caught a betrothed virgin in the field, and
lay with her, he only was put to death, as the law in that case supposed, she
had cried and there was none to help her; but in the city, if any one lay with
a betrothed virgin, they were both stoned; for then the law supposed, that if
she had cried, she would have found assistance to save her from the ravisher:
and so great was the abhorrence of adultery in the first ages, that most of the
ancient legislators prohibited it by the severest penalties; and there are
still extant some Greek copies of the Decalogue, where this prohibition is
placed before that against murder, supposing it to be the greater crime.

In the heroic ages, while revenge was almost the only principle that actuated
the Greeks, adultery was frequently punished by murder. In the Italian states,
in Spain and Portugal, though they have proper laws for the punishment of this
crime, revenge considers them as too mild, and cruelly watches an opportunity
of stabbing the offender. In no case has the principle of revenge operated more
strongly on the human mind than punishment of this crime. When the Levite's
wife was defiled, it instigated the Israelites to take arms, and almost destroy
the whole tribe of Benjamin, because they refused to give up the adulterers.
Thyestes having debauched the wife of his brother Atreus, Atreus invited him to
a feast, and in revenge entertained him with the flesh of his own son. Margaret
of Burgundy, Queen to Lewis Hutin, king of France, was hanged for adultery; but
not contented with the death of her gallants, they were ordered to be flead
alive.

So greatly does a man reckon himself dishonored and affronted by the
infidelity of his wife, and so strong is the principle of revenge, that the
punishment of female adulterers will frequently not wait for the cool and
dilatory sentence of the law, which does not keep pace with the vengeance which
the husband reckons due to the crime. In some places, the execution of this law
is left to the husband. The Novels of Justinian gave a husband a right to kill
any person whom he suspected of abusing his bed, after he had given him three
times warning in writing before witnesses, not to converse with her. -- Among
the ancient Swedes and Danes, if a husband caught his wife in the act of
adultery, he might kill her, and castrate her gallant. And among some of the
tribes of Tartars, it was not uncommon for a husband to destroy his wife even
upon suspicion. -- Some of the eastern chiefs, on suspicion of the infidelity
of their wives and concubines, order them to be buried up to the chin, and left
to expire in the utmost agony. The Grand Signior, if he suspects any of his
women, orders her to be sewed in a sack, and thrown into the next river. Among
the ancient Germans, the husband had a power of instantly inflicting punishment
on his adulterous wife; he cut off her hair in the presence of her relations,
drove her naked out of his house, and whipped her out of the city. In the
kingdom of Benin, the husband exercises a similar power. Somewhat less severe
is the punishment of an adulteress in several other countries, where the sense
of honor is less acute, and the injuries done to it less stimulating. The
Chinese, a phlegmatic kind of people, sell an adulteress for a slave. Their
neighbors of Laos do the same. And in old times, even the king of Wales
thought that a full reparation was made for the dishonor of defiling his bed,
by obliging the offender to pay a rod of pure gold, of the thickness of the
finger of a ploughman, who had ploughed nine years, and which would reach from
the ground to the king's mouth when sitting.

In what has been now observed, we see the gradation of the ideas concerning
adultery. Among some people it is thought a crime not to be expiated but with
death; among others whipping is thought a sufficient punishment; some again
think a fine fully compensates for it; while in some savage countries, it is
not considered as having the smallest degree of criminality. In Louisiana,
Pegu, Siam, Cambodia, and Cochin-china, it is even looked upon as an honor;
they present to strangers their wives and daughters, and think it a disgrace to
their beauty and merit if they are refused.

Where the punishment of adultery is vested in the laws of the country, it is
commonly less severe, than where vested in the hands of the party offended; and
even when in the hands of the offended, it is commonly more or less severe
according to the ideas entertained of women, and to the power assumed over
them; where it is vested in the hands of the women, though it may not be more
severe than when in those of their husbands, yet as their passions and
jealousies are stronger, they are apt to inflict it where the certainty of the
guilt is not so well ascertained.

Of all the modes which have been adopted for the punishment of adultery, with
the greatest efficacy, and at the same time with the least seeming severity, we
give the preference to these which follow; Edgar, kind of England enacted, that
an adulterer of either sex should, for the space of seven years, live three
days every week upon bread and water; Canute, in the beginning of his reign,
finding that the punishment then in use of cutting off the nose and the ears,
did not answer the purpose; decreed, that such as broke their conjugal vow
should be condemned to perpetual celibacy. A similar idea for the punishment of
the same crime, has suggested itself to the Muskohge Americans, a people noway
famous for ingenuity in legislation; they oblige the adultress to observe the
strictest continence during four full moons from the time that her crime was
discovered. Perhaps this idea of a mild and efficacious punishment was more
perfectly conceived by the Greeks, than any of the foregoing instances; in some
of their states, a woman offending in this manner, was never after allowed to
adorn herself with fine clothes, and if she did, any one might tear them off,
and beat her, so as not to destroy or disable her; adultresses were subject to
the same treatment if they were found in the temples of the gods, and their
husbands were forbid ever to cohabit with them under the pain of being declared
infamous.

We might easily insert here, a variety of other methods of punishing
adulterers, but as these few convey a tolerable idea of the sentiments
entertained of this crime in different periods, and by different people, we
shall proceed to observe, that the canon law, following rather the footsteps of
Moses than of Jesus, always condemned adulterers to death: one of the canons
has these remarkable words: Let adulterers be stoned, that they may cease to
increase, who will not cease to be defiled. And Pope Sixtus Quintus, not
content with the death of adulterers themselves, ordained, that such husbands
as knew their wives to be unfaithful, and did not complain to him, should be
put to death also. Amidst all this seeming regard for conjugal fidelity and
sanctity of manners, we are sorry to observe, that the clergy of the middle
ages, while they enacted canons against, and punished adultery with
excommunication, were themselves a kind of licensed adulterers: debarred from
marriage, regardless of character, and exempted from the punishments inflicted
on the laity, their debaucheries were often carried to such lengths as we could
scarcely credit, were we not assured of them by the most authentic records.

Before we leave the subject of adultery, we shall just observe, that, among
some nations, there were methods devised for such women as were accused of that
cr^me to clear themselves; among these the waters of jealousy is the first we
meet with. In Sicily, Japan, and on the coast of Malabar, the accused is
obliged to swear that she is innocent; the oath is taken in writing, and laid
on water, and if it does not sink, the woman is held to be innocent. These and
such like are the ridiculous exculpatory proofs required in countries
overspread with ignorance and superstition; in these that are more enlightened,
those who are accused of this crime can only invalidate the evidence brought
against them by the testimony of witnesses.

In the primitive ages, before laws of matrimony were properly understood and
digested, and before the rights of women were settled upon any other basis than
the pleasure of their parents and husbands, the felicity of divorcing or
putting away a wife, was almost equal to that of obtaining her. The ancient
Israelites had a power of divorcing their wives at pleasure. When a man, says
Moses, has taken a wife and married her, and it come to pass that she find no
favor in his eyes, because he has found in her some uncleanness, then let him
write her a bill of divorcement, and give it into her hand, and send her out of
his house. This vague expression of uncleanness gave occasion among the Jews to
the most frequent divorces, even upon every trifling occasion, insomuch that
one of their rabbis tells us, it was lawful, and sometimes practiced by a
husband, if a wife spoiled his dinner in cooking; and by another, that a
husband might give his wife a bill of divorce, if he met with a woman who
pleased him better, or looked handsomer in his eyes. A privilege which gave
this fickle people such an unlimited right of getting rid of their wives when
disagreeable, was highly valued, and reckoned one of their distinguishing
prerogatives: but he who deflowered a virgin forfeited it, and the law obliged
him, in compensation for that injury, not only to pay her father fifty shekels
of silver, but to marry and retain her for life. Was it possible to devise a
law that more strongly protected female chastity?

But this facility of obtaining or rather of giving, a divorce, was not
peculiar to the Jews; it seems to be the result of the nature of the
matrimonial engagement; for when a man must purchase his wife as he does a
slave, it naturally follows, that he may turn her off when he finds that she
does not answer the purpose for which he intended her; a rule, which will be
found to obtain pretty universally among all nations. The negroes purchase
their wives, and turn them away when they think proper; in China and
Monomatapa, they observe the same custom; all the savages of South America, who
live near the Oroonoko, purchase as many wives as they can maintain, and
divorce them at pleasure; and even in the isthmus of Darien, and on the banks
of Hudson's river, they purchase a plurality of wives, and dispose of them
according to the dictates of convenience and inclination.

In such places, the bargain a man makes for his wife, is on his part absolute
and unconditional; but in countries where the natural rights of women are
established, where the bargain is between the man and his wife, is conditional,
and the fortunes of both are joined in one common stock; the nature of this
bargain implies, that neither of them are privileged to dismiss the other,
without a just cause; in many parts of the world, this cause has been construed
to be a mutual dislike of the parties, and a mutual consent of separation; in
others, barrenness of the woman is thought a sufficient cause. In Europe, no
cause has been deemed valid, unless adultery in the woman, and impotence in the
man. Several of the primitive councils enjoined a husband, for the salvation of
his soul, and on pain of spiritual censure, to put away an adulterous wife,
which was putting into the hands of the husband a power of divorce; but the
council of Trent afterward decreed, that the marriage-bond was indissoluble,
and could not be broken on any account: notwithstanding this, the Pope, who
frequently arrogated to himself a power of trampling on all the laws of heaven
and earth, readily enough granted divorces, with or without cause, to such as
were able to pay for them, either in money, or by adding to the power and
territory of the church; while the poor plaintiff could not gain a hearing at
the chair of him who styles himself, servant of servants.

English lawyers, ever fond of verbosity and endless distinctions, have divided
divorces into two distinct kinds; the first, when the party is divorced from
bed and board, but not allowed to marry another; the second, when he or she is
divorced or loosened from the chains of matrimony, and allowed to marry again
at pleasure: but neither of these kind of divorces can be obtained by any other
means than a proof of adultery. Milton, and several other writers who have
followed him, galled by the indissoluble chain which they thought themselves
entitled to break, have endeavored, by a variety of arguments, to show, that
equity, natural justice, and sound policy, all dictate, that the matrimonial
compact ought to be dissolved from a variety of other causes besides adultery.
The legislature has, however, hitherto taken no notice of these arguments; when
philosophy and reason have still farther enlightened the human mind, they may
perhaps undergo a scrutiny, and from that scrutiny, some new regulations may
arise.

In rude and uncultivated states of society, we have seen that the power of
divorce is placed in the husband; in civil society, it is vested in the laws:
but in some states it appears to have been occupied by, and in others formerly
vested in, the women. Josephus tells us, that Salmone, sister to Herod the
Great, was the first who took upon her to repudiate her husband, and that her
example was soon followed by many others. Among the Cherokees, the women are
said to marry as many husbands as they think proper, and to change and divorce
them at pleasure; a custom, which, with little variation, we have already seen
practiced by the women of several other countries. In the Wallian laws it is
decreed, that a wife may leave her husband, and demand her portion again, if he
has as offensive breath: what is remarkably whimsical, the same laws ordain,
that, on a divorce, the woman shall divide the substance into two equal parts,
and the man shall have choice of the lots; but in particular, the man shall
have all the swine, and the woman all the poultry.

CHAPTER XXVIII. The same Subject continued.
THOUGH we have seen, in the course of our enquiry, that the ideas of the
matrimonial compact, and of the duties and privileges of the parties entering
into it, have been very different in different periods, and among different
people; yet, as any kind of regulation of the commerce between the sexes is
better than a vague and undetermined commerce, every well regulated state has
solicitously endeavored either to promote that kind of matrimony already in
use, or to rectify its errors, and model it in a new and better manner; and
such is the prevalence of nature, that though the powers and privileges of a
husband are so enormous, it is only in a few places that we have met with any
backwardness in the women to trust themselves in their hands.

By the story of Jephtha's daughter, we are informed, that it was customary
among the Jews, for a woman, who, on account of a vow or any other reason, was
condemned to perpetual celibacy, to bewail her virginity; the reason assigned
for which, by commentators, is, that the Jews having a promise that the Messiah
should be born of one of their women, every woman among them flattered herself,
that she might arrive at that honor, from all prospect of which she was
entirely cut off, if she died a virgin. But the Israelitish damsels were not
the only wom^n of ancient or modern times, who reckoned perpetual virginity a
misfortune. The ancient Persians were of opinion, that matrimony was so
essentially necessary to man, that such of either sex as died single, must
infallibly be unhappy in the next world. This opinion gave birth to the most
singular custom we meet with in history; when any one died unmarried, a
relation, or, in default of such, a person hired for the purpose, was solemnly
married to the deceased, as soon as it could conveniently be done after death,
as the only recompense now left for having neglected it in life.

The Turks of this present period at Constantinople, reckoning, perhaps, the
first great command, "Increase and multiply," the most necessary of all others,
entertain the same opinion of virginity, though they take no such ridiculous
methods of endeavoring to obviate the effects of it on their future happiness.
Every woman, say they, was made to have as many children as she can, she
therefore, who dies unmarried, dies in a state of reprobation. Virginity was
likewise reckoned a disgrace by the Greek women; Sophocles makes Electra bewail
bitterly her hard fate in not being married; and Polycrates, tyrant of Samos,
being angry with his daughter for dissuading him from going to meet Orates,
governor of Sardis, threatens her, that should he return in safety, he would
defer giving her in marriage for a long time. But this female dislike to living
single, has not been peculiar to any period or people, it has universally
prevailed among the sex. In many nations, laws have been promulgated to prompt
the men to enter into matrimony, to prompt the women none have ever been
needed. -- Young women, says the celebrated Montesquieu, who are conducted by
marriage alone to liberty and pleasure, who have a mind which dares not think,
a heart which dares not feel, eyes which dare not see, ears which dare not
hear; who appear only to show themselves silly; condemned without intermission
to trifles and precepts; have sufficient inducements to lead them on to
marriage: it is the young men that want to be encouraged.

A variety of encouragements have accordingly been offered by the wisest
legislators to tempt young men into matrimony; but not content with these,
disagreeable circumstances, and even punishments, have been also annexed to the
state of a bachelor. The Lacedaemonians were not only severe against those who
abstained from, but also always against those who deferred, entering into the
conjugal state: no man among them could live single beyond the time appointed
by the laws of his country, without incurring several penalties, the first of
which was, old batchelors we^e obliged once every winter to run naked round the
market place, singing a song which pointed out their crime, and exposed them to
ridicule. They were excluded from the games where the Spartan virgins,
according to the custom of their country, danced naked. And, on a certain
solemnity, the women, in revenge for the contempt which was shown them, were
allowed to drag these despisers of matrimony round an altar, beating them all
the time with their fists; and lastly, they were deprived of all that honor
and respect which the young men of Greece were obliged to pay to their seniors.
One of their old captains coming into an assembly, when he expected that a
young man by whom he stood wo^ld have risen to give him his seat, received this
rebuke from him: Sir, you must not expect that honor from me, being young,
which cannot be returned to me by a child of yours when I am old.

The Jews were of opinion, that marriage was an indispensible duty implied in
the words "Increase and multiply;" a man, therefore, who did not marry at or
before the age of twenty, was considered as accessory to every irregularity
which the young women for want of husbands might be tempted to commit; and
hence there is a proverb in the Talmud: Who is he that prostitutes his
daughter, but he who keeps her too long unmarried, or gives her to an old man.
Among the ancient Persians, though there was no positive law for the
encouragement of matrimony, yet their kings frequently proposed annual prizes
as a reward to those who were fathers of the greatest number of children.

While the Romans retained their primitive simplicity and integrity, no laws
were requisite to encourage their young men to matrimony; when they became
debauched with the love of pleasure, and expensive in the pursuit of it; when
their wives required immense sums to uphold their extravagance, and their
children scarcely less to give them a proper education, neither threatenings
nor encouragements could sometimes prevail on them to enter into that state. In
no country was there ever a legislature more forward in attempting to encourage
matrimony, in none were the subjects ever less forward in seconding these
attempts.

As soon as luxury and expense had begun to frighten, and licentious pleasures
to decoy the Roman citizens from marriage, to counterbalance these, it was
thought necessary to deny such men as had not entered into that alliance the
privilege of giving evidence in courts of justice; and the first question asked
by the judge was, Upon your faith, have you a wife, whereby you may have
children? If he answered in the negative, his evidence was refused. And so
intent were the Roman consuls at one time upon multiplying their citizens, that
they extorted from all the men an oath, that they would not marry with any
other view than that of increasing the subjects of the republic, and that
whoever had a barren wife should put her away and marry another. But the men,
who had other opportunities of satisfying their appetites than that of
marriage, continued still fond of celibacy, which obliged the censors, upon
finding that population was decreasing, to extort another oath from them, that
they would marry with all convenient speed.

As it commonly happens that oaths extorted by compulsion are but ill observed,
unless the same compulsatory power also enforces obedience to them, those
imposed upon the Romans had but little effect; to remedy which, new honors
were heaped upon the married, and fines and punishments were laid upon the
batchelors. It was ordained, That such of the plebeians as had wives, should
have a more honorable place in the theaters than such as had none: that the
married magistrates and patricians should have the precedence of such of the
same rank as were unmarried; that the fines which had been first levied by
Camillus and Posthumus upon batchelors, should be again exacted.

When Caesar had subdued all his competitors, and most of the foreign nations
which made war against him, he found that so many Romans had been destroyed in
the quarrels in which he had often engaged them, that, to repair the loss,
promised rewards to fathers of families, and forbade all Romans who were above
twenty, and under forty years of age* to go out of their native country*
Augustus, his successor, to check the debauchery of the Roman youth, laid heavy
taxes upon such as continued unmarried after a certain age, and encouraged with
great rewards the procreation of lawful children. Some years afterward, the
Roman knights having pressingly petitioned him that he would relax the severity
of that law, he ordered their whole body to assemble before him, and the
married and unmarried to arrange themselves in two separate parties, when,
observing the unmarried to be the much greater company, he first addressed
those who had complied with his law, telling them, That they alone had served
the purposes of nature and society; that the human race was created male and
female to prevent the extinction of the species; and that marriage was
contrived as the most proper method of renewing the children of that species.
He added, that they alone deserved the name of men and fathers, and that he
would prefer them to such offices as they might transmit to their posterity.
Then turning to the batchelors, he told them, That he knew not by what name to
call them; not by that of men, for they had done nothing that was manly; not by
that of citizens, since the city might perish for them; nor by that of Romans,
for they seemed determined to let the race and name become extinct; but by
whatever name he called them, their crime, he said, equalled all other crimes
put together, for they were guilty of murder, in not suffering those to be born
who should proceed from them; of impiety, in abolishing the names and honors
of their fathers and ancestors; of sacrilege, in destroying their species, and
human nature, which owed its original to the gods, and was consecrated to them;
that by leading a single life they overturned, as far as in them lay, the
temples and altars of the gods; dissolved the government, by disobeying its
laws; betrayed their country, by making it barren. Having ended his speech, he
doubled the rewards and privileges of such as had children, and laid a heavy
fine on all unmarried persons, by reviving the Popaean law.

Though by this law all the males above a certain age were obliged to marry
under a severe penality, Augustus allowed them the space of a full year to
comply with its demands; but such was the backwardness to matrimony, and
perversity of the Roman knights, and others, that every possible method was
taken to evade the penalty inflicted upon them, and some of them even married
children in the cradle for that purpose; thus fulfilling the letter, they
avoided the spirit of the law, and though actually married, had no restraint
upon their licentiousness, nor any encumbrance by the expense of a family.

Such were the methods the Romans were obliged to make use of, in order to
prevent matrimony from falling almost into disuse. In succeeding periods,
scarcely any thing compulsatory has been attempted. It has been generally
thought sufficient to stain, with some degree of infamy and dishonor, all
kinds of illicit connection between the sexes, to make the way to the enjoyment
of lawful love as easy and accessible as possible, and to trust the rest to
nature. In this last respect, the English legislature seems of late to have
acted contrary to the common maxim, and thrown a variety of obstacles in the
way of matrimony; but should decrease of people be the consequence, that body,
it is presumable, are too wise to persist in a voluntary error.

As every regulation of the commerce between the sexes seems plainly to tend
toward the salutary purpose of population and continuance of the species, so
every wise legislature, not solely contented with encouraging or even enforcing
matrimony, has likewise endeavored to correct all those errors and abuses
which frustrated the main intention of it, and to oblige the sexes to join
themselves together in such a manner as might tend to the increase and
multiplication of their species; thus the Jewish laws forbade eunuchs to marry.
Lycurgus enjoined the coupling together of such men and women as were strong
and healthful, and gave a liberty of prosecuting such men as did not marry at
all, as deferred marrying till they were too old, or married improperly; and
thus in Rome, it was ordained, That no woman under fifty might marry a man
above sixty, and that no man above sixty should marry a woman who was not, like
himself, far advanced in life; laws of this nature, though evidently tending to
promote the great end and design of marriage, have in subsequent periods been
but little attended to.

If what has been advanced by naturalists be true, that crossing the breed,
either of animals or vegetables, tends greatly to improve their strength and
vigor; then it will follow, that such political reasons, as regard strength
and population, have likewise prompted all wise legislators to interdict the
marriages of near kind^ed. Among the Jews, the degrees of consanguinity, within
which it was unlawful to marry, were accurately marked by the code of Moses.
Among other ancient nations, the affair was subject to much variation. The
Egyptians were allowed to marry their sisters. The Scythians were even said to
have married their mothers, grandmothers, and sisters. The Medes and Persians
married their sisters; and, among the Tartars, a man might marry his daughter,
but a mother might not marry her son. Among the Hunns, the men married whoever
they pleased, without the least regard to consanguinity; a son even married the
widow of his father: something of the same nature seems to have been practiced
by the kings of Israel; for Absalom is said to have gone in unto the wives and
concubines of David, his father, when he rebelled against him. In Peru, the
Inca, or king, was always married to his sister; or, if he had no sisters, to
his nearest female relation: and, in Otaheite, we are told, that their young
king was designed as a husband to his sister, when he became marriageable. At
Athens, a man might marry the sister of his father, but not the sister of his
mother.

The natural advantages arising from crossing the breed of men, as well as
other animals, in order to preserve the species from degenerating, must have
been the result of experience and observation; it would therefore be long
before they were attended to; and hence, though Moses, who was inspired by the
Divinity, appears to have been acquainted with them, the other nations, whom we
have mentioned, were not; and, consequently, long indulged themselves in
marrying, as inclination, or convenience, dictated. But another political
reason may be given, why the marriage of near kindred was prohibited. Before
mankind were thoroughly civilized, and brought under the government of laws,
families were frequently at war with one another; either on account of
property, which was then unsettled, or from their natural inclination to rapine
and plunder; in this state every acquisition of strength to a family, was an
addition of its security; instead, therefore, of marrying in his own family, or
among his own kindred, who were already in his interest, a man would, from
motives of policy, rather wish to take a wife from a neighboring ^amily, and
by that means bring it into an alliance with his, a circumstance which would
tend greatly to the security of both; and hence the practice of marrying of
kindred would fall into disuse.

But besides these, and other political reasons that might be given against
near kindred and relations intermarrying with each other, there are also
natural reasons that strongly counteract such alliances. The marriage of a
father with his daughter would, in most cases, be preposterous; as the husband
would generally be past the age of propagation long before his wife. The
marriage of a son to his mother, besides being liable to the same objection of
inequality of age, would likewise confound the nature of things; as the son
ought to have an unlimited respect for his mother, and the wife an unlimited
respect for her husband. But though similar reasons do not militate against the
marriage of brothers and sisters with each other, yet nature herself seems here
to have interposed her authority; she seems not to have given to brothers and
sisters, the same power of raising the passions and emotions of love in each
other, as she has given to those who are less known, and nowise related. The
emotions, which pass between a brother and a sister, are friendship; in the
same circumstances, between a young man and woman, not related to each other,
they would be love.

With respect to the prohibitions, concerning the marriage of relations to each
other, it is a thing extremely delicate to fix exactly the point at which the
laws of nature stop. The greater part of civilized nations seem, in this
respect, not to have differed widely from the directions of Moses. the
Christian world had been entirely governed by the rules of that lawgiver,
except in some periods, when a spirit of greater sanctity extended it still
wider. In a council, held by pope Honorius, in the year 1126. marriages were
proscribed between all relations, till after the seventh generation; and all
who had married within that degree, were ordered to put their wives away: such
were the laws the sea of Rome imposed upon mankind; but as, in other cases, it
reserved to itself a power of dispensing with them; and, like the English, who
will not allow any body to abuse their kings but themselves, the popes would
not suffer any but themselves to infringe the laws of the pentateuch or of the
gospel.

But besides the restrictions laid upon marriage, by consanguity and politics,
there are others affecting certain classes of mankind, which seem to have
arisen solely from opinion or caprice. Such are those which custom has imposed
almost every where, on people of the same religion, and of the same rank and
condition of life, restricting them from marrying those of a different
religion, By the ancient law, a Christian, of either sex, marrying with a Jew,
was to be burnt or buried alive; and at Geneva, a marriage between a Protestant
and a Roman Catholic, is not valid.
or of an inferior condition; such are those that the laws of Brama have
imposed on the Hindoos, whereby both the men and women, of every particular
cast, are prohibited from marrying into any other cast; but what we have more
particularly in view, is the restrictions which, in this particular, have been
laid upon the clergy of a variety of nations. While the Israelitish laity were
at liberty to marry whom they pleased, the priests were prohibited from
marrying a woman that was a whore, or that had been put away from her husband:
or, in short, any other but a virgin. The Egyptians, though they indulged their
laity in polygamy, would not grant the same liberty to their priests. After the
introduction of the Christian religion, the clergy were in marriage restricted
by almost the same laws as those of Moses; and if the wife of a clergyman,
particularly of a bishop, died before him, hew as never allowed to take
another. In process of time it became unlawful, according to the canons of the
church, for a clergyman to marry upon any pretense whatever; a scheme which, as
we shall see afterward, was the source of much wrangling among the priests, and
of much mischief to society.

Though, by the Mosaic law, the whole body of the Israelites were strictly
prohibited from intermarrying with other nations; yet, in the twenty-first
chapter of Deuteronomy, we find an allowance given them to make wives of the
captives taken in war; and the preparation of these captives, to fit them for
so near an alliance with their captors, was such as would not a little disgust
a modern lover: the bride was to be brought to the house of her future husband,
and there to shave her head; a circumstance of the most mortifying nature to a
woman, as the loves and the graces wanton in waving ringlets; besides this, she
was to put the raiment of captivity upon her, and to wear it a month, and
comply with some other ceremonies; of the intention of which, we are, at this
period, entirely ignorant.

We return now to take a further view of the ceremonies of marriage, and to
trace the progress of that institution, from the ancient Greeks, where we left
it, to the present times.

There were three different kinds of marriage among the Romans, distinguished
from each other by the names of Conferration, Coemption, and Use; Conferration
was the manner in which only the pontiffs and other priests were married, and
was always celebrated by a priest; and we call the attention of our readers to
this remarkable circumstance, that, in the marriages of the Roman pontiffs, we
discover the first (...) of priests having celebrated the rites of that
institution. The ceremony consisted in the young couple eating a cake together,
made only of wheat, salt, and water; part of which, along with other
sacrifices, were, in a solemn manner, offered to the gods of marriage.

The second kind of marriage, called Coemption, was celebrated by the parties
solemnly pledging their faith to each other, by giving and receiving a piece of
money; a ceremony which was the most common way of marrying among the Romans,
and which continued in use even after they became Christians. When writings
were introduced to testify that a man and woman had become husband and wife,
and also, that the husband had settled a dower upon his bride, these writings
were called Tabulae Dotales, dowry tables; and hence, perhaps, the words in our
marriage ceremony, I thee endow.

The third kind of marriage, denominated Use, was when the accidental living
together of a man and ^oman had been productive of children, and they found it
necessary, or convenient, on that, and other accounts, to continue together;
when, if they agreed on the matter between themselves, it became a valid
marriage, and the children were considered as legitimate. Something similar to
this, is the present custom in Scotland; where, if a man and woman have lived
together till they have children, if the man marry the woman, even upon his
deathbed, all the antinuptial children become thereby legitimated, and inherit
the honors and estates of their father. The case is the same in Holland; with
this difference only, that all the children to be legitimated must appear with
the father and mother in church, at the ceremony of their marriage.

When a marriage was celebrated, in any of the two first methods, in order to
know the pleasure of the gods, the auspices were first of all consulted, and
the days which they held unfortunate avoided. -- When the contract was drawn
up, it was sealed with the seals of the parents, and the portion sometimes
deposited with the augur; the bridegroom sent to the bride a plain iron ring.
On the wedding day, while the bride's head was dressing, it was customary to
divide her hair into six tresses, with the point of a spear, after the manner
of the vestals; to teach her that she was to be a vestal to all but her
husband. She was then crowned with a wreath of vervain, and other herbs,
gathered by her own hands; over the wreath they sometimes threw a veil; and put
on her feet a pair of shoes, of the same color as the veil, and so high as to
make her appear taller. In ancient Rome, when the couple were ready for the
ceremony, they put a yoke upon their necks, called Conjugium; and hence our
word conjugal, or yoked together, is derived: a ceremony which is more
emblematical of the matrimonial state, than any we have hitherto met with. That
the bride might seem reluctantly to part with her virgin state, they feigned to
force her from the arms of her mother; which was done by the light of five
torches carried by five boys, previously washed and perfumed, in honor of the
five divinities of marriage, Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Diana, and the goddess
Persuasion. The bride was led by two young children to the house of her
husband; a distaff was carried behind her, with a spindle, and a trunk or
basket, in which was her toilette; she was sprinkled with lustral water, in
order that she might enter holy into the house of her husband; when she arrived
at the door, which was adorned with garlands of flowers and evergreens, fire
and water were presented to her, and she was at the same time asked her name;
to which she answered, Caia, to signify that she would be as good a wife as
Caia Caecilia, who was famous for the domestic and conjugal virtues.

Before the bride entered the house, she put wool upon the door, and rubbed it
with oil, or with the fat of some animal; she was then carried over the
threshold, which the augurs reckoned exceedingly unlucky for her to touch, on
her first entrance: immediately after, the keys of all things in the house were
delivered to her, and she was set upon a sheep's skin with the wool on it, to
teach her, that she was from that to provide clothes for her family. After the
young couple were conducted to their chamber, immediately before the company
took their leave of them, the bridegroom scattered nuts to the children, and
the men sung verses, to obviate charms and incantations. Care was taken that
there should be no light in the nuptial chamber, to spare the modesty of the
bride, and prevent the bridegroom from discovering her blemishes: on the next
day, the husband gave a public entertainment, when the bride, appearing on the
same couch with him at table, leaned upon him with an air of familiarity, and
in her discourse seemed to glory so much in having thrown off her virgin
modesty, that it became a proverb in Rome, when a woman talked indecently, to
say, she talks like a bride.

Such were the ceremonies by which a husband and wife were joined together, and
such the additional ceremonies that served to give solemnity to their junction.
In the early periods of Rome, Romulus ordered, that no woman should pretend to
direct her husband, but that a husband might discard his wife, if she poisoned
the children, counterfeited the keys, or committed adultery: after-periods gave
him a power to inflict a suitable punishment upon her, if she acted perversely,
dishonestly, or drank wine; and even to kill her, if he surprised her in
infidelity to his bed. But all the privileges were not on the side of the
husband; some of a very extraordinary nature belonged to the wives, or rather
to the widows, of Romans. Children born ten months after the death of the
husband were reckoned legitimate; and Hadrian, thinking this period too short,
extended it to eleven.

Among the northern nations who were contemporary with the Romans, and who
afterward overturned their empire, a surprising similarity of manners was
every where observable. Wherever fighting was concerned, they were universally
distinguished by a brutal ferocity almost inconceivable; while, in regard to
the fair sex, they carried their politeness in many particulars to a degree
hardly known even among the most civilized nations. From the remotest
antiquity, they confined themselves to one wife, to whom they were married in a
manner more solemn than we commonly meet with among a people so rude and
uncultivated. The father, or guardian, gave away his daughter in words to this
effect: I give thee my daughter in honorable wedlock, to have the half of thy
bed, the keeping of the keys of thy house, one-third of the money thou art at
present possessed of or shall possess hereafter, and to enjoy the other rights
appointed to wives by law. The husband then made his bride a present, by way of
dowry: the relations of both parties were witnesses of what he gave; which were
not things adapted to flatter the vanity, or adorn the person of the bride, but
commonly consisted of some oxen, a bridled horse, or a shield, spear, or sword;
in return for which, the bride, too, made her husband a present of some arms;
and the mutual interchange of these presents they esteemed the most
indissoluble tie, as they were given and received before witnesses the most
nearly connected with them, and before the connubial gods.

As modes and customs are perpetually changing with the times and
circumstances, this simple ceremony among the descendants of these people
became more complicated; the bridegroom sent all his friends and relations to
the house of the bride's father, who attended also with her relations,
conducted her from thence to that of her future husband, being led by a matron,
and followed by a company of young maidens. On her arrival, she was received by
the bridegroom, who proceeded along with her to the church, where a priest
performed the nuptial benediction. When the bride was a virgin, this was
commonly done beneath a large canopy, to save her blushes: when a widow, it was
thought unnecessary. Among the Franks, instead of the church, marriages were to
be performed in a full court, where a buckler had been three times lifted up,
and three causes at least openly tried: otherwise it was not valid. When it was
done in the church, the priest afterward crowned the young couple with flowers:
and in this manner they went home, and spent the afternoon in drinking and
dancing; and at night, the whole of the company having seen the bridegroom and
bride in bed together, drank to them, and retired.

It is a melancholy truth, that the improvement of society improves also the
arts of fraud and of cunning, and renders a far greater number of laws and of
ceremonies necessary, in order to bind mankind to (...) faith and duty, than
are among the less cultivated part of the species. This is one reason why the
ceremonies of marriage were obliged to be made more solemn and binding; but
besides this, there are others not less powerful. The laws of Moses, as well as
those of almost all antiquity, had given to the men a liberty of polygamy, of
concubinage, and had made divorces a matter of the greatest facility: hence the
yoke of matrimony to them not only felt light, but was easily shaken off. But
the introduction of Christianity brought with it laws of a different nature; it
destroyed all these privileges, and having joined only one man and one woman
together, required the same absolute and unconditional fidelity from both, and
bound the yoke of matrimony so hard upon them, that death only could break it.
Hence the men not only violated their faith to their wives in secret, but, when
opportunity offered, also denied their marriage; and hence religion was at
first called in to overawe the conscience, and make the compact more solemn.

We have already mentioned, that the first celebration of marriage by priests
was among the ancient Romans; and as the Christian religion was almost at its
very origin introduced into Rome, from them the Christian priests, perhaps,
borrowed the custom of celebrating marriages also. But it was some ages before
mankind began to consider those as the only legal marriages, which were
solemnized by a priest, or before the priests themselves thought of
appropriating this privilege entirely to their order. The Franks and (...)
other Christians were married in their courts of justice, by their relations or
magistrates. Whether Christian priests first performed the ceremonies of
marriage, with a view to give an additional solemnity to them, and, by so
doing, to induce the parties more strictly to observe their obligations, or
with a view to add to the importance and revenues of the church, is at this
period uncertain. But however that be, Soter, the fifteenth bishop who had
filled St. Peter's Chair (for they had scarcely then assumed the name and
authority of Popes,) finding that the appropriation of marriage solely to the
clergy was likely to bring in no inconsiderable revenue, ordained, that no
woman should be deemed a lawful wife, unless formally married by the priest,
and given away by her parents. -- Though this was a great innovation on the
ancient customs, and perhaps encroachment on the right of civil power, we do
not find that any resistance was made to it at Rome. In other parts of the
Christian world, however, where the successor of St. Peter had less influence,
parents and magistrates still continued to exert the power of marrying; but
this power seems, in process of time, to have been almost entirely wrested out
of their hands, especially in R. Catholic countries, where the clergy were
obliged to make marriage a sacrament, in order to keep the profane laity
entirely from administering it; but at what time they fell upon this expedient
is not certainly known.

Among nations which had shaken off the authority of the church of Rome, the
priests still retained almost an exclusive power of joining men and women
together in marriage. This appears rather, however, to have been by the tacit
consent of the civil power, than from any defect in its right and authority;
for in the time of Oliver Cromwell, marriages were solemnized frequently by the
justices of the peace; and the clergy neither attempted to invalidate them, nor
to make the children proceeding from them illegitimate; and when the province
of New England was first settled, one of the earliest laws of the colony was,
that the power of marrying should belong to the magistrates. How different was
the case with the first French settlers in Canada! For many years a priest had
not been seen in that country, and a magistrate could not marry: the
consequence was natural; men and women joined themselves together as husband
and wife, trusting to the vows and promises of each other. Father Charlevoix, a
Jesuit, at last traveling into those wild regions, found many of the simple,
innocent inhabitants living in that manner; with all of whom he found much
fault, enjoined them to do penance, and afterward married them. After the
Restoration, the power of marrying again reverted to the clergy. The
magistrate, however, had not entirely resigned his right to that power; but it
was by a late act of parliament entirely surrendered to them, and a penalty
annexed to the solemnization of it by any other person whatever.

Whence it originated is not easy to say, but a notion pretty generally
prevails in this and several other countries, that the clergy, and they only,
are vested with a power from heaven, of licensing men and women to come
together for the purposes of propagation; This was not the only right usurped
by the clergy in the middle ages; there were a variety of others. No man was
lowed Christian burial who had not, according to his circumstances, bequeathed
something to the church. A new-married couple were not allowed to go to bed
together for the first three nights, unless they paid the church for a
dispensation. In short, a man could neither come into the world, continue in
it, nor go out of it, without being laid under contribution by the clergy.
whereas nothing can be more evident, than that the two sexes being made for
each other, have from nature, the right of coming together for this purpose,
and of disposing of themselves to each other; so that a clergyman, in
performing a marriage ceremony, does not confer any right or privilege on the
parties, which they had not before, but only in a public manner, and as
appointed by the legislature of his country, witnesses and authenticates the
public declaration they make of having entered into a matrimonial agreement
according to the laws and customs of that country; to which bargain or
agreement, this solemn and public authentication obliges the parties to stand,
and becomes their security for the fidelity of each other: thus, whether the
marriage ceremony be performed as it now is in most parts of the Christian
world, by a clergyman, or, as it formerly was, and still is in many parts of
the globe, by a civil magistrate; neither the act of the clergyman, nor of the
magistrate, convey any right, but only enter on public record, the recognizance
of such parties entering with mutual consent on the exercise of a right they
have by nature; in the same manner, as when an heir at law succeeds to an
estate, the ceremonies customary in the country where he resides at entering
him heir, do not convey to him any new right ^o that estate, but only publicly
declare and manifest to his country, that he has entered on the use of that
estate by virtue of his inherent right as heir to it by nature.

There are many people, and particularly of our fair readers, who imagine, that
if marriage were only considered as a civil ceremony, it would lose much of its
validity; but a little reflection will discover this to be an error. When two
or more people make an agreement to do such and such offices, and to abstain
from the doing of others, if they take an oath, on the Bible, on the Koran, or
the Talmud, at the altar, or in the open field, the oath is not by any of these
additional circumstances rendered more or less binding, unless to superstitious
minds; its force and obligatory power is derived from another source: from our
ideas of moral rectitude and fidelity, and its obligation upon us would be as
strong, and a breach of it as immoral and dishonorable, if we made it in our
closet, as if before witnesses, and in any of the methods we have mentioned.
Every person whose mind is not warped by superstition, considers himself to be
as firmly bound by a civil as a religious oath, and with an equal degree of
conscientiousness performs what he swore to, at the bar, as at the altar; and
were this not the case, we should either be obliged to call in the aid of
religion to every kind of obligation, or to put an end to all mutual trust and
confidence in every civil transaction. Marriage, therefore, stands exactly in
the same light as all other transactions of a nature interesting to the public,
it is not allowed that every one should enter into it according to his own whim
and caprice, but according to all the forms and ceremonies prescribed by the
laws of this country. In Japan, she is only a lawful wife who is given by their
great regal pontiff. By the laws of Mahomet, she is only so, who is married by
the judge; and in a great many parts of the world, she cannot be so unless
given by her parents.

Marriage is a word which, in different countries, admits of a very different
signification; among the greatest part of the ancients, it implied a sort of a
ba^gain entered into by one man and several women, that they should serve and
obey him, and be liable to be turned off at his pleasure; in the East it
implies nearly the same thing at this day: in the Greek islands, and a variety
of other places, it signifies a temporary agreement between a man and a woman
to cohabit together so long as they can agree or find it convenient. On the
coast of Guinea, and in almost all savage countries, it is a legal method of
condemning women to be the slaves of their husbands, who consider them only as
made to earn their subsistence, and rear their children. In Europe, it is a
mutual and almost indissoluble agreement between one man and one woman, to live
and cohabit together for life, and abide by one another in every circumstance
of prosperous or adverse fortune.

But Europe is not the only country where marriages are for life; they are so
wherever men are polished by society, and the marriage rites and ceremonies in
such places generally have a regard to the liberties and privileges of the
woman as well as of the man. But in countries little civilized, and where the
sex, from the cradle to the grave, are slaves to their parents, relations, or
husbands, the marriage ceremonies are for the most part someway expressive of
that abject condition. There are, however, many exceptions to these general
rules, and the marriage ceremonies in many countries seem to have been
contrived with no other view, than to make the marriage publicly known, by
exhibiting some pompous rite in the presence of a great number of people, which
indeed, besides the private engagements of the parties, is all that can
reasonably be wanted in any marriage agreement whatever.

Over the greater (...) of Europe, and in countries peopled by European
colonies, the marriage c^^emony expresses the duty of the parties, as we^^ as
their interests, and the regard they ought to have for the happiness of each
other; and the general laws of the country, as well as the particular
stipulations of the matrimonial bargain, take care of the freedom and
immunities of the woman, and will neither suffer her person nor property to be
abused by the arbitrary will of a husband. The Russians were formerly
accustomed to use their wives with the most relentless severity; to remedy
which, the husband has of late subjected himself, by his marriage contract, to
certain penalties if he used his wife ill, either by manual correction,
whipping, boxing, kicking, or scratching.
But we have already seen, that among the Jews, and other ancient nations, the
laws securing either the persons or property of married women were but few and
weak, and that both were too much left at the mercy of their husbands. The same
matrimonial powers are vested in the husbands of Asia and Africa at this day.
The Moguls, who marry as many women as they please, have their wives of several
different ranks, and may always advance any of them to one of the higher ranks,
or degrade them to one of the lower at pleasure. In Russia, it was formerly a
part of the marriage ceremony for the bride to present the bridegroom with a
whip, made with her own hands, in token of subjection; among the savages of
Canada, a strap, a kettle, and a faggot, are put into the bride's apartment as
symbols of her submission and slavery; in the island of Java, the bride washes
the bridegroom's feet; on the coast of Guinea, the bride solemnly vows love and
constancy, whatever usage or returns she may meet with from her husband.

To these instances, we might add many others, where the marriage ceremonies
are expressive of the condition of the wife; but we leave the ungrateful task,
and proceed to take notice of those, where, on the part of the bridegroom, they
express his acknowledgment of having attained something he esteems, values, and
wishes to cherish and protect.

CHAPTER XXIX. The same Subject continued.
THE customs we have just now related, are only to be met with among savages,
or such as are a few degrees removed from that state. Those we now proceed to,
mark a people either considerably removed from ferocity of manners, or far
advanced in a state of cultivation and politeness. Among the ancient Peruvians,
the bridegroom carried a pair of shoes to the bride, and put them upon her feet
with his own hands. At Laos, the marriage ceremony is not only rational, but
expressive of the value the bridegroom has for his bride; their mutual
engagements are attested by two witnesses, selected from among those who have
lived the longest and most lovingly together. In Siam, the bridegroom makes a
present of betel to his bride, in the most respectful manner. In Lapland she is
presented with brandy, reindeer, and trinkets. In countries more civilized, a
dower is settled upon her, and presents made her on her going home to the house
of her husband. In England, she is treated with ^very circumstance of honor
and respect, and the words of the marriage ceremony are carried to the most
foolish and unmeaning length: With my body I thee worship, and with my worldly
goods I thee endow. -- Much more simple, and at the same time more sensible,
were the marriage ceremonies of the ancient Mexicans, and inhabitants of
Ceylon, who tied the garments of the bride and bridegroom together, thereby
signifying that they had bound themselves to each other through all the
prosperous and adverse circumstances of life.

But besides these ceremonies of marriage, which seem plainly to be expressive
of the low or of the high condition of women, there are others which have no
regard to either, and seem only calculated to give a public notoriety and
firmness to the compact. Such is that said to have been anciently practiced in
Canada, where the bride and bridegroom held a rod between them, while the old
men pronounced certain prayers over them, after which they broke the rod into
as many pieces as there were witnesses, and gave to each a piece, who carried
it home, and deposited it as a testimony of the marriage that had happened.
Such is the ceremony of tying the garments publicly together, and such are
those of inviting friends and neighbors to feast, and to be witnesses of the
matrimonial engagements. As the natural modesty of the sex always supposes that
a woman shall with some reluctance relinquish her state of virginity, the
marriage ceremony is frequently expressive of this reluctance. In some
countries, the bride hides herself; in others, she must seemingly be fought
for; in others, the ceremony must be performed while she is covered with a
veil, or under a canopy to save her blushes. But what seems more extraordinary,
there are instances where the man is seemingly to be forced to accept of what
almost in all countries he eagerly seeks after. In a province of Old Mexico,
the bridegroom was carried off by his relations, that it might be thought he
was forced into the state of wedlock, a state so perplexed with thorns and
cares. In almost all countries, the day of marriage is dedicated to mirth and
to festivity, and every thing that can cloud the brow, or damp the general joy,
is carefully avoided. In Muscovy, however, the case was different; as a part of
the ceremony they crowned the young couple with wormwood, as an emblem of the
bitterness of those anxieties and cares upon which they were entering.

If the laws we have formerly mentioned, forbidding the marriage of nea^
relations with each other, originated from the political view of preserving the
human race from degeneracy they are the only laws we meet with on that subject,
and exert almost the only care we find taken of so important a matter. The
Asiatic is careful to improve the breed of his elephants, the Ara^ian of his
horses, and the Laplander of his reindeer. The Englishman, eager to have swift
horses, staunch dogs, and victorious cocks, grudges no care, and spares no
expense, to have the males and females matched properly; but since the days of
Solon, where is the legislator, or since the times of the ancient Greeks, where
are the private persons, who take any care to improve, or even to keep from
degeneracy the breed of their own species? The Englishman who solicitously
attends the training of his colts and puppies, would be ashamed to be caught in
the nursery; and while no motive could prevail upon him to breed horses or
hounds from an improper or contaminated kind, he will calmly, or rather
inconsiderately, match himself with the most decrepid or diseased of the human
species; thoughtless of the weaknesses and evils he is going to entail on
posterity, and considering nothing but the acquisition of fortune he is by her
alliance to convey to an offspring, by diseases rendered unable to use it. The
Muscovites were formerly the only people, besides the Greeks, who paid a proper
attention to this subject. After the preliminaries of a marriage were settled
between the parents of a young couple, the bride was stripped naked, and
carefully examined by a jury of matrons, when, if they found any bodily defect,
they endeavored to cure it; but if it would admit of no remedy, the match was
broke off, and she was considered not only as a very improper subject to breed
from, but improper also for maintaining the affections of a husband, after he
had discovered the imposition she had put upon him.

In England, the marriage ceremony is not to be performed but in the church,
and between the hours of eight and twelve o'clock in the forenoon. In Scotland,
this is deemed incompatible with morality and sound policy, as it hinders the
valetudinarian from doing all the justice in his power to the mistress he has
lived with and debauched; he may therefore marry her at any hour, or in any
place, and by that marriage, legitimate all the children he has by her, whether
they be present at the marriage or not. -- Nearly the same thing takes place
all over Germany, only in some parts of it, the children to be legitimated are
required to be present, to be acknowledged by the father, and to hold the
lappet of his garment, during the performance of the marriage ceremony.

In Prussia, though their code of laws seems in general to be as reasonable,
and as consistent with sound policy as any in Europe, yet we still find in it,
an allowance given for a species of that concubinage, which has long since been
expelled from almost all the western world. A man may there marry what is
called a left handed wife, to whom he is married for life, and by the common
ceremony; The only difference in the ceremony is, the bridegroom gives her his
left hand instead of his right.
but with this express agreement, that neither she nor her children shall live
in the house of her husband, nor shall take his name, nor bear his arms, nor
claim any dower or donation usually claimed by every other wife, nor dispose of
any part of his property, exert any authority over his servants, nor succeed to
his estates or his titles; but shall be contented with what was agreed on for
their subsistence during his life, and with what he shall give them at his
death. This privilege, however, is always in the power of the king to deny, and
is seldom granted to any but such of the nobility as are left with large
families, and from the smallness of their fortunes cannot afford to marry
another legal wife, and rear up another family of the same rank with themselves.

Though the laws of almost every civilized country have required the consent of
parents to the marriage of their children, yet when such children marry without
it, the evil is considered as incapable of any remedy. The Prussian law,
however, thinks otherwise: and in this case gives the parents a power of
applying to the consistory, which separates the parties, and obliges the man to
give the woman a portion for the loss of her virginity, and contribute to the
maintenance and education of the child or children of the marriage. Promises of
marriage to a woman, have, in all well regulated states, been considered as
sacred, and the breach of them punished by a variety of methods; but the
Prussian laws proceed in another manner; they do not endeavor so much to
punish the breach of the promise, as to enforce the performance of it, which
they do by the admonitions of religion, by imprisonment, by a fine of half the
man's fortune, or a certain part of what he earns by his daily labor; or if he
runs away to evade the marriage, by marrying the woman to him by proxy, and
allowing her a maintenance out of his effects.

Before we take leave of the subject of matrimony, it may not be improper to
take a view of the oppositions that have been made to it; oppositions which
have arisen chiefly on pretense of religion, but which, when thoroughly
examined, will, we persuade ourselves, appear to have been founded on a very
different motive. The two sexes were evidently intended for each other, and
"increase and multiply" was the first great command given them by the Author of
nature; but suppose no such command had been given, how it first entered into
the mind of man, that the propagation or continuation of the species was
criminal in the eye of heaven, is not easy to conceive. Ridiculous, however, as
this notion may appear, it is one of those which early insinuated itself among
mankind; and plainly demonstrated, that reasoning beings are the most apt to
deviate from nature, and not only to disobey her plainest dictates, but, on
pretense of pleasing her Author, to render themselves forever incapable of
obeying them.

As the appetite toward the other sex is one of the strongest and most
ungovernable in our nature; as it intrudes itself more than any other into our
thoughts, and frequently diverts them from every other purpose or employment;
it may, at first, on this account, have been reckoned criminal when it
interfered with worship and devotion; and emasculation was made use of in order
to get rid of it, which may, perhaps, have been the origin of eunuchs. But
however this be, it is certain, that there were men of various religions, who
made themselves incapable of procreation on a religious account, as we are told
that the priests of Cybele constantly castrated themselves; and by our Savior,
that there are eunuchs who make themselves such for the kingdom of heaven's
sake.

However absurd it may appear to reason and to philosophy, it is certainly a
fact, that religionists of various kinds had early got an idea, that the
propagation of their species was, if not criminal, at least derogatory to their
sacred functions. Thus the priests of ancient Egypt were obliged, by the rules
of their order, to abstain from women, though in after periods they allowed
them one wife; the priests of the Mysians likewise bound themselves to
celibacy; and the priests of the Romish church, in times more enlightened by
reason, still follow the execrable example, as if Heaven were pleased with
every means of preserving the individual, and displeased with the means of
continuing the species.

But not only the priesthood, but several other religious orders of both sexes,
began to spring up, who vainly imagined to conciliate the favor of the Author
of nature, by discontinuing his works. -- The Egyptians and ancient Indians had
communities of Cenobites, who are supposed to have lived in celibacy. Strabo
mentions a sect among the Thracians that vowed perpetual abstinence from women,
and were on that account revered for their sanctity. The Essenes, among the
Jews, laid themselves under the same obligation. The Romans had their vestal
virgins, who kept perpetually alive the sacred fire in the temple of the
goddess of chastity, and were buried alive if they proved incontinent. The
Peruvians had their virgins of the Sun, who were brought up in the temple of
that luminary, and obliged to the strictest virginity, under the same penalty
as the vestals among the Romans. Friga, the goddess of the ancient
Scandinavians, had also a temple where her oracles and a sacred fire were kept,
by prophetesses devoted to perpetual virginity. Some tribes of the ancient
Indians reckoned virginity endowed with such a power, that their most approved
remedies were useless and unavailing, unless administered by the hand of a
virgin.

Soon after the introduction of christianity, St. Mark is said to have founded
a society called Therapeutes, who dwelt by the lake Moeris in Egypt, and
devoted themselves to solitude and religious offices. About the year 305 of the
christian computation, St. Anthony being persecuted by Dioclesian, retired into
the desert near the lake Moeris; numbers of people soon following his example,
joined themselves to the Therapeutes; St. Anthony being placed as their head,
and improving upon their rules, first formed them into regular monasteries, and
enjoined them to live in mortification and chastity. About the same time, or
soon after, St. Synclitica, resolving not to be behind St. Anthony in her zeal
for chastity, is generally believed to have collected together a number of
enthusiastic females, and to have founded the first nunnery for their
reception. Some imagine the scheme of celibacy was concerted between St.
Anthony and St. Synclitica, as St. Anthony, on his first retiring into
solitude, is said to have put his sister into a nunnery, which must have been
that of St. Synclitica; but however this be, from their institution, monks and
nuns increased so fast, that in the city of Orixa, about seventeen years after
the death of St. Anthony, there were twenty thousand virgins devoted to
celibacy.

Such at this time was the rage of celibacy; a rage which, however unnatural,
will cease to excite our wonder, when we consider, that it was accounted by
both sexes the sure and only infallible road to heaven and eternal happiness;
and as such, it behoved the church vigorously to maintain and countenance it,
which she did by beginning about this time to deny the liberty of marriage to
her sons. In the first council of Nice, held soon after the introduction of
christianity, the celibacy of the clergy was strenuously argued for, and some
think that even in an earlier period it had been the subject of debate; however
this be, it was not agreed to in the council of Nice, though at the end of the
fourth century it is said that Syricus, bishop of Rome, enacted the first
decree against the marriage of monks; a decree which was not universally
received: for several centuries after, we find that it was not uncommon for
clergymen to have wives; even the popes were allowed this liberty, as it is
said in some of the old statutes of the church, That it was lawful for the pope
to marry a virgin for the sake of having children. So exceedingly difficult is
it to combat against nature, that little regard seems to have been paid to this
decree of Syricus; for we are informed, that several centuries after, it was no
uncommon thing for the clergy to have wives, and perhaps even a plurality of
them; as we find it among the ordonnances of pope Sylvester, that every priest
should be the husband of one wife only; and Pius the Second affirmed, that
though many strong reasons might be adduced in support of the celibacy of the
clergy, there were still stronger reasons against it.

In the year 400, it was decreed in a council, that such of the clergy as had
faithful wives should not entertain concubines, but such as either had no
wives, or were joined to unfaithful ones, might do as they pleased. In the year
441, it was decreed, that priests and deacons should either abstain from
marriage, or be degraded from their office. This law seems afterward to have
been a little relaxed, for in the year 572 one of the canons of the council of
Lucense says, when a deacon is elected, and declares that he has not the gift
of chastity, he shall not be ordained; but if he says nothing, is ordained, and
afterward desires to marry, he shall be set aside from the ministry; and if a
subdeacon take a wife, he may be a reader or doorkeeper, but he shall not read
the apostles. In the year 633, it was ordained, That priests should live
chaste, having clean bodies and pure minds; and the same council, as if it had
been to show how ill their statutes were observed, ordained also, That such
clergy as had married widows, wives divorced from their husbands, or common
whores, should be separated from them. In the year 743, all the canons against
marriage seem to have been totally disregarded, as we find, that even those who
were bigamists, or had married widows, might be promoted to sacred orders. In
the year 1126, the notion of enforcing celibacy seems again to have prevailed;
for in a synod held by pope Honorius, all the clergy are strictly forbid to
have wives, and ordered to be degraded from their office if they disobeyed the
mandate, a mandate which was renewed in the year following, with some
additional threatenings annexed to it; and so warm were the fathers of the
church in their invectives against matrimony, that some of them rendered
themselves ridiculous by their intemperate zeal. St. Jerome expressly declares,
that the end of matrimony is eternal death, that the earth is indeed filled by
it, but heaven by virginity. Edward the Confessor was sainted only for the
abstaining from the conjugal embrace; and many of the primitive christians,
fully persuaded that every species of the carnal appetite was inconsistent with
pure religion, lived with a wife as they would have done with a sister.
Jovinian was banished in the (...) century by the emperor Honorius, for
maintai^ing, that a man who cohabited with his wife mig^^ (...) saved, provided
he observed the laws of piety and virtue laid down in the gospel.

The first canons against marriage were, it is said, only received in Italy and
France, a proof that the inhabitants of these countries were either less
sensible, or less tenacious of the rights of mankind, than their neighbors:
when, or by whom the celibacy of the clergy was first introduced into England
is not perfectly agreed upon, some supposing it was St. Dunstan who, with the
consent of king Edgar, first proposed to, and pressed the married clergy to put
away their wives, which all those that refused to do were deposed, and monks
put into their livings; these monks, whose invention was always very fruitful
in stories to advance their own interest, gave out, that all the married clergy
who disobeyed the order of the saint were, with their wives and children,
transformed into eels; and, as many of them resided in the Isle, now called
Ely, it is said to have taken its name from that circumstance.

At a synod held at Winchester under the same St. Dunstan, the monks farther
averred, that so highly criminal was it for a priest to marry, that even a
wooden cross had audibly declared against the horrid practice. Others place the
first attempt of this kind, to the account of Alefrick, archbishop of
Canterbury, about the beginning of the eleventh century: however this be, we
have among the canons a decree of the archbishops of Canterbury, and York,
ordaining, That all the ministers of God, especially priests, should observe
chastity, and not take wives: and in the year 1076, there was a council
assembled at Winchester, under Lanfranc, which decreed, That no canon should
have a wife; that such priests as lived in castles and villages should not be
obliged to put their wives away, but that such as had none should not be
allowed to marry; and that bishops should not either ordain priests nor
deacons, unless they previously declared that they were not married. In the
year 1102, archbishop Anselm held a council at Westmi^ster, where it was
decreed, That no archdeacon, priest, deacon, or canon, should either marry a
wife, or retain her if he had one. Anselm, to give this decree greater weight,
desired of the king, that the principal men of the kingdom might be present at
the council, and that the decree might be enforced by the joint consent both of
the clergy and laity; the king consented, and to these canons the whole realm
gave a general sanction. The clergy of the province of York, however,
remonstrated against them, and refused to put away their wives; the unmarried
refused also to oblige themselves to continue in that state; nor were the
clergy of Canterbury much more tractable.

About two years afterward, Anselm called a new council at London, in the
presence of the king and barons, where canons still severer than the former
were enacted; those who had taken women since the former prohibition, were
enjoined to dismiss them so entirely, as not to be knowingly with them in the
same house; and any ecclesiastic accused of this transgression by two or more
witnesses, was, if a priest, to purge himself by six witnesses; if a deacon, by
four; if a subdeacon, by two; otherwise to be deemed guilty. Priests,
archdeacons, or canons, refusing to part with their women, here styled
ADULTEROUS CONCUBINES, were to be deprived of their livings, put out of the
choir, and declared infamous, and the bishop had authority to take away all
their moveable goods, as well as those of their women. This law, highly unjust
and severe, was still more so in France; for a council held at Lions in the
year 1042, a power was given to the barons to make slaves of all the children
of the married clergy. As the English clergy were still very refractory in the
year 1125, cardinal Crema, the pope's legate, presiding in a council at
Westminster with a view to enforce the papal authority, made a long and
inveterate speech against the horrid sin of matrimony, in which he is said to
have declared, that it was the highest degree of wickedness to rise from the
side of a woman, and make the body of Christ; though it happened somewhat
unlucky for the poor cardinal, that he was himself that same evening caught by
the constable in the very situation he had painted as so sinful, and the shame
of it soon drove him out of England.

In the year 1129, the archbishop of Canterbury being legate, a council was
called at London, to which all the clergy of England were summoned: here it was
enacted, That all who had wives, should put them away before the next feast of
St. Andrew, under pain of deprivation. The execution of this decree was left to
the king; who took money of several priests, by way of commutation, and so the
intention of the decree was frustrated. Many of the clergy now finding a heavy
fine imposed on them, for keeping a lawful wife, and none for a concubine,
chose the latter; by such means their lives became so openly scandalous, that
about forty-six years after, in the reign of Henry the second, Richard,
archbishop of Canterbury, in a synod held at Westminster, prohibited all, who
were in holy orders, from keeping concubines, as well as from marrying. The
like prohibition was issued afterward, by Herbert, archbishop of Canterbury,
and then also chief justice of England, in a synod held at York. In the ninth
year of Henry the Third, Stephen Langton revived these decrees; and added, That
priests keeping concubines, should not be admitted to the sacraments, nor their
concubines allowed Christian burial. But in spite of all these efforts, many of
the clergy still retained their wives, concubines, and benefices, till cardinal
Otho, some time after made a positive decree, declaring, That the wives and
children of such priests should have no benefit from the estates of their
husbands and fathers; and that such estates should be vested in the church.
This, as it cut off the widows and children of the clergy from all means of
subsistence, and turned them beggars into the world, had a more powerful effect
than all the censures and thunders of the church; and at last gave the fatal
blow to a right which the clergy had struggled to maintain for many centuries;
and from this time they seem quietly to have submitted to the yoke, till the
Reformation restored to them again the rights of mankind, which had been
violently taken from them.

In this manner did things continue till the reign of Henry the Eighth, when
dispensations to keep concubines became common to such priests as were able to
purchase them; but lest this should be a bad example, they were enjoined to
keep them privately, and never to go publicly to them on account of scandal.
Some years after, a temporal law was added to the spiritual, declaring it
felony for a priest to marry; or if married, to have any commerce with his
wife; or even so much as to converse with her; or for any person to preach or
affirm, that it was lawful for a priest to marry. This law was repealed the
following year, though the canons of the church were still in force, and
continued so till the time of Edward the Sixth; when the authority of the sea
of Rome being thrown off, an act was made, by which the marriages of the clergy
were declared lawful, and their children legitimate. Queen Mary, in the first
year of her reign, repealed this act; and in this state things continued during
the reign of queen Elizabeth; but in the first year of James the First, an act
was again made, restoring to the clergy the rights of nature, and of citizens;
and the act remains in force at this day.

In this contest we have seen a long and severe struggle, between one part of
the clergy, contending for the authority of the church, and another part,
contending for the rights of nature. But why this authority of the church, and
the rights of nature, should be so opposite to each other, is a point involved
in much obscurity. It has been alleged, that the reason why the church enjoined
celibacy, was, that the clergy having no legitimate offspring, might turn their
whole attention to enrich and aggrandize that community only of which they were
members. This, however, does not appear to be well sounded; for illegitimate
children may engross the attention of parents, and engage them as strongly in
providing for them, as legitimate ones; as has frequently appeared in the
conduct of the sovereign pontiffs; and yet the church has at most but weakly
exerted herself in preventing the clergy from having children of this kind.

In the human breast there is not a passion so natural, so prevalent, as that
which attaches us to the fair sex. The Romish clergy are sons of nature; they
are endowed with the same passions, and susceptible of the same feelings as the
rest of her children. How then they should voluntarily give up the
gratification of these passions, the pleasure arising from these feelings,
seems, if it really were a fact, altogether unaccountable; but if we consider
it only as a finesse, we may guess at the motives which induced them to it.

In all countries, and at all periods, the clergy, rather wiser and more
cunning than the rest of mankind, have arrogated and secured to themselves
privileges which were denied to all others. Thus the Romish clergy, no doubt,
considered the enjoyment of the fair sex as a source of the most exquisite
pleasure; but then, in the way of matrimony, this enjoyment was attended with
many inconveniences and disadvantages, which they were willing to avoid: they
therefore pretended, that persons so sacred as themselves, were forbid to enter
into that state; but at the same time resolved to enjoy all the pleasures
arising from the commerce with the other sex, without the expense of a family,
or the chance of being tied to a disagreeable partner. To effect this it was
necessary, first, to have access to every woman in private; secondly, to get
into all the secrets of the sex; and, thirdly, to have places appropriated,
where none but them and priests should ever be suffered to enter. In the
celibacy of the clergy we may, therefore, perceive the origin o^ auricular
confession; a scheme well calculated to promote their licentious purposes, as
it obliged all the women, under pain of eternal damnation, to discover every
secret; and not contented with denouncing damnation on her who concealed any
thing, it promised absolution, in the most full and ample manner, of every
thing discovered. Thus threatened with the greatest of all evils, on the one
hand, and so easy a method of escaping it, even after every criminal
indulgence, held out on the other, is there any wonder that women were
frequently prevailed upon to discover even those secrets which the sex most
cautiously of all others conceal. When women had confessed themselves guilty of
one or more faults of this kind, it was natural to think, that, without great
difficulty, they might be prevailed upon to repeat them; and thus the crafty
sons of the church were led to discover where they might make their attacks
with the greatest probability of success; and they knew also, that if gentle
methods should fail, they could in a manner, force compliance, by threatening
to publish the former faults of their penitents.

Being by these schemes, secured of admittance to all the women, and possessed
of all their secrets, which they, no doubt, communicated to each other, the
next step was to secure themselves from interruption, when in private with
them. This was easily accomplished; they had only to denounce the vengeance of
heaven against the daring miscreant, whether husband, father, or lover, who
should sacrilegiously disturb a holy lecher, while confessing his penitent.
Thus being possessed of all the secrets of the heart, and secured in their
privacy with the women, with nature and the passions on their side, and pardon
and remission in their power; is it any wonder that the Romish clergy became so
debauched, and so dangerous to the peace of society, that the French and German
laity, jointly, petitioned the Council of Trent, that priests might be allowed
to marry, and that their petition should have these remarkable words? We are
afraid to trust our wives and daughters at confession, with men who reckon no
commerce with the sex criminal, but in wedlock.

In the celibacy of the clergy, we may discover also the origin of nunneries;
the intrigues they could procure, while at confession, were only short,
occasional, and with women who they could not entirely appropriate to
themselves; to remedy which, they probably fabricated the scheme of having
religious houses, where young women should be shut up from the world, and where
no man but a priest, on pain of death, should enter. That in these dark
retreats, secluded from censure, and from the knowledge of the world, they
might riot in licentiousness. They were sensible, that women, surrounded with
the gay and the amiable, might frequently spurn at the offers of a cloistered
priest, but that while confined entirely to their own sex, they would take
pleasure in a visit from one of the other, however slovenly and unpolished. In
the world at large, should the crimes of the women be detected, the priests
have no interests in mitigating their punishment; but here the whole community
of them are interested in the secret of every intrigue, and should Lucina
unluckily proclaim it, she can seldom do it without the walls of the convent,
and if she does, the priests lay the crime on some luckless laic, that the holy
culprit may come off with impunity.

Such has been the opposition made by the clergy to the marriage of their
fraternity, and such perhaps have been the causes of it; nor will it appear to
any one who is acquainted with the history of the middle ages, that we censure
too severely in so saying; besides, our censure is justified by the joint
opinion of two mighty nations in their petition, a part of which we quoted
above. The clergy never had any arguments of consequence to offer in support of
so arbitrary a measure; that of Cardinal Crema, already mentioned seems to have
been what they made most use of, and besides, they quoted the authority of St.
Paul, who says, He that marries does well, but he that marries not does
better. They trusted most to papal authority, and dogmatical assertion; but
even in the ages of ignorance all these were too weak to stifle nature; and men
easily saw through the thin disguise, which the flagitiousness of their lives
often threw aside without any ceremony; and besides, they blundered in making
marriage a sacrament, and denying the administration of it to that part of
mankind who were accounted the most holy of all others.

As we have frequently mentioned the concubinage of the clergy, we think it
justice to take notice here, that, however infamous it became afterward, it
was toward the beginning of the middle ages a legal union, something less
solemn, but nothing less indissolute than marriage; and that though a concubine
did not enjoy the same consideration in the family as a wife of equal rank, she
enjoyed a consequence and honor greatly superior to a mistress. By the Roman
law, when the want of birth, or fortune, prohibited a woman from becoming the
wife of a man of family, the civil law allowed him to take her as a concubine,
and the children of such concubine, both at Rome and among the ancient Franks,
were not less qualified, with the father's approbation, to inherit, than the
children of a wife. The Western church, for several centuries, held concubinage
of this kind entirely lawful. The first council of Toledo expressly says, That
a man must have but one wife, or one concubine, at his option; and several
councils held at Rome speak the same language: but so much were these
indulgences abused, that they were at last obliged to abolish and declare them
infamous in every well regulated state.

We shall now take our leave of the subject of matrimony, with a few
observations on the causes of the frequent discords and uneasinesses which
arise in that state. If the satirical writers and declaimers of the present age
may be credited, married women have in general arrived at such a height of
debauchery, that few marriages are tolerably happy, and fewer husbands without
the invisible marks of a cuckold. We do not pretrend to justify all the wives
of the present times; but on comparing them with the past, we find the same
clamours have always existed against them; and without pretending to any spirit
of prophecy, we may venture to affirm, that they will exist so long as
marriages are contracted solely with a view to the interest of the parties,
without considering whether they are possessed of any of the qualifications
necessary to render each other happy; a scheme by which, tempers the most
discordant are frequently joined together, though neither of them are so bad,
but they might have made good husbands and wives, if they had been matched with
propriety.

But this is far from being the only reason to which we attribute many of the
unhappy marriages of this country; the basis of them is laid and established in
the education of our young women, as well as in the manners and customs of our
young men. Young women, instead of being taught to mix the agreeable with the
useful, are early instructed to cultivate only the former, and to consider the
latter as fit for none but maiden aunts, and other antiquated monitors: but
this is not all, flattered by the men from their earliest infancy, they are
never accustomed to the voice of truth, nor to that plain-dealing which must
unavoidably take place in the married state; constantly accustomed to see a
lover accost them with the most submissive air, to find him yield every point,
and conform himself entirely to their will, they consider themselves as oracles
of wisdom, always in the right; taught to form their ideas of the husband only
from those of the lover, and the ridiculous notions imbibed from romances; they
enter into the married state fully convinced that every husband is through life
to play the lover, and that every lover is the romantic being depicted in the
novels which they have read, -- ideal fancies and dreams, which must soon
vanish in disappointment. Nor do the men act more wisely; blinded for the most
part by love, they consider the object of their passion as all perfection and
excellence; and when they come to be undeceived, as every lover soon must,
remorse and chagrine sour their tempers, and make them incapable of forgiving
the cheat they think imposed upon them, or behaving with that degree of
gentleness with which the stronger sex should regard the foibles* and even some
of the follies, of the weaker.

Every one who has been attentive to what passes in other nations, and to what
happens here, before and after marriage, must readily agree, that nothing can
be more certain than the truth of the old saying, Too much familiarity breeds
contempt. In order to inspire and preserve respect, it is necessary for kings
and other great men to wear ensigns of grandeur, and to be attended with
guards; for judges to be arrayed in the symbols of solemnity and wisdom, and
for learned men never to be too free in opening the depth of their knowledge.
The case is exactly the same with women, and they seem sensible of it before
marriage, but insensible of it afterward; before marriage, we are seldom
permitted to see them but in their gay and splendid dress, and in their most
cheerful and lively humor; we enter not into the penetralium of their
weaknesses; we discover none of their faults, and but few of their foibles: but
after marriage, they precipitately throw aside the mask, in such a manner as to
discover that they wore it only for convenience; and an intimacy with them
opens to the husband, views which could not possibly fall within the inspection
of the lover; and hence his ideas of the same woman when his mistress and his
wife, are so widely different.

In endeavoring to explore the sources of conjugal infelicity, we may likewise
observe, that few men have so successfully studied the temper of women, as to
be able to manage it to the best advantage. It has long been an observation of
the fair, that a reformed rake makes the best husband; and we have known
instances where women, after having made but indifferent wives to men of
probity and virtue, who seldom committed any faults, have afterward made much
better ones to rakish young fellows, whose whole lives consisted in sinning and
repenting. The reason is plain; such is the constitution of female nature, that
a little well-timed flattery and submission will seldom fail of putting them
into good humor; whereas the most faultless and prudent conduct cannot always
keep them in it. A woman, by the assistance of a few tender caresses, and
protestations of future amendment, will frequently be prevailed on to forgive
ten thousand faults, if she is persuaded that her husband loves her in the
intervals of his folly; but she will never forgive indifference, nor contempt.
Hence many of the most learned and sensible men are reckoned the worst
husbands, because they have more friendship than love, and more of both than
they express; and many of the most wild and rakish reckoned the best, because
they have more love than friendship, and express more of them both than they
feel.

These, and several others too tedious to mention in sketches of this nature,
seem to be the sources from which matrimonial infelicity so often arises; but
would the parties come together with less exalted notions of each other; would
they lay their account with finding in each other a mixture of human weaknesses
as well as perfections; and would they mutually forgive faults and weaknesses,
matrimony would not be so fraught with evils, and so disturbed with strife. It
is the ox that frets who galls his own neck and that of his fellow with the
yoke, while the pair who draw quietly and equally, scarcely feel it
inconvenient or troublesome.

CHAPTER XXX. Of Widowhood.
AS the state of matrimony is of all others the most honorable, and the most
desired by women, so that of widowhood is generally the most deplorable, and
consequently the object of their greatest aversion.

Women, by nature weak, are not able to defend themselves against the insults
and outrages of man; the same weakness incapacitates them for maintaining
themselves either by the means of fishing and hunting, practiced among the rude
nations, or even by the pasturage and agriculture of those that are more
polite: to launch out into trade and commerce would require, perhaps, more
industry, and more steady efforts of mind, than are consistent with their
volatile natures and finer feelings, and would, besides, expose them to many
assaults, which even the severest virtue might not always be able to repel. On
these, and a variety of other accounts, we find women commonly dependent on the
men for the two important articles, maintenance and protection: while young,
they are under the protection of their parents or guardians, who are likewise
to provide for them, or at least to superintend the management both of their
fortunes and conduct: when they enter into matrimony, they put themselves under
the protection and guardianship of a husband; but when they become widows, no
person is henceforth so much interested in their welfare, no person is legally
bound to defend or to maintain them; and hence their dislike to that forlorn
condition.

But there are other causes beside these, which strongly contribute to heighten
this dislike. In the bloom of virginity, though a woman may not be very
handsome, yet there is always in youth and the prime of life something in her
that attracts the attention and procures the good offices of the men, and
consequently the chance of a husband is considerable. But when a woman has been
married, and is become a widow, she is generally past the bloom of life, and
has lost, by the bearing of children and care of a family, a great part of
those charms which procured her a husband; and on this, and several other
accounts, is not so likely to succeed in getting another; and, as the sex have
a strong proclivity to the joys of love, which matrimony only can procure them
with reputation, we need not wonder at the readiness with which they enter
into, and the reluctance they feel in quitting, that state.

Thus the condition of widowhood, in the politest countries, is attended with
many disadvantages: in rude and barbarous ones, these disadvantages are still
more numerous and more grievous. The sacred records, and indeed the history of
all antiquity, give the strongest reasons to suspect, that widows were often
the prey of the lawless tyrant, who spoiled them with impunity, because they
had none to help them. In many places of the scripture, as well as of profane
authors, we frequently find the state of the widow and the fatherless depicted
as of all others the most forlorn and miserable; and men of honor and probity,
in recounting their own good actions, making a merit of their having forborne
from despoiling the widow and the fatherless. In the book of Exodus it is
declared as a law, That ye shall not afflict the widow, or the fatherless
child: if thou afflict them in any ways, and they cry unto me, I will surely
hear their cry; and my wrath shall wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword,
and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless. In the eighth
century, one of the canon laws enacted, That none shall presume to disturb
widows, orphans, and weak people; all of which create a strong suspicion, that
widows were often oppressed; otherwise, why so many laws for their particular
protection? But to men who live in happier times, when laws extend an equal
protection to all, and when humanity dictates finer feelings than those of
triumphing over weak and helpless beings, such laws appear superfluous and
unnatural; and the causes of promulgating them can only be cleared up, by
considering the manners and customs of the times in which they were instituted.

One of the most ancient of all the customs of antiquity seems to have been
that of revenging injuries, or, as the scripture calls it, avenging of blood.
In the dawn of society, the privileges of maintaining their property, and
revenging the wrongs either done to that or their persons, were the rights of
nature, and belonged only to individuals; nor is it stretching the point to
say, that this privilege, or law, was prior to Moses, and that he probably
borrowed it from some of the neighboring nations. By this law or custom, which
seems to have been established among every people not thoroughly cultivated,
when any person was killed, the nearest relation only was empowered to take
vengeance on the murderer; which vengeance he was at liberty to execute with
his own hand: but as this could seldom or never be done but at the risque of
life, it often happened, that a widow or an orphan might be murdered with
impunity, as there was no person so nearly related to either, as to venture his
life in taking vengeance on the murderer; and as the public was not then so
connected into a whole, as to discover that it suffered any damage from the
loss of an individual. But besides this, as widows and orphans have not friends
so nearly interested in their property, as women who have husbands, and
children who have fathers; and as, among uncultivated people, that which is not
defended by strength has hardly any barrier around it, widows and orphans, in
the times of ancient barbarity, were liable to be frequently wronged,
oppressed, and plundered. Hence the dreadful misfortune of being in any of
these conditions; and hence, also, the superior virtue of not only resisting
the temptation of plundering them, but of pleading their cause, in times when
the exertions of humanity were but weak, and the temptation of acquiring even a
little, exceedingly strong.

When we consider the manners and customs of the savage nations of our own
times, we are presented with a picture nearly resembling that of the periods we
have just now mentioned. There, as weakness is not protected by the laws, to be
allied to powerful relations and friends, or to be joined in some formidable
party, are its only securities against rapine and violence. To be thought
worthy of the protection of such friends, or of such a party, it is necessary
either to be able to share in their common dangers, or to be useful to them in
some other manner. Widows and orphans are frequently incapable of either:
hence, among such people, they are despised and neglected, if not plundered and
devoured, by the hand of the oppressor; circumstances, which nowhere happen
more frequently than in Greenland; a climate so extremely barren, that almost
the whole of their subsistence must be drawn from the sea; and when they cannot
derive it from thence, as is frequently the case in stormy weather, then women,
who are in general but little regarded, fall the first victims of famine. But
should no such accident happen, widows, who are left without sons come to age
and strength enough to fish, and catch seals for them, are always in the most
deplorable condition; for the whole riches of a Greenlander consists in his
little stock of provisions; and such is the barbarous custom of the country,
that when he dies, the neighbors, who assemble to bury him, seldom or never
depart from his hut, till they have consumed the whole of that stock, and left
the widow to inhabit the bare walls. In so horrid a climate, and on so stormy
an ocean, it is but little a woman can procure; she is therefore obliged to
subsist by the cold hand of charity; in Greenland much colder, than where the
blood and kindlier spirits are fanned by a more benevolent atmosphere, and
warmed by a more resplendent sun. Hence it frequently happens, that the pieces
of seals or of whale-blubber thrown to her, hardly sustain a wretched
existence, or entirely fail; when, neglected and unpitied by all around her,
she expires by hunger and by cold.

Among many of the ancients, widows were, either by law or by custom,
restricted from having a second husband. Almost over all the East, and among
many tribes of the Tartars, wives were supposed to serve their husbands as well
in the next world as in this; and as every wife there was to be the sole
property of her f^^st husband, she could never obtain a second, because he
could only secure to himself her service in this life. After the Greeks became
sensible of the benefits arising from the regulation of Cecrops concerning
matrimony, they conceived so high an idea of them, that they affixed a degree
of infamy on the woman who married a second husband, even after the death of
the first; and it was more than two centuries after the death of Cecrops,
before any woman dared to make the attempt. -- Their history has even
transmitted to posterity, with some degree of infamy, the name of her, who
first ventured on a second marriage. It was Gorgophona, the daughter of Perseus
and Andromeda, who began the practice; a practice, which, though soon after
followed by others, could not, even by the multitude of its votaries, be
screened from the public odium; for, during a great part of the heroic ages,
widows who remarried were considered as having offended against public decency;
a custom to which Virgil plainly alludes, when he describes the conflict in the
breast of Dido, between her love for Aeneas, and fear of wounding her honor by
a second marriage: nay, so scrupulous were the Greeks about second marriages,
that in some circumstances they were hardly allowed to the men. Charonidas
excluded all those from the public councils of the state, who had children, and
married a second wife. -- It is impossible (said he) that a man can advise well
for his country, who does not consult the good of his own family: he whose
first marriage has been happy, ought to rest satisfied with that happiness; if
unhappy, he must be out of his senses to risque being so again.

Among some nations, as the ancient Jews, and Christians of the primitive ages,
there were certain orders of men, who were not allowed to join themselves in
marriage with widows. Every priest of the Jews was to take a wife in her
virginity; a widow, or a divorced woman, or profane, or an harlot, these he
shall not take; but he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife. And Pope
Syricus, copying the example set by Moses, ordained, that if a bishop married a
widow, or took a second wife, he should be degraded. It is somewhat remarkable,
that Moses should have put widows on the same scale with harlots and profane
women: an arrangement which greatly degraded them, and which must doubtless
have depended on some opinion or custom, of which we are now entirely ignorant.
We are almost as little acquainted with the reason why the clergy of the middle
ages were prohibited from marrying widows; for, besides the prohibition of
Syricus, which only extended to bishops, the church afterward issued many
others of the same nature, which extended in time to all men in holy orders. In
the year 400, we find it decreed in the Cyprian Council, that if a reader
married a widow, he should never be preferred in the church; and that if a
subdeacon did the same, he should be degraded to a doorkeeper or reader.

As the Egyptians were the first people who treated women with propriety, and
allowed them to enjoy the common rights of nature, they were not even unmindful
of their widows, but protected them by their laws, and allowed them a proper
maintenance from the effects of their husbands. The Greeks, who derived their
laws from ancient Egypt, likewise allowed their widows a dowry for their
subsistence; but if they had any children, and married a second husband, they
could carry to him none of the dower of the first. Among the Romans, when a man
died intestate, and without children, his widow was the sole heiress of his
fortune; and if he left children she had an equal share with them of all that
belonged to him. In the middle ages, when it was customary for creditors to
seize upon and sell the wives and children of a debtor, they were not empowered
to take his widow: the connection was dissolved, and she was no longer his
property; though her sons and daughters were, and might be taken and sold
accordingly. In the eleventh century, the church began to espouse the cause of
widows, and required a promise from penitents, before she would give them
absolution, that they would not henceforth hurt the widow and the fatherless.
Among the Franks, it was customary to pay to the bride a small sum of money, by
way of purchase: this sum was commonly a sol and a denier to a maiden; but to a
widow three golden sols and a denier were requisite; because, all women besides
widows being under perpetual guardianship, marriage made no change in the
liberty of a maiden; whereas a widow parted with the liberty she had gained by
the death of her husband, when she joined herself to a second.

The melancholy ceremonies of mourning have, in all ages and countries, been
more particularly allotted to women, as the best fitted for them, not only by
the sympathetic feelings, but also by their greater readiness in calling forth
these feelings almost at pleasure. Widows, however, whether from a sense of the
almost unspeakable loss they sustain by the death of a husband, or from some
other reasons known to themselves only, have generally, in those solemn
ceremonies, gone greater lengths than the rest of their sex. Jewish widows
mourned the death of their husbands, at least for the space of ten months, and
were reckoned shamefully abandoned, if they married again within that time.
Almost every civilized people have in some degree copied this example; some
allorting a longer, and some a shorter time to the mourning of widows, and all
agreeing to mark them with infamy, if they married again too soon. Most
legislators, finding widows rather too prompt to enter into second marriages,
fixed a certain time within which they should not marry. The Romans, contrary
to the practice of all other nations, fixed the time in which widowers should
marry. The Julians first allowed three years, afterward but one. The Papians
gave them two. In the eleventh century the church decreed, that a widow should
not marry within the space of one year after the death of her husband. The laws
of Geneva have shortened this period to half a year, and in most civilized
countries it is more regulated by custom than by law.

It was formerly the custom in Scotland, and in Spain, for widows to wear the
dress of mourners until death, or a second husband put an end to the ceremony.
In the latter, the widow passed the first year of her mourning in a chamber
hung with black, into which daylight was never suffered to enter: when this
year was ended, she changed this dark and dismal scene for a chamber hung with
gray, into which she admitted the sunbeams sometimes to penetrate; but neither
in her black nor gray chamber did custom allow her looking glasses, nor
cabinets, nor plate, nor any thing but the most plain and necessary furniture;
nor was she to have jewels on her person, nor to wear any color but black. We
are so much accustomed in Europe to see mourners dressed in black, that we have
affixed a melancholy idea to that color. Black is not, however, universally
appropriated to this purpose. The dress of the Chinese mourners is white; that
of the Turks blue; of the Peruvians a mouse color; of the Egyptians yellow,
and in some of their provinces green, and purple is at present made use of as
the mourning dress of kings and cardinals.
-- The faultless victim, is, however, immediately discharged from her gloomy
prison, if she is lucky enough to get a second husband, and she frequently lays
herself out for one, as much with a view to escape from her confinement, as on
account of reiterating the joys of wedlock.

Among nations less cultivated, the idea of what a widow ought to undergo on
the loss of her husband, has been carried to a length, in some respects, more
unreasonable than in Spain. The Muskohge savages in America allot her the
tedious space of four years to chastity and to mourning, and the Chikkasah
dedicate three to the same purposes; this, however, on the part of the women is
not voluntary, but complied with only to save them from the punishment of
adulterers, to which they would be liable if they acted otherwise. To this
mourning and continency are added particular austerities; every evening and
morning, during the first year, a widow is obliged, by custom, to lament her
loss in loud and lugubrious strains, and if her husband was a war-chief, she is
also obliged, during the first moon, to sit the whole day under his war-pole,
This war-pole is a tree stuck in the ground, the top and branches cut off, is
painted red, and all the weapons and trophies of war which belonged to the
deceased are hung on it, and remain there till they rot.
and there incessantly bewail her loss in loud lamentations, without any
shelter from the heat, the cold, or whatever weather shall happen; a ceremony
so rigid and severe, that not a few in the performance of it, notwithstanding
the natural hardiness of their constitutions, fall victims to the various
distempers which then attack them, and to which they are not allowed to pay any
regard, till the ceremony is ended. This custom, according to the Indians, was
instituted, not only to hinder women from taking any methods to destroy, but
also to induce them to do all in their power to preserve the lives of their
husbands. Besides this, there may be other reasons. It was anciently considered
as one of the greatest of misfortunes to die unlamented; a circumstance which
the sacred records, and the historians and poets of antiquity frequently allude
to, and which is at this day a custom in many parts of the Indies, and exists
also in Wales, Ireland, and Scotland, in some of the northern parts of which,
nothing would more disturb a chieftain when alive, than to think that his
funeral dirge would not be sung by his dependants when dead; perhaps,
therefore, this long and painful mourning of the American widows was instituted
to prevent the illusive evil of dying unlamented.

But this painful ceremony, and this long celibacy of the Muskohge and
Chikkasah widows is not all that they are condemned to suffer; the law obliges
them also, during the continuance of their weeds, to abstain from all kinds of
diversion, and from all public company, to go with their hair negligent and
dishevelled, and to deny themselves the enchanting pleasure of anointing it
with grease or oil; the observance of all which is enforced by the nearest of
kin to the deceased husband, who keeps a watchful eye over the conduct of his
widow, because, should she fail in any particular of the duty we have
mentioned, she would thereby bring the most indeliable stain on the memory of
the deceased, and the honor of his family. Through the whole of their
widowhood, the women continue to mourn their lost husbands, and in their
lamentations constantly call on them by name, especially when they go out to
work in the morning, and when they return in the evening, at which time the
whole company of maids and and widows join in a melancholy chorus, making the
hills and dales reverberate the funebral sound. Husbands, however, never weep
for their wives -- Tears, say they, do not become men; it is only women that
ought to weep; and we may add, that in America they frequently have great
reason so to do, for if the friends of a widow cannot find a husband for her,
add if she has no sons of age to procure her the means of subsistence, her
condition is but wretched and miserable; what little charity she receives is
often given with an ill grace, and at last she is frequently in no small danger
of perishing for want.

Such are the severities which mark the fate of widows among the savages of
America; but hard as we may reckon all these unmerited sufferings and
austerities, they are lenient and tender, when compared to what widows in
several parts of Africa are obliged to undergo. In that country of tyranny and
despotism, wives and concubines are not only doomed to be the slaves of their
husbands in this world, but, according to their opinion, in the next also; the
husband, therefore, is no sooner dead, than his wives, concubines, servants,
and even sometimes horses, must be strangled, in order to render him the same
services in the other world which they did in this. At the Cape of Good Hope,
as widows are less esteemed than virgins, in order that they may not impose
themselves on the men for such, they are obliged by law to cut off a joint from
a finger for every husband that dies; this joint they present to their new
husband on the day of their marriage. In the Isthmus of Darien, both sexes were
formerly obliged to observe this custom, that none of them might impose
themselves on each other for what they were not; or according to some authors,
which is not less probable, i^ was their marriage ceremony, by which they were
affianced to each other. We have already seen that widows are in several places
neglected, and allowed at least to fall a prey to famine; but in Dari^^, the
barbarity is carried much farther; when a widow dies, such of her children as
are too young to provide subsistence for themselves are buried with her in the
same grave, no one being willing to take the charge of them, and the community
not being so far ripened as to discover that the loss of every individual is a
loss to the state. Such is the savage barbarity of African and American policy;
a barbarity which can only be exceeded by what we are going to relate of the
Hindoos, or ancient inhabitants of the banks of the Ganges, and some other
parts of the East Indies.

Besides the remarkable custom of making every woman a prisoner for life, the
Asiatics present us with still more extraordinary, and, if possible, more
repugnant to human nature. The Hindoos do not bury their dead after the manner
of many other nations, but burn their bodies upon a large pile of wood erected
for the purpose; upon this pile the most beloved wife, and in some places it is
said, all the wives of great men are obliged to devote themselves to the flames
which consume the body of their husbands.

This cruel and inhuman custom having existed among them from the remotest
antiquity, its origin is dark and uncertain, though they generally give the
following account of it. The Hindoo wives having in ancient times become so
wicked and abandoned, as to make a common practice of poisoning their husbands
whenever they displeased them; several methods were in vain attempted to remedy
the evil, when at last the men found themselves under a necessity of enacting a
law, That every Hindoo wife should be burned to death on the funeral pile of
her dead husband; a most effectual, though dreadful, remedy to prevent the most
horrid of crimes. If there is any truth in this cause, and the law which was
the consequence of it, it has to some seemed strange that obedience to that law
was not enforced by any penalty; but this is not in the least strange or
unaccountable, for it would be absurd to enforce the execution of a law by a
penalty, when no penalty could be devised so dreadful as the execution of the
law itself. The Hindoos took a more effectual method, they did not drag the
victims to the pile like criminals to execution, but prevailed upon them to
offer themselves to it of their own accord; in the first place, by annexing to
such a sacrifice all the most glorious and incomprehensible rewards of
religion; and in the second, by subjecting the refusal to perpetual infamy, by
degrading the woman from her tribe, and considering her as bringing an eternal
disgrace on her family.

As there is no positive proof, however, that this was the origin of the
burning of widows, others have supposed, that the custom arose in the following
manner. At the death of Brama, the great prophet and lawgiver of the Hindoos,
his wives, inconsolable for so great a loss, resolved not to survive him, and
therefore voluntarily sacrificed themselves on the funeral pile: the wives of
the chief Rajahs, or officers of state, unwilling to have their love and
fidelity reckoned less than the wives of Brama, followed in a kind of bravo the
example set them by those wives. The Bramins, or priests of Brama, foreseeing
that it would turn out advantageous to their society, extolled the new invented
piety, and declared that the spirits of those heroines from thenceforth
desisted from being transmigrated into other bodies, and immediately entered
into the first bhoobun of purification; According to the Bramins there are
fourteen bhoobuns or spheres, seven above the earth, for the reception of the
spirits of the blessed, and seven below it, for the reception of those who are
condemned to further misery and punishment, till they arrive at the necessary
degree of purification.
a reward so glorious, which put an end to the spirit passing a long and
disagreeable state of probation, in the bodies of a variety of inferior
animals, induced even the wives of the Bramins themselves to claim a right of
sacrificing their bodies in this manner. The wives of all the Hindoos caught
the enthusiastic contagion, and thus in a short time the (...) heroism of a few
women brought on a general custom; the Bramins sanctified it by religion, and
thereby established it on a foundation that several thousand years have not
been able to destroy.

As the Bramins receive considerable emoluments from the burning of widows,
being entitled to all the finery in which they are adorned before they ascend
the funeral pile; they take care to interweave into their education an idea of
its necessity, and from their earliest youth instruct them to consider this
catastrophe as the most pleasing to Brama, and the most beneficial to
themselves and their children. When they become wives, the same unwearied
efforts are continued to confirm their minds in the principles so early
inculcated; all the enthusiasm of religion, and all the ardour arising in the
human mind from glory, are kindled up into a blaze; all the abhorrence starting
up against degradation; shame and infamy are likewise conjured up to exert
themselves. The woman is told, from the Shaster, their fountain of infallible
truth, that she who burns with the body of her husband shall enjoy life eternal
with him in Heaven; that the children descended of a mother thus voluntarily
sacrificed, acquire thereby an additional luster, are courted in marriage by
the most honorable of their cast, and even sometimes advanced to a cast
superior to that in which they were born; that she who dastardly declines to
ascend the funeral pile, is degraded from her cast, thrown out of all society,
and by every one contemned and despised; her children too, degraded and
buffetted, feel the effects of her crime, and become with herself the
detestation even of the lowest and most despicable of mankind.

In whatever light we view this custom, or from whatever source we derive its
origin, it is certainly one of the most extraordinary that we are presented
with in history; several authors, and among them Mons. Voltaire, have mentioned
it as the highest effort of fortitude and resolution, that a woman, in the
bloom of youth and beauty, should not only voluntarily relinquish life, but
calmly and intrepidly kindle, and afterward ascend the pile whose flames are
to devour her. Of this calmness and intrepidity there may, perhaps, be, or
rather there appear to be, some instances: but even these are not so numerous
as we are taught to believe; for a variety of authors tell us, and indeed their
testimony is most consonant to human nature, that the greater part, if not all
of the victims who devote themselves in this manner, are previously rendered
insensible by opium and other soporific drugs. Besides, when we attentively
consider an action so repugnant to self-preservation, the strongest of all
human principles, we shall find, that though the victims really offer
themselves, yet the sacrifice is not altogether voluntary; it is an act to
which the mind is forced to give consent, by hopes of the highest rewards, and
fears of the most dreadful punishments; and to constitute a voluntary act, it
is evident the mind must not be influenced by either.

It may, perhaps, be alleged here, that no motives whatever are sufficient to
influence the human mind to relinquish life, and far less to meet death when
armed with such ten-fold terrors; but this is not really the case; there are
two motives of a nature so powerful, that either of them have frequently
enabled both men and women to undervalue life, and set death and all his
terrors at defiance. The first of these is Religion; almost every religion has
been persecuted, and that persecution has constantly been productive of
martyrs, who, influenced by the glorious rewards which they fancied annexed to
their sufferings, and terrified by the punishments they should incur by
declining to suffer, have behaved in death with a courage and magnanimity
equal, if not superior to the Hindoo women. The second is the delusive phantom
Honor, whose empty name drags the soldier to the field of blood, prompts him
to scale the offensive wall, and meet the death planted there in ten thousand
terrible shapes; where, if he perishes, the honor he sought after will not
enter with him into, nor reward him, in the other world. These motives which,
when acting singly, are each of them so powerful, both combine together to lead
the Hindoo women to the funeral pile; and what gives them an additional force
is, the education of the women, who are from their infancy trained up to
consider this world as their place of punishment, their bodies as their
prisons, and the final release from both as the undoubted commencement of the
most certain and perfect happiness. Less tenacious, therefore, of life than
people educated and instructed in different and more doubtful principles, they
submit, though not altogether in a voluntary manner, yet with less reluctance
than is natural with us, to this sacrifice, which they consider not only as
releasing them from all farther transmig^ations, but as joining them for ever
to the happy spirits of their departed husbands, in a state of the most perfect
purification.

But this custom of burning has not been altogether confined to women; several
Indian philosophers, through an excess of fanaticism, or chagrined with the
ills and accidents of life, have flung themselves into the devouring flames,
and there expired in seeming tranquillity. The latest instance, perhaps, of this
was Calanus, who followed Alexander in his expedition to India; he had lived
free from pain and sickness to the age of eighty-three, when being seized with
a violent cholic, and perhaps loaded with the infirmities of age, he took the
resolution of freeing himself from the whole by the funeral pile; a resolution
which he executed in spite of all the remonstrances of his royal master and
other friends. We would naturally suppose that a nation in which both men and
women were so regardless of life, should be brave and warlike, yet the contrary
has always been the case, they have yielded and easy conquest almost to every
invader.

But to return to the women. In spite of the care of the Bramins, in spite of
all the glorious rewards offered to those who burn, and indignant punishments
threatened against those who do not, nature will often revolt at death, and
prefer even a life of ignominy to an exit attended with all the flattering
ideas of honor and felicity. We are encouraged to assert this, because a
gentleman, who has been present at many of these executions, declares, that in
in some of the victims he observed a dread and reluctance, which strongly spoke
their having repented of their fatal resolution. But too late; for Vistnu is
waiting for the spirit, and must not be disappointed: when the woman,
therefore, wants courage, she is forced to ascend the pile, and is afterward
held down by long poles till the flames reach and destroy her; mean while her
screams and cries are drowned by the noise of loud music, and the still more
noisy shouts and acclamations of the surrounding multitude.

Some historians have of late asserted, that the custom of burning no longer
exists in India; this, however, is a mistake; there are two recent instances of
it transmitted by Europeans, who were witnesses of the transactions they
relate. Of one of these, as being the most circumstantial, we shall give our
readers an abstract. On the 4th of February, 1742, died Rham Chund, pundit of
the Maharat^or tribe; his widow, aged seventeen or eighteen years, as soon as
be expired, immediately declared to the Bramins, and witnesses present, her
resolution to burn. As the family was of great importance, all her relations
and friends left no arguments unattempted to dissuade her from her purpose. The
state of her infant children, and the terrors and pains of death she aspired
after, were painted to her in the strongest and most lively colors; but she
was deaf to all. Her children, indeed, she seemed to leave with some regret;
but when the terrors of burning were mentioned to her, with a countenance calm
and resolved, she put one of her fingers into the fire, and held it there a
considerable time; then, with one of her hands, she put fire into the palm of
the other; sprinkled incense upon it, and fumigated the attending Bramins.
Being given to understand, that she should not obtain permission to burn, she
fell immediately into the most deep affliction; but soon recollecting herself,
answered, that death would still be in her power; and that if she were not
allowed to make her exit, according to the principles of her cast, she would
starve herself. Finding her thus resolved, her friends were, at last, obliged
to consent to her proposal.

Early on the following morning, the body of the deceased was carried down to
the water side; the widow followed about ten o'clock, accompanied by three
principle Bramins, her children, relations, and a numerous crowd of spectators.
As the order for her burning did not arrive till after one o'clock, the
interval was employed in praying with the Bramins, and washing in the Ganges:
as soon as it arrived, she retired, and staid about half an hour in the midst
her female relations; she then divested herself of her bracelets and other
ornaments; and having tied them in a kind of apron which hung before her, was
conducted by the females to a corner of the pile. On the pile was an arched
arbor, formed of dry sticks, boughs, and leaves; and open only at one end to
admit her entrance. In this was deposited the body of the deceased; his head at
the end, opposite to the opening. At that corner of the pile, to which she had
been conducted, a Bramin had made a small fire, round which she and three
Bramins sat for a few minutes; one of them put into her hand a leaf of the bale
tree; of the wood of which a part of the funeral pile is always constructed:
she threw the leaf into the fire, and one of the others gave her a second leaf,
which she held over the flame, whilst he, three times, dropped some ghee on it,
which melted and fell into the fire: whilst these things were doing, a third
Bramin read to her some portions of the Aughtorrah Beid, and asked her some
questions, which she answered with a steady and serene countenance; these being
over, she was led with great solemnity three times round the pile, the Bramins
reading before her; when she came the third time to the small fire, she
stopped, took her rings off her toes and fingers, and put them to her other
ornaments; then taking a solemn and majestic leave of her children, parents,
and relations, one of the Bramins dipped a large wick of cotton in some ghee,
and giving it lighted in her hand, led her to the open side of the arbor,
where all the Bramins fell at her feet; she blessed them, and they retired
weeping. She then ascen^ed the pile, and entered the arbor, making a profound
reverence at the feet of the deceased, and then advancing seated herself by his
head. In silent (...), she looked on his face for the space (...) minute; then
set fire to the arbor in three places; but soon observing that she had kindled
(...) to the leeward, and that the wind blew the flames from her, she arose,
set fire to the windward, and placidly resumed her station; sitting there with
a dignity and composure, which no words can convey an idea of. The pile being
of combustible matter, the supporters of the roof were soon consumed, and the
whole tumbled in upon her, putting an end at once to her courage and her life.

The other account, of a woman who burned herself, happened within these very
few years, and differs from this, only in a few particulars: in this we are not
told how the victim disposed of her jewels; in it, they were given to the
Bramins: this woman kindled herself the fire that was to devour her; the other
had it kindled by her children: this sat by her deceased husband; the other
stretched herself by his side. But these, and some others, are immaterial
differences, and may perhaps be regulated by the customs of different districts.

From such scenes of horror, we naturally turn with abhorrence; and we are
happy to say, that though the practice is not altogether abolished, by the
authority and example of the Europeans, it is gradually falling into disuse,
and cannot be executed without the leave of the governor; who grants it as
seldom as possible: European authority and example, however, cannot prevail on
the Asiatics to consider their women in a more liberal point of view; to treat
them as companions and equals, or to release them from those prisons where they
are confined for life. When such, therefore, is the general treatment of the
sex, even while in all the bloom of youth and beauty, we are not to expect that
such widows as do not burn with their husbands, are to experience much good
treatment -- when their youth, when their beauty, is no more; when they have
failed in a point of duty, and of gratitude, reckoned so necessary; and have
nothing, consequently, left to plead their cause but humanity, a passion
scarcely alive among the people we are treating of, and whose feeble exertions,
in many places of Asia and Africa, cannot rescue even the widow of a friend, or
a brother, from being considered as the property of the relations of her
deceased husband, and sold or condemned to labor for their profit.

Widows are not, however, in all parts of Asia treated in this indignant
manner. In China, if they have had children, they become absolute mistresses of
themselves, and their relations have no power to compel them to continue
widows, or to give them to another husband. It is not, however, reputable for a
widow who has children, to enter into a second marriage, without great
necessity, especially if she is a woman of distinction; in which case, although
she has been a wife only a few hours, or barely contracted, she frequently
thinks herself obliged to pass the rest of her days in widowhood; and thereby
to testify to the world the esteem and veneration she had for her husband or
lover. In the middle statio^^ of life, the relations of the deceased husband,
eag^^ to reimburse the family in the sum which the wife originally cost it,
oblige her to marry, or rather sell her to another husband, if she has no male
issue; and it frequently happens, that the future husband is fixed upon and the
money paid for her, before she is acquainted with the transaction. From this
oppression she has only two methods of delivering herself; her relations may
reimburse those of the deceased husband, and claim her exemption; or she may
become a Bonzesse; a state, however, not very honorable, when embraced in an
involuntary manner. By the law of China, a widow cannot be sold to another till
the time of her mourning for the first expires; so eager, however, are the
friends often to dispose of her, that they pay no regard to this law; but on
complaint being made to a mandarin, he is obliged to do her justice. As she is
commonly unwilling to be bartered for in this manner, without her consent or
knowledge, as soon as the bargain is struck, a covered chair, with a
considerable number of lusty fellows, is brought to her house; she is forcibly
put into it, and conveyed to the house of her new husband, who takes care to
secure her.

Though among the savages of America, though in Africa and in Asia, widows are
treated in this infamous manner, and their condition thereby rendered the most
deplorable; in Europe the case is so widely different, that widowhood, when
tolerable circumstances are annexed to it, is, of all other female states, the
most eligible; being free from that guardianship and control, to which the sex
are subject while virgins and while wives. In no part of Europe is this more
exemplified than at Parma, and some other places of Italy; where a widow is the
only female who is free either to choose a husband, or assume government of any
of her actions; while, should a virgin pretend to choose for herself, it would
be reckoned the most profligate licentiousness; should she govern her actions
or opinions, she would be considered as the most pert, and perhaps most
abandoned of her sex. At Turin, the order of St Maurice are restricted from
marrying widows; and yet at Turin the condition of a widow is, in point of
every other liberty, preferable to that of a maid.

As we shall have occasion in the next chapter to treat more fully of the
rights and privileges of widows in England, we shall not at present enter on
that subject. Our ancient laws, and those of a great part of Europe, ordained,
that a widow should lose her dower, if she married again, or suffered her
chastity to be corrupted; and the laws of Prussia retain this ordinance to the
present time. They likewise ordain, that a widow shall not marry again within
nine months after the death of her husband; and that if a widow, while she is
with child by a deceased husband, marry another, she shall be put into the
house of correction; and the husband, if he knew her condition, put to work at
the wheel-barrow for one year. Besides making a widow lose her dower when she
enters into a second marriage, the Prussians have another regulation concerning
them, highly descriptive of the humanity and wisdom of their legislator. When a
widower and a widow intend to marry, one or both of which having children, as
it too frequently happens that such children are either despised or neglected,
in consequence of the new connections formed, and perhaps of the new offspring
raised up, the laws of Prussia provide for their education and fortune,
according to the rank and circumstances of the parents; and will not suffer
either man or woman to enter into a second marriage, without previously
settling with the children of the first, and producing a certificate that they
have done so from the judge of the district where they reside.

We have already related, that widows in some parts of the world are obliged to
distinguish themselves by certain marks from the rest of the sex, that they may
not have a power of imposing themselves on the men as virgins. The laws of
Prussia carry this idea still farther; they reckon that the man who marries a
widow, believing her to be a virgin, is so egregiously cheated, that they
retort the evil on the aggressor, and render the marriage null and of no
effect. We cannot pretend to describe particularly the ideas that the Prussians
entertain of widows: they are certainly, however, much less exalted than those
they entertain of virgins; as in their code of laws we meet with this
remarkable sentiment: The husband MAY present to his bride the morgengabe, or
gift, on the morning after marriage, even though he should have married a
widow. But though widows seem by them much less esteemed than virgins, they are
not without several privileges. In some provinces, if there is no marriage
settlement, and the husbands dies intestate, they succeed to the half of all
that was the joint property of both; but a privilege still more extraordinary,
and neither reconcilable to nature, nor to sound policy, is, the allowing in
some cases to a widow, eleven months after the death of her husband, to bring
forth the child that was begot by him; which, according to the Prussian law,
shall be legitimate, provided nothing can be proved against the woman.

In almost all the other countries of Europe, the laws and customs, which
regard widows, are little different from those concerning virgins, only in this
circumstance, that they every where allow the widow to be mistress of herself;
while the maid and the wife are controuled by parent or a husband. They
generally also secure to the widow a maintenance from the estates and effects
of her deceased husband, and frequently devolve upon her in the important trust
of bringing up her children, and suffer her to reap some advantages from board
and education; but such advantages are, for the most part, in the power of the
father, who, by his will, may leave them to his wife, or to any other guardian
he shall think proper to appoint; for the laws of Europe do not consider the
mother as the natural guardian of her own children, nor endow her with any
authoritative power over them.

CHAPTER XXXI. Of the Rights, Privileges, and Immunities of the Women of Great
Britain; the Punishments to which they are liable by Law; and the Restrictions
they are laid under by Law and Custom.
IN proportion as real politeness and elegance of manners advance, the interest
and advantages of the fair sex not only advance also, but become more firmly
and permanently established; the interests, however, and good treatment of the
sex do not altogether depend on the advancement of politeness and elegance, for
it sometimes happens, that a people rather less advanced in these articles than
their neighbors, make up the losses thereby arising to their women, by
goodnature and humanity. The French and Italians are before the inhabitants of
Britain in politeness, they are superior to them in elegance, yet the condition
of their women, upon the whole, is not preferable. Such privileges and
immunities as the French and Italian women derive from the influence of
politeness, the British derive from the laws of their country. Flowing in this
channel, though they are perhaps accompanied with less softness and indulgence,
they have the advantage of being established on a firmer foundation; and being
dictated by equity and humanity, are less liable to be altered and infringed,
than if they depended on the whim and caprice which influences gallantry and
politeness.

Before we proceed to a particular detail of those laws which regard the
persons and properties of the women of this country, it may not be improper to
observe, that, taken collectively, and compared with the same kind of laws in
other countries, they seem so much preferable, that we cannot help imagining
that the same spirit which for many centuries has instigated the English to be
liberal of their blood and of their treasure in support of those weaker nations
who were oppressed by their more powerful neighbors, has also dictated the
laws which regard that sex who are almost every where enslaved or oppressed by
the other. It is true, the laws of several countries are in some particulars
more favorable to the sex than ours. Those of Frederic king of Prussia, which
regard the matrimonial compact, show a greater indulgence to the women, and
vest in them powers more extensive than those of England. -- Those of France
and Italy, as well as the customs which regard their personal liberty, seem
more indulgent; and those of Spain, which regard their rank, and settle the
deference to be paid to them, greatly exceed any thing experienced in this
country. But these favors and indulgences are only partial, they only mark
particular parts of their code of female laws, and do not uniformly extend
their influence over the whole.

In considering the advantages and disadvantages in the condition of our women,
we shall begin with the higher ranks of life. In France, the Salique law does
not allow a female to inherit the crown; but in England a woman may be the
first personage in the kingdom, may succeed to the crown in her own right, and
in that case, not bound by any of the laws that regard women, she may enjoy the
same powers and privileges as a king. Such a queen, if she marries, retains the
same power, issues the orders, and transacts the business of the state in her
own name, and continues still the sovereign, while her husband is only a
subject. But when a king succeeds in his own right to the crown, and marries,
his queen is then only a subject, and her rights and privileges not near so
extensive; she is exempted, however, from the general laws which exclude
married women from having any property in their own right; she is allowed a
court, and officers distinct from those of the king her husband; and she may
sue any person at law, without joining her husband in the suit. It is high
treason to endeavor to compass her death, and to violate her chastity is
punishable in a much severer manner than the punishments for committing
adultery with any other woman. She may purchase lands, she may sell and convey
them to another person, without the interference of her husband. She may have a
separate property in goods and in lands, and may dispose of these by will, as
if she were a single woman. She is not liable to pay any toll, and cannot be
fined in any court of law. In all other respects she is only considered as a
subject, and on the commission of any crime may be tried and punished by the
peers of the realm. A queen-dowager has privileges different from all other
women of whatever rank; she remains still entitled to almost every right she
enjoyed during the life of her husband, and even if she marries a subject, does
not lose her rank or title; but as a marriage of this kind is considered as
derogatory to her dignity, no man is allowed to espouse her without a license
from the reigning king.

Some of the other females of the royal family are also peculiarly
distinguished and protected by the law. To violate the chastity of the consort
of the prince of Wales, or of the eldest daughter of the king, although with
their own consent, is deemed high treason, and punishable accordingly. In
former times, the king had a power of levying an aid upon his subjects, to
enable him to defray the expense of marrying and giving a portion to his eldest
daughter; but this power, which was frequently stretched into the most
exorbitant oppression, declined with the feudal system, and has long since
happily expired. As for the younger sons and daughters of the king, they are
hardly otherwise distinguished by the laws from other subjects, than by having
the precedence in all public ceremonies.

Besides the privileges annexed to the females of the royal family, there are
some also enjoyed by peeresses, which are not common to other women. A peeress,
when guilty of any crime, cannot be tried but by a jury of the house of peers;
and if convicted of any crime within the benefit of clergy, may plead, and is
entitled to an exemption from the punishment of burning on the hand, a
punishment commonly inflicted upon people of all inferior ranks for such kind
of offenses. A woman, who is noble in her own right, cannot lose her nobility
by marrying the meanest plebeian; but she can neither communicate her nobility
to her husband, nor to her own children had by him: she who is only ennobled by
marrying a peer, loses that nobility if she afterward marry a commoner, the law
judging it expedient that marriage should have a power of degrading as well as
of elevating her. She who first marries a duke or other peer of a superior
order, and afterward a simple baron, is still allowed to retain her first
title, and the privileges annexed to it; for the law considers all peers as
equals. In the scale of female rank and importance, there is a kind of
intermediate space between the peeress and the commoner, filled up by the wives
of bishops, judges, and baronets; all of which, though they share in the
splendor and opulence of their husbands, have no title in consequence of the
rank which these husbands enjoy: by the courtesy indeed of this country, the
wives of baronets are called ladies, a title superior to that of their
husbands, but at the same time a title to which they have no legal right, being
in all judicial writs and proceedings only denominated Dame such-a-one,
according to the name of their husbands. In Scotland the courtesy of the
country is carried still much farther; every woman who is proprietor of any
land in her own right, or is the wife of a man who is proprietor of an estate,
great or little, is called Lady such-a-thing, according to the name of that
estate: so that a woman is sometimes accosted with the pompous title of lady,
who may almost cover the whole of her territorial district with her apron.

Such are the privileges and immunities enjoyed by the more elevated ranks of
female life; but besides these, they are also entitled to all the other
privileges and rights which the laws of this country have conferred upon women
in general, and which we shall now more particularly consider.

As women are, in polished society, weak and incapable of self-defence, the
laws of this country have supplied this defect, and formed a kind of barrier
around them, by rendering their persons so sacred and inviolable, that even
death is in several cases, the consequence of taking improper advantages of
that weakness. By our laws, no man is allowed to take a woman of any rank or
condition, and oblige her to marry him, under pain of imprisonment for two
years, and a fine at the pleasure of the king. But he who forcibly carries away
an heiress, and marries her, even though he should obtain her consent after the
forcible abduction, subjects himself to a still greater penalty, he is guilty
of felony without benefit of clergy; and there is hardly any criminal whom the
law pursues to death with more steady and unrelenting severity. Women are, on
account of their weakness, and the better to preserve the modesty of their sex,
excused from serving all kinds of public offices; and succh as are under twelve
years of age, which is the time fixed by the law for being marriageable, if
forced into marriage, or even seduced to consent to it, may afterward refuse
to the husband the rights of matrimony, and have the marriage declared null and
of no effect.

In no instance has the law exerted itself more strenuously, than in guarding
women from rare and violence offered to their chastity. Their security in these
respects has, in every well regulated state, been considered as an object of
the utmost importance, not only as guaranteeing to themselves that liberty of
refusal, which throughout the whole extent of nature seems the right of
females, but also, as affording to the public all the security which the law
can give, for ^he the chastity of their wives, and the legitimacy of their
children. We have already mentioned the punishments inflicted on the
perpetrators of rapes in several periods and countries. In Britain these
punishments have varied with the manners of the times, and the genius of the
legislators. In the time of the Anglo-Saxons, he who committed a rape suffered
death. William the Conqueror altered that punishment to the loss of eyes and
emasculation, which (...) the offender from b^ing again guilty of the (...).
Henry the Third, considering these punishments as too severe, and finding that
a power so extensive lodged in the hands of all sorts of women, was often
abused from motives of resentment, and a desire of revenge upon those who had
slighted or otherwise ill-treated them, ordained, that a rape, when not
prosecuted within for^y days, should only be considered as a simple trespass,
and punished by two years imprisonment and a fine, at the pleasure of the
crown; and even when it was prosecuted within the forty days, the king reserved
entirely to himself the power of punishing the offender. Having made trial of
this method, and finding it was far from being sufficient to guard the fair sex
from violence and insult, he at last made the commission of a rape, felony;
finding even this defense too weak, he, some time after, was obliged to make it
felony without benefit of clergy. And so careful has the law been to secure all
women of whatever character or condition, that even the most common prostitutes
have in this case the same powers and privileges as other women.

In almost all other cases, whether civil or criminal, parties cannot be
witnesses for themselves; a woman, however, who is ravished, may give evidence
upon her oath, and is in law not only considered as a competent witness, but
may, by her sole testimony prove the fact, and deprive the aggressor of his
life. In some measure to counteract the exorbitance of this power, and secure
the lives of the men from being sacrificed to pique and resentment, the
credibility of her testimony is left entirely in the breast of the jury, to be
judged of from the tenor of her conduct, and the circumstances that occur in
the trial. This power of being a witness in her own cause, in cases of assault,
is not confined to such women only as are allowed by the law to be competent
witnesses in other cases, it is extended even to infants, and she who is under
twelve years of age may be a competent witness against a man who has abused
her, provided she has attained a sufficient degree of understanding to know the
nature of an oath: nor does the privilege of the sex in this particular
instance stop even here; it is extended to a length un^nown in most other
cases; if a man has been tried and condemned for a rape, and is afterward
pardoned, the woman may, by an appeal, have him tried again for the same
offense. A married woman may sue her ravisher in any criminal court, without
the consent or approbation of her husband; and to sum up all, a woman may even
kill a man who attempts to ravish her.

Such extensive privileges, vested in a sex so much guided by the impulses of
passion, and so susceptible of the strongest and most implacable resentment,
has by many been considered as a violent stretch of legal authority, whereby
the balance of justice, which ought in all cases to be equal, is evidently made
to preponderate in favor of the one sex, in prejudice to the other. But on the
other hand, when we consider the weakness of that sex, the violence of ours,
and the necessity which humanity and the rules of society lay us under of
defending them; when to these we add, the impossibility, in this case, of
framing a law which shall answer the intention of the legislator, and lay
neither of the sexes under any disadvantage; and that much greater evils would
arise to society, were women subject to the assaults of every rude invader,
than from the powers with which they are invested, we cannot help thinking,
that this law, as it stands at present, is, perhaps, the best that the nature
of the case will admit of.

Besides these powers which are vested in the female for the protection and
defense of her chastity, when she has suffered herself to be seduced from this
virtue by fraud, or by the imbecility of human nature, the law confers on her
another power, that of ascertaining, by her oath before a justice of the peace,
the father of her child. In all other matters of litigation, whether civil or
criminal, the person accused has liberty to bring an exculpatory proof: but
here, as the nature of the crime is supposed to have stronger motives to wish
for exculpation than the woman can have to give her child to a wrong father, no
exculpatory proof is admitted, but such as renders the commission of the crime
impossible. In Scotland the reverse of this is the case; there, the legislator
considering it as an extravagant power for a woman to be able to oblige whoever
she pleases to father her child, and confiding in the religious veracity of the
man, has vested in him the power of exculpating himself; an unmarried woman
with child is obliged to discover to the minister and elders of the parish, who
is the father; they summon him before them, and if he denies it, he may
exculpate himself by oath; this oath, of the most tremendous nature, in which
he invokes all the curses of heaven to light on his devoted head if he swears
falsely, is administered to him by the minister, in presence of the whole
congregation; and is so replete with terror, that it is supposed very few men
have had the temerity to venture on it, who were not innocent. -- The church
also assumes a power in Scotland of making every woman of whatever rank or
condition, submit to certain penance, and declare the father of her bastard
child, otherwise they deny her the sacrament; and if she continues obstinate,
at last excommunicate her. In England, the church seldom interferes with the
matter; nor have the church wardens any legal right to carry a woman before a
justice who is pregnant with a bastard child, unless she is likely to become
chargeable to the parish; and even then, they cannot compel her to go before a
justice, nor can he summon her before him, till at least one month after her
delivery. We have just now seen, that the only punishment which the laws of
Scotland allow of being inflicted on a woman for having a bastard child, is to
make her do penance in the church. In England the church exacts no penance, but
a justice of the peace may oblige her, if in proper circumstances, to defray
some part of the maintenance of her child; and on refusal may commit her to the
house of correction. Such are the laws which regard women who are settled in a
place, and who, though they have fallen victims to seduction, or their own
frailty, are not become absolutely abandoned; but a vagrant woman, when
delivered of a bastard child in any parish where she is begging, may, by the
order of a justice, be committed to the house of correction, and punished with
whipping by the quarter session.

As licentiousness of manners, fickleness of temper, or a fraudulent intention
of debauching a woman under pretense of marriage, frequently induce the more
giddy or worthless of our sex, to address, swear, and make promises to a woman
without any intention of marrying her; and as it is impossible in all cases for
the sex to discover the real lover from the impostor; that they may not be
altogether without redress when so cheated, the law of England ordains that
when a man courts a woman, promises to marry her, and afterward marries
another, she may, by an action at law, recover such damages, as a jury shall
think adequate to the loss she has sustained. In Scotland, it is said, she may
recover one half of the fortune he receives with his wife. On the other hand,
as it sometimes happens, that artful women draw on the more fond and silly part
of our sex, to make them valuable presents under pretense of marriage, and
afterward laugh at, or refuse to marry them: a man who has been so bubbled may
sue the woman to return the presents he made her, because they were presumed to
have been conditionally given, and she failed in performing her part of that
condition.

Those personal privileges, and the few restrictions upon them which we have
here enumerated, are chiefly such as regard unmarried women: we shall now
proceed to relate some of the more peculiar advantages and disadvantages of
those who have entered into the state of wedlock.

By the laws of this country, the moment a woman enters into the state of
matrimony, her political existence is annihilated, or incorporated into that of
her husband; but by this little mortification she is no loser, and her apparent
loss of consequence is abundantly compensated by a long list of extensive
privileges and immunities, which, for the encouragement of matrimony, were,
perhaps, contrived to give married women the advantage over those that are
single. Of all the privileges which nature has conferred upon us, none are so
precious and inestimable as personal liberty. Men of all ranks and conditions,
and women who are unmarried, or widows, may be deprived of this for debts
contracted by themselves, or by others for whom they have given securi^^ but
wives cannot be imprisoned for debt, nor deprived of their personal liberty for
any thing but crimes; and even such of these as subject the offender only to a
pecuniary punishment must be expiated by the husband. No married woman is
liable to pay any debt, even though contracted without the knowledge, or
against the consent, of her husband; and what is still mo^e extraordinary,
whatever debts she may have contracted while single, devolve, the moment of her
marriage, upon the husband, who, like the escape goat, is loaded by the priest
who performs ceremony with all the sins and extravagances of his wife. It is a
common opinion among the vulgar, that a general warning in the Gazette, or in a
news-paper, will exempt a man from the payment of such debts as are contracted
by his wife without his knowledge, but this opinion is without any good
foundation; particular warnings however, giving in writing, have been held as
good exemptions; but such are of little advantage to a husband, as his wife may
always find people to give her credit, whom the husband has not cautioned
against it.

So long as a wife cohabits with her husband, he is, by the laws of his
country, obliged to provide her with food, drink, clothing, and all other
necessaries suitable to her rank and his circumstances, even although he
received no fortune with her, or forces her to leave him by ill usuge; he is
also liable to maintain her in the same manner; but if she runs away from him,
and he is willing that she should abide in his house, he is not liable to give
her any separate maintenance, nor to pay any of her debts, unless he take her
again; in which case he must pay whatever she contracts, whether she behave
herself ill or well: when a husband forces his wife to leave him by cruel
usage, she may claim a separate maintenance; but while she enjoys that, he
shall not be liable to pay any of her debts.

As personal safety is of all other privileges the greatest and most valuable,
and as weakness may often be exposed to danger when in the hands of power, the
laws of this country have taken the most effectual method of securing the
safety of married women. When a husband, from maliciousness of temper, or
resentment, or any other cause, threatens, or actually beats his wife, she may
demand security for his future good behavior; and on application to any
justice of the peace, such justice is obliged to make the husband find such
security. And when a husband, conscious of having used his wife ill, will not
allow her to go out of his house, or carries her away, or keeps her concealed,
in order to prevent her endeavoring to find redress for the evils that she
suffers, her friends may in that case, by applying to the court of King's
Bench, obtain an order for the husband to produce his wife before the said
court; and if she there swears the peace against him, she delivers herself from
his jurisdiction, and he cannot compel her to go to live with him, but the
court will grant her an order to live where she pleases; and should he attempt
to force her to do otherwise, it would be a breach of the king's peace, by
which he would be subjected to the penalties annexed to such breach.

When a wife is beaten by any person, so as to be disabled from managing her
family affairs, the husband is by law entitled to such damages on that account
from the offender as a jury shall think fit to give; but if an attack is made
upon a man's wife in his presence, the law considers the attack as made upon
himself, and gives him the same liberty of defending her that it allows in
defending himself: nor does it stop at the attacks made on her person; if her
property is in danger, he may repel force by force, and the breach of the peace
which happens on that account is only chargeable on the aggressor; but care
must be taken that such defense do not exceed what is necessary for prevention;
for if it does, the defender becomes himself an aggressor. Among the Romans,
among several other ancient nations, and among some people in the present
times, it is not deemed culpable for a husband to kill the man whom he
surprises commiting adultery with his wife. By the laws of England, he who
should do so, would be reckoned guilty of manslaughter; but in consequence of
the enormous provocation given, the court commonly orders the sentence of
burning on the hand to be inflicted in the slightest manner.

As it is considered by the legislature as advantageous to population as well
as conducive to the harmony of society, that every married couple should live
together, the law ordains that no man take away a wife from her husband,
neither by force, nor by fraud, nor by her own consent; and he who transgresses
this order, is liable to a writ of trespass, or an action of ravishment, by
which he shall be obliged to pay damages to the injured husband, and suffer
imprisonment for two years: but this is not the utmost extent of the law, for
it also intitles a husband to damages, not only against the person who actually
takes away his wife, but also against him who entices or persuades her to live
separately from him. The ancient laws of England are said to have been so
strict in this particular, that when a wife happened to miss her way, the man
who found her might not even take her to his house unless she was benighted, in
danger of being drowned, of falling into the hands of robbers, or of being
devoured by wild beasts; but a stranger might carry her on horseback to the
nearest market town, or justice of the peace, there to remain, till claimed by
her husband.

As the wife is not allowed to leave the husband, so neither may the husband
abandon his wife; and if he does so, without showing a sufficient cause, she
may enter a suit against him for restitution of the rights of marriage; and the
spiritual court will compel him to return, to live with her, and to restore
them. But the law extends its privileges to married women still farther, and
grants them immunities almost scarcely compatible with the rules of civil
society and the public safety; if a wife commit felony in the company of her
husband, it supposes she did it by his compulsion, and on that account absolves
her from the punishment commonly inflicted on such delinquents: if a wife take
away the goods of her husband without his knowledge, and sell them, neither the
wife who stole them, nor the person who bought them of her, are considered as
guilty of felony. A wife may receive and conceal her husband if he is guilty of
felony or any other crime; for this action of concealment is only considered in
her as self-preservation, an instinct which no law can take away or destroy. If
a wife receives stolen goods into her house, and secrets them from her
husband, the law will nevertheless impute the crime to the husband, unless he
either divulges the matter to a magistrate, or leaves his house as soon as he
discovers the crime. Though wives are thus far indulged by the law, yet they
are not emancipated from the punishment it inflicts, when they commit robbery,
treason, or murder, although in the company of, and by the coercion of, their
husbands.

As a wife always is, or ought to be, the manager of her husband's family, she
commonly has (...) in the same manner as if she were not married; by which
inequitable bargain, the husband is debarred from enjoying any of the rights of
matrimony, except the person of his wife. But this is not all: if the wife,
too, were curtailed in her privileges, the bargain would be in some degree
equitable: this, however, is so far from being the case, that it is quite the
reverse; the husband becomes thereby liable to pay all the debts which his wife
may burden him with, even though she have abundance of her own to answer that
purpose; he is also obliged to maintain her, though her circumstances may be
more opulent than his; and if he should die before her, she has a right to a
third of his real estate and to whatever is customary for widows to have out of
his personals; while, if she dies before him, he is not entitled to the value
of one single halfpenny, unless she has devised it to him by will. These are
obvious disadvantages on the part of the husband; but, what is still worse,
such a bargain overturns the natural order of things, and destroys that
authority, which the gospel and the laws of this country give a man over his
wife, and that obedience and subjection which the rules of christianity
prescribe in the deportment of a wife toward her husband.

Such are the privileges and immunities which the women of this country derive
from marriage, and which they enjoy from the moment that they enter into that
state; but there are others of a posthumous nature, and these are only reserved
for them if they survive their husbands. When a woman, on her entrance into
matrimony, gives up her fortune to the power and discretion of her husband; or,
perhaps, when she has no fortune, when, through a long and tedious course of
years, she joins her ow^ management, labor, and industry to his; nothing can
be more reasonable, than that she should be provided for, in case of his dying
before her; and it would be a capital defect in the laws of civil society, to
leave this provision altogether in the power of individuals, by whom it might
frequently be disregarded or neglected, and the widows even of such husbands as
had died in affluence, left to experience all the hardships of want and
poverty: to prevent which the law of this country has wisely ordered, that
every widow shall have a reasonable dower out of the effects or estates of her
deceased husband, even though there was no marriage-settlement, or though, in
such settlement, no dower was stipulated to the wife.

Dowers, as it is supposed, were first introduced into England by the Danish
kings, and into Denmark, by Swein, the father of our Canute the Great, who
bestowed on the Danish ladies this privilege as a grateful acknowledgement of
their having parted with their jewels to ransom him from captivity, when taken
prisoner by the Vandals. Dower out of lands was unknown among the Anglo-Saxons;
for, by the laws of king Edward, the widow of any one who dies, is directed to
be supported entirely out of his personal estate; but afterward, a widow
became entitled to a share in one-half of the lands of her deceased husband, so
long as she remained chaste and unmarried; conditions which seem anciently to
have been annexed to all dowers in this country; on a supposition, perhaps,
that the dread of falling into poverty would be the strongest inducement to
continence, and that if she married another husband, all the obligations which
bound the estates and effects of the former to maintain her, from that moment
^eased to exist. Such was the case for some time after dowers were instituted;
but these conditions were afterward only required of a widow, when her husband
left any children, and in time they fell entirely into disuse; so that at
present a widow may claim her dower, whether she is chaste and unmarried or
otherwise; but no woman can claim her dower, who was not actually the wife of a
man at the time of his decease: a divorce, therefore, from the chains of
matrimony takes away all right to a dower; but a divorce only from bed and
board, although for the crime of adultery, has no such effect. A woman who runs
away from her husband, and lives with an adulterer, loses her right to dower,
unless the husband is reconciled to, and takes her back. As every foreigner is
by the laws of England, incapable of holding lands, therefore the wife who is
an alien is entitled to no dower out of the lands of her husband. The wife of
him who commits high treason is entitled to no dower; nor the wife of an idiot;
for an idiot, being incapable of consenting to any contract, cannot lawfully
marry; and therefore all the rights which women acquire by marriage are
nugatory in the case of her who is joined to an idiot.

Before marriage-settlements came so much into fashion, the dower which was
settled by the law, or with which the husband endowed the wife at the time of
marriage, was the only security she had for a maintenance, in case she became a
widow. Respecting dowers, there are in certain places particular customs, which
set aside the operations of the law in the districts where they prevail. In
some places, custom allots to the widow no less than the whole of her husband's
lands; in others more moderate, it gives her only the half, in others only a
quarter. Anciently, the most common method of settling the dower of the wife
was, by publicly endowing her at the church-door, in the presence of all the
company who were assembled at the marriage, with the whole, or such quantity of
his lands as the husband thought proper to bestow. When the wife was endowed
with the whole, we have some authorities to believe the husband made use of
these words: With all my lands and tenements I thee endow. When he endowed her
with a part only, he gave a specific description of such part, that no doubt
might remain as to its situation or extent; but when he endowed her with
personal property only, then he used to say, With all my worldly goods I thee
endow; a speech, which, being still preserved in our marriage-ritual, shows how
fond we are of continuing forms, even after the reasons which gave birth to
them are totally extinct.

The dower of a widow was formerly neither subject to tolls nor taxes, nor
could even the king seize on it for a debt due to the crown; but this
privilege, being found greatly to diminish the public revenue, was at last
discontinued: at this day, however, the dower of a widow cannot be seized by
the creditors of her husband; for it would be unjust, that she should not be
entitled to an equivalent of her fortune, or a recompense for her labor and
care, as well as the creditors to payment of their money. Besides the dotal
right to a life-rent of one-third of the husband's real estate, which is
commonly allowed by law, where the custom of the manor or place does not
determine it otherwise, when a husband lends money in the name of himself and
his wife, if the wife survive him, and there be enough besides this money to
pay his lawful debts, the wife is entitled to it. No widow can be endowed out
of copyhold lands, unless by the local custom of the manor, nor can she have
any castle, or place of defense, as her dower; for she is considered as
incapable of managing it, so as to make it answer the purposes for which it was
intended.

In the city of London, province of York, and in Scotland, the effects of him
who dies intestate are generally divided according to the ancient doctrine of
giving every one a reasonable share. If the deceased leaves a widow and
children, the widow is first allowed the furniture of her bed chamber, and
wearing apparel; then all the rest is divided in the following proportions: if
the deceased left a widow and two children, the widow shall have eight parts
(six by the custom, and two by law), and each of the children five (three by
the c^stom, and two by the law): if he leaves a widow and one child, each shall
have one-half; if he leaves a widow and no child, the widow shall have
three-fourths of the whole, and the remaining fourth shall go to the next
relation.

As dower, either by the common law or by the special custom of the place, was
frequently considered by the contracting parties as too great or too little,
the present times have hardly left any thing to run in that channel, the
parties thinking it better to stipulate and agree between themselves on a
specific quantity of land or money, which is, previous to the marriage, settled
upon the wife by way of jointure, and which effectually takes away all her
right to any dower. The jointure, thus legally settled, is still more inviolate
to the wife than her dower; it cannot be touched by the creditors of the
husband; and though a dower be forfeited by the husband being guilty of high
treason, a jointure is not. Every jointure must be made to the wife, for the
term of her own natural life; if made for the life of another person, it is not
legal, and she may refuse it, and claim the dower the common law assigns her.
When a jointure is made before marriage, a wife cannot refuse it, and claim her
dower in its stead, she having consented to it, while in a free and independent
state; but if the jointure was made after the marriage, she may refuse it, and
have a right to a dower, as she is then considered as having been obliged to
give her consent by the impulse and coercion of her husband. If a husband
settle upon his wife a jointure that shall be of a certain yearly value, and it
falls short of it, she may commit waste, so far as to make up her deficiency,
though prohibited from so doing in the deed of settlement; for it it is but
justice, that the widow should have to the full extent of what was intended her
by her husband. The widow must have a right to enter upon her jointure
immediately on the death of her husband; and if any subsequent period is fixed
for it, she may claim her dower in preference.

In some parts of England there remains still a Saxon custom, called Borough
English, by which the youngest instead of the eldest son succeeds to the estate
of his father; and the widow, as guardian of that son, has the whole estate for
life; by the custom of those lands called Gavelkind, the widow has no jointure,
but succeeds to one-half of the lands of the deceased husband, and holds them
so long as she remains chaste and unmarried. Before the time of William the
Conqueror, when a widow married within the year, she forfeited her dower, or
jointure; but that custom long since fell into disuse, and at present the law
does not prescribe any time in which she shall not re-marry: custom, however,
fixes a kind of stigma upon such as take second husbands, before they have
dedicated a decent time to grief and mourning.

What we have hitherto mentioned respecting the women of Great Britain, has
chiefly regarded those privileges and immunities which are established to them
by law, or conceded to them by custom; but as this long list of privileges is,
on the other hand, contrasted with many disadvantages, which are necessary, in
civil society, to put the two sexes nearly on an equal footing with each other,
let us turn to the other side of the picture, and take a view of these also.

The Salique law of France excludes a woman from governing the nation; in
Britain, we allow a woman to sway our scepter, but by law and custom we debar
her from every other government but that of her own family, as if there were
not a public employment between that of superintending the kingdom, and the
affairs of her own kitchen, which could be managed by the genius and capacity
of woman. We neither allow women to officiate at our altars, to debate in our
councils, nor to fight for us in the field; we suffer them not to be members of
our senate, to practice any of the learned professions, nor to concern
themselves much with our trades and occupations; we exercise nearly a perpetual
guardianship over them, both in their virgin and their married state; and she
who, having laid a husband in the grave, enjoys an independent fortune, is
almost the only woman who among us can be called free. Thus excluded almost
from every thing which can give them consequence, they derive the greater part
of the power which they enjoy, from their charms; and these, when joined to
sensibility, often fully compensate, in this respect, for all the disadvantages
they are laid under by law, and by custom.

As the possession of property is one of the most valuable of all political
blessings, and generally carries the possession of power and authority along
with it, one of the most peculiar disadvantages in the condition of our women
is, their being postponed to all males in the succession to the inheritance of
landed estates, and their being generally allowed much smaller shares than the
man, even of the money and effects of their fathers and ancestors, when this
money or those effects are given them in the lifetime of their parents, or
devised to them by will; for otherwise, that is, if the father dies intestate,
they share equally with sons in all personal property. When an estate, in
default of male heirs, descends to the daughters, the common custom of England
is, that the eldest shall not, in the same manner as an eldest son, inherit the
whole, but all the daughters shall have an equal share in it. Westmoreland,
however, and some other places, are exceptions to this general rule, and the
eldest daughter, there, succeeds to the whole of the land in preference to all
the other sisters.

In some ancient states, where the women had attained a considerable degree of
importance, the right of inheritance from an ancestor devolved equally upon the
males and females. Among the Greeks and Romans, however, from whom all Europe
at first derived the origin of its laws, the sons succeeded in preference to
the daughters. In France, and every other kingdom where the feudal system was
introduced, women were totally excluded from the inheritance of the feudal
lands, because the baron, of whom such lands were held, required a military
tenant, who should take the field with him when occasion required; and women
being incapable of this service, were also considered as incapable of
succeeding to such estates as required it. This rule was strictly adhered to in
England for some ages after the time of William the Conqueror, who first
introduced the feudal system among us; but in process of time, when it became
customary to levy money on the tenants, instead of their personal attendance in
the field, it became customary to allow women to inherit, in failure of male
issue. We have already observed, that formerly the kings of this country might
levy an aid on the subjects for the marriage of their eldest daughters: the
great barons exercised the same power over their tenants, and, on the marriage
of their eldest daughters, obliged each of them to pay what amounted to above
five per cent. of their yearly income. But this was only a small part of the
oppression these tenants labored under: if any of them presumed to give his
daughter in marriage without the consent of his lord, he was liable to an
action for defrauding the lord of his property, as the lord had a right to
choose her a husband, to make that husband pay a fine or premium, for providing
him with a wife. But besides this, it is believed, that the lord claimed a
right of a more extraordinary nature, that of enjoying the wife of his tenant
the first night; a claim which, however* improbable it may seem to us, is not
altogether incredible, when we consider the exorbitant abuse of power which
marked with so much infamy the times we are speaking of.

But besides these laws, which for the most part operate so as to hinder the
fair sex from getting into possession of much property, the laws of marriage
again divest them of such property as they really are in possession of; by
marriage, all the goods and chattel which belonged to the woman become vested
in the husband, and he has the same power over them as she had before, while
they were her sole and absolute property. When the wife, however, is possessed
of a real estate in land, the power which the husband acquires over it is not
so extensive, he only gains a right to the rents and profits arising out of it
during the continuance of the marriage; but if a living child is born to him,
though it should die in a very short time, he becomes, in that case, tenant for
life, by the courtesy of the country: if there happens to be no child, then at
the demise of the wife the estate goes to her heirs at law; but the property of
her goods and chattels de^olves upon the husband, who has the sole and obsolute
power of disposing of them according to his pleasure.

Every married woman is considered as a minor, and cannot do any deed which
affects her real or personal property without the consent of her husband, and
if she does any such deed, it is not valid, and the husband may claim the
property she disposed of, as if no such disposal had been made. As a married
woman cannot dispose of her property while living, so neither does the law give
her that power at her death. In the statute of wills, she is expressly
prohibited from devising land, and even from bequeathing goods and chattels
without the leave of her husband; because all such goods and chattels are,
without any limitation, his sole and absolute property; whether they were such
as the wife brought along with her at the marriage, or such as she acquired
even by her labor and industry afterward.

The laws of this country not only deny to a married woman the power of making
a will, but also dissolve and render of no effect upon her marriage all and
every will she may have made while single; and even when a single woman who has
made her will marries, and her husband dies, the will she had made, being
invalidated by her marriage, does not recover its validity by the husband's
death. If a husband and wife are jointly possessed of houses and lands, which
are settled upon the survivor, if the husband destroys himself, his wife shall
not have the half that belonged to him; it become the property of the crown, as
a compensation for the loss of a subject. When a husband and wife agree to live
separate, and the husband covenants to give her so much a year, if at any time
he offers to be reconciled and to take her home, upon her refusal, he shall not
any longer be obliged to pay her a separate maintenance. If a legacy be paid to
a married woman who lives separate from her husband, the husband may file a
bill in chancery to oblige the person who paid it to his wife to pay it again
to him with interest. If a wife proves insane, the husband, as her proper
guardian, has a right to confine her in his own house, or in a private mad
house; but should the husband not be inclined to release her when her senses
return, a court of equity will give her that relief which the husband denies.
The power which a husband has over the person of his wife does not seem
perfectly settled by the laws of this country; it is nevertheless certain, that
she is not to go abroad, nor to leave his house and family, without his
approbation; but what coercive methods he may make use of to restrain her from
so doing, or whether he may proceed any farther than to admonition and denying
her money, seems a point not altogether agreed upon.

When a wife is injured in her person or in her property, so limited is her
power, that she cannot bring an action for redress without the consent and
approbation of her husband, nor any way but in his name; if, however, such
husband has abjured the realm, or is banished from it, he is considered as dead
in law, and his wife in that case may sue for redress in her own name and
authority. When a husband and wife are outlawed, and the wife appears in court
without her husband, she cannot have the outlawry taken off, because she is
considered only as a part of the object against which the outlawry was issued.
When a husband becomes bankrupt, and is suspected of having dealt fraudulently
with his creditors, the commissioners of the bankruptcy may summon his wife
before them, examine her concerning his affairs, and commit her to prison if
she either refuses to answer such questions as are put to her, or answers them
in a doubtful manner. When a widow is endowed of certain lands and tenements,
and sells them, the heir at law may not only recover them of the purchaser, but
also refuse to restore them back to the widow, or to pay her any dower in their
stead. By the laws of England, a father only is empowered to exercise a
rightful authority over his children, and no power is conferred on the mother,
only so far as to oblige these children to consider her as a person entitled to
duty and a reverential regard.

Besides the limitations and restrictions which the laws of this ^ountry have
laid upon the fair sex, it is necessary for the good of society that
punishments should be an^^^ed to their crimes as well as to thos^ committed by
us; those punishments are for the mos^ part nearly the same in equal degrees of
delinquenc^ in either sex, a few cases, however, are excepted. A woman guilty
of high treason is not punished in the same manner as a man; for this crime, a
man is condemned to be hanged up, taken down alive, and his bowels taken out,
and his body divided into quarters. A woman is condemned to be drawn to the
place of execution, and there burnt to death. Condemnation to the flames is
obliging the criminal to suffer a death of all others the most tremendous and
terrible, and has been seldom inflicted in Europe but by bigoted priests and
relentless inquisitors; the laws of England, however, reckoning high treason
and the murder of a husband equal to heresy, condemn to the flames her who is
guilty of either, supposing that a punishment too exemplary cannot be held out
to deter from the commission of such unnatural crimes. In Scotland, the woman
who murders her husband is only hung as a common felon. In all the capital
punishments of the sex, the laws of Britain lay it down as a maxim, that
decency is not to be violated; we wish the same delicacy was observed in those
which are only intended for the reformation of the culprit; but whipping at the
cart's tail, as practiced over all England, is often a shameful instance of the
contrary.

Keeping a house for the purpose of prostitution, being a nuisance to the
neighborhood, and subversive of the peace and order of society, may be
punished by subjecting the lady abbess to labor, to bodily correction, or to
fine and imprisonment at the pleasure of the court. In the protectorship of
Cromwell, wilful adultery was capital, and keeping a brothel, or repeatedly
committing fornication, were felony without benefit of clergy. At present,
adultery is only punishable in the spiritual court by certain penances, and in
the civil courts by divorce and loss of dower. Adultery was in Scotland for
several centuries punishable by death; and even Mary queen of Scots, a lady, if
not belied by fame, no way remarkable for conjugal fidelity, published some of
the severest edicts against her sisterhood o(...) sinners; but these
severities, at last, in Scotland as well as in England, and the laws respecting
adultery are now in both kingdoms nearly upon an equal footing. For a variety
of the other crimes committed by the sex against chastity, decency, and
decorum, the laws have hardly devised any punishment, leaving the unhappy
delinquent to the stings of conscience, the loss of character, the contempt of
the virtuous, and the vengeance of offended heaven.

To this short account of punishments, we shall add an inconvenience to which
the widowed part of the sex are liable in England, originally brought upon the
whole by the indiscretion of a few.

When a husband dies, and either leaves no children, or only daughters who are
by the nature o(...) an entail cut off from inheriting his estate, it ha(...)
sometimes happened, that his widow, though no(...) really pregnant, has
declared herself so, and at last imposed a spurious heir on the family, in
prejudic(...) of the real heir at law. To prevent such abuse, th(...) statutes
concerning widows, allow a woman forty weeks after the death of her husband, as
the time for pregnancy, and if she is not delivered in tha(...) time, the child
is deemed illegitimate; but as thy(...) is far from being a sufficient security
against all fraud and imposture, they further empower the heir a(...) law, as
soon as the widow shall declare herself pregnant, to have her examined by a
jury of matrons and if they declare she is not pregnant, the heir may
immediately enter upon his estate; but if they declare that she is pregnant,
then the heir, to preven^ all fraud and imposition, may obtain an order from
the court of Common Pleas, directing the sheriff o^ the county where she
resides to confine her in ^ house, the doors of which shall be well guarded and
access denied to all improper persons; to caus^ her to be every day examined by
some of the jury o^ matrons, and also to order, that some of them b^ present at
the birth, to prevent all collusion, an^ declare whether the child of which she
is delivere^ be a male or female; such treatment, of a person guilty of no
crime, in a country where liberty is the boasted prerogative, may justly be
deemed a peculiar hardship, and as such is, if possible, scarcely ever
practiced, except where depravity of manners or particular malevolence against
the heir at law make it necessary; and even then, it is conducted with the
utmost caution, and care is taken that the woman shall have nothing to complain
of that is no absolutely necessary to prevent the dreaded imposition on the
family.

THE END.
ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.
ACCOUNT of the ceremony of a widow burning herself in Hindostan 307 Advantages
of men over women 83 of women over men ibid.
Adultery, how punished among the Jews 230 among the Egyptians ibid. among the
Hindoos 231 in what it consists in Hindostan 232 the severity with which they
punish it when committed by women of superior cast 234

various ideas concerning its criminality by various nations 235 most effectual
method of punishing it with least severity ibid.
Americans, their dress 128 ambitious to be fine though naked 129 how the sexes
are distinguished by dress 130
Ancient Chinese, their idea of women 49 Ancients not acquainted with the
diamond 99 magnificently dressed on public occasions 103
Ancients at other times clothed in skins 104 Ancient Greeks, the dress of
their women 105 Germans were only allowed one wife 217
Asiatics place their grandeur in a numerous seraglio 20 take titles sometimes
from the number of their wives ibid.
Assyrians, their method of disposing of their young women in marriage 200 had
a court, whose only business was to take cognizance of the laws of marriage 202
Auricular confession, one of the modes of securing female chastity 30
B.
Barbarity of manners, how it affects female delicacy 5 Bards attended on the
great in Germany 59 Barons could not claim a heriot, nor the church a mortuary
for women 331 Bastard children, the power of women in fathering Batchelors,
when old, are annually beaten by the women of Greece 243 them in England 323
how this power is restricted in Scotland ibid.
Benedictions pronounced over a new-married couple by the Jews note -- 198
Betrothing, what it means in the sacred writings 195 its meaning according to
the Talmud 196
Bigamy practiced in the sixth cent. by the clergy 219 Brama, his laws allow
only people of the same cast to marry 251 Bramins attend at the burning of
widows, and exhort them to suffer with fortitude 307 Breed, the improvement of
that of the human species neglected 268 Bride, in some countries hides herself,
in others must be seemingly forced from her relations 267 Bride examined by a
jury of matrons, to see if she has any defect, in Muscovy 268 and bridegroom
crowned with wormwood, in Muscovy 267
Bridegroom, in Old Mexico, seemingly forced into wedlock 267
C.
Candaules, king of Lidia, his foolish behavior 10 Canons of the church
forbidding the clergy to marry, how disregarded 283 Captive women, the Jews
allowed to marry them 252 Cecrops, the first institutor of marriage among the
Greeks 193 his ceremonies and laws respecting marriage, what 205
Charonides, his opinion of second marriages 294 Chastity, and the various
methods of preserving it, considered 15 Cleopatra, her extravagance 99 Clergy,
forbidden to marry, in the first council of Nice 274 prohibited from marrying
by a variety of subsequent decrees 275 ordered by Pope Honorius to be degraded
if they married ibid of the diocese of York refuse to put away their wives 277
never had any proper arguments to offer in defense of celibacy 280 conjectures
on the causes of their celibacy 276 instituted auricular confession to get into
the secrets of all the women 281 why they instituted nunneries 283
Clothes, their origin 85 were not invented merely to defend from the cold 86
Clothes, why the author is of this opinion 87 were supposed by some to have
been invented to cover shame 88 their simplicity in the primitive ages 90 were
sewed together with the sinews of animals split into fibers 91 were originally
made loose, and not to fit the body, as at present ibid made of cotton and flax
in Egypt and Palestine 92 had originally no contrivance to keep them firm to
the body 93
Commerce between the sexes, some regulations concerning it, their necessity
186 was early regulated in most countries 192
Compacts whether civil or religious, equally binding 262 Concubines at one
time allowed to the clergy, but not wives 274 what they were among the Romans
and in the middle ages 279
Confinement of women, its origin 18 supposed to have arisen from the rape of
Jacob's daughter ibid and from that of Io and Proserpine among the Greeks 19
idea of the famous Montesquieu concerning it 22 illiberality of the idea of
Montesquieu concerning it ibid
Conjectures on fighting to obtain the favor of the ladies 180 Consanguinity,
how far it affects the rights of marrying, not settled by any fixed rule among
mankind 248 Courage is generally acquired, like any other acquisition 77
Courage, instances of it in women 78 ancient and modern, their kinds 79
Courtship, anciently carried on by proxy 147 managed by presents to the lady
and her friends ibid of Jacob to his bride 148 of Sechem to the sons of Jacob
for their sister ibid of Sampson to his parents to procure him Delilah 151 by
exhibiting feats of dexterity and skill in arms 153
Courtship how carried on by the Greeks 154 unknown to the Romans, who
bargained for a bride with her relations 157 of the ancient northerns consisted
in showing their skill in arts and in arms 159 a singular method of it by the
Saccae 163 in the island of Amboyna 168 other methods of it in different parts
of the world ibid is in general managed by tempting the sex with every thing
pleasing and agreeable 169 how carried on in Lapland 170 forwarded best there
by brandy ibid
Crema, Cardinal, his speech against the commerce with the other sex 278 is
caught the same evening in the arms of a prostitute ibid
Crete, the magistrates had the sole power there of providing wives for their
young men 213 Cruelties exercised on supposed witches 64 were a disgrace to the
times and the magistrates 65
Customs of various countries in disposing of women in marriage 210
D.
Delicacy most conspicuous in certain states of society 5 altogether unknown in
savage countries 6 and laughed out of existence in too polished ones 7
flourishes most among people not too rude nor too much cultivated ibid is more
natural to females than to males 8 has no existence in Otaheite ibid is
remarkable in the women of China and Japan ibid
Diamonds, where found 100 first polished with their own dust by Lewis de
Berguen ibid the methods taken by the Spaniards to secure the mines whence they
are dug 101 are the badge of quality and opulence ibid
Difference of powers and faculties of the sexes in civil life, conjectures on
it 44 Different sentiments concerning dress 116 Disadvantages of female life
338 Division of the human genus 36 Divorce among the ancient Jews easily
obtained 237 the manner in which it was given, according to the rabbis ibid
why the power of it was lodged in the hands of the husband 238 was decreed by
the council of Trent to be unlawful in any case whatever 239 was always granted
by the popes to those who could pay well for it ibid
Divorce, instances of the power of it being lodged in the hands of the wife
240 Dower, first introduced by the king of Denmark 333 Dower was not to be paid
to widows, unless they lived chaste and unmarried 333 the ancient method of
conveying a right to it 335 cannot be seized by the creditors of a husband ibid
Dress of women in the primitive ages not known 98 Dying unlamented, reckoned
in many places a great evil 299
E.
Eastern women, their dress 121 are at much pains to decorate themselves,
though they cannot be seen by the men 122
Edinburgh, how the ladies are dubbed toasts there 176 Edward the Confessor,
why sainted 275 the VIth first declared it lawful for the English clergy to
marry 280
Egyptians did not allow of polygamy 218 sometimes suffered it to take place
ibid
England, the contradictory fashions that have prevailed among the women there
140 the ladies (...) laced tight in the beginning of this century ibid ladies
there discarded stays altogether toward the middle of this century ibid and
toward the end of it laced tighter than ever ibid
England, their present enormous head-dress 141 Eunuchs, their origin 15
Europe, remarks on the dress used in it 110 its extensive trade brings
materials for dress from every part of the world 112
European princes have frequently been obliged to enact sumptuary laws 111
European women, their method of rendering themselves agreeable 84 Europeans,
about what time new materials for dress were introduced among them 128 from
whence they imported these materials ibid

F.
Female inferiority deduced from false principles 46 arises, in civil life,
from education and their mode of living ibid
Feudal tenants could not give their daughters in marriage without consent of
their lords 340 Folly of declaiming against modern ornament and dress 98 of the
ancients in dress more conspicuous than that of the moderns 92
French, their mode of dressing 138 their method of courtship 178 their
courtship carried on by the relations of the parties 179 were formerly much
addicted to fighting to gain the ladies they adored 180

G.
General idea of men by some philosophers 35 idea of love 144 law, that males
have the right of asking, and females of refusing 145
Grand Signior, privileges of his married sisters 228 Greeks burnt the axle of
the chariot that carried a bride to the house of her husband 206 their
sumptuous marriage feasts 207 obliged a bride and bridegroom to eat a quince
together ibid sung Epithalamia in the evening and morning to a new married
couple ibid
Greeks of Sparta, differed from all the others in their ceremonies and customs
of marriage 208 Greenland women, their aversion to marriage 171 whence this
aversion arises 172
Grymer, the story of his courtship 162 Gorgophona, the first Grecian widow
who, after the laws of Cecrops, took a second husband 294
H.
Hair powder, when the white kind was first used 108 Harams, supposed by some,
not to be places of confinement, but of retreat from the world 21 are places of
confinement ibid how situated 25
Heida, a famous enchantress, how she lived 61 Henry the VIIIth. granted the
clergy dispensations to keep concubines 279 Hindoo women, their dress 123
arrayed in silks richly ornamented 124 their hair finely decorated with
diamonds, and dressed into the forms of various flowers ibid their paint for
beautifying the skin 125 their perfumes 126 their cases for their breast ibid
Husbands, their unlawful power over wives in several countries 22^ the powers
granted them by law over their wives ibid what these powers were among the
Jews, Romans, in Brasil, Hindostan, and Europe 223 may recover damages of a
person who beats their wives 326 may defend their wives as in cases of
self-defence 327 are only guilty of manslaughter, if they kill a person caught
with their wives in adultery 328
Husbands are not to have their wives taken from them by fraud or force 128 may
recover damages of those who entice their wives to separate from them 128 their
power over the estates of their wives, how limited 340 may confine their wives,
if insane 342 the power given them by the laws of England over the goods and
chattels of their wives 340

J.
Jack of Leyden, famous for the number of his wives 220 Idea of dress and
fashion, the effects of custom 124 Jewels were polished, set, and engraved, in
the time of Moses 99 Illiberal reflections on the fair sex by ancient and
modern writers 50 Inclination to each other, the source of whatever is pleasing
and useful 84 Indelicacy, instances of it in some countries 13 Inferiority of
women an idea too much entertained by the men 35 does not appear in the females
of the brute animals 36 has no foundation, except with regard to bodily
strength ibid
Instances of men burning themselves to death 306 Iointure of a widow bars her
right to dower 336 is not lost to the wife by high treason in her husband 337
Iointure must be made to a wife for the term of her own life 336 Iovinian was
banished for maintaining that a married man might be saved from eternal
damnation 276 Italians, their whimsical dress in the time of Petrarch 134
protract the time of courtship, as being the most happy part of life 178
Isle of Ely, why so called 276 Justices of the peace, their power over women
who have bastard children 324
K.
Kindred, near, political reasons why they should not intermarry 249 natural
reasons why they do not marry 250 the laws concerning their marriages in most
places the same as those of Moses ibid were not allowed to marry by Pope
Honorius till after the 7th generation 251

L.
Law, that of Europe takes care both of the persons and property of women 316
that of Asia leaves them at the mercy of their husbands ibid
Left Handed wives in Prussia, how married 269 what restrictions they are under
270
Legitimation of children, how accomplished in Scotland 253 how in Holland 254
Love, among the ancients, destitute of sentiment 15^
M.
Magistrates, among the Franks, solemnized marriages in their courts justice
257 also had the power of marrying in the time of Cromwell 260
Marriage, the word falsely applied by many writers 263 was first a simple
approbation of a woman, or living with her by accident 189 ceremony afterward
became more complex as society advanced 190 advantages arises from it in the
early ages 193 ceremonies first particularly described by the Greeks 203
ceremonies of the Greeks after they became a polished people 204 a civil
compact only 210 portions, their origin 216 the ceremonies used in celebrating
it among the Romans 252
Marriage, its yoke in ancient times easy to the men but less so to the women
258 rites, at what time the clergy assumed the sole right of celebrating them
259 vows not the less valid by considering it as a civil compact 261
ceremonies, which are expressive of the love and regard of the men 266
ceremonies which serve only to make the bargain public 267
Married women, their privileges in England 325 cannot be imprisoned for debt
ibid can oblige their husbands to pay all the debts they contract before and
after marrriage ibid
Married women may oblige their husbands to give security for their good
behavior 327 may bring an action to oblige husbands to restore the rights of
marriage 329
Married women may carry on any trade they have been accustomed to, and their
bargains bind the husband 331 are all considered as minors ibid
Mary queen of Scots, how she punished adultery 345 Matrimony an early
institution 187 encouraged and enforced by the Greeks 243 and by the Jews and
Persians 244 still more so by the Romans ibid
Matrimonial regulations concerning the ages of a bride and bridegroom 248
discord, conjectures on its causes 285 arises from the wrong education of the
women ibid also from the particular manners and customs of this country 286

Men have taken from women the power of refusing such husbands as their
relations provide for them 145 their right of courting the gift of nature 146
their greater liberties in the married state than women 241
Middle ages, sketches of the dress used then 115 hair then the principal
ornament 116 a great punishment to cut it off ibid
Milesian women, their delicacy 11 Mirrors used in an early period 96 were made
of brass ibid the first glass ones made of Tyrian sand ibid afford a proof,
that the early ages were not so rude as we imagine ibid
Modern Greek women their dress 105 Mogul women, how concealed when they travel
26
N.
Natch^^, the privileges they allow to such wives as are sisters of their great
chief 228 and to wives who are noble ibid
Northern nations, their ancient dress 114 women, how they dressed their hair
ibid slight sketches of the other parts of their dress 115 warriors, placed
their greatest happiness in love 163 women, the manner in which they refused
the addresses of the men ibid
Nose and ear jewels, where used 124 Nunneries, the first founded by St.
Synclytica 273
O.
Obstacles only increase our ardour to overcome them 24 Oliver Cromwell, dress
and ornament despised in his time 136 sentiments in his time concerning the
fair sex ibid is no sooner dead than these sentiments take a different
direction 137
Omens, good and bad, much taken notice of by the Greeks at marriages 205
Operation of the laws of England in divesting women of property 340 Opinions
concerning the intercourse of women with invisible beings 51 that are
disadvantageous to the sex 83
Origin of celibacy, whence 271 Ormus, description of its magnificence 127
Ornament and finery, supposed to be passions not natural to the fair sex 89
this supposition ill founded ibid of the early ages consisted in jewels, rings,
perfumes, and garments of diverse colors 92
Otaheite, singular manner of dressing the head 132 Otho, his decree, that the
wives and children of the clergy should receive no benefit from their estates
279
P.
Parents, in the isle of Timor, sell their children to purchase wives 212
Parliament of Britain has obstructed the road to marriage, which almost every
other legislature has made plain and easy 247 Persians, their idea of the
necessity of marriage 242 caused such as died unmarried to be married after
death ibid
Peeresses of England, their privileges 318 Philtres, the women of Thessaly
famous for preparing them 154 their dangerous nature ibid instances of their
fatality 153
Polygamy, its early introduction 216 and concubinage, their origin ibid and
concubinage, their increase 217 how the Jews were restricted in these matters
ibid practiced in the sixth century 219 arguments for and against it ibid
Possession by devils, conjectures on its origin 68 an obsolete opinion, now
only held by the church of Rome 69
Pregnant women, how defended by the law of England 330 Price of a wife in
Mingrelia 212 Priests of the Jews, whom they might marry 251 of Egypt not
allowed to marry ibid of the Christians, borrowed the custom of celebrating the
rites of marriage from those of ancient Rome 258 are supposed to have a divine
right to celebrate the rites of marriage, which none else can enjoy 259 the
powers they have usurped note -- 260 declared infamous if they did not put away
their wives 278 their legitimate children made slaves in France ibid
Privileges of women more firmly settled in Britain than in any other country
315 of the Princess of Wales, the daughters and sisters of kings of England 317
of the women of England in general 319 of women by marriage contract 331
Prussia, parents there may have the marriage of their children made null when
without their consent 270 Prussian laws make a marriage void, when a widow
imposes herself instead of a maid 312 widows in some cases, allowed eleven
months after the death of a husband to bring forth a legitimate child 314
Punishment of deflowering a betrothed virgin 232 Purchasing of wives, its
consequences 220
Q.
Queen of England, her particular privileges 317 Mary of England, declared the
marriages of the clergy unlawful 280
Queen of Lydia, her revenge for being affronted by her foolish husband 11
R.
Rabbis, their account of the marriage ceremonies of the ancient Jews 197 of
the ceremonies they ascribe to Moses in marriage 198 and of those which came
into use in later periods 199
Rank of birthright cannot be lost by a woman 331 Rape, the punishment for it
in ancient Britain 320 a woman upon whom it is committed allowed to be a
witness in her own cause 321 a man may be tried again for it after having been
pardoned 322
Reasons why wives in Europe are not confined 23 why the Asiatics seldom keep
company with their women 24 why women have contributed little to advancing the
sciences 42 why the opinions concerning witches were so much altered 62 why
wives brought portions along with them 213
Religion, morality, honor, all contribute to secure chastity among polished
people 30 Religion of Asia and Europe, the difference between them in regard to
continence 32 called in to make the ceremony of marriage more solemn 258 and
honor, their power over human actions 305
Remarkable women of several nations 43 Revival of dress and ornament, their
causes 133 Roman women, their dress 106 how they chastised-their slaves if they
did not dress them properly ibid the variety of slaves they employed at the
toilette 107 allotted to each her proper office ibid did not admit men to the
toilette 108 the ornaments they wore in their hair and at their ears ibid their
high head-dresses 109 dyed their hair yellow, and powdered it with gold dust
ibid. their cosmetics, paint, and coating for the face 109 their false teeth
made of box 110 the materials of their dress 111 were long unacquainted with
the use of linen and silk ibid
women, their most fashionable colors 113 their extravagance in ornamenting
their shoes ibid
knights, the speech of Caesar to them on their having neglected to marry 246
fined by him for this neglect 247 some of them married children to fulfill the
letter, and avoid the spirit of the law, which obliged them to marry ibid
priests, the first of the sacred order who solemnized marriage rites 253
Romans enforced matrimony on the men 244 fined old batchelors, and obliged the
men to swear that they would marry as soon as convenient 245 their different
kinds of marriage 247

S.
Sabaeans had their wives in common 217 Savages, the reasons why they suppose
women to be inferior to men 37 Scotland, the church there makes women do
penance for bastard children 323 Servants, their punishment by the law of
England for abusing their mistress 330 Shame, annexed to incontinence, one of
the methods of securing chastity 130 the consequences of this shame being taken
off in Denmark 31
Silk, whence originally brought and when 111 Singular method of securing
chastity in Africa 27 of preserving the fidelity of wives among the Jews 28 in
Poland 29

instance of human folly 133
Spaniards, their mannner of courtship 172 court by serenading their mistress
before her window 173 are the most obsequious sentimental lovers in the world
174
Spaniards whip themselves to gain the affec^ion of the ladies 175 Species,
human, the propagation of it reckoned criminal 271 Stains in the skin, an
ornament of savages 131 St. Ierom, his ridiculous opinion of matrimony 275 St.
Maurice, the knights of that order not allowed to marry widows 312 Sum of all
that is alleged for and against each sex tends to prove that they are nearly
equal 43 Superior strength of body evident in the males of brute animals 36 but
have no other superiority 37
T.
Tartars, their ideas of their women 49 The two sexes in savage life compared
39 female savage hardly inferior to the male ibid share each sex has had in
progressive improvement 40 arts attributed to female invention ibid that
languish under their direction 42 reasons why they do so ibid
Therapeutes, by whom founded 273 governed by St. Anthony ibid
Thorbiorga, a Danish enchantress, story of her 59 Turin, a girl there said to
be possessed by a devil 71 she is managed by two jesuits and a physician ibid
they pretend to exorcise the devil ibid Dr. R. maintains there is no devil in
the case of the girl there 72 and puts some questions in a language that the
devil does not understand ibid the jesuits threaten the doctor 73 he produces
an order from court to examine the girl ibid
Turkish dress, some sketches of it 128 Turks, their cruel method of gaining
the affection of the ladies 176
V.
Various methods of securing chastity in Spain 26 Veils anciently used by women
97 Venitians, their manner of dressing 138 Virginity, to remain in it reckoned
a great misfortune by the Jews 241 by the ancient Persians 242 by the Greeks
ibid and by the women of the Levant ibid

W.
Wales, the king there was formerly satisfied with fineing the man who had
debauched his wife 234 Widowhood, why so disagreeable to women 289 was the most
despicable of all conditions in the primitive ages 294 is the most eligible
female condition in Europe, when the widow is in good circumstances 311
Widows in the early ages had none to redress their wrongs 292 suffered in
Greenland to die of hunger 293 not allowed to marry again in some countries and
why ibid what classes of men were not allowed to marry them 294 their condition
begins to amend 295 not allowed to be seized nor sold by the creditors of their
husbands 296 were protected by the christian clergy ibid their methods of
mourning for their deceased husbands ibid
Widows were prescribed, in many centuries, a certain time, within which they
should not marry 296 were condemned by custom to wear their weeds for life in
Spain and Scotland 297 dismal life which they were condemned to while mourning
in Spain ibid
Widow (...) time allotted to their mourning in America 298 the punishment to
which they are liable, if they do not mourn according to the custom of their
country ibid reasons of subjecting them to this long and severe mourning 299
are obliged at the Cape of Good Hope, and in the Isthmus of Darien, to cut off
a joint from a finger for every husband they bury 300 are burnt to death on the
funeral pile of their husbands in Hindostan 301 whether their burning is
voluntary considered 304 sometimes revolt against the dreadful death assigned
them 306 the fortitude and resolution shown by some of them in those dreadful
moments 308 sometimes set fire themselves to the pile that is to devour them
309 in China, are sold by the relations of a deceased husband 310 of China, may
deliver themselves from being sold by turning Bonzesses 311 are put in the
house of correction in Prussia, if they marry while with child to a deceased
husband 312 their privileges by the law of England 332 their children all
buried along with them in the isthmus of Darien 301 when left with child,
particular hardships to which they are liable in England 343 of the Jews, might
ask the brothers of deceased husbands in marriage 149 have the same right among
the Iroquois and Hurons 150
Witchcraft, the idea of it early propag^ted among mankind 51 and most
ridiculously believed by the superstitious and ignorant 52 conjectures on its
origin 53 why women were thought more addicted to it than men 54 all antiquity
full of the ideas of it 55 made a pretense for destroying such as were
obnoxious to kings and their ministers 64 nothing that was connected with it
too absurd to gain credit ibid causes of its decline 62 tortures that were made
use of to extort confession 67 executions obliged to be made every day, to make
room in the prisons for the accused 68 even the magistrates suspected ibid
Witches revered by the ancient Germans 51 generally in all nations supposed to
be mostly old women ibid of antiquity, supposed to be endowed with most
extraordinary powers 56 consulted at Calcutta about the destiny of children 58
Wives, why purchased 192 places in which they are purchased 211 were allowed a
plurality of husbands by the Medes, on the coast of Malabar, at Calcutta, etc.
220 their privileges among the Jews 226 among the Egyptians and others 227 in
the Marian islands, exercise an unlimited authority over their husbands ibid
their privileges among the ancient Germans 229 in Turkey ibid in Hindostan ibid
Wives method of exculpating themselves when accused of adultery 237 Wives and
concubines, instances of their being strangled to serve their husbands in the
other world 300 cannot bring an action at law without consent of their husbands
341
Women said to be incapable of listening to reason 75 charged with inconstancy
of temper 76 said by some not to have any souls 47 origin of that opinion
probably was in Asia ibid why they cannot have souls, according to the opinion
of the Scots clergyman 48 among the ancient northerns considered as divinely
inspired 58 endowed with courage when in circumstances where it is necessary 77
are in some countries more valued than men 81 were deified, and had temples
erected for their worship ibid conscious that their strength lies in their
beauty 89 in the isthmus of Darien and the Ukrain, court the men 50 their power
to compel the performance of a promise of marriage 324 are obliged to return
the presents made by lovers, or to marry them 325 are hardly allowed any power
or management of affairs 338 the punishment afflicted on them 346 could not
succeed to feudal estates 340 were in process of time allowed to succeed to
them in default of male heirs ibid their wills and testaments made void by
marriage 341
Women keeping a house of ill fame, how punishable 343 their inferiority to the
other sex less than is commonly believed 37
Wulstan, his ridiculous enmity to long hair 117
Y.
Young men, in ancient Israel, appear not to have had the power of courting a
bride for themselves 151
SUBSCRIBERS TO THE HISTORY OF WOMEN, PHILADELPHIA.
A.
ABBOT and Barnes Alexander Adams Catharine Auner Elizabeth Anderson George
Ashbey Hannah Armstrong Henry H. Abel Henry Adams Henry Andrews Jacob Anthony
Jacob Anthony, jun. Jacob Ashmead James Anderson John Alexander John Aitken
John Allstine J. B. Ackley Joseph Allen Nathaniel Ashby Nicholas Anthony
Rebecca Allee Samuel Allen Samuel I. Axford Susan Alberger St. Laurence Adams
Thomas Allen William Abbott William Anderson William Alexander William Allen
William Allibone, jun. William Annan, M. D.
B.
A. Baird, Washington, Pennsylvania Abner Briggs Andrew Bell Andrew Boyd Andrew
Butler Anthony Tate Boyd Benj. Franklin Bache Bela Badger Daniel Brewe^
Ebenezer Bowman Eleanor Brown Elizabeth R. Burden Francis Brown Francis G.
Brewste^ George Booth George Blackwell George Bringhurst Henry Baker, jun.
Henry Barrington Herman Bake Jocob Bower, Reading, Berks County Jacob Brown
John Bedford John Bennett John Bever, George-Town, Ohio John Bioren John
Brandon, Greensburgh, Pennsylvania John Brittengham John Burk Johnson Beefley
Joseph Ball jun. Joseph Britten Joseph Burden Joseph Buroughs Kennard
Blackiston Lewis Baker Margaret Bowls Margaret Boylan Margaret Brown Martin
Bernard Nathan Beach, Luzerne Peter Bell Peter Bob Samuel Bullus Stephen
Bennett Thomas Bartleman Thomas Batson William Bonnell William Buck William D.
Brown William L. Blair William P. Beatty William P. Brady, Northumberland
C.
Abraham Cohen Adam Corman Alexander Campbell, Richmond, Virginia Ann Carey Ann
Chaloner Catharine Coleman Charles Campbell Daniel Carson Daniel Casey Daniel
Carteret George R. Chapman Hugh Cochran, 12 copies Jacob Carver Jacob Creamer
James Collings James Corkrin John Cameron John Campbell John Cannon John
Chambers John Clarke John Claxton John Cloyd, Attorney at law Jonathan Carmant
Joseph Case Levi Crosgrove Lewis Crousellat Mary Cline Mary Comfort Mary Cowell
Matthew Carey, 12 copies Nancy Cornick Nathaniel Coborn Nicholas Coleman Paul
Custer Richard Coutty Robert Carr Samuel Church Thomas Carstairs Genesis Thomas
Craig William Carr William Clarke William Clew
D.
Anna Dougherty Benjamin Davies, 6 copies Benjamin Dutton Elizabeth Doyle
Francis Daymon Frederick Dern G. Decombaz, 2 copies Isaac Davis James Dilworth
John Dobelbower John Duche Lewis Dobelbower Lucinda Doman Martin Dubs Mason
Dickey Matthew Doyle Nicholas Diehl Samuel Dugee Sarah Doyle Thomas Dennis
Thomas Dougherty Vorothia Dale William Dewees, M. D. William Dawson
E.
Charles Eagan Daniel Estal David Everhart Elizabeth Emery George Etris
Jonathan Edwards Samuel Elliott Samuel Ervin
F.
Charles Farmer Frederick Foy Frederick Frayley James Faichney James Farmer
John Felter John Flanigan Joseph Feinour Joseph H. Flemming Maria Flemming
Rebecca Fleeson Sarah Fletcher Thomas French Walter Fortune William Fadel
William Fling William Brown Foggo William Foster
G.
Adam Guyer Casper Guyger D. Grasset Daniel Green Henry Garrison Jacob Gilbert
James Gamble John German John Grace J^seph Gladding Richard Graham, Dumfries,
Virginia Thomas Grant, Sunbury, Pennsylvania Thomas McMullen Gardner,
Wilmington, Del. William Gibbons William A. Grant
H.
A. Hallowell Abraham Hambright Abraham Hilyard Allfree Heart Assheton Humphreys
Benjamin Harrison David Hall Elizabeth Hartung Henry Hill Henry Hoskins Jane
Henderson John Hafline, jun. John Hallman John Harper John Harrison John
Higgins John Hurley Josiah Holmes Mahlon Hutchinson Maria Hughs Margaret Hains
Mary Harper Philip Heyl Sarah Hunter Sarah Hutton Simon Heligas Susan Henderson
Susan Hoffman Thomas Hood Thomas Hoskins William Harnett William Heart, M. D.
I. and J.
Alphonzo C. Ireland Elizabeth Ingram Imlay and Harper John Inskeep David
Johnston Eleanor Jenney Elizabeth Jones Isaac Jones Jacob Johnson, and Co. 25
Copies John Jeffres John Johnson John Jones, Attorney at Law Maria Johnson Mary
Jones Thomas Janvier Thomas Johnson
K.
Catharine Kingston Charles Kirkham Daniel Knight Edmund Kinsey Ezekiel King
Frederick Kisselman George D. Knorr, (deceased) Jacob Knorr, jun. John Kean
John Kidd, Reading Berks County John King Luke Kelly Margaret Knapp Thomas
Kelley
L.
Abraham Lower Elizabeth C. Leiper James Lackey James Laverty J. Lang, jun.
Lang and Ustick, 12 copies John Lisle, jun. Joseph Lownes Laetitia Lippincott
Michael Lewis Nathaniel Lewis Peter Lohra Samuel Leacock Samuel Levis William
Levis William Linch William Lyle
M.
Adam Mendenhall Alexander Miller Ann Mc Pherson Archibald McCallum Barney
Merkle, Reading Berks County Blair McClenachan Charles Minifie David Mc Calla
Denis McLaughlin Elisha Moore Frederick Meyers George S. Moore Henry Mitchell
Henry Muhlenberg Hyman Marks Isaac Martin Isaac W. Morris I. Minty James
Milnor, Attorney at Law James Molony John Martin John Mearns John Mc Collom
John Mc Donald John Mc Knight John Mc Laughlin John Moore Joseph Master Joseph
Maxfield Joseph Miller L. Mitner Lewis Monroe Mary Mason Mary McInnes Mary
Miller Michael Moore Michael Murphy McKenzie and Westcott, Bridge-Town,
New-Iersey, 12 Copies Miller and Atwater, Burlington, New Iersey, 12 copies
Nathan Matthias Patrick Moore Peter and Henry Mierken Robert Mc Kean Samuel
Mason Thomas Makoln Thomas Matthias Thomas Mifflin, Governor of Pennsylvania
Thomas Moore Thomas More, jun. Timothy Mountford, 50 copies W. Mott Walter
Mairs William Martin William Miller William Moore William Morgan, M. D.
Charleston, South Carolina
N.
Enoch Northrop James Newark John Newman Michael Newbold Samuel Nightlinger
Thomas Nelson
O.
Anthony Ogilvie Griffith Owen John Ormrod, 12 copies P. O'Donnell, 3 copies
Thomas Ogle William Owen
P.
Abraham Painter Alexander Power Daniel Preston David Pimple George Peter James
Potts John Page John Parker, 6 copies John J. Parry John Paterson John Phillips
Joseph Peart N. Phillips Philip Pancake Sarah Payran Thomas Pickins
R.
Ann Russell Charles Robertson Elizabeth Randolph, Richmond, Virginia Elizabeth
Rhoads Elizabeth Row Francis Rising George Rees George Roberts H. and P. Rice
Jacob Rizer James Reid James Roche John Rain John Riever John Ross, jun. Martin
Row, jun. Mary Rush Miles Rourk Morgan John Rhees Samuel Rhodes Samuel
Richards, sen. Spicer Rudderow Stephen Rider
S.
Abbey Skellenger Alexander Shaw Charles Schaffer Charles Shoemaker Charles
Smith Conrad Seyfert, 8 copies Daniel Smith Daniel Sutherland Daniel Sutter,
jun. Dorothy Stone Edward Scott Esther Sweetzer Francis Shallus George
Schlosser George Spain Jacob Siddons James H. Sloan James Smither James Spotts
James Stuart, M. D. John Stroup Lawrence Sink Mrs. Stewart Mahlon Scholfield
Prince George County, Maryland Margaret Smith Maria Shepherd Maria Stephens
Morgan Sweeny Nicholas Sullivan Peter Seybert Rebecca Sims Robert Simpson
Samuel Starr Sophia Seckel Sower and Jones, 6 copies Thomas Stephens, 12 copies
William Semple
T.
Benjamin Thornton Elizabeth Tailor George Thompson George Tryon Henry Toland
Isaac Tomkins Jacob Thomas James Thackara s N="10"
REF="029964_0785_0FE3A4AFD604B800"andgt;James Truman John R. Tailor John
Thornhill John Thum John Turner J. Ozier Thompson, M.D. Jonathan Tyson Lesley
Thompson Thomas Tillyer Thomas Tustain
V.
Henry Van Kleeck, Poughkeepsie James Valliant Jacobus Vanosten, Lower Dublin
Thomas Valerius
W.
Francis Wilson George Wager George Walters George Watts George White George
Wilson, Mifflin county, Pennsylvania Isaac Wainwright Isaac Wampole James
Whitehead James Wilson, Judge of the Supreme Court of the United States John
Waddington John Ward John White Joseph Wirt Joseph Wright Mahlon Wright Samuel
Wakeling, 6 cop. Samuel Williamson Samuel Witman Thomas White William Watson
William Wilson, Milesburgh, Mifflin County William W. Woodward 6 copies
Y.
Anthony Yerkes Charles Yarbrough John F. Young, M. D.
Z.
Adam Zantzinger Jacob Zeller John Zeller.

