Amusement Hall; OR, AN EASY INTRODUCTION TO THE ATTAINMENT OF USEFUL KNOWLEDGE.

BY A LADY.

In Works of learned labor let THE MEN,
With their superior powers, employ the Pen,
And hidden truths explore; -- it is OUR design
Instruction with Amusement to combine,
Pleasure with useful Knowledge to unite,
And yield at once Improvement and Delight.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed by Lang and Ustick, and Sold by T. USTICK, No. 79, North
Third Street,

M.DCC.XCVI.

Review:
FROM THE EVANGELICAL MAGAZINE.
AMUSEMENT HALL; or An EASY INTRODUCTION to the ATTAINMENT of USEFUL KNOWLEDGE
-- By a Lady -- 12mo.

The title of this book led us to think that it did not belong to our
department. But as it was sent to us for our opinion of its merits, we thought
it only justice to give it a reading, and we must acknowledge we were very much
pleased with it. Whatever engages the youthful mind, and at the same time
inculcates the principles of religion or morality, deserves no inconsiderable
share of praise. In these the author has succeeded; and she has rendered her
work so interesting, that we found it difficult to lay the book aside till we
had got through it. Her plan of improving the minds of young people in useful
branches of education, unites pleasure with instruction. And it deserves our
notice, that whatever tends to inspire with a contempt for what is frivolous,
and to give the mind a taste for rational pursuits, promotes the interests of
Christianity. A performance of this character may be justly viewed as the
handmaid of religion, endeavoring to bring the gay, the giddy, and
thoughtless, within the reach of her divine and enchanting voice. This may be
truly asserted in the present case, as we find, along with the conveyance of
useful knowledge, well-directed efforts to correct vicious habits and
propensities, and to point out the beauty and excellence of virtuous
dispositions and actions.

Amusement Hall, etc.
AMUSEMENT HALL, though not a superb, is a handsome structure, situated in a
delightful spot, on a rising ground, commanding a pleasing view of the road and
adjacent country. The surrounding hills are interspersed with hanging woods and
shady groves, the mansions of the opulent, and the cottages of the poor: thus
is the eye gratified with an extensive prospect, while the diversified scenes
that it exhibits, afford ample materials for contemplation to a reflecting
mind. The furniture of the house is elegantly neat; the library, though not
large, contains many valuable productions. Mrs. Smith, the proprietor of this
mansion, is descended from an ancient family: she possesses this estate in her
own right, besides an ample fortune left her by Mr. Smith. She is generous,
though not profuse; no object of distress is passed by unnoticed; she
distributes not her bounty through the hands of servants, but visits the
cottages herself, and relieves them that are in want, according to their
various necessities. As industry leads to happiness, she finds the Poor
employment suited to their abilities: there are none idle in the village; the
children are employed according to their different ages, and are taught to read
and write under her own inspection. Her company is sought by the lovers of
literature: her conversation is easy and unaffected; she seeks not to kill
time, but to improve it, and therefore never finds it hang heavy on her hands.
By the cheerfulness of her temper, her happiness is made apparent to all; even
those, who follow a round of folly and dissipation, approve of her conduct,
though they have not resolution to imitate it.

Her sister, Mrs. Denew, is also a very amiable character, and has the
happiness of being united to a worthy gentleman, whose manners and disposition
accord with her own. They are blessed with several children. Amelia, the eldest
daughter, possesses every advantage which can be derived from education, good
sense, and and an amiable disposition. She was about ten years of age at the
period, to which this little history refers, and had just obtained permission
of her papa and mamma to pay a visit to her aunt at Amusement Hall, which was
about twenty miles from Mr. Denew's.

Upon Amelia's arrival, the following conversation took place:

MRS. SMITH. I am glad to see you, my dear, again at Amusement Hall; I hope
your mamma will give you leave to spend some months with me.


AMELIA. My mamma was with difficulty prevailed on last summer to part with me,
(...) your indulgence would spoil me; but when I returned home, my papa and
mamma were both pleased to find me so much improved, and said, if my aunt
requested it, my visit should be longer next time. When your letter came, I
jumped for joy; my brothers and sisters cried, "Pray, mamma, let me go -- pray,
mamma, let me go." Mamma told them, that they must stay till they were old
enough to leave the nursery.


MRS. SMITH. My dear, it is time you should have some refreshment after your
journey; just touch the bell, that I may order tea. How does your little friend
Miss Laura do?


AMELIA. She was almost wild when I told her I had an invitation to Amusement
Hall, and teazed her papa every day to let her come with me. He told her he
could not take the liberty to send such an ungovernable rude girl to you,
especially without an invitation. When I took leave of her, she cried so, I
thought the poor creature would have broken her heart; but indeed, aunt, she
always does so when she cannot have her own way: her papa is so good, that he
does n^^ deny her any thing in his power to grant, and will not suffer her to
b^ ^ontradicted; yet she is not happy.


MRS. SMITH. That is owing to her papa's over fondness, which prevents him from
seeing her faults.


AMELIA. I am sure my papa and mamma see my faults plain enough.


MRS. SMITH. So much the better for you, my dear.


AMELIA. Indeed, madam, I should like it better, if they did not see them; for
then they would never be angry with me.


MRS. SMITH. But, my dear child, is not more to your advantage for your friends
to see your faults, than for others, who might make the same remarks on you, as
you do on Miss Laura? It is in love to you that your parents admonish and
correct you, that you may appear amiable in the eyes of the world; and when you
attend to their instructions and reproofs, it endears you the more to them:
were your mamma to leave you to do and say what you please, I fear you would be
as unhappy as Miss Lloyd, who, if under proper government, might, in every
respect, equal, if not exceed, my dear Amelia. (...) is greatly to be pitied;
she has lost her mamma: her papa is much engaged, and the poor girl is left to
the care of servants, who are never to contradict her; she is very lively, far
from being of a bad disposition, and, if she had the advantage of good
instruction, not ungovernable.


AMELIA. Oh, my dear aunt, will you send for Laura? You can make her happy, I
am sure.


MRS. SMITH. I am very willing, my dear, to ^^^ply with your request, and will
write to Mr. Lloyd this evening. I think Miss Lloyd is about your own age.


AMELIA. I believe she is a few months older.

Mrs. Smith received, by return of post, a very polite letter of thanks from
Mr. Lloyd, accepting the invitation, and expressing the mortification he felt
in not being able to accompany his daughter, as he was about to set off on a
journey of some weeks, but would send her the next day.

Amelia, impatient to see her little friend, was standing at the window when
Mr. Lloyd's carriage arrived. She flew to receive her, and, on introducing Miss
Lloyd to her aunt, said, "Now, madam, you have made me happy, for I do love
Laura."


MRS. SMITH. My dear Miss Lloyd, I am very happy to see you. I hope you and
Amelia will improve each other.


LAURA. I am much obliged to you, madam, for sending for me; I am sure I shall
enjoy myself with Amelia; for I suppose all our time will be spent in play.


MRS. SMITH. I mean that all your time shall be spent in amusements.


LAURA. Then, madam, I shall not fail to be happy.


MRS. SMITH. Amelia, I shall leave you to entertain Miss Laura in my absence,
which will not be long.

On Mrs. Smith's entering the room, she is surprised to find Laura in tears!


MRS. SMITH. What is the matter?


AMELIA. Laura's grief is occasioned by my answers to her enquiries concerning
our amusements. When I told her the morning was to be spent in working and
reading, she burst out a crying, and said she should with herself at home again.


MRS. SMITH. Pray, Miss, dry up your tears; you shall choose your own
amusements; but Amelia must have the same liberty.


LAURA. What then, must I play by myself? I cannot believe work can be any
amusement to her, only she is forced to do it.


AMELIA. Indeed, my dear Laura, you are mistaken; I should think a day very
tedious, in which I did not do any work; besides, you cannot think what
pleasure I find in working with my mamma: you would have thought I was well
repaid, had you seen how pleased my papa was with the first shirt I finished;
he said he should ever look on it with pleasure, as his dear Amelia's little
(...) had been employed in making it; and it was shown to all our friends; so
that I had praises in abundance; but the more I was praised, the more I loved
my mamma.


LAURA. I am sure I should have loved myself the more; Did not you make it?


AMELIA. Yes; but think, Laura, what I owe to my mamma, who instructed me: I am
often told what a clever girl I am; but my mamma's kind instructions make me
so; and yet she lets me have all the praise: how can I help loving her more and
more every day!


LAURA. Well, I think we have had enough about work; let us go and play in the
garden.


MRS. SMITH. Go, my dear children; I will join you presently.


AMELIA. Here comes my aunt.


LAURA. I don't like your gardener, madam: my papa would have turned his away,
were he as idle as yours: look at this piece of ground! see how it lies all in
disorder, and covered over with weeds! it spoils the view of the whole garden;
for it strikes one's attention the moment one enters.


MRS. SMITH. Amelia, take this book into the parlour; we shall soon follow you.
-- My gardener, yesterday, was at work at this bed; but, by my orders, left it
in the state in which you now see it. I was in hopes it might afford a useful
lesson to Miss Lloyd, and it gives me pleasure to find it has struck you just
as I wished it should. I have known you from your infancy; and with concern
perceive, that to this hour your mind has continued uncultivated, as the piece
of ground before you. Your exterior form attracts our attention; and you are
blessed with a large share of vivacity: from such an appearance we have much to
expect: but I am sorry to say it, the prevailing qualities of your mind are so
many moral weeds; and you must not wonder if they are soon discovered, and
severely censured. We are apt to pass by a hundred beauties unnoticed, if but
one striking defect appears, as you have just now done. My gardener has taken
peculiar care of the surrounding beds; observe the order in which they lie, and
the various flowers that adorn them; all these you passed by unnoticed, in
observe that this uncultivated plat spoils the whole. So it is, my dear, with
young ladies, however pretty they may think themselves, if their minds are
uncultivated, and unadorned with useful knowledge.


LAURA. Madam, you shock me with the picture you have drawn! yet I own, with
shame, it is too just a likeness of myself. Indeed, I love nothing but play,
and abhor working and reading. I wish I was like Amelia; but I fear I never
shall be.


MRS. SMITH. You must not be discouraged, if you meet with a few difficulties,
which Amelia did not, having been led in the paths of knowledge from her
infancy. What say you to being of our party tomorrow morning?


LAURA. Most willingly, madam: I intend, for the first time, to prefer reading
and working to play; but I must beg of you to call me Laura, that I may be the
same as your Amelia; for I intend to be very good.


MRS. SMITH. Then, my dear Laura, you shall not want for encouragement; but
Amelia will think us long.

The next morning Mrs. Smith renewed the proposal she had made the day before,
to which poor Laura, inconstant to her resolution, replied:


LAURA. Pray, madam, excuse me to day: I shall lose all my spirits to sit
yawning at work now the sun shines; I want to run about the garden.


MRS. SMITH. I always keep my word: I promised you the choice of your
amusements; you are at liberty to go.


LAURA. But I want Amelia to go with me.


MRS. SMITH. That I cannot permit.

Laura goes out, and in about an hour after is heard screaming and crying.


AMELIA. I am afraid, madam, some accident has happened to Laura.


MRS. SMITH. A strange screaming, indeed! I will go and see what is the matter.

Mrs. Smith finds her kicking against the kitchen door.


MRS. SMITH. Laura, you surprise me! what is all this uproar about?


LAURA. Molly has shut me out of the kitchen.


MRS. SMITH. The kitchen is not the place for young ladies.


LAURA. But she had no need to push me out, and lock the door.


MRS. SMITH. I fear you have behaved very much amiss, or else Molly would not
have treated you in this manner. Come into the parlour. What a frock! how
dirty! and what a great rent in it! how happened all this?


LAURA. It was Rover that did it; he played very prettily for some time with me
in the pleasure-ground; but when we came by the fish ponds he jumped in: when
he came out, he ran and rolled himself in the dust, and then jumped upon me. I
was so provoked to see the nasty condition he made my frock in, that I took up
a stick, and beat him; upon which he seized on my frock, and tore it; I
endeavored to get rid of him, but he still kept his hold. I ran screaming into
the kitchen; Molly laughed at me, which so provoked me, that I struck her: she
then turned me out. I Am sure none of my papa's servants dared to have done so.


MRS. SMITH. Molly was certainly wrong to laugh at your distress; but that does
not justify your conduct. I cannot permit any child to strike one of my
servants. I must, therefore, insist on your asking her pardon.


LAURA. No, that I never will.


MRS. SMITH. I shall not admit you into my presence till you do. As you do not
seem disposed immediately to comply, you may retire to your chamber, and
consider of it. I shall not use any entreaties, or see you again, till you have
obeyed my commands: your ill-humour will be no interruption to me.


AMELIA. Permit me, aunt, to go and persuade Laura to comply with your commands.


MRS. SMITH. Not at present, my dear: when your morning employment is over, I
shall leave you to follow your own inclination.


AMELIA. Here comes Laura, with a clean frock and a smiling face.


LAURA. I hope, madam, you will forgive me: I am quite ashamed to think I have
been so long before I obeyed you commands; nor should I have done it now, had
it not been for the kind persuasion of Nanny. I told her I never would submit
to ask Molly's pardon. She said, I am sorry to hear you say so, Miss; you had
much better do it at first, for you must at last, as my mistress never retracts
her word. I replied, I Will fret and cry, and then Mrs. Smith will let me come
down into the parlour, lest I should be sick. No, Miss, said she, you are quite
mistaken, if you think to gain any thing by that; for my mistress would order
you to have water gruel, and be put to bed: I told her I could never bear that:
then it will be very easy for you, Miss, to ask Molly to forgive your striking
her. She then left me, and returned with Molly, who said, I am come, Miss
Lloyd, to ask your pardon for being so rude as to laugh at you. I started up,
No, Molly, it is I that ought to ask your pardon for striking you, and I do it
sincerely.

I shall always have an esteem both for Molly and Nanny for their kindness to
me; and now, madam, if I obtain your forgiveness, I shall be quite happy again.


MRS. SMITH. That you freely have: but I must caution you not to give way to
your passions, as that has been the cause of all the mortifications you have
met with today. I will tell you a little Fable, that I hope you will gain
instruction by.

A Bear, that was stung by a Be, was so enraged by the pain he felt, that he
ran, like a mad thing, into the be garden, and overtur^^ all the hi^es. This
outrage brought upon him an army of (...): being almost stung to death, he
re^^^cted how much more prudent it would have been to pass over one injury,
than by rash passion to provoke a thousand.


LAURA. If I had put up with he injury Rover did me, I should have saved all
the consequences that followed. I will endeavor to remember this fable, when
any thing provokes me again.


MRS. SMITH. I hope you will; for it is unbecoming a young lady to give way to
resentment. I am very glad you have seen your error. After dinner Amelia shall
repeat to you a story which she has been reading this morning.


LAURA. I am sure I could not remember, so as to repeat a story, the next
minute after I had read it.


MRS. SMITH. I am persuaded it is for want of attention, rather than of memory:
accustom yourself to think while you read, and what you read will fasten on
your memory. Amelia imbibed this habit very early, so that it is no difficulty
to her. I would wish you to adopt the sentiment of the two following lines:
Despair of nothing that you would attain,
Unwearied diligence your point will gain.


In the afternoon Amelia repeated the following story out of Hume's History of
England:

Edward the third, when he retook Calais, after a shameful revolt, was so
incensed, that he was determined to take exemplary vengeance on the
inhabitants, and would not receive the town on any conditions which should
confine him in the punishment of those offenders. Edward was at last persuaded
to more moderation, and insisted on six of the most eminent citizens being sent
to him, to his camp, with the keys of the city, bareheaded, and barefooted,
with ropes about their necks; and on these conditions he promised to spare the
lives of all the remainder.

When this intelligence was conveyed to Calais, there was a general
consternation. To sacrifice six of their fellow-citizens to certain
destruction, when they had all signalized their valor in a common cause,
appeared to them more severe than that general punishment they were before
threatened with; and they were irresolute in so cruel and distressing a
situation: at last one of the principal inhabitants, called Eustace de St.
Pierre, stepped forth, declaring himself willing to encounter death, to save
his friends and companions: animated by his example, another made a like
generous offer, and a third and fourth, till the whole number was completed.
These six brave men, with ropes about their necks, thus appearing like
malefactors, laid the keys of the city at Edward's feet, who ordered them to
execution.


LAURA. Every one must detest the cruelty of Edward.


AMELIA. But the entreaties of his Queen Phillippa saved his memory from that
infamy: she threw herself on her knees before Edward, and, with tears in her
eyes, begged the lives of these citizens. Having obtained her request, she
conducted them into her tent, ordered a repast to be set before them, and,
after making them a present of money and clothes, dismissed them in safety.


LAURA. What noble generosity! If ever I should be able to relate a story as
well as Amelia does, I shall be quite proud.


MRS. SMITH. I would advise you to apply yourself more to acquire knowledge
than to show it; for you would appear very ridiculous, if you had only just
enough to excite your pride, and not enough to cure it.


LAURA. Will knowledge cure pride?


MRS. SMITH. It certainly has that tendency; for the more we converse with the
excellencies of others, the less we shall esteem ourselves; and the more we are
acquainted with their imperfections, the more readily shall we acquiesce in the
probability of our character being open to censure. You and Amelia may go to
play.

The next day Laura addressed Mrs. Smith as follows:


LAURA. Will you permit me, madam, to be of your party this morning.


MRS. SMITH. With pleasure; you may hem this handkerchief for me, and Amelia
shall read a story.

The Art of Happiness. (The World.) A good temper is one of the principal
ingredients of happiness: this, it is said, is born with us, and so in a great
measure it is; yet oftentimes it may be acquired by art, and always improved
by culture: almost every object that attracts our notice, has its bright and
its dark side. He that habituates himself to look to the displeasing side, will
sour his disposition, and consequently impair his happiness; while he, who
constantly looks on the bright side, insensibly meliorates his temper, and, in
consequence, improves his own happiness, and that of all about him.

Arachne and Melissa are two friends, both women in years, and alike in birth,
fortune, education, and accomplishments. They were originally alike in temper
too; but by different management are grown the reverse of each other. Arachne
has accustomed herself to look on the dark side of every object. If you show
her a new publication, she slightly skims over the passages that would give her
pleasure, and dwells only on those that fill her with dislike. Her garden is a
very delightful one; but if you take a walk with her in it, she talks of
nothing but blights and storms, of snails and caterpillars. If you sit down
with her in the temples to enjoy a beautiful prospect, she observes to you,
that there is too much wood, or too little water; that the day is too sunny, or
too gloomy; that it is sultry or windy; and finishes with a long harangue upon
the wretchedness of our climate. In company she casts a gloom over all, by
giving you the history of her own bad health, or of some melancholy accident
that befell one of her daughter's children. Thus she insensibly sinks her own
spirits, and the spirits of all around her, and at last discovers, she knows
not why, that her friends are grave.

Melissa is the reverse of all this: she is cheerful herself, and communicates
it to all about her. If any misfortune has befallen her, she considers it might
have been worse, and is thankful to Providence for an escape. She opens every
book with a desire to be entertained and instructed, and, therefore seldom
misses what she looks for. Walk with her, though it be but on a heath or
common, and she will discover numberless beauties, unobserved before, in the
hills, the dales, the broom, the brakes, and the variegated flowers of weeds
and poppies. She enjoys every change of weather and of season, as bringing
something of health or convenience. In conversation, it is a rule with her
never to start a subject that leads to any thing gloomy or disagreeable; you,
therefore, never hear her repeating her own grievances, or those of her
neighbors, or (what is worst of all) their faults and imperfections. Thus
Melissa, like the Be, gathers honey from every weed; while Arachne, like the
Spider, sucks poison from the fairest flowers: the consequence is, that of two
tempers, once nearly allied, the one is for ever sour and dissatisfied, and the
other always cheerful.


LAURA. I have hemmed your handkerchief, madam, before I was aware of it; I was
so taken up with the story: I never enjoyed a morning so before.


MRS. SMITH. You will always find your happiness increase with your usefulness:
here is a short story for you to read.


LAURA. I hope I shall remember it, that I may repeat it after dinner.


MRS. SMITH. Now I would have you go to play.

After dinner Amelia and Laura repeated the following stories.


AMELIA. Augustus, who was prone to anger, got the following lesson from
Athenodorus, the philosopher: That as soon as he should feel the first emotions
of anger, he should repeat deliberately all the letters of the alphabet; for,
that anger was easily prevented, but not easily subdued. To repress anger, it
is a good method to turn the injury into a jest. Socrates having received a
blow on the head, observed that it would be well if people knew when to put on
a helmet. Another time, being attacked with opprobrious language, he calmly
observed, that the man was not yet taught to speak respectfully.


MRS. SMITH. Now, my dear Laura, I hope you can remember what you read in the
morning; it was very short.


LAURA. I Will try, madam.

Antigonus, King of Syria, hearing two of his soldiers reviling him behind his
tent, "Gentlemen," said he, opening the curtain, "remove to a greater distance,
for your king hears you."


AMELIA. What a command of temper!


MRS. SMITH. This was likely to have a better effect than punishment would have
had; for the wisest of men says, "a soft answer will turn away wrath." I hope,
my dear Laura, you will not be discouraged, for you have performed very well;
and you will find less and less difficulty, as you proceed; the faculties of
the mind, as well as the body, being strengthened and improved by exercise.


LAURA. And I never enjoyed playing, as I have done today.


MRS. SMITH. That does not surprise me; for the spirits tire in continually
pursuing one thing, let it be what it will.

The same method was continued every day. Laura soon became quite happy, in
finding that the pursuit of useful knowledge led to the higher gratifications
of her mind, and proved an inexhaustible source of pleasure and entertainment.
Thus the time insensibly passed away, till near three months had elapsed.


END OF THE FIRST PART.
PART THE SECOND.
ONE day Mrs. Smith paid a visit to Mrs. Murray at Play-Hall. Miss Murray took
the little ladies into another room, to play by themselves.

AMELIA. What do you usually play at, Miss Murray?


MISS MURRAY. We hardly ever play at any thing else but cards: brother James,
fetch them.


AMELIA. I shall like to see what sort they are.


JAMES. Here they are, sister.


MISS MURRAY. Come, ladies, sit down to the table; this is a charming
amusement! Don't you think so, Miss Denew?


AMELIA. Indeed, Miss, I cannot find a deal of pleasure in cutting and
shuffling cards, which convey no useful knowledge. Our cards amuse, and at the
same time instruct us.


JAMES. I wish you had a pack in your pocket.


AMELIA. I believe I have.


MISS MURRAY. Oh they are pictured: here is a Dutchman.


AMELIA. He lives in Holland; if you can give us a map, we will find the
country.


MISS MURRAY. I believe, brother James, there are several in my papa's study.


JAMES. I have brought a map of the world.


AMELIA. Lay it down on the table, Master Murray. Now, Sir, where is Holland?


JAMES. I don't know; I never looked at a map.


AMELIA. You joke: your papa has certainly instructed you in the use of maps.


JAMES. My papa and mamma have so many engagements, that they cannot attend
much to us: we have card parties two or three times a week. I should be obliged
to you, Miss Denew, to show me Holland.


AMELIA. There it is. In winter their women scate to market.


MISS MURRAY. Let me draw a card. I have got a Greenlander.


AMELIA. Here is Greenland; the nearest country to the North Pole, that is
inhabited: our ships go thither for whales, which are so valuable for their oil
and bone.


JAMES. Now let me draw: Oh it is an Indian. Show me the place where he resides.


AMELIA. Here, where our Nabobs get their riches, and the East India Company
trade: they employ many (...) to to bring us tea, spices and china.


LAURA. What, is it my turn? A West Indian. There are the islands; Jamaica,
Barbados, and a great many besides, which are called the West India Islands;
from which we are supplied with rum, sugar, and cotton.


AMELIA. Now I will take one; a Spaniard; I am not very fond of the Dons, for
the characteristic of their nation is pride.


JAMES. That is a common proverb, as proud as a Spaniard.


AMELIA. But now we have got to Spain, I will show you the famous Rock of
Gibraltar, which the English so bravely defended last war.


MISS MURRAY. A South American. I must apply to you, Miss Denew, to show me the
place where he lives.


AMELIA. Here it is; the Spaniards conquered it, to get possession of its rich
mines of gold and silver. Now, Laura, it is your turn.


LAURA. An Italian, a subject of the Pope, whose dominions are in Italy, and
whose residence is at Rome. Here it is.


JAMES. I heard a gentleman talk about a burning mountain: Do you know, Miss
Lloyd, what part of the world it is in?


LAURA. I believe there is one in Italy; but I have forgot the name.


JAMES. Perhaps Miss Denew can tell us.


AMELIA. There are three principal ones; Mount Vesuvius, near Naples, in Italy;
here is the place: Mount Etna, in Sicily. Now we will go to Iceland, where
there is another, that is called Mount Hecla. Master Murray, you have just put
your finger on your own country.


JAMES. Oh, what England! I shall know where to find you: if I am but fortunate
enough to draw an Englishman; but you are to draw first, Miss. Denew.


AMELIA. A Turk, with his great turban; you see their manner of dress is
different from ours; the men wearing long garments; but we must find the
country: here is Turkey, which belongs to the Grand Signior. Come, Master
Murray, I know you are impatient to draw your Englishman.


JAMES. How lucky! I have got him (laying the card down on England.) Now,
squire, you have got home. (They all laugh.)


AMELIA. But have you nothing to say of your gentleman, or his country.


JAMES. I think it the best country in the world.


AMELIA. It vies with all other nations in its commerce, our ships trading to
most parts of the globe.


MISS MURRAY. I like your cards better than ours.


AMELIA. I thought you would; we may always find something new to say upon
them; and when we meet with gentlemen who have been abroad, it is pleasant not
to be ignorant of the situation of the countries they are conversing about.
When you come to see us, we will show you our geographical and historical cards.


JAMES. Let us go on.

The servant opens the door -- Ladies, tea is ready.


MISS MURRAY. I don't like to leave our play: I hope you will come and see us
again; and pray bring your cards with you. As Mrs. Smith was returning home,
Amelia thus addressed her:


AMELIA. Pray, aunt, did you play at cards with Mrs. Murray?


MRS. SMITH. Mrs. Murray is well acquainted with my opinion of cards, and has
too much politeness ever to introduce them when I am present.


AMELIA. Miss Murray wanted us to play.

Amelia then related the conversation that passed between them, and how much
Miss and Master Murray were entertained with the pictured cards, and with
finding out the places on the map.

The day following (the morning and afternoon being passed according to their
usual method) Mrs. Smith, after tea, proposed to spend the evening in walking.


MRS. SMITH. What say you to a walk?


LAURA. I can answer we shall be agreed in that; shall we not, Amelia?


MRS. SMITH. The pleasure ground, or the fields?


LAURA. The fields, the fields; we'll be ready in a moment.


MRS. SMITH. Ring the bell for John to attend us.


LAURA. How delightful the corn looks in shocks! and the people scattered up
and down gleaning it!


AMELIA. May we go and help them, madam? I should like to gather some for that
poor woman, who has so many children with her.


MRS. SMITH. I have no objection; for I can amuse myself with a book, which I
have in my pocket, while you are engaged in so useful an employment.


AMELIA. Look, aunt, what a bundle I have gathered! Here comes Laura.


LAURA. Oh! I Am so tired! (flings herself on the ground.)


MRS. SMITH (looking at her watch.) What, give out in half an hour? Those poor
children have been toiling best part of the day.


LAURA. They were born to work, and do not feel it as we do.


MRS. SMITH. There is no difference at all in our birth: were the infant of a
rich man, and the infant of a poor man, to be dressed in the same manner, and
laid on the same bed, you would not know the one from the other; and were I to
say to you, Now, Laura, point me out the child of the poor, I should impose a
task on you, which I am sure you would be utterly unable to perform; for the
gifts of nature are equal. The difference of our persons and manners arises
solely from education; if any one of the women now in the field had, from her
infancy, been brought up with all the delicacy of the fine lady, she would have
had the same languors, and be as soon fatigued.


LAURA. But she would have been happier.


MRS. SMITH. I should think not, if I may judge from what I have been witness
to. I have seen the fine lady discontented with every thing; this was a misery!
and the other was a misery: and she was surrounded with miseries!


LAURA. Then she was miserable without a cause.


MRS. SMITH. It was entirely owing to peevishness and lassitude, arising from
the want of exercise and employment. The poor have none of these artificial
miseries; if they have food to eat, though coarse, they enjoy it; for exercise
carries off those ridiculous vapors, which destroy the appetite, and create
endless complainings.


LAURA. Then it is better to be poor than rich.


MRS. SMITH. So it would, if those miseries were necessarily attendant on
riches; but why may not we use the same means to acquire health and spirits?


LAURA. Must we, then, labor in the fields!


MRS. SMITH. No; but we must expect to enjoy more or less health and spirits,
as we use or neglect proper exercise; at any rate, we ought always to be
employed. The distribution of happiness is much more equal than we in general
imagine; for it does not consist in what we possess, but in the disposition of
mind with which we possess it.

In this book, which I have just been reading, I have found a great, though
poor man, and his views of poverty strengthen what I have said, that happiness
is more equally dispensed than we are apt to imagine.


LAURA. Pray, madam, give us some account of him.


MRS. SMITH. He was a Roman citizen; and being a virtuous honest man, he was
often employed in state affairs. At this time, he was sent as an Ambassador,
with others, to Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, then at war with the Romans, to treat
with him for the ransoming of the prisoners, who honorably entertained them,
and sent the prisoners back to Rome without any ransom. Pyrrhus, admiring
Fabricius, and understanding he was poor, endeavored to win him over, by
making him considerable offers, which were rejected by Fabricius with disdain.


AMELIA. But if he was poor, how did he support the dignity of an Ambassador?


MRS. SMITH. While he was employed in the state, they provided him with all
necessaries suitable to the situation he was in; but I will read you part of
his speech to Pyrrhus: "It would be needless (said Fabricius) for me to mention
the experience I have had in state affairs, as well as in those of a private
nature, since you have been told these things by others. You also seem to be so
well informed of my poverty, that there will be no occasion for me to acquaint
you, that I have neither money to put out to interest, nor slaves to produce me
any income; all my wealth consisting of a little house, and a small field,
which yields sufficient for my subsistence. Though I am not possessed of a
considerable estate, I never thought, nor can yet think, my poverty ever did me
the least injury. With regard to my fortune, so far from repining at it, I look
upon myself as the happiest of men, when I compare my condition with that of
the rich; and I even feel, on this occasion, a kind of complacency and pride.
My little field, though not over fruitful, furnishes me sufficiently with all
things necessary, provided I do but bestow the proper culture, and preserve the
produce of it. Do I need any thing more? All food, when seasoned by hunger is
agreeable to me. When I am parched with thirst, it is luxury to quench it; and
when I am fatigued, I take the sweets of sleep with exquisite pleasure; I
content myself with a suit that shelters me from the inclemency of the weather;
and, among the several movables, which may be of the like use, the meanest
always suits me best.

"It would be unjust in me to accuse fortune, since she furnishes me with all
that nature requires. It is, indeed true, that for want of this affluence, I am
prevented assisting the necessitous, which is the only advantage for which the
opulent may justly be envied. Even with my little, I assist where that little
can be of use, and I do my fellow citizens all the service in my power."


LAURA. I fear I shall never attain to this true noble spirit of choosing the
meanest things to wear, that I may give to others.


MRS. SMITH. I have known young ladies, that have retrenched their own expenses
to clothe others; yet not so, but that they have appeared genteel, according to
their situation; economy will do great things, and if we look upon it as a
privilege to do good, we shall easily find the means to do it; but it looks as
if we should have a shower; we must be walking. Where is John?


AMELIA. He has been helping a poor woman to glean; but he is just here.


MRS. SMITH. John, do you know of any house near?


JOHN. Yes, madam, Joe Sage's, the gardener's; it is about three fields off.


MRS. SMITH. How far are we from home?


JOHN. Almost three miles, madam.


MRS. SMITH. Then do you return, and bring the carriage, and we will wait at
the gardener's.

Just as they had got to the cottage, and were about entering, Mrs. Smith said,
"Stop! I think I hear the voice of distress; let us listen." (They hear the
following discourse.)

Oh Eliza! what shall we do? Nurse says our dear mamma will not live! What will
become of us? My mamma has left all her acquaintance, and nobody knows where we
are; -- we must die with mamma.


ELIZA. Pray, Ann, do not talk so; my heart is almost broken; but here comes
little William: let us dry up our tears.


WILLIAM. Mamma will not let me stay; she can hardly speak; bade me come to you to
kiss me, for she cannot. Her hand feels quite cold! What is the matter with
her? -- They each take him by the hand, and, kissing him, burst into tears
afresh, saying, "What shall we do without a mamma?"

Mrs. Smith, feeling herself much affected with the distress of these children,
said, "Let us go in, and see if we can afford them any comfort."

Mrs, Smith, on entering, addressed the eldest child.


MRS. SMITH. I hope, Miss, you will excuse our intrusion: we were led hither to
beg a little shelter from the approaching rain.


ELIZA. Pray, madam, walk in -- Ladies, here are chairs.


MRS. SMITH. May I enquire, my dear young Ladies, into the cause of your grief?
I presume your residence has not been long in this place.


ELIZA. Only six weeks, madam. My mamma was ill when she came, and has been
getting worse ever since; and Nurse says she cannot live long. (They all cry
afresh.)


WILLIAM. I will not let mamma die; for William must have a mamma.


MRS. SMITH. Come, kiss me, my sweet boy.


WILLIAM. No; not without you will promise to go and see my mamma; and I will
love you dearly, if you will make her well.


MRS. SMITH. My sweet fellow, I will do all in my power to make your mamma
happy.


WILLIAM (running up to her.) Then you shall have twenty kisses.


MRS. SMITH. Will you, Miss, be so obliging as to inform your mamma that a
stranger wishes to see her, and afford her all the consolation in her power.


ELIZA. I will go, madam, immediately.


MRS. SMITH (addressing Ann.) Is your papa living, my dear?


ANN. No, madam; he died about three months ago; but we did not cry when my
papa died; for he used to beat us, only to vex my mamma, when we had not been
naughty.


ELIZA (returning.) My mamma will be happy to see you, madam.


MRS. SMITH (on entering the Chamber.) My dear madam, I hope you will not think
that mere curiosity has induced me to beg an interview with you. I was
accidentally brought to hear the distresses of your little ones, and a sincere
desire of alleviating your afflictions, induced me to intrude upon you. If I
can be of any service to you, or your children, you may command me.

The sick Lady desired Nurse to raise her up, and thus addressed Mrs. Smith.


SICK LADY. I am overpowered, madam, with your goodness; my troubles are nearly
at an end; but my children, my children! what will become of them? they have no
friend left. (Here a flood of tears interrupted her.)


MRS. SMITH. I will be their friend. If your strength will permit, I should be
glad to know how you came into this distressful situation.


SICK LADY. Your kindness, madam, demands all the satisfaction in my power to
give you. My father was a man of large fortune; his name was Brown: I was his
only child. My mother died when I was very young. My father spared no pains or
expense in my education; his love for me was great; and not any young person
could be happier than I was, till I saw Captain Smith, who gained my
affections; but my father would not consent to the union. The Captain persuaded
me to risk my father's displeasure, and become his, telling me, when once we
were married, I should soon be received into favor again; -- that as I was his
only child, he could not do otherwise. The moment I forsook my dear father's
house, all happiness fled. My father declared he would never see me again, and
nothing could alter his determination. My husband, when he found that my father
would by no means be reconciled, slighted and neglected me, declaring he only
married me for my fortune; and though I was young and handsome, his pleasures
were not to be confined, and that he wanted my fortune to pursue them; but,
since he had lost his aim, he cared not how soon he got rid of me. Ah, madam!
you will easily conceive what my feelings must be, to hear such a declaration
from the man I loved, and had forsaken all for! I spent most of my time alone:
books were my chief amusement; and the educating of my dear children beguiled
many an hour: but the keen reflection of my disobedience to my dear father, was
the bitterest ingredient in my bitter lot: had I followed his advice, I had
still been happy. He knew the character of the man I married better than I did,
and all he told me has since proved true; but I could not be persuaded to
think, that a man, who manifested such politeness, attention, and tenderness,
could ever alter.

The last letter I wrote to my dear father, for I still love him, and could I
ever have thought that he would never more have seen his dear Eliza, as he used
to call me, not any thing would have tempted me from him; but I thought, as
most young people do, that his love for me would overcome his anger: the last
letter I wrote to him was on the birth of my dear William, now three years old;
but it is impossible to describe the anguish I felt, when I received his
answer, which was to this effect: -- That he had a daughter, a once dearly
beloved daughter, who had torn herself away from him; he had found it very hard
to forget her; his house, his gardens were a desert without her, and though
years had elapsed since her departure, he was still solitary: he heard, from
various persons, that his once beloved child was miserable, and that the
Captain had avowed that he treated his wife ill, in hopes to hasten the old
fellow her father's death, that he might get possession of his fortune. As that
was the case, he intended to cut off all his expectations; he was upon the
point of selling his estates, and leaving England, that he might, in a foreign
land, forget all that was dear to him in his native country; -- as for her
children, he never wished to see them; they had a father to provide for them.
-- I fainted with the letter in my hand. My cruel husband entered at that
moment, read the letter, and roused me by his storming and raving; threatened
to leave me, and the children, and flew out of the room. I had no resource
left, but to weep over my poor, forlorn, helpless infants. I dreaded his
leaving me, because I had no means of providing for myself and children, and
equally dreaded his return.

My strength, my dear madam, will not permit me to enter into a detail of the
ill treatment I met with, till within a month of his death. One day he came to
me, and said, he had been the basest of men to one of the best of women, but it
would never be in his power to make me amends; -- That he must leave me for a
time, and perhaps should never see me more, as he was going on a secret and
dangerous expedition; but if he should return he would not treat me as he had
done; -- he was now stung to his very soul, to think he had driven my father
from me. He then said, "My Eliza, take this," (which was a note of 100 l.) it
is all that is left of your uncle's legacy: then embracing me and the children,
with tears in his eyes, left the room, and I never saw him more. The next news
I heard was, that on his arrival on the continent, he was taken ill of a fever,
and was carried off in a few days. Thus was I left in accumulated distress: the
lodgings I was in were ready furnished, and expensive: at the end of six weeks
I dismissed my servant, quitted my lodging, and came to this cottage, where my
Eliza was nursed. (Here she fainted.)


NURSE. What have I heard! I thought my mistress was rich. What will become of
the children? Oh, my dear child Eliza! -- (She bursts into a flood of tears.)


MRS. SMITH. My good woman, be still, your mistress revives.


SICK LADY. Oh my children! my children!


MRS. SMITH. Be composed, my dear madam, and take something to refresh you. I
feel interested for your children; give me leave to ask if they have any
relations on their father's side.


SICK LADY. The Captain's father was a man of fortune, lived at --, in Suffolk,
left his estate to his son William, his only surviving child: he sold the
estate, and entered into the army; and it was not long before he ran through
the whole, when he thought to retrieve his affairs by my fortune. He sometimes
mentioned a first cousin of his father's, whose name was Harvey Smith; -- that
he had seen him when he was a child; but whether he was living or dead, he
could not tell.


MRS. SMITH. How astonishing that I should be led to this spot just at this
juncture, to discover the only relations of that late dear and excellent man!
Would you believe it, madam? I am the widow of Mr. Harvey Smith. I heard him
often mention his cousin in Suffolk, and that he never could learn what was
become of his son. If you can commit your lovely children to my care, I will
provide for them. I have no children; yours shall be mine.


SICK LADY. What do I hear! my children provided for! Oh, madam, you have made
me happy. I die contented! (On which she fell back, and expired.)

Mrs. Smith left the room, and went to the children. Eliza, on seeing her,
enquired how her mamma did. Mrs. Smith informed them, in the tenderest manner,
of her death, telling them, that their mamma had committed them to her care,
and she would be their mamma; then embracing them, asked William if he would
love her.


WILLIAM. No, not as I did my mamma; you are quite a stranger; besides, you
have not made my mamma well, and my sisters cry; I will love Nurse, and stay
with her; I will not go with you.


MRS. SMITH. But Nurse shall come and see you as often as she pleases.


ELIZA. I always loved Nurse, but shall now better than ever, she has been so
very kind to mamma.


AMELIA. Laura and I will do every thing in our power to make you happy.


MRS. SMITH. I think, Nurse, the children had better go with me this evening.


ANN. No, I cannot, I cannot go; -- I must see my mamma. I do not know where
you will take me.


NURSE. My dears, you need not be afraid to go with this lady. I have not the
least doubt of her being kind to you; she lives but a little way off, and I
will come and see you.


ELIZA. Permit us, madam, to stay one night longer with Nurse, that we may talk
about my mamma.


MRS. SMITH. My dear, I do not wish to take you from Nurse, till you are quite
willing.


ELIZA. Your goodness is so great, madam, that we will do any thing you wish us.


MRS. SMITH. Suppose, then, we fix tomorrow.


ELIZA. If you please, madam.


MRS. SMITH. What say you to it, my dear Ann?


ANN. If you can forgive me, madam, I will endeavor to love you.


MRS. SMITH. You have not offended me, my dear; what you said was very natural,
as I am quite a stranger. William, shall I fetch you tomorrow?


WILLIAM. No, I will not go without my sisters: look! look! how hard it rains! you
must stay all night.


MRS. SMITH. But I have sent for the coach.


WILLIAM. Have you got a coach?


MRS. SMITH. Yes, I have.


WILLIAM. Shall I ride in it?


MRS. SMITH. You shall, if you live with me.


WILLIAM. Then I will.


NURSE. Will you be so obliging, madam, as just to step into this little room.
I wish to speak to you alone. -- Pray, madam, what must I do about the funeral?


MRS. SMITH. I will give orders about it, and my servant shall take the charge
of it.


NURSE. My spirits are all in agitation! I am, as if I was in a dream! What
should we have done if you had not been here? My mistress was a charming woman,
but how altered in her person, from the time I first knew her! Well! she is now
free from all care! -- and that she should know, before she went, that her
children were provided for! I wish she had lived a few hours longer, that I
might have told her to what a good lady they were going, and how happy they
would be.


MRS. SMITH. Did you know this lady's father?


NURSE. No, madam; the first time I saw her was when the Captain was at our
county town with part of the regiment; we used to supply them with fruit. Mrs.
Smith took a liking to me, and being distressed for a wet-nurse, asked me to
take Miss Eliza. Ah! when I brought the dear little infant home, little did I
think her mamma would die at my house! Indeed, who should ever have thought
such a lady could ever condescend to be in two such small rooms! though to be
sure they are neat and clean. When she came, I was quite surprised to see her
so ill, and offered to go and take lodgings in the town for her, for I was sure
mine were not ^it for her; but she would not let me, said nobody could nurse
her like me, and the situation of my house would contribute, if any thing
could, to restore her to health. I was surprised she did not bring a servant
with her, but she was of such a sweet temper, that she was pleased with every
thing I did for her.

Here she was interrupted by the return of John, who informed his mistress the
coach was at the gate.

Mrs. Smith took an affectionate leave of the children, promising to see them
the next day.

As they were riding home, Mrs. Smith asked Laura if she felt any regret that
the rain had sent them to the cottage.


LAURA. No, madam; for if it had not rained, we should not have known any thing
of these sweet children.


AMELIA. They made us feel for them, they were so distressed: when you was up
stairs, they said, if their mamma died, they should have nobody to take care of
them: but I was quite rejoiced, aunt, when you said you would take them; for I
begin to love them already.


LAURA. You are very generous, Amelia; but perhaps you do not think of the
consequences. Your aunt's love will then be more divided.


AMELIA. I esteem the affection of my friends as my greatest treasure; at
first, I own, I felt hurt, and thought my aunt would give us all up for these
strangers. (I hope, madam, you will pardon this ungenerous thought.) A little
recollection brought right ideas to my mind. I put myself in their place,
destitute of father, mother, or friend, and every selfish motive vanished. I
was then willing they should share in your affections.


MRS. SMITH. My dear Amelia need not fear a rival, while she retains such
sentiments as these. I can tell you something, which will give you pleasure;
these dear children prove to be the relations of your late Uncle Smith, and the
only ones he has left.


AMELIA. Then they have an equal claim with us to your affections; and we will
return our uncle's love to us, by loving them.


The next morning Laura and Amelia, anxious to visit the cottage, went to Mrs.
(...).

LAURA. It is a lovely morning; pray, madam, let us fetch the Miss Smiths. Ann
must be my companion, Eliza Amelia's, and William our little playfellow.


AMELIA. What, Laura! do you mean to cast me off?


LAURA. Oh, no; not for any body.


AMELIA. I do not mean to be jealous: our attention at present must be confined
to them, that we may make them forget their loss.


LAURA. I shall sometimes please them, and sometimes teaze them; there is no
amusement without a little of that.


MRS. SMITH. You remind me of the fable of the Frogs. Some boys, at the side of
a pond, seeing the frogs put up their heads, pelted them down again with
stones. "Children," said the frogs, "you never consider, that, though it is
play to you, it is death to us."

Thus you, my dear, may teaze in good humor; but, if it is ill timed, though
it is play to you, it may give a wound to others, which may not soon be
forgotten.


LAURA. Thank you, madam, for your kind instructions; I should be sorry to
cause grief in any one, through my trifling disposition. Pray let us set out
directly for the cottage.


MRS. SMITH. I cannot conveniently go till the afternoon; we will now attend to
our morning employments.


LAURA. I quite forgot the piece of work I was so anxious to finish. How
surprised my papa will be to hear I am fond of working and reading! I am quite
delighted with it: for it brings me acquainted with so many things, which I
knew nothing of before, that I can refer continually to something new to amuse
me: I cannot think how I used to yawn through a wet day; but here confinement
to the house is no burden; for we have always something useful to amuse us.


MRS. SMITH. Amelia, do you read what you wrote last week out out of Rollin's
history. What character have you chosen?


AMELIA. One that I am almost ashamed of, it is so bad.


MRS. SMITH. How came you to make choice of such a one?


AMELIA. Because I was so struck with the misery attendant on wickedness, even
in the most exalted state.


MRS. SMITH. Let us hear it, my dear.


AMELIA. Dionysius the Elder was a prince of great political and military
abilities, and had occasion for them all, in raising himself, as he did, from a
mean condition to so high a rank. After having held the sovereignty
thirty-eight years, he transmitted it peaceably to a successor of his own
election, and had established his power upon such solid foundations, that his
son, notwithstanding the slenderness of his capacity for governing, retained it
twelve years after his death; all which could not have been effected without a
great fund of merit as to his capacity. But what qualities could cover his
vices, which rendered him the object of his subjects abhorrence? His ambition
knew neither law nor limitation; his cruelty had often no regard to the
affinity of blood; his avarice spared nothing, not even the most sacred places;
and his open and professed impiety only acknowledged the Divinity to insult him.

The amazing precautions that Dionysius thought necessary to the security of
his life, shows to what anxiety and apprehension he was abandoned. He wore
under his robe a cuirass of brass. He never harangued the people but from the
top of a high tower, and thought proper to make himself invulnerable by being
inaccessible. Not daring to confide in any of his friends or relations, his
guard was composed of slaves and strangers. He went abroad as little as
possible, fear obliging him to condemn himself to a kind of imprisonment. These
extraordinary precautions regarded, without doubt, certain intervals of his
reign, when frequent conspiracies against him, rendered him more timid and
suspicious than usual; at other times we have seen that he conversed freely
enough with the people, and was accessible even to familiarity. In those dark
days of distrust and fear, he fancied that he saw all mankind in arms against
him. He never went into the chamber of his wives at night, till they had been
first searched with the utmost care and circumspection. His bed was surrounded
with a very broad and deep trench, with a small drawbridge over, for the
entrance. After having locked and bolted the doors of his apartment, he drew up
the bridge, that he might sleep in security. Neither his brother, nor even his
sons, could be admitted into his chamber, without changing their clothes, and
being visited by the guards.

In the midst of his greatness, possessed of riches, and surrounded with
pleasures of every kind, during a reign of almost forty years, notwithstanding
all his presents and profusion, he never was capable of making a single friend.
He passed his life with none but trembling slaves and sordid flatterers, and
never tasted the joy of loving, or being beloved, nor the charms of social
truth, and reciprocal confidence. This he owns himself.


LAURA. What a wretched being!


AMELIA. But this was not known to every one; it was hid under the glare of
pomp; for one his of courtiers, named Damocles, was perpetually extolling with
rapture his treasures, his grandeur, the number of his troops, the extent of
his dominions, the magnificence of his palaces, and the universal abundance of
all good things and enjoyments in his possession, always repeating, that never
man was happier than Dionysius.

What method, Laura, do you think Dionysius took to convince him of the
contrary of all this, without ever mentioning that he was unhappy?


LAURA. I am sure I cannot tell.


AMELIA. He said to Damocles, "Will you taste, and make proof of my felicity in
person?" The offer was accepted with joy. Damocles was placed upon a golden
bed, covered with carpets of inestimable value. The sideboards were loaded with
vessels of gold and silver. The most beautiful slaves, in the most splendid
habits, stood around, watching the least signal to serve him. The most
exquisite essences and perfumes had not been spared. The table was spread with
proportionate magnificence. Damocles was all joy, and looked upon himself as
the happiest man in the world, when, unfortunately casting up his eyes, he
beheld, over his head the point of a sword, which hung from the roof only by a
single horse-hair. He was immediately seized with a cold sweat; every thing
disappeared in an instant; he could see nothing but the sword, nor think of any
thing but his danger. In the height of his fear, he desired permission to
retire, and declared if this was happiness, he would be happy no more.


LAURA. Amelia, you give us a very unfavourable idea of kings.


MRS. SMITH. We are not to form our estimate of any set of men by a few. Laura,
read the following account of Cyrus.


LAURA (reads.) Cyrus did not think a man worthy to reign over others, unless
he was more wise and virtuous than those he governed: he was also persuaded
that the surest means for a prince to gain the respect of his courtiers, and of
such as approached his person, was to have so much regard for them, as never to
do, or say any thing before them, contrary to the rules of decency and good
manners. Liberality he looked upon as a virtue truly loyal; nor did he think
there was any thing great or valuable in riches, but the pleasure of
distributing them to others. "I have prodigious riches (says he to his
courtiers) I own, and I am glad the world knows it; but you may assure
yourselves they are as much yours as mine. For to what end should I heap up
wealth? For my own use, and to consume it myself? That would be impossible, if
I desired it. No: the chief end I aim at, is to have it in my power to reward
those who serve the public faithfully, and to succor and relieve those that
will acquaint me with their wants and necessities."

Croesus one day represented to him, that by continual giving, he would at last
make himself poor; whereas he might have amassed infinite treasures, and have
been the richest prince in the world. "And to what sum (replied Cyrus) do you
think those treasures might have amounted?" Croesus named a certain sum, which
was immensely great. Cyrus thereupon ordered a little note to be writ to the
lords of his court, in which it was signified to them that he had occasion for
money. Immediately a much larger sum was brought to him than Croesus had
mentioned. "Look ^ere (says Cyrus to him) here are my treasures; the che^^s I
keep my riches in, are the hearts of my subjects."

But as much as he esteemed liberality, he still laid greater stress upon
kindness and condescension, affability and humanity, which are qualities still
more engaging, and more apt to acquire the affection of a people, which is
properly to reign. For a prince to be more generous than others in giving, when
he is infinitely more rich than they, has nothing in it so surprising or
extraordinary, as to descend, in a manner from the throne, and to put himself
upon a level with his subjects. ROLLIN.


AMELIA. Laura has quite the advantage of me today, in her Hero. What a
contrast to Dionysius!


LAURA. But I am obliged to your aunt for it.


MRS. SMITH. You are in part obliged to Amelia, for her story introduced the
other, and we may derive profit from each.


LAURA. In what way, madam?


MRS. SMITH. By imitating the good actions of the one, and avoiding the evil
actions of the other.


LAURA. But it respects kings more than us.


MRS. SMITH. That is the common error, to push every thing off from ourselves:
but is it of no consequence to you, Laura, whether you are covetous or
generous, condescending or proud? whether you render yourself contemptible or
respected, beloved or hated? When we read of great characters, we should
endeavor to follow their example as far as our situation will admit; for
though we cannot come up to them in every thing, yet the leading characteristic
of virtue is the same in every situation.


AMELIA. Pray, madam, is this the same Cyrus we read of in the Scriptures?


MRS. SMITH. The very same; you may take the second volume of Rollin, and there
you will find the history of Cyrus: you may write out any part of his life that
strikes you most, and read it to us at a future time.

In the afternoon Mrs. Smith ordered the carriage, and set out for the cottage;
but, on her arrival found the children pensive, pale, and languid.


NURSE. I am glad, madam, you are come. I fear the poor children will be ill; I
could scarcely pacify them last night. Miss Eliza fainted away, and frightened
me sadly; and today little William is quite feverish; I fear he is going to
have the measles; he has scarcely been out of my lap all day.


MRS. SMITH. I hope you are better, Eliza.


ELIZA. I don't feel quite as I did yesterday.


MRS. SMITH. My dear Ann, you look unwell.


ANN. My head aches, madam.


MRS. SMITH. My sweet little fellow, will you go with me?


WILLIAM. Yes, I will; but let nurse go too.


MRS. SMITH. Nurse, if you can be spared from your family, I shall think it an
acquisition to have you with us till the children are quite well again.


NURSE. I will attend them, madam, with pleasure, as my daughter can take care
of the concerns of my family. Miss Eliza, have you got the pictures?


ELIZA. Yes, Nurse; -- then, turning to Mrs. Smith, Oh, madam (taking out of
her pocket two miniature pictures) this is my dear mamma's; the other is one
that my mamma used to weep over, and kiss, and tell us to love it; perhaps we
might one day see the original; it is my grand-papa's.


MRS. SMITH. You shall keep them yourself, and look at them as often as you
please. Are you ready to go, my dears?


ELIZA AND ANN. Yes, madam.


WILLIAM. But I must be in Nurse's lap.


MRS. SMITH. You shall, my dear boy.


NURSE. But, if Master William will sit in his sister's lap, I will walk, or
else, madam, you will be crowded.


MRS. SMITH. No, no, Nurse, you shall ride with us; it will be of no
consequence for so little a way.


NURSE. Look about you, my sweet boy: is it not nice riding?


WILLIAM. I had rather have been with my mamma than in this coach; but let me
go to sleep.


MRS. SMITH. How many children have you, Nurse?


NURSE. Four, madam; my eldest daughter is almost twenty; she is nurse-maid in
a gentleman's family, and is as dutiful a child as I could wish; my next is
about sixteen, and is as notable a girl as ever lived: my two boys work with
their father.


MRS. SMITH. You are quite a happy family.


NURSE. Yes, madam; I cannot wish for more than I enjoy in one of the best of
husbands. Joe and I never had one quarrel since we came together: we had, to be
sure, some difficulties to struggle with while the children were young; but now
we want for nothing. I little thought I was happier than my mistress. Who could
have imagined such a fine gentleman could have used his wife so ill? I plainly
see, madam, that gentlefolks are not always the happiest people.


MRS. SMITH. Your observation is very just.

The carriage stopping, the conversation was broken off.

On their entering Amusement Hall, Mrs. Smith thus addressed Eliza and Ann.


MRS. SMITH. Now, my dear children, I hope you will look on this place as your
home, and me as your mamma, as I have adopted you for my own; I feel already
that I love you. Eliza, you weep; tell me what causes those tears?


ELIZA. I cannot forget my dear mamma.


MRS. SMITH. My dear, I would wish you to remember your mamma, and retain the
highest reverence for her; we will talk of her, and love her memory; but I will
leave you a while with your little friends.


ELIZA. What a sweet place! but I shall not enjoy it. Oh my dear mamma! You
must excuse me, ladies, for I cannot help talking of my mamma; -- she is
uppermost in my thoughts.


AMELIA. Excuse you, my dear! I do more, I sympathize with you; but after tea
we will walk in the garden, which, I hope, will remove your sister Ann's
headache. Is it any better, my dear Ann?


ANN. I think it is a little.


LAURA. Let us go up stairs, and we will show you where you are to sleep.
Little William is not awake yet. I hope you will all be better tomorrow.

The next day Ann and William had the appearance of an eruption, which proved
to be the measles.

Mrs. Smith attended them with the solicitude of a mother. For three days their
lives were despaired of; during which time she never left them: their recovery
was very slow, and their coughs continuing, Mrs. Smith called in a physician,
by whose advice she took them a journey for some weeks, accompanied by her
niece and Miss Lloyd.


END OF THE SECOND PART.
PART THE THIRD.
THE journey proved so beneficial to the health of the little Smiths, that they
were perfectly recovered on their return to Amusement Hall, which they entered
with all the vivacity and sprightliness common to children of their age.

The next morning Mrs. Smith thus addressed the children.

MRS. SMITH. We must now, my dear children, proceed in our usual method. Eliza
and Ann are both fond of reading, and I have proofs that they are neat workers.
Pray, my dear, what age are you?


ELIZA. I am near eleven, and my sister Ann nine; but I fear* madam, you have
too high an opinion of us; I wish we may not disappoint your expectations.


LAURA. You are very humble Eliza. My papa will expect a great deal from me
when I return home, and I am not afraid of his being disappointed.


MRS. SMITH. Perhaps you will think you know better than your papa.


LAURA. If I do, I shall tell him so; for I can say any thing to him; he never
contradicts me: I almost long to go home, I shall be of so much importance.


MRS. SMITH. Of just as much, Miss Laura, as the gnat in the fable, that placed
himself upon the horn of a bull, and very civilly begged pardon for the liberty
he took; but rather than incommode you, said he, by my weight, I Will remove. Oh!
says the bull, I felt you not when you sat down, and I shall not miss you when
you please to depart.

I would have you to know, your papa as far exceeds you in understanding, as
the bull did the gnat in bulk.


LAURA. Indeed, madam, you make me quite ashamed of myself; but I will
endeavor to think of the gnat, and then my own importance will vanish.


MRS. SMITH. That will be a good improvement of the fable. You will each
remember that what you read in the morning must be repeated in the afternoon,
in your own way, as you can recollect.


WILLIAM. I must learn something, mamma.


MRS. SMITH. So you shall; there, spell that word, then you shall have a
picture.


WILLIAM. Sister Ann, look what a many pretty pictures here are! horse, dog,
cat, lamb, and a whole heap more.


ANN. Did William spell them all?


WILLIAM. Yes, all.


ANN. But you don't love spelling.


WILLIAM. But I do, for such pretty things as these; and mamma has got a great
many more in her grammar box.


MRS. SMITH. Now, my dears, go to play.

After dinner the conversation was resumed.


MRS. SMITH. Now, my dear Ann, do you give an account of what you read in the
natural history this morning.


ANN. It was about those great creatures the Elephants, who are said to be from
seven to fifteen feet high: but what pleased me most was, that they have
trunks, formed of many rings, so that they can turn them about as they please,
can even take up a halfpenny, or a glove, and give it to the owner, as I was
informed by a lady, who saw it.


MRS. SMITH. You have, my dear, very prettily introduced this circumstance into
your story: go on.


ANN. The eyes are extremely small, the legs short, and the tail like that of a
hog; in the upper jaw are two tusks, of six or seven feet long, from which we
obtain our ivory. When united in droves, and enraged, it would require an army
to repel them. They were formerly used in battle, to carry towers with soldiers
in them. They sleep standing, and have been known to live from 120 to 130 years.


MRS. SMITH. You have given a very good account.


ELIZA. I will tell you, madam, what I heard of the gratitude of an elephant. A
drove used to go daily to water; and a woman that sold greens particularly
noticed one, and constantly gave it something from her stall, as it passed. One
day, as they were returning from the water, the woman having left her little
child, it had fallen off the stall into the road, and would have been trodden
to death, if it had not been for the elephant, whom the woman used to feed, who
saw the child, and carefully took it up with its trunk, and laid it on the
stall.


MRS. SMITH. Thank you, my dear, for this account. There are few animals but
what are sensible of kindness received: this however, is a remarkable instance
of sagacity and gratitude.


ANN. What my sister has related reminds me of one, who took a laughable
revenge on some tailors, who were sitting at work with the windows open. An
elephant putting his trunk into the window, the tailors pricked the end of it
with their needles; the elephant went down to the river, and filled his trunk
full of water (which they say will contain near a pail full) and came and
poured it upon the tailors, to the amusement of all that saw it.


LAURA. Thank you, Ann for your droll story.


MRS. SMITH. Laura, let us have your anecdote on integrity.


LAURA. The inhabitants of a great town offered Marshal de Turenne 100,000
crowns, upon condition he would take another road, and not march his troops
their way. He answered them, "as your town is not in the road I intended to
march, I cannot accept the money you offer me."


ANN. He might have taken the money without saying what his intentions were.


MRS. SMITH. True integrity will never listen to any reasoning against
conscience, nor can it be induced by the prospect of gain to take advantage of
the ignorance of any, but will rather assist them to obtain that information,
the want of which evidently leads to mistakes prejudicial to their interest.
This little story instructs us also to be guided by principles of the strictest
integrity, in those parts of our conduct, which are not open to the view of our
fellow creatures, and never to commit an act of injustice, because it appears
to us impossible to be detected.

I think, Eliza, your subject is Natural History.


ELIZA. Yes, madam, about a curious cotton tree, from which our cotton clothing
is derived. There are three sorts; one creeps on the earth like a vine; the
second is thick, like a bushy dwarf-tree; and the third is tall, as an oak: all
the three, after they have produced very beautiful flowers, are loaded with a
fruit as large as a walnut, and whose outward coat is entirely black. This
fruit when it is fully ripe, opens and discovers a down extremely white, which
is called cotton. The seeds are separated from the cotton by a mill; the cotton
is afterward spun, and prepared for all sorts of fine works, such as
stockings, waistcoats, quilts, and conveniences of various kinds.


LAURA. Pray don't our muslins come from the cotton tree?


ELIZA. Undoubtedly; I wonder I should forget that; and cotton is sometimes
mixed with wool, sometimes with silk, and even gold itself.


LAURA. Amelia says she has written a pretty story out of Rollin; if she has
your permission, madam, she will read it to us.


MRS. SMITH. You are anxious, Laura, to hear more of your favorite Cyrus. I
cannot deny your request; Amelia has my permission.


AMELIA (reads.) The king of Armenia, who was vassal to the Medes, looking upon
them as ready to be swallowed up by the formidable league formed against them,
thought fit to lay hold on this occasion to shake off their yoke.

Accordingly he refused to pay them the ordinary tribute, and to send them the
number of troops he was obliged to furnish in time of war.

This highly embarrassed Cyaxares (who was uncle to Cyrus): at this juncture he
was afraid of bringing new enemies upon his hands, if he undertook to compel
the Armenians to execute their treaty; but Cyrus, having informed himself
exactly of the strength and situation of the country, undertook the affair. The
important point was to keep his design secret, without which he was not likely
to succeed: he therefore appointed a great hunting match on that side of the
country; for it was his custom to ride out that way, and frequently hunt with
the king's son, and the young noblemen of Armenia.

On the day appointed he set out with a numerous retinue. The troops followed
at a distance, and were not to appear till a signal was given. After some days
hunting, when they were come pretty near the palace where the court resided,
Cyrus communicated his design to his officers, and sent Chrysanthes with a
detachment, ordering them to make themselves masters of a certain steep
eminence, where he knew the king used to retire, in case of an alarm, with his
family and treasure.


LAURA. Cyrus does not appear to me in a very favorable light, in this affair:
it was coming upon them before war was declared.


MRS. SMITH. I shall not attempt to plead Cyrus's cause, he is so well able to
do it himself.


LAURA. I shall be glad if he comes off with honor: but I will not interrupt
you any longer, Amelia.


AMELIA. This being done, he sends a herald to the king of Armenia, to summon
him to perform the treaty, and in the mean time ordered his troops to advance.
Never was court in greater surprise and perplexity. The king was conscious of
the wrong he had done, and was not in a condition to support it; however, he
did what he could to assemble his forces together from all quarters, and in the
mean time dispatched his youngest son, called Sabaris, into the mountains, with
his wives, his daughters, and whatever was most precious and valuable; but when
he was informed by his scouts, that Cyrus was coming upon his heels, he
entirely lost all courage, and all thoughts of making a defense. The Armenians,
following his example, ran away, every one where he could, to secure what was
dearest to him.

Cyrus, seeing the country covered with people, that were endeavoring to make
their escape, sent them word that no harm should be done them, if they staid in
their houses; but that as many as were taken running away should be treated as
enemies. This made them all retire to their habitations, excepting a few that
followed the king.

On the other hand, they that were conducting the princesses to the mountains
fell into the ambush Chrysanthes had laid for them, and were most of them taken
prisoners. The queen, the king's son, his daughters, his eldest son's wife, and
his treasures, all fell into the hands of the Persians.

The king, hearing this melancholy news, and not knowing what course to take,
retired to a little eminence where he was presently invested by the Persian
army, and obliged to surrender. Cyrus ordered him, with all his family, to be
brought into the midst of the army. At that very instant arrived Tigranes, the
king's eldest son, who was just returned from a journey. At so moving a
spectacle he could not forbear weeping. Cyrus, addressing himself to him, said,
Prince, you are come very seasonably to be present at the trial of your father.
And immediately he assembled the captains of the Persians and Medes, and called
in also the great men of Armenia; nor did he exclude the ladies from this
assembly, who were in their chariots, but gave them full liberty to hear all
that passed.

When all was ready, and Cyrus had commanded silence, he began with requiring
of the king, that in all the questions he was going to propose to him, he would
answer sincerely, because nothing could be less worthy a person of his rank
than to use dissimulation or falsehood.

The king promised he would. Then Cyrus asked him, but at different times,
proposing each article separately, and in order, Whether it was not true, that
he had made war against Astyages, king of the Medes, his grandfather? Whether
he had not been overcome in that war, and, in consequence of his defeat, had
concluded a treaty, by which he was obliged to pay a certain tribute, to
furnish a certain number of troops, and not to keep any fortified place in his
country? It was impossible for the king to deny any of these facts, which were
all public and notorious. For what reason, then (continued Cyrus) have you
violated the treaty in every article? For no other (replied the king) than
because I thought it a glorious thing to shake off the yoke, to live free, and
to leave my children in the same condition.


LAURA. Was not this, madam, a sentiment worthy of a king? Who would live in
subjection when he might be free?


MRS. SMITH. But the ties and obligations we are under are to be taken into
consideration, as you will presently see. Go on, Amelia.

It is really glorious (answered Cyrus) to fight in defense of liberty; but if
any one, after he is reduced to servitude, should attempt to run away from his
master, what would you do with him? I must confess (says the king) I would
punish him. And if you had given a government to one of your subjects and he
should be found to commit malversations, would you continue him in his post?
No, certainly; I would put another in his place. And if he had amassed great
riches by his unjust practices? "I would strip him of them." But, which is
still worse, if he had held intelligence with your enemies, how would you treat
him? Though I should pass sentence upon myself (replied the king) I must
declare the truth! I would put him to death. At these words Tigranes tore his
hair from his head, and rent his garments: the women burst into lamentations
and outcries, as if sentence had been actually passed upon him.


MRS. SMITH. Now, my dear Laura, you see how people may be drawn away by
specious notions of honor; but when their actions are painted in true colors,
they are forced to condemn themselves; therefore, in every important concern we
undertake, we should examine it ourselves in every point of view.

If the king of Armenia had done so, and acted upon his convictions he would
not have been brought into this dreadful situation.


LAURA. I long to know what Cyrus did with him.


MRS. SMITH. Amelia, proceed.

Cyrus having again commanded silence, Tigranes addressed himself to the prince
to this effect: Great prince, can you think it consistent with your wisdom to
put my father to death, even against your own interest? "How against my
inturest?" (replied Cyrus.) "Because he was never so capable of doing you
service." How do you make that appear? do the faults we commit enhance our
merit, and give us a new title to consideration and favor? They certainly do,
provided they serve to make us wiser. For wisdom is of inestimable value. Are
riches, courage, or address, to be compared to it? Now it is evident that this
single day's experience has infinitely improved my father's wisdom. He knows
how dear the violation of his word has cost him. He has proved and felt how
much you are superior to him in all respects. He has not been able to succeed
in any of his designs? but you have happily accomplished all yours: and with
that expedition and secrecy that he has found himself surrounded, and taken,
before he expected to be attacked; and the very place of his retreat has served
only to ensnare him. But your father (replied Cyrus) has yet undergone no
sufferings that can have taught him wisdom.

The fear of evil (answered Tigranes) when it is so well founded as this is,
has a much sharper sting, and is more capable of piercing the soul, than the
evil itself. Besides, permit me to say, that gratitude is a stronger, and more
prevailing motive, than any other whatever; and there can be no obligations in
the world of a higher nature than those you will lay on my father. His fortune,
liberty, scepter, life, wives, and children, all restored to him with such a
generosity. Where can you find, illustrious prince, in one single person, so
many strong and powerful ties to attach him to your service?

Well, then (replied Cyrus, turning to the king) if I should yield to your
son's entreaties, with what number of men, and what sum of money, will you
assist us in the war against the Babylonians? My troops and treasures (says the
Armenian king) are no longer mine -- they are entirely yours. I can raise forty
thousand foot, and eight thousand horse; and as to money, I have about three
thousand talents; all these are wholly at your disposal.

Cyrus accepted half the number of troops, and left the king the other half,
for the defense of the country against the Chaldeans, with whom he was at war.
The annual tribute which was due to the Medes he doubled, and, instead of fifty
talents, exacted a hundred, and borrowed the like sum over and above, in his
own name. But what would you give me (added Cyrus) for the ransom of your
wives? "All I have in the world" (answered the king). "And for your children?"
"The same thing." From this time you are indebted to me the double of all your
possessions. And you, Tigranes, at what price would you redeem the liberty of
your lady? Now he had lately married her, and was passionately fond of her. "At
the price (says he) of a thousand lives, if I had them!"

Cyrus then conducted them all to his tent, and entertained them at supper. It
is easy to imagine what transports of joy there must have been upon this
occasion. Cyrus, before they parted, embraced them all, in token of a perfect
reconciliation. This done, they got into their chariots, with their wives, and
went home full of gratitude and admiration. Nothing but Cyrus was mentioned the
whole way; some extolling his wisdom, others his valor; some admiring the
sweetness of his temper, others praising the beauty of his person, and the
majesty of his mien. And you (says Tigranes, addressing himself to his lady)
what do you think of Cyru's aspect and deportment? I do not know (replied the
lady); I did not observe him. Upon what object, then, did you fix your eyes?
Upon him that said, he would give a thousand lives to ransom my liberty.


LAURA. Amelia, this is a charming story! I know not which to admire most --
Cyrus for his clemency, or Tigranes for his eloquence in pleading his father's
cause.

The next morning Mrs. Smith, on entering the breakfast parlour, finds Eliza
weeping.


MRS. SMITH. Has any accident happened, my dear child?


ELIZA. No, madam, I was only drawing a contrast between our situation, and
that of one of our play-fellows, who was left in similar circumstances; but she
met with all sorts of mortifications; while we, in our new mamma, meet with
every indulgence; so that I could not help weeping for joy.


MRS. SMITH. If the relation of this child's misfortunes will not affect you
too much, I should like to hear them.


ELIZA. Her name was Lee: her papa was lieutenant in our regiment. She lost her
mamma when she was very young, for which reason she was almost constantly with
us, my mamma being very fond of her. About two years ago her papa died, and
left her quite destitute. My dear mamma wept over her, regretting that it was
not in her power to provide for her; but a distant relation of her mamma's, who
was a mantua-maker, took her, intending to bring her up to her own business. My
mamma sent us one day to see her; her cousin said she was a proud little thing;
she had only asked her to sweep up the hearth, and truly Miss had refused,
telling her she had done it before she came, and might now, for she was not
used to do such things; but added, I hit her a good slap, and brought down her
pride.


LAURA. I cannot bear this, cousin: if I had been Miss Lee, I would not have
done it, for all her beating: a pretty thing, indeed, to ask a young lady!


MRS. SMITH. Laura, do you know lady Mary? She is about your own age; and
though her father is an earl, yet it is said he is very poor. Suppose this
child reduced to poverty, and your papa were to take her, and bring her up as
your companion.


LAURA. I would treat her with the kindness of a sister.


MRS. SMITH. Would you scruple to beg of her to fetch your cap out of such a
drawer?


LAURA. Certainly not.


MRS. SMITH. But if she was to deny you?


LAURA. I should be quite provoked, and say she was a proud, good-for-nothing
girl; for that could be no hardship; it is not like sweeping the hearth.


MRS. SMITH. But would you not consider her dignity?


LAURA. I think she ought to consider her poverty, and be thankful she was not
asked to do any thing worse; and if she would not do that willingly, I think
she ought to be made.

Now, Laura, draw a comparison between yourself and Miss Lee's cousin: before
we condemn the conduct of others, we ought to put ourselves in their place. It
would be as much below the dignity of Lady Mary to fetch Miss Lloyd's cap, as
for Miss Lee to sweep her cousin's hearth, though it would be the duty of each
to submit to their benefactors. Miss Lee's cousin asked her to do only what she
herself was accustomed to do, and therefore thought it pride in her to refuse.
I own there was want of feeling in beginning so hastily: and she for a moment
put herself in Miss Lee's situation, she would have adopted a milder way of
urging her point. My dear Laura's falling into the same error, is from the same
cause, not entering into the feelings of others. Though your father is rich,
yet you have been taught that you have feet to carry you to your drawers, and
hands to take out what you want; while Lady Mary has a servant standing behind
her all the time she is dressing, to fetch and carry every thing she wants. If
you ever do any person a kindness, always do it as if you were the most
obliged; there is more in the manner of bestowing a favor, than in the favor
itself; and, by removing every thing that gives pain, we imperceptibly bring
people into our own ideas of things. Amelia, should you have treated Lady Mary
the same? You are silent; don't be ashamed to own the truth. I endeavor to
fathom your hearts out of love to you; you have much to learn; but what will be
of the most service to you is to know yourselves.

I have just recollected the conduct of a prin^^ (...) our own nation, which
will not be unsuitable on the present occasion:

The Prince of Wales, commonly called the Black Prince (from the color of his
armor) who distinguished himself by his conduct and bravery in the battle of
Poictiers, was not less admired, after the victory, for his modest and generous
behavior to his prisoner King John. The evening after the battle, the Prince
refused to sit down with the King at supper; but standing behind his chair,
entertained him with his discourse. As the king's thoughts were wholly employed
about his present misfortune, the Prince said to him, in a modest and
unaffected manner, "That his Majesty had one great reason to be comforted,
which was, that the battle was not lost by his fault; that the English, to
their cost, had experienced him to be the bravest of princes, and that God
alone had disposed of the victory; and (continued he) if fortune has been your
adversary, you may, at least, rest secure, that an inviolable regard shall be
preserved for your person; and that you shall experience in me a very
respectful relation, if I may glory in that title."

The king upon this, recovering himself, turned to the Prince, and said, with
an air of satisfaction, "That since it was his destiny to be vanquished, and
taken, in an action wherein he had done nothing unworthy of his character, he
found great comfort in falling into the hands of the most valiant and generous
Prince alive."

It is said that when King Edward, father to the Prince, received the news of
the battle, he declared, that his satisfaction at so glorious a victory was not
comparable to what he felt from the generous behavior of his son.


LAURA. I hope I shall take pattern by this Prince, and do all in my power to
alleviate the distresses of others.


ELIZA. I have often thought of a conversation I heard between my papa and some
officers; they agreed that stratagems in war were necessary, and gave several
examples* they then went on to the subject of treachery; but my mamma sent me
out of the room, and so prevented me from hearing their opinion. This was a sad
disappointment. Pray, madam, is it lawful, by treachery, to take advantage of
an enemy?


MRS. SMITH. I should hope, my dear, there are few to be found, that would
plead for it. I will tell you how Fabricius acted when his enemy was put into
his power.


AMELIA. Was it the same Fabricius that was sent ambassador to Pyrrhus?


MRS. SMITH. The very same.

The year after he was sent out with the army against Pyrrhus, their camp lying
at no great distance, Pyrrhus's physician came to Fabricius by night, offering
to dispatch Pyrrhus by poison, if he would reward him for it.

Fabricius instantly ordered him to be bound, and carried back to his master;
and that Pyrrhus should be informed what proposals the physician had made
against his life.

The king was so struck with admiration, that he is reported to have said:
"Fabricius is a person of such virtue, that it is more difficult to divert him
from the paths of honor, than the sun from his course."


AMELIA. I think it is a great doubt whether Pyrrhus would have been as
generous to him.


MRS. SMITH. But, my dear, if we have an enemy in our power, the question ought
not to be, What would he have done to me? but, What is my duty toward him,
according to true rectitude?

Mrs. Smith receives two letters.


AMELIA. The address of that letter is my papa's handwriting; the other is Mr.
Lloyd's.


MRS. SMITH (reads them.) The purport of these two letters is to summon my dear
Amelia and Laura away.


ELIZA. How can we part with them?


MRS. SMITH. I do it with the less regret, as they are not to be parted from
each other.


LAURA. I rejoice at that, though I long to be a little with my papa, having
been absent from him for such a length of time.


MRS. SMITH. You will enjoy that pleasure also, as your papa has consented to
accompany Mr. and Mrs. Denew in their visit to Bath for the winter, with their
whole family.


LAURA. I am quite delighted that my papa is to be with us!


AMELIA. What an addition to our happiness would it be, if my dear aunt and
young friends were to be of our party!


PART THE FOURTH.
THE next morning an affectionate parting took place.

They were no sooner gone than Eliza gave vent to her feelings.

ELIZA. You must excuse me, madam; I cannot help weeping: I did not know how
much I loved them till the separation come.


ANN. We shall lose many advantages by the loss of their company.


MRS. SMITH. But it is useless to dwell on the gloomy side; you should rather
look forward to the pleasure you may enjoy in a correspondence with them.


ELIZA. They promised to give us an account of all the adventures they met
with. I am sure we shall find a great deal of entertainment in their letters.


ANN. How we shall watch the post!


WILLIAM. Mamma, John is going to ride your horse; may I go before him?


MRS. SMITH. Yes, you may; and tell John I shall want the carriage in the
afternoon.


ELIZA. I wish I did not feel so uncomfortable; I cannot settle any thing.


MRS. SMITH. To give a turn to your thoughts, I will let you see an allegory,
that was put into my hands the other day by a lady of my acquaintance.


ELIZA. Thank you, madam.


ANN. Pray, Eliza, read it out.


ELIZA. That I will with pleasure.


CARE AND GENEROSITY. (By Mr. Smart.)
Old Care, with industry and art,
At length so well had played his part,
He heaped up such an ample store,
That avarice could not sigh for more:
Ten thousand flocks his shepherds told,
His coffers overflowed with gold;
The land all round him was his own,
With corn his crowded granaries groan:
In short, so vast his charge and gain,
That to possess them was a pain;
With happiness oppressed he lies,
And much too prudent to be wise.
Near him there lived a beauteous maid,
With all the charm of youth arrayed;
Good, amiable, sincere, and free,
Her name was Generosity.
'T was here is the largess to bestow,
On rich and poor, on friend and foe.
Her doors to all were opened wide,
The pilgrim there might safe abide;
Forth' hungry and the thirsty crew,
The bread she broke, the drink she drew;
There sickness laid her aching head,
And there distress could find a bed:
Each hour, with an all-bounteous hand,
Diffused she blessings round the land;
Her gifts and glory lasted long,
And numerous was the accepting throng:
At length pale penury seized the dame,
And fortune fled and ruin came;
She found her riches at an end,
And that she had not made one friend.
All cursed her for not giving more,
Nor thought on what she would done before;
She wept, she raved, she tore her hair,
When lo! to comfort her came Care,
And cried, My dear, if you will join
Your hand in nuptial bonds with mine,
All will be well; -- you shall have store,
And I be plagued with wealth no more.
Though I restrain your bounteous heart,
You still shall act the generous part.
The bridal came -- great was the feast,
And great the joy that was expressed:
The bride, in nine moons, brought him forth
A little maid of matchless worth;
Her face was mixed of care and glee,
They named her Economy;
And styled her fair Discretion's queen,
The mistress of the golden mean.
Now Generosity confined,
Is perfect easy in her mind;
She loves to give, yet knows to spare,
Nor wishes to be free from Care.
MRS. SMITH. Do you, my dear, understand the allegory?


ELIZA. I think, madam, it means that the avaricious can have no enjoyment of
their riches, and that an unbounded generosity, without economy, must bring on
ruin; but that a prudential care, with a generous heart, will make riches a
blessing to the possessor, and to all around him.


MRS. SMITH. You have given a good explanation.

Some days after, as they were sitting at work, Eliza started up: Oh, madam!
there is a gentleman flung from his horse! Mrs. Smith rung for the servants,
and flew to the assistance of the gentleman, who, they found, had broken his
leg, and was stunned by the fall. They conveyed him into the house, and then
sent for a surgeon who set his leg, and ordered him to be kept very still,
being apprehensive from the blow on his head. Mrs. Smith learned, from the
gentleman's servant, that his master's name was Carbonnel; that he had lived
with him only six months, which time had been spent in traveling.

Mr. Carbonnel continued some days in a state of insensibility. Mrs. Smith
going into the room one day, he started: "What! is it my daughter?" recovering
himself, "O no! madam, I ask your pardon; where am I?"


MRS. SMITH. Be composed, Sir: you are with a friend, who will do every thing
in her power to accommodate you; but I will go, Sir, and send your servant.

Mr. Carbonnel, on his servant's entering, said, "Thomas, how came I into this
situation? and whose house am I in?"


THOMAS. Oh, Sir! how rejoiced I am to find you take notice! He then informed
his master that he was in the house of a Mrs. Smith, a widow lady, who had
three fine children: "When you recover a little, Sir," said he, "you will be
amused with these children."


MR. CARBONNEL. No, Thomas; they will only revive my grief? why did I say I
never wished to see them, when now I would give all the world to behold them?
but then their father was living; now the case is altered.


THOMAS. Who is it, SIR, that you wish to see?


MR. CARBONNEL. I cannot tell you, Thomas: leave me; I will try to get a little
sleep.


MRS. SMITH (meets Thomas.) How does your master do, Thomas?


THOMAS. He talks quite wandering, madam. I fear his head is not right: I hope
he will recover. He is one of the best of masters. He is very rich, and makes
good use of his riches: -- I never knew any place that he went to, but what he
did some good: -- he does not wait to be applied to, but seeks out the
distressed: -- I should keep you a whole day, madam, were I to relate to you
all I know. (Turning his head to a window) Oh! Master Smith is climbing a tree
in the orchard?

Away he flew; but, before he got there, poor William had fallen to the ground,
and lay screaming terribly. Thomas picked him up, and brought him in.


THOMAS. I hope, madam, that master is not much hurt.


MRS. SMITH. William, are you hurt?


WILLIAM. Oh! yes, mamma.


MRS. SMITH. I have no pity for you, but am glad you feel it.


WILLIAM. What! mamma glad that William feels pain!


MRS. SMITH. Yes that you may remember not to undertake any thing, which you
are not equal to; had you asked the gardener if you could climb that tree, he
would have told you the consequence of such a little boy's attempting it.


WILLIAM. He told me not to do it: for if I did I should be sure to fall.


MRS. SMITH. Then you are a very naughty boy not to mind what is said to you.
You may go to Nanny to have your arm rubbed with brandy: I see it is bruised a
little; but I do not wish to have any thing to do with naughty children.

(He goes away sobbing and crying.) Mr. Carbonnel continued to mend. One day
William crept into his room.


MR. CARBONNEL. Well, little fellow, who are you?


WILLIAM. My name is William Smith: I wanted sadly to see you; your Thomas told
me you would love me; and I am come to see if you do.


MR. CARBONNEL. Do you think you could love me?


WILLIAM. Yes; and (climbing on the bed) I will show you I do, by giving you
ten kisses; but do you love me?


MR. CARBONNEL. How can I do otherwise, when you are so kind as to come and see
me?


WILLIAM. But if mamma were to know I was here, she would be angry.


MR. CARBONNEL. Why?


WILLIAM. Because I asked her to let me come, and she said, By no means, till
you were better.


MR. CARBONNEL. I think I shall be angry with your mamma for attempting to
deprive me of so great a pleasure.

William immediately got off the bed, and was marching away in a pet, saying,
"Then I will not let her come to see you; for nobody shall be angry with my mamma."


MR. CARBONNEL. Stop, stop, my dear boy; I have got some plums for you.


WILLIAM. I wont have them, without you will promise not to be angry with my
mamma.


MR. CARBONNEL. Well, I will promise.


Just at this juncture Mrs. Smith entered.

MRS. SMITH. William how came you to intrude into Mr. Carbonnel's room?


MR. CARBONNEL. Madam, you must excuse William, for he has only imitated his
mamma in being anxious to pay attention to a stranger.


MRS. SMITH. I believe, Sir, as my boy has intruded, I must beg leave to
introduce my girls, who are equally anxious to see you.


MR. CARBONNEL. I shall be happy, madam, to see them.

Mrs. Smith, on introducing them, observed Mr. Carbonnel to be particularly
pensive, and fetch a deep sigh, when he looked on Eliza.

The children being withdrawn, he thus addressed Mrs. Smith.


MR. CARBONNEL. Madam, you are blessed with lovely children: -- may the
enjoyment of them be long continued to you, and may no adverse fortune imbitter
your days. (Here an involuntary tear started.)

Mrs. Smith, finding that something prayed on Mr. Carbonnel's spirits, which he
wished to conceal, turned the conversation to general topics.

In a few weeks Mr. Carbonnel was sufficiently recovered to be carried in a
chair into the library. Mrs. Smith, Eliza, and Ann were at work; -- they all
rose.


MR. CARBONNEL. Mrs. Smith, if you suffer me to be any interruption, I will be
carried back to my chamber immediately.


MRS. SMITH. I shall be happy, Sir, to have your company; the children have
nearly finished; they have only two short stories to repeat, which they read a
morning or two ago.


MR. CARBONNEL. I esteem myself quite fortunate, that I am in time to hear them.


MRS. SMITH. Eliza can you recollect the account of Alcibiades?


ELIZA. Yes, madam:

Alcibiades was a young nobleman, who was continually boasting of his wealth,
and the great estates in his possession. He was pupil to Socrates, who one day
carried him to a geographical map, and asked him to find Attica. It was so
small it could scarce be discerned upon that draught; he, however, found it
with difficulty; but, upon being desired to point out his own estate there: "It
is too small," says he, "to be distinguished in such a narrow compass." "See
then," replied Socrates, "how much you are affected about an imperceptible
point of land."


(ROLLIN.) ANN. Pray madam, let us fetch the map, and see how large England is.


MRS. SMITH. Do, my dear.


ANN. Here it is; but it bears no proportion to Europe.


ELIZA. Nor Europe to the whole world.


MRS. SMITH. And what is our world compared with those immense globes which
surround us! I have, at times, Mr. Carbonnel, been lost in reflecting on the
infinity of space.


MR. CARBONNEL. Indeed, madam, the subject is too big for the human
understanding to grasp. If we confine our views to the solar system, of which
we form a part, and only contemplate the magnitude of the planets, their
respective distances, and the orbits in which they move, the globe that we
inhabit dwindles into a point; but if we extend our ideas to the fixed stars,
and consider each of them as a distinct sun, the center of a system like our
own, our world sinks into nothing; and as for the possessions of the greatest
monarch on earth, they are but as a mere atom, lost in the abyss of bodies, and
the boundless dimensions of space. What, then, has man to boast of? But I will
not not detain the ladies. Miss Ann will favor us with her story.


ANN. The Lacedemonian youth were taught to reverence and respect the aged, and
to give them proofs of it upon all occasions; by saluting them, by making way
for them, and giving them place in the street, by rising up, to show them
honor in all companies and public assemblies; but, above all, by receiving
their advice, and even their reproofs, with docility and submission.

By these characteristics a Lacedemonian was known wherever he came; if he had
behaved otherwise, it would have been looked upon as a reproach to himself, and
a dishonor to his country.

An old man of Athens going into the theater once to see a play, none of his
own countrymen offered him a seat; but when he came near the place where the
Spartan ambassadors, and the gentlemen of their retinue, were sitting, they all
rose up, out of reverence to his age, and seated him in the midst of them.


ELIZA. I think the Athenians must be quite ashamed. I hope, madam, we shall
imbibe the spirit of the Lacedaemonians, and always honor the aged.


MR. CARBONNEL. You are a happy mother, madam; your daughters make a noble
choice, and your son William is not behind them; for I can assure you he is a
Lacedemonian already.


MRS. SMITH. I do not understand you, Sir.


MR. CARBONNEL. I was a spectator of his actions from my window: he was very
busy drawing a cart, when, all on a sudden, he left his play, and ran out of
the garden into an adjoining field, where I perceived a poor old man very
feeble: the dear boy took him by the hand, and led him into the house, talking
to him all the way. Thomas afterward told me how free and good-natured he was
with the old man, handing the bread and beer to him, asking if it was good, and
if he would come again, he should have more.


ANN. It was neighbor Goodall, mamma.


MRS. SMITH. He is a worthy old man; it gives me sincere pleasure to find
William was so attentive to him.


MR. CARBONNEL. It is a pleasure to see children early imbibe sentiments of
regard for the poor.


MRS. SMITH. I hope, Sir, they will ever retain them. Eliza and Ann, seek your
brother, and take him with you into the pleasure-garden.


ELIZA. We will, madam.


MR. CARBONNEL. I admire with what ease the Miss Smiths relate what they have
read; and their being accustomed to make remarks on what they read, will be of
great advantage to them when they grow up. I am much indebted to them for their
endeavors to amuse me: a day or two ago they brought me their game of
arithmetic. I was surprised to find even little William so ready at casting up
the numbers. Another day they presented me with their game of geography,
choosing me their president to assign and distribute their rewards, each
answering to the counters they took out of the bag; so that they went through
every county and principal town in England, Scotland and Ireland, with the
counties watered by the seaports, bays, and capes, pointing out each on the
plain map.


MRS. SMITH. It gives me pleasure, Sir, to find that their amusements meet with
your approbation. We are much indebted to the Abbe Gaultier, and other learned
men, who have condescended to enter into the playful ideas of children; so that
learning is no longer a task, but a pleasure; and what is attained by their own
free will makes an abiding impression on their minds.


MR. CARBONNEL. But, at the same time, they must have a good instructor. You,
madam, have so happily blended instruction with amusement, that you can
scarcely fail of gaining the hearts of your little pupils. They tell me the
first thing they attend to in a morning is reading the Scriptures: even here
you have studied the peculiar propensities of youth, by forming the historical
parts into dialogues, and have thereby given yourself an opportunity of
conveying instruction of the utmost importance in a pleasing and imperceptible
manner. Miss Smith has been so obliging as to lend me the manuscript. Your
History of the Jews, from the time of the Babylonish captivity to the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, in letters, as an Appendix to the history of
the Bible, is a part of history which I have long wished children to be
acquainted with, as it tends to illustrate the sacred writings by showing us
how fully the prophecies therein contained were fulfilled in the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the Jews for their rejection of the Messiah.


MRS. SMITH. Those dialogues, Sir, were written by a particular friend. I am
gratified that they meet with your approbation: they have a tendency to
encourage a spirit of enquiry, which should be promoted by all the means in our
power.


WILLIAM (running in.) Mamma, Mr Noble's carriage is at the door. I wonder
whether little Charles is with them; if he is I Will show him my rocking horse.


MRS. SMITH (on her return.) You will excuse me, Sir, for so abruptly leaving
you.


MR. CARCONNEL. Madam, it needs no apology; that ought to rest with me, for my
long intrusion upon you; but your goodness, and the company of your little
folks, have almost made me forget that it is time for me to think of removing.


MRS. SMITH. I must beg you, Sir, to wave that subject, till you are quite
recovered; perhaps you have a long way to travel to your residence.


MR. CARBONNEL. I have had no fixed habitation since I came from abroad; but I
am in pursuit of an object, which if I should be happy enough to find, I may
still have some enjoyment in life. (Here he stopped, and sat pensive, with his
handkerchief up to his eyes.)

William, to divert him, says, "Pray, Mr. Carbonnel, lend me your watch."


MR. CARBONNEL. But I must know what you want it for.


WILLIAM. Only to hold it in my hand; -- I will not break it; -- mamma can guess
what I want it for.


MRS. SMITH. I believe I must guarantee it.


MR. CARBONNEL. You have so good a surety, William, that I cannot deny it you.


WILLIAM. Mamma, what a pretty gold watch it is!


MRS. SMITH. But it is not the beautiful outside, William, that constitutes its
usefulness.


WILLIAM. No, mamma; it is the works within.


MRS. SMITH. Can you prove that?


WILLIAM. Yes, mamma; by the lines you taught me -- and, holding the watch in
his hand, he thus spoke: Little monitor, by thee
Let me learn what I should be;
Learn the round of life to ^^ill,
Useful and progressive still.
Thou can gentle hints impart,
How to regulate the heart:
When I wind thee up at night,
Mark each fault, and set thee right;
Let me search my bosom ^^o,
And my daily though^ ^eview;
Mark the movements of my mind,
Nor be easy when I find
Latent errors rise to view,
Till all be regular and true.



MR. CARBONNEL That is well said, my charming boy; you will make me love you.


WILLIAM. It would not be fair if you did not, for I love you; but my sisters
are waiting for me to go a walking.

In a little time Mr. Carbonnel was so far recovered, as to be able to go down
stairs. One day, as he was sitting in the parlour with the children, Eliza took
a picture out of her pocket.


MR. CARBONNEL. Ah, Miss Eliza, what have you got there? something for me to
see?

"No, Sir," replied Eliza, blushing, and tried to put it into her pocket.


MR. CARBONNEL. Nay, but I must see it; it is your mamma's picture; I must see
if it is a good likeness. (Snatches the picture out of her hand.) He no sooner
beheld it than his countenance changed, and he exclaimed "How, child, did you
get possession of this picture?"


ELIZA (bursting into tears.) It is my own mamma's.


MR. CARBONNEL. What is the child talking of? Is not Mrs. Smith your mamma?


ELIZA. She is now, as she kindly adopted us when my own mamma died.


MR. CARBONNEL (in an agitation.) What was your own mamma's name.


ELIZA. Smith.


MR. CARBONNEL. What was her name before she married?


ELIZA. Brown: but why, Sir, do you ask me? did you know her?


MR. CARBONNEL. Oh, my daughter! my daughter! never shall I see you! (Flings
himself back in his chair in an agony of distress.) Children! what! my grand
children! (They all weep.)


ANN. You cannot be our grand-papa, for his name was Brown; we have got his
picture (pulling it out of her pocket); my mamma used to tell us to love it;
and kiss it, for the sake of the original.


MR. CARBONNEL. This is too much!


ANN. The picture is not like you; it is much prettier than you are.


MR. CARBONNEL. Ah, my dear child! age and grief have made a strange
alteration. Come to me, my dears: you are, indeed, my own grandchildren.

Just at this instant Mrs. Smith entered the room. The children were hanging
about Mr. Carbonnel, and he embracing them.


MR. CARBONNEL. These children, madam, are mine.


MRS. SMITH. Sir, you surprise me!


MR. CARBONNEL. They are my grandchildren.


MRS. SMITH. How, Sir, can that be? their grandfather's name was Brown.


MR. CARBONNEL. So was mine, madam, till I changed it about ten months ago, for
an estate left me by a distant relation. This picture is my dear daughter's:
(Here tears interrupted him:) excuse my feelings, madam, I have lost her; but
here is her image, pointing to Eliza; if it had not been for the discovery of
this picture, I should have left you in the possession of these dear children,
who are now doubly dear to me.


MRS. SMITH. I heartily congratulate the children in finding such a
grandfather, but feel myself uncommonly interested. How can I part with them?

The children fly to her. "No, mamma, we cannot, we will not leave you." They
mingle their tears together.


MR. CARBONNEL. Madam, I must be a monster of ingratitude, were I to offer any
such thing; I shall teach them still to love you as their mother.


WILLIAM. Then William is your little boy, mamma, and Mr. Carbonnel's little
boy.


MRS. SMITH. Grand-papa's little boy.


WILLIAM. Oh! I forgot.


MR. CARBONNEL. I long to know the history of my poor unfortunate daughter.

The children retiring, Mrs. Smith informed Mr. Carbonnel of the situation in
which she found his daughter, and the conversation they had together, with what
followed.


MR. CARBONNEL. My poor suffering child! What misery she brought on herself!
There was not any sacrifice which I would not have made, could it have been
productive of her happiness: but a reconciliation would not have had that
effect. I knew Smith's disposition too well, and likewise the warmth of my own
temper; that circumstances might have occurred, which would have made him use
her worse, and then I should have reflected upon myself, that I had made her
unhappy; whereas, if I was at a distance she could suffer no more than she
brought upon herself: but when I was informed that Smith used her ill, in hopes
to hasten my death, I was determined to cut off all his expectations: I
therefore sold my estates, and went abroad; but the moment I heard of his
death, I prepared to set off for England, not doubting but I should ^^^d my
dear Eliza. I applied to the War-office, to know where the regiment was
quartered. -- I immediately flew to the place, and found her lodging, which she
had quitted six weeks before, but could not learn where she was, only that she
was gone where one of her children was nursed, for the sake of the air, as she
was in a bad state of health. My grief was inexpressible; but I was determined
to travel through every county in search of her. I have, at times, been almost
distracted to think what she and the children might suffer, as I knew Smith had
nothing to leave them; the poor children would, indeed, have been in a
deplorable situation, had not your goodness led you to take compassion on them.
Oh, madam! how shall I ever repay you the kindness you have shown these orphans?


MRS. SMITH. I esteem myself amply repaid, Sir, by your kindness, in permitting
me still to enjoy them as my own, for I find that affection for them, that it
would imbitter all my comforts to part with them.

Mr. Carbonnel bought an estate adjoining Mrs. Smith's; so that they mutually
enjoyed the children. William was chiefly with his grand-papa, and Eliza and
Ann with Mrs. Smith. The good old gentleman enjoyed his grandchildren five
years, when he was taken off suddenly; -- went to bed in good health, and was
found dead in the morning. The Carbonnel estate came to William; the rest of
his fortune was divided between his three grandchildren, except a handsome
legacy to Mrs. Smith, who was left their sole guardian.


THE END.

