THE FAMILY ADVISER; OR, A PLAIN AND MODERN PRACTICE OF PHYSIC; CALCULATED For
the Use of Families who have not the Advantages of a Physician, AND
ACCOMMODATED TO THE DISEASES OF AMERICA.

THE SECOND EDITION, CORRECTED.

BY HENRY WILKINS, M. D.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED Mr. Wesley's Primitive Physic, REVISED.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, NO. 25. CHURCH-ALLEY, AND SOLD BY
JOHN DICKINS, NO. 44, NORTH SECOND STREET, NEAR ARCH STREET. 1795.

PREFACE.
THE substance of the following pages is chiefly drawn from those excellent
authors, Home, Cullen, and M'Bride; whose names alone are a sufficient
recommendation: They were compiled at the request of our friend Mr. Asbury.

The work contains a good description of each disorder, and its remote causes,
as far as known The proximate cause is generally omitted, being unintelligible
to those who are not acquainted with medicine, of little use, and much disputed
by physicians. The cure is as simple as possible, so as not to interfere with
efficacy: few medicines being recommended, and no compounds where they could be
omitted. To this is prefixed the management of the sick, about which the
attendants are usually much at a loss.

Such medicines as are frequently used are put at the end, numbered and
referred to, which prevents frequent repetition, but those that are not so
general are inserted in the reading. Will not this be much more agreeable to
the reader, than a general reference or a general insertion?

A few disorders are omitted, because they are not proper to this country, or
because they are unmanageable even in the hands of physicians, or for other as
good reasons: otherwise it comprehends as many disorders as Dr. Cullen has
treated on.

It is recommended to the Methodist Society in particular, by the author, their
Friend.

PHILADELPHIA, 1793.
THE FAMILY ADVISER, etc.
CHAP. I. OF FEVERS IN GENERAL.
FEVERS admit of a twofold distinction: first, with respect to their duration;
as into continued, Remittent and Intermittent Fevers.

Continued fevers go on to their end, without any very obvious change for
better or worse, in a period of twenty-four hours.

Remittent fevers, either obviously abate at some period or periods during
twenty-four hours, or are like a number of short continued fevers linked
together, abating once in the course of two or three or more days.

Intermittents go perfectly off every day and return the next, which is called
a Quotidian; or every other day, leaving an intermediate well day, called
Tertians; or every fourth day inclusive, leaving two well days, called
Quartans. In this manner they go and come till they change, or finish their
course.

The second distinction respects the state of the system: as Inflammatory,
Nervous, and Putrid fevers.

Inflammatory fevers show more or less the symptoms of general inflammation;
strong action (...) absence of every symptom of putridity and inse(...); they
are most commonly continued.

Nervous fevers show a general debility, in(...)lity and irregularity, without
any symptoms (...) tending much to dissolution; though a slight and slow
tendency is observable, after they have continued for some time.

Putrid fevers sometimes show signs of inflammatory action for a while; but
these quickly give way to symptoms of putrefaction, viz. blackness of the gums
and tongue; from being lined with foetid secretions: a blackness and foetor of
what is discharged by vomiting, which usually attends: and the same appearance
of many of the secretions and excretions, particularly the stools; to which may
be added a quick succeeding debility.

CHAP. II. INFLAMMATORY FEVER.
THIS fever most frequently attacks the young in the vigor of their life; such
as are of a rustic sanguine athletic constitution, who indulge themselves in
living freely: though sufficient causes will bring it on in some degree, in
almost any constitution and way of living. It attacks at all seasons, but most
frequently in the spring and beginning of summer.

Causes. Heat and cold alternately, or variously applied, fatigue, anger,
immoderate use of spirituous liquors, watching, etc. etc.

Symptoms. It discovers itself by a lassitude, with a dull sensation of the
body, debility, alternating chills and heats, tremors, pains throughout the
whole body, but more particularly about the shoulders, back, knees and head.
These are succeeded by an intense and burning heat, an inextinguishable thirst,
inflamed eyes, tumefaction or fullness of the face, sickness and vomiting,
inquietude, anxiety, full and strong pulse, dry skin, red (though sometimes
watery) urine; rough, dry, yellow, or dark colored tongue, covered with a
crust; difficult breathing, costiveness, cough, watching, delirium, stupor; and
if the fever is not checked, a coma, or constant tendency to sleep, tremors,
partial convulsions as of the hands, etc. hiccough, involuntary discharges of
the belly and bladder take place and close the scene in death. This is a
description of it in its most violent degree. In the greatest number of cases,
we meet with it far more moderate; a strong pulse, sick stomach and thirst
being the chief symptoms.

Management. The patient should be confined to his bed, in a cool, dark and
silent room; the coolness to be regulated by the season. He should abstain from
all kinds of meats and strong drinks. For food; panada, barley, jellies, light
unseasoned puddings and pies, may be given in small quantity. For drink;
lemonade, vinegar and water, barley water, herb teas with lemon juice, apple
water, tamarind water or jelly and water, may be given largely.

Cure. If the fever be violent, and the patient as described in the first
paragraph of the case, from half to two thirds of a pint of blood should be
taken away (according to the age and customs of the patient) as quick as
possible; which may be repeated the next day in lesser quantity, if the fever
has not abated. After the first bleeding let him take one ounce of Glauber
salts, which will frequently exclude the necessity of another bleeding. After
this the bowels should be opened daily if required, by a common clyster. if
after one bleeding and a dose of salts, the fever does not go off, which it
seldom does, let the patient have one of the powders No. 1. every two hours,
provided they will remain on his stomach: but if they will not, give the saline
mixture No. 2. two table-spoonfuls every two hours; and after this has been
given some time, if the patient's skin become soft and moist, it should be
continued in, otherwise lay it aside and try the powders again. If these when
given for a day or two do not lessen the fever, or if they will not remain, and
the saline mixture is ineffectual, and (...) bleeding has been practiced as far
as prudent; it will then be necessary to put a blister to the back of the neck,
and to soak the patient's feet in lukewarm water for an hour if he can bear it;
after this try the powders, or the mixture again, and they will then have their
only chance, and in many cases will be effectual.

In the slighter cases of this fever, such as I have said, we most commonly
meet with. If the patient will allow of it, one bleeding will be proper, after
which or in such as will not allow bleeding, give a ^^ke; two grains of tartar
emetic divided into three doses and taken in half an hour, or fifteen grains of
ipecacuana, or half a table-spoonful of antimonial wine will answer; after
which give the powders or the mixture, and open the bowels with a dose of
salts. After the fever has gone off, which usually is attended with a sweat, if
the patient is much reduced, let him take a tea-spoonful of bark in port wine,
or in water every three hours till he has taken an ounce, after which he may
take one or two more at longer intervals. He should use gentle exercise in a
carriage, and return gradually to his business and diet.

There is a fever which has the name of synochus, which in the first stage is
of the above type, but after a while quickly changes to the putrid, to be
hereafter described. In such a case all the management and cure above should be
relinquished as soon as the change is observed, and the management and cure for
the putrid immediately adopted.

CHAP. III. NERVOUS FEVER.
THOSE of relaxed fibers and weak nervous system, are the persons most subject
to this fever.

Causes. Excessive evacuations, repeated salivations, immoderate venery,
depressions of the mind from grief, watching and night study, humid stagnant
air of subterraneous apartments, indigestible food, especially such as is unfit
for nutrition; as of cold watery fruits and vegetables; thin clothing, rainy
seasons, soft moist winter, etc.

Symptoms. This fever approaches with dejection of mind, loss of appetite,
oppression, sleeplessness, involuntary groans, repeated sighs, fear, unusual
lassitude after motion, and alternate successions of cold and heat.

After some days a swimming or pain in the head comes on with sick stomach and
vomiting of insipid phlegm, great weakness, moderate heat, insensibility to
thirst; frequent, weak, and sometimes intermitting pulse; a moist tongue,
sometimes red and at other times covered with a white or yellowish tough mucus;
dry lips, oppression about the breast and difficult breathing, pale watery or
whey-like urine: a dull sense of pains about the breast and head, dozing,
delirium, redness and warmth of the face, whilst the feet are c^ld; a tendency
and disposition to be easily and frequently disturbed by dreams: -- after these
have taken place and continued some time, they are followed by immoderate
sweats and wasting laxes, great dullness and slothfulness of the external and
internal senses, anxiety and fainting. And now nature being exhausted by the
disorder, the tongue trembles, the extremities from a coldness become cold, the
nails turn livid, sight and hearing perish, the delirium turns to a coma, the
b^lly and bladder are involuntarily evacuated, topical convulsions come on, and
death closes the scene, usually before the fourteenth day. The symptoms
increase in the evening. -- The delirium is only a muttering continually; quite
different from the delirium of the former fever: though in this there is
generally a great insensibility, and toward the end a loss of sight and
hearing, yet at times in the beginning there is a great and preternatural
sensibility to light and noise: sometimes an eruption like millet seed appears
without any alteration for better or worse. A continuance of this fever has
brought on temporal idiotism, which vanished with the debility.

Management. The patient should be confined to his bed in an airy darkened
room, and kept a^^^^ably warm or cool, according to the season. His room, bed
and body clothes, face, hands and feet should be kept clean. His diet should be
light though nourishing, and given frequently, rather than in large quantities
at once; it should be mild: chicken water and broth, or beef tea may be given
if the patient desires it, and the effect proves it to be useful; but the
general stock of food should consist of the various preparations of mild,
digestible, nourishing vegetables, sufficiently well known to every
housekeeper; those should be suited to the patient's appetite, and changed so
as not to pall him with any one. Wine and water may be used from the beginning,
though then it may only be given to allay the thirst, and should be made weak:
five or six times a day a cup full may be given, even though the patient do not
ask for it; but as the strength fails it should be made stronger and stronger,
and given in as large quantity as a person in health could take. When the wine
has not the effect of increasing the symptoms and rendering the pulse too
quick, it may be safely continued in. -- Claret is supposed to be the best.

Cure. A gentle vomit of 12 grains of ipecacuana in a little water may be given
in the beginning, and may be repeated the next day. The bowels should be opened
with thirty grains of rhubarb, and costiveness continually prevented by small
doses of the same medicine. A blister should be applied to the side early in
the disease, and when it has drawn, the water let out, and the part dressed
with a colewort leaf or a little Turner's cerate; after this another may be
applied to the other side, or to the back of the neck, provided no bad symptoms
follow the first, if they do, blisters should be laid aside till a state of
insensibility comes on, when they should be applied successively, as long as
they are attended with advantage. If the patient's skin be dry in the
beginning, let him take three o^ four grains of James' powder, in thick syrup
three or four times a day, washing it down with snake-root tea; yet not so as
to sweat the patient. If the James' powder is not to be had, one-eighth of a
grain of tartar emetic may be used in its stead. When the debility increases,
let the patient begin and take two table-spoonfuls of the decoction of bark No.
3. every hour or two, putting a little mint water with it, and when the patient
has taken this some time, let him take the bark in substance with wine: one
tea-spoonful of bark in two table-spoonfuls of old claret every two or three
hours: this or No. 4. should be continued in till the patient perfectly
recovers.

When the patient has been much harassed for want of sleep, have his feet
bathed at evening in tepid water, and give him ten or fifteen drops of
laudanum. This practice may be continued as long as it proves effectual in
procuring sleep. In those cases that proceed from excessive evacuations there
is little hope and scarce any thing should be attempted, but the strengthening
plan.

The patient should carefully shun all the causes, and use a generous diet with
regular varied exercise of body and mind, and be sparing of his strength.

CHAP. IV. PUTRID FEVER.
THOSE who are of a relaxed habit and gloomy disposition; those who have been
debilitated by living upon bad victuals, by venery, famine, labor, or loss of
rest, etc. easily take this fever (which is caused by putrid contagion or
noxious air) and difficultly emerge from it.

Symptoms. An intense consuming though remitting heat, particularly inwards;
small, frequent, and unequal pulse without strength; throbbing of the arteries
that run along the neck and temples; great prostration of strength, heaviness
without sleep; and when sleep does take place, little or no refreshment is
gained from it; an anxious, dejected, and desponding mind, nausea, and vomiting
of black bile, pain of the head and temples, redness of the eyes, and (...)out
their sockets; dusky countenance, noise in the (...) interrupted breathing,
with sighs and foetid breath; pains about the stomach, joints and back,
difficulty of lying in one posture, trembling, delirium. At first the tongue is
whitish but quickly changes blackish, whilst the lips, teeth and gums are beset
with a tough disagreeable mucus; an inextinguishable thirst attends with a
bitter mawkish taste, which is communicated to the drink. The urine, on the
increase of the disorder, becomes blackish or red with a sediment: The sweats
become foetid, the stools lived, black or bloody, and very ^^^tid: and if the
fever goes on, a thrust and ulcers attack the mouth and throat; blood is
discharged from different parts, a hiccough and other partial convulsions come
on, which death scarce ever fails to follow.

Management. The patient should have fresh air admitted by keeping the door of
his chamber open, if it is not too cold, and by opening his windows if it is
summer time, and the weather clear. Salt petre or vinegar should be burned upon
the hearth in winter, and boughs of trees and flowers thrown about the room in
summer.

His hands, face and feet should be washed daily in vinegar and water, or wine
and water; he should be served frequently, and shifted in bed and body clothes
as frequen^^y as can be afforded, if it is daily: in fine, the greatest
attention should be paid to cleanliness. -- His food should be mostly of acid
vegetables, such as please his appetite and stomach best. His drink should be
port wine diluted^ this he should drink more and more of, as he becomes more
debilitated, so as to make it his drink and medicine: a quart a day may be
used; this he should continue in for some time after he has recovered, though
in smaller doses: A fresh airing every day, after recovery, will be highly
useful.

Cure. An emetic of eight grains of ipecacuana and one of tartar emetic, or
half a table-spoonful of antimonial wine, should be given as quick as possible,
beside this, twenty-five or thirty grains of rhubarb, or two drachms of cream
of tartar, should be given in a little jelly, to open the bowels, after which
the decoction of bark No. 3. should be given: two table-spoonfuls with a little
mint water, every hour; if the stomach bears this well, and the symptoms of
putrefaction and debility increase, the bark in substance should be used: a
tea-spoonful in lemon juice and mint water every hour. But if the stomach does
not bear the bark, or if the heat and fever be considerable, apply a blister to
the breast, and give a dose of the saline mixture or one of the following pills
between the times of taking the bark, (...) Camphor beat to an impalpable
powder, with common spirits, twenty-four grains, powdered seneca root as much;
make them up with syrup.

If the stomach still refuses the bark in the above ways, try it in triple
quantities in clysters, or try the vinous tincture, No. 4. The bark is the only
chance, we are therefore to persist in its use till a cure is made. Three drops
of oil of vitriol in a glass of water every hour, may be tried where the
delicacy of the stomach or fever, will not admit any preparation of bark; (...)
as it is apt to gripe, it should never be used when the bowels are affected.

Clysters of salt, sugar, and decoction of bitter herbs are to be used to keep
the bowels regular, or some of the gentle purges mentioned above; but it will
be often best to use first one and then the other, according to circumstances.
In case this fever should be of a remittent form, the remissions should be
greatly attended to, and a double quantity of bark given if possible. Sometimes
a lax with distension of the belly comes on after a while, in such a case the
belly should be fomented with bitter herbs, boiled and applied warm, and one
grain of ipecacuana, with five drops of laudanum, given every two hours.

Sometimes spots break out in this fever, then it has been termed the Spotted
Fever; at other times there is a yellowness of the skin, then it is termed the
yellow or West India fever. In this last case the symptoms of putridity are in
this country more lenient, and a considerable vomiting sometimes hinders the
giving of medicine: in this case a blister to the breast and the effervescing
saline mixture have been found effectual to stop the vomiting; but in general
the treatment is the same as recommended above.

In the end of these fevers, some physicians recommend blisters to rouse the
patient: if they are applied, the skin should not be pealed off as is sometimes
done, but only opened to discharge the water, and then dressed with Turner's
cerate. But the beginning or first stage is the most proper for blisters.

CHAP. V. REMITTENT FEVER.
CAUSES. Exposure to the sun for hours together, or the effects of a cool
evening, and other similar causes after fatigue or summer heat. Thus there is
no difference in the real causes of this fever and intermittents, except in the
degree and mode of their application.

Symptoms. Alternating cold and heat, followed by a continued heat and a fever:
Sometimes a delirium comes on at the first attack.

The patient is distressed with thirst and vomiting, usually of bile; pain of
the head, back and joints; the region of the stomach swells, and becomes
painful; the tongue is white and moist, and the patient is harrassed with
sleeplessness; the skin and eyes are of a yellow cast; the pulse is sometimes a
little hard, and seldom full; the bowels are sometimes bound, sometimes loose:
with these symptoms the fever usually proceeds, for 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 or 8 days,
at one of which times, after a little sweat it remits, and the patient becomes
evidently better. After a few hours have elapsed, commonly in the evening, the
accession comes on, sometimes with, at other times without a chill, and so goes
on as before: In this manner, that is, by accessions and remissions, the fever
goes on to its final period.

A copious sweat or discharge of blood from the nose, or an universal
yellowness, commonly attend the conclusion of it.

After the fever has gone off, a great lightness of the head attends, so that
the patient can scarce walk; rheumatic pains, and dropsical swellings sometimes
follow.

Management. The patient should be kept cool and airy; he should have plenty of
acid drinks, as lemonade, jelly, tamarind water, and for food, he should have
toasted bread moistened with a little tea, baked fruits, rice, sago, barley,
etc. but these, though proper, will seldom have a place, as the patient can
scarce ever contain on his stomach what his little appetite inclines him to
take: but the toast has often been found to stay, when nothing else would.

Cure. If the vomiting be considerable, a little camomile tea may be given to
promote it a moment or two, that a remission may be procured to give the saline
mixture No. 2. one table-spoonful every hour. When this sits on the stomach
pretty well, ten drops of antimonial wine and a little mint water may be added
to each dose, and the medicine continued: but if the vomiting is only slight,
the best way to procure a remission of the ^ymptoms will be to give an emetic,
one tea-spoonful of antimonial wine, may be given every ten minutes until it
operates, or 12 grains of ipecacuana may be given at once, after which the
mixture may be given in the manner directed with antimonial wine.

If the vomiting resists every thing given, or if a remission does not take
place in a few days, blisters should be used; on the breast in the first case,
on the back of the neck in the last. Sometimes a bundle of mint stewed in wine,
and applied to the breast, has been found useful in checking the vomiting,
therefore it may be tried before a blister.

Costiveness should be regularly obviated by taking a tea-spoonful or more of
cream of tartar, or by using the common clysters of salts, sugar and milk
occasionally.

When the patient has suffered for want of sleep, after giving a clyster, and
bathing the feet in lukewarm water for half an hour, ten or fifteen drops of
laudanum may be given in a dose of the saline mixture No. 2. and this should be
done after noon before the increase of the fever, for it usually makes some
increase toward night.

When the fever remits, the decoction of bark should be given, two
table-spoonfuls every hour, and if the accession is postponed by it, the bark
in substance should be given, as long as the accession is absent: in some cases
it will put it off altogether; then, as well as when the fever ceases, the bark
should be given in large quantities, until the patient recovers his strength.

When a lax attends, four grains of rhubarb and one of ipecacuana with two
drops of laudanum, may be given every three or four hours instead of the saline
mixture.

When great sweats attend in the end, it may be necessary to add five drops of
elixir of vitriol to each or every other dose of bark: in case a headache
follows, apply a small blister behind the ear, and repeat it if necessary. The
patient should be very careful in avoiding the causes of this fever, or he will
experience a relapse.

CHAP. VI. INTERMITTENT FEVER (COMMONLY) FEVER AND AGUE.
CAUSE. The relaxing heat of summer, especially when accompanied with moisture
and bad air of marshy places, will so relax the surface and expose the extreme
vessels to the air, that nothing more than the usual effect of common air is
necessary to bring on the fever; at other times, when the predisposition is not
so great, a cool air will produce it.

Symptoms. A languor with yawning and stretching, coldness, sick stomach,
rigors and tremors, usually attend the commencement; the cold with shivering
continues in a very considerable degree, for one, two or three hours, when it
begins to give way, first to flushes, and then to a continual burning heat and
fever, with a full pulse and thirst. Pain of the head and frequently of the
joints, attended sometimes with delirium. After this has continued for some
time, a sweat breaks out, which becomes profuse, and this is succeeded by an
intermission of a part, a whole, or two days, according to the type. See page
5. In the intermission, the patient is affected with scarce any thing but
debility. The fever returns again in the end of the time mentioned, with the
same symptoms, and so goes on to its end, unless it changes its form.
Quotidians come on in the morning, and usually attack the delicate and
irritable. Tertians come on about noon, and usually attack the more robust and
vigorous. Quartans come on in the afternoon, and most commonly attack the aged
and torpid.

Management. Sometimes the ague so reduces the patient, that it will be
necessary to keep him warm and give a little wine; but this is seldom the case.
In common nothing is necessary but to lie down. In time of the fever, lemonade
and other acid drinks, or warm teas may be used; the former will be most
grateful.

In the intermissions, port wine and water, and a strengthening easy digested
diet will be proper.

Cure. In the beginning of the cold stage, if the patient is able to puke, he
should take one; three grains of tartar emetic in a gill of water, may be taken
in the course of forty minutes, if required to take all: or 15 grains of
ipecacuana in a spoonful of water, or a tea-spoonful of antimonial wine every
fifteen minutes: either of these may be used; the tartar is the most active and
effectual, but acts too rough with some. When this has been taken, and the
fever has come on, a sweating should be encouraged by taking about three pints
of warm drink in the course of two hours, to which one hundred drops of
antimonial wine may be added, to make it more effectual. In case the patient
cannot take a puke, let him take an Anderson's pill to open his bowels before
the time of the ague, and when the fever has come on, and continued a while,
let him take fifteen drops of laudanum and fifteen of antimonial wine, in a cup
of warm tea every half hour, for three times.

But when nothing forbids a puke but the person's inclination, he may take just
before the fit, or after it is over some time, the following powder; twenty
grains of rhubarb, and five of calomel in a little syrup, and when the fever
comes on, take the warm drink as above.

These medicines will prepare for the exhibition of bark, which should be given
immediately after the sweat goes off. Any of the preparations may be given, but
the powder is the best; it may be given in mint water, milk or wine; one
tea-spoonful every hour, till the ague comes on again; then it should be laid
aside till this is over, when it is to be given again; the patient should not
cease under an ounce and an half, or two ounces. If, when this has been taken,
the ague does not cease, another puke should be used as before In all cases the
bowels should be kept open by Anderson's pills or rhubarb.

Sometimes twenty drops of laudanum given before the ague, will put it off, and
sometimes giving it just before the patient is expected to sweat, will prepare
for the bark; sometimes a quantity of snake-root tea at the same time will
prove effectual: and in many cases bitters, of horehound, dogwood, rue, etc.
will do as well as bark.

The fever and ague, after it has continued for some time, is apt to associate
custom with its causes of recurrence; and thus it will frequently continue
through such seasons as it would not have begun in. In such cases as these
almost any alteration in the system will lessen or remove it; thus keeping the
patient under expectation; fear or joy have often removed it; and thus the
impositions of old women have often been effectual, when the faith of her
patient has roused his expectation and fixed his attention. Though such things
may at times be allowed, yet I would caution every prudent person to keep his
skin to himself, and not let ignorant quacks fill up their lack of knowledge
upon him, with the virulence of an arsenical plaster, or a more dangerous bolus.

CHAP. VII. HECTIC FEVER.
CAUSES. Violent racks of the constitution from any cause, absorption of matter
from ulcers, excessive relaxation, and delicacy of any part that is exposed to
irritation, as the lungs, stomach and bowels; all these causes are attended
with general debility, and particular relaxation of the parts that defend the
tender extreme vessels, from the irritations which act about them.

Symptoms. The fever usually comes on in the forenoon, sometimes with
considerable chills or coldness, which last some time; this is succeeded by
heat, a quick, small and weak pulse in general, though sometimes there is some
hardness in it, especially in those who are not much reduced, and early in the
complaint; this sometimes lessens toward evening, and again increases at
night; at other times it continues on without any very obvious change till
toward morning, when it intermits or greatly remits with a profuse swet which
lasts a considerable time; the sweats do not appear in the first stage, that
is, in profusion. A headache usually attends the fever, as also a sick stomach,
both of which grow better in the intermission or remission.

The tongue is usually clean in this fever, the belly at first is often bound,
but in the end a lax almost always attends. The patient wastes away gradually,
his feet swell, particularly at night, his hair falls off, his nails become
crooked and thick, his face sharp, and a general failing takes place in every
thing but his expectations of getting better, and his understanding, which
usually remain to the last.

This is the most usual form, but there is some variety, owing to the variety
of the parts affected, and the state of the patient.

Management. The patient should have the lightest and most nourishing food
given him in small quantities at a time, and at such times chiefly as the fever
is absent or slight, thus his breakfast or dinner at ten o'clock, should
contain most of what he should eat. Milk is very proper when the stomach will
receive it: sometimes it may be most agreeable when diluted with water and
sweetened, at other times it may sit better when boiled. Custards, light
puddings, chicken water and broth, beef tea, rye mush, corn mush, with the
common vegetables of the grain kind, are mostly proper. Weak wine and water in
the absence of fever; barley water and sage tea at other times, will be proper
for drink. The patient should be kept clean, and when his strength admits, he
should be aired in a chair, and at all times have access to pure air.

Cure. In many cases it will be needless to attempt any thing but a removal of
the cause, when the fever will quickly cease: but in general both the one and
the other are to be combated. For treating the causes I refer to the places
where they are treated of (though some of them could not have a place in this
book, as they belong to surgery) for the treatment of the fever alone, the
debility should be removed and the fever interrupted: for the first, when
nothing forbids, bitters and bark are necessary; also elixir of vitriol, which
may be given to sixty drops a day. These are to be taken whilst the fever is
off, or when it has greatly remitted, just before the time when the return is
expected, and again after it has commenced, one of the following powders may be
given: ipecacuana two grains, magnesia one tea-spoonful, mix them and give it
in a little camomile tea. When a lax comes on there is little hope, but the
following may be given: columbo root one dram, pour one gill of boiling water
upon it, and in a quarter of an hour strain it off; to this twenty drops of
laudanum may be added; this may be used in the course of eight hours, and
repeated. -- Rice will now be the best food.

CHAP. VIII. INFLAMMATION OF THE EYE.
CAUSES. These act either externally or internally, though frequently both take
place in producing the affection.

The externals are, violence, dust, cold winds, changes from heat to cold,
viewing minute objects or bright bodies; metallic fumes, great heat, especially
when accompanied with moisture; night reading, etc. The internal causes are,
checked excretions, as the menses, etc. repulsion of some eruptive disorders,
long continued ulcers dried up, immoderate use of spirituous liquors and
spices, fevers, measles, scrophula, venereal disease, etc. etc.

Symptoms. Redness, swelling, stiffness and pain of the ball of the eye or the
lids; both from an inflammation of the vessels that pass over and through them,
being filled with too much blood, or with red blood, instead of the fine white
parts of it.

When the inflammation is considerable, a fever attends; and in such cases
there is danger of the effects, unless speedily prevented by curing the disease.

Management. In no case a cure can be hoped for unless the causes be removed,
which in many cases will be followed with an immediate cure. In any body be
lodged in the eye, it is to be extracted, and if another disease be the cause,
it must be cured by the means directed for such disease. In every case the
patient should avoid exercising his eyes any more than what there is necessity
for: -- He should confine himself to a dark room, or apply a fold of green silk
over his eyes, and use an umbrella in the summer. His food should be light and
mostly vegetable, in all cases without pepper or mustard. His drink should be
cooling and acid, without any mixture of spirit. His room should be cooled with
sprinkling in the summer time.

Cure. If there be a fever, or if the inflammation be considerable, and the
patient able to bear bleeding, he should lose half a pint of blood, which may
be repeated if necessary; this should be followed by a dose of salts, or if the
patient's case does not require bleeding, or other circumstances prevent it,
the salts then should be the first thing. All this is to be done after the
cause is removed, and thus in many cases where removing the cause will be the
chief means of cure, they will have no place; as where the inflammation
proceeds from the venereal disease, scrophula, etc. One of the fever powders
No. 1. when the fever continues, or the inflammation remains obstinate, given
every four hours, will be serviceable. The belly should be kept regular by
cream of tartar or small doses of salts, or of jalap and nitre: as jalap
fifteen grains, nitre twenty-five, mix them. -- For external applications, a
blister behind the ears is most effectual, and to the eyes the following: sugar
of lead twelve grains to half a pint of water, or as much white vitriol to an
equal quantity of water: to either of which, when the inflammation has
continued, and the former remedies have been used, may be added a
table-spoonful of brandy.

These external applications (the blister excepted) will be proper in every
case and time. The weakness that follows requires that the patient use either a
general or topical cold bath, and avoid much application and exposure.

CHAP. IX. INFLAMMATION OF THE BRAIN.
THIS is either a symptomatic disorder, as when it follows in the course of a
primary affection: or it is original, being primary itself -- of this alone I
shall treat, that requiring the treatment of the concomitant disorder.

It usually attacks in the heat of summer those of an irascible disposition,
who are in their youth and given to study.

Causes. Drunkenness, watching, long exposure (...) the sun, anger, excessive
cogitation, g^^^^, care, vehement desires, external violence, certain poisons,
and suppressions of particular discharges; as the piles, the discharge after
parturition.

Symptoms. It begins with rigors, which are followed by heat, pain and
throbbing of the head, disturbed sleep, noise within the head and ears,
inflammation and pain in the eyes, with inability to bear the light and noise,
and a bloated countenance -- the p(...) low, oppressed and quick, often weak as
well as low, though sometimes it is hard: the patient continues without any
sleep for a long time, sometimes till the eighth day; the arteries along the
neck perceptibly throb, and blood sometimes issues by drops from the nose;
great debility, anxiety and sighing attend, yet the patient is subject to
anger, f^^^ce delirium, startings and convulsions. When the disorder has
ceased, a swimming and heaviness of the head, weak eyes and great delicacy of
hearing attend for a considerable time.

Management. The patient should be confined in an airy, darkened, silent and
cool room; his bed should be hard, and his head somewhat raised upon it. He
should have plenty of acid, cool drinks, without any mixture of spirit. His
food should be of p^^^d^, barley, jelly, etc. The causes of the disorder must
be carefully removed.

Cure. The patient should be bled pretty freely, and this may be repeated again
and again in less quantities, during the first 48 hours; provided the symptoms
demand it, and the patient be able to bear it: -- the pulse will usually be the
best guide; for if this does not sink very low, there will be no danger from
bleeding. A dose of salts should be given after the first bleeding, and it may
be necessary to repeat this the next day. Clysters may be given daily, such as
No. 5. one of the fever powders No 1. may be given every three hours, beginning
after the operation of the first dose of the salts. The patient's head should
be shaved and washed with cold vinegar and water. If the delirium runs on after
the above evacuations, a large blister should be applied to the crown of the
head, and when this has drawn, others, if necessary, may be applied to the
ankles.

When the patient has suffered some time for want of sleep, the feet should be
bathed half an hour or twice as long, in water moderately warm, and if this is
ineffectual, let him have ten or fifteen drops of laudanum, one tea-spoonful of
paregoric at night, with this care, that if it makes him worse, to discontinue
it; but if it has the desired effect, to persist giving it every night, if
required.

A nourishing diet and the use of wine should be gradually entered into, after
the symptoms of danger are perfectly gone, in order to prevent the succeeding
symptoms of debility.

Great care will be necessary to avoid the causes of this disorder, as slighter
ones may cause a relapse or repetition.

CHAP. X. QUINCY.
CAUSES. The application of cold to the neck or throat, a stream of cool air
applied with force to the very part; as in riding and running: these causes
produce their effect more certainly when preceded by heat.

Exercising the parts that suffer, as in singing, and loud speaking; acrids,
mechanic bodies, suppressed evacuations, or artificial evacuations, that have
been long used, neglected.

Symptoms. This complaint usually appears with redness and swelling of the
glands situated on each side of the palate; one is usually most swelled in the
beginning, and as this declines, the other increases; a pain that shoots
toward the ear attends, with feverish symptoms, and a strong, full, quick
pulse: The patient feels a disagreeable clamminess, and the tumor is usually
tipped with whitish mucus.

In some cases the external parts are much swelled; sometimes scarce any tumor
is to be perceived by looking into the mouth, and at the same time the
difficulty of swallowing and pain may be very considerable: In the worst cases
the breathing becomes very difficult, the tumors closing up the passage almost
entirely; then the patient sits with his mouth open, his drink regurgitates
through his nostrils, and he is ready to strangle every minute for want of a
free respiration, which is totally impeded when the patient dies.

What is usually termed a sore throat, is a lesser degree of this same
affection, therefore the same remedies may be used, omitting the most general
and powerful one of bleeding.

Management. The patient should be kept neither hot nor cold: he should have a
light vegetable diet of a fluid preparation; his drink should be of the acid
kind, and not cold or warm, but just aired. His head should be kept up in bed,
or he may sit up altogether; speaking, and every exertion of the throat, should
be avoided, and the causes should be removed.

Cure. The patient should be bled pretty freely, and this may be repeated the
next day if necessary: he should take a dose of salts as soon as possible, and
then a blister should be applied under the throat, of a slim form, so that it
may reach from ear to ear: the bowels should be regularly kept open: before the
tumor has become very considerable, fifteen grains of ipecacuana will be of
great service. In such patients as do not allow of bleeding, this may be the
first medicine.

Warm water and vinegar should be inspired from a proper machine for the
purpose, or from a funnel put over a wooden bowl of water and vinegar, the
mouth should be frequently gargled with astringent washes, as sage tea and
vinegar; or alum-vinegar and honey, or decoction of oak bark and salt petre.
Scarifications with a lancet are necessary where there is danger of choking;
and likewise to let out the matter, when the tumors have suppurated.

If the patient is liable to frequent returns of this affection, I would advise
him to use the cold bath daily; at any rate to wash his neck, and habituate
himself to wear nothing but a very thin stock or ribband, instead of a large
neckcloth.

CHAP. XI. PUTRID SORE THROAT.
THIS disorder has for its cause, specific contagion, and therefore attacks all
ages and constitutions.

Symptoms. It begins with chills, which are followed by an intense and burning
heat, a swimming and pain of the head, a troublesome sensation in the throat,
sickness and vomiting, looseness, inflamed and watery eyes, tumid and flushed
face, with a stiffness of the neck, a small, frequent and irregular pulse,
foetid breath and a disagreeable taste. Very soon, white spots appear on the
glands each side of the palate, and these with the palate appear red, swollen and
glossy: these spots spread and unite, covering almost all of the mouth with
thick sloughs, which falling off, leave ulcers in their places: the redness and
tumor are sometimes extended to the internal parts of the nose.

On the second day, or later, efflorescences appear on the skin, which are
sometimes in such small eminences as scarcely to be seen, but more usually
spread in red patches, so as to cover the whole skin; beginning first about the
face and neck, and so extending to the extremities, which feel stiff and
swelled; this usually continues about four days, and then goes off with a
peeling of the skin. The glands about the neck are sometimes swelled to an
alarming degree. As the complaint advances, discharges of blood from different
parts are frequent, and sometimes a gangrene takes place at the beginning of
the windpipe or of the oesophagus, the channel which leads to the stomach.

The patient's voice is hoarse and flat, though his swallowing is not usually
much impeded; with these symptoms it runs on from two to seven or more days,
increasing every evening.

Management. For food, drinks, and general management, the same may be used as
directed for the putrid fever, only a less degree of cold will be requisite in
this.

Cure. Ten grains of ipecacuana should be given early in the complaint; three
grains of calomel in a little honey, may be given once or twice the evenings
after the puke, and if the first dose produces more than two stools, it should
be checked by giving ten drops of Laudanum. This medicine will often prove very
efficacious, without producing any discharge. Some of the preparations of bark,
or the powder, which is best, should be given every two hours after the puke,
and to the end of the complaint. The throat should be frequently washed with
the following: one hundred drops of elixir of vitriol or twenty drops of oil of
vitriol to half a pint of water, and one spoonful of honey. Spring water
colored with indigo has been found useful as a gargle. Port wine should be
given to a pint, or quart a day, with the bark. If the tumor in the inside of
the throat be considerable, a blister should be laid on the outside.

For the swelling of the legs which sometimes follows, the patient may use
eight drops of elixir of vitriol with each dose of bark, four times a day.

CHAP. XII. CROUP OR HIVES.
CAUSES. Foregoing disorders, as the measles and the hooping cough: cold moist
air from the water.

It most frequently happens to such as live in seaport towns; and to children,
from the time they are weaned to their twelfth year.

Symptoms. It sometimes comes on with the symptoms of a common cold only; but
the peculiar symptoms are a hoarseness, and ringing sound of the voice; at the
same time there is an uneasiness, or pain in the throat, and a whizzing noise
in breathing, as if the passage was too much straitened for the air; the
patient has a cough that is either dry, or accompanied with the discharge of
flakes of phlegm, like a membrane; the pulse is quickened, and an uneasy sense
of heat attends. By looking into the throat, a redness and flakes of phlegm
like those discharged, may sometimes be perceived. It has happened that the
patient has been taken off without scarce any complaining, in three, four, or
five days.

Management. The patient should not be kept cold, nor disagreeably warm, he
should have a spare thin vegetable diet, with light acid, or bitter drinks, as
teas of various herbs. In time of coughing, he should be raised and assisted,
to keep him from strangling.

Cure. The patient should take a puke as quick as possible. (If he is twelve
years old, ten grains of ipecacuana, and half a grain of tartar emetic will not
be too much, for there is a great degree of insensibility in the stomach in
this complaint; if he is only four years old, let him have half as much, or one
tea-spoonful of antimonial wine, to be repeated every quarter of an hour, till
it operates.) After taking the puke, he should take four grains (if twelve
years) of calomel, and ten of jalap, the evening of the same day; after this
for three or four days, he should take one day the puke, and the next the
purge; after the first puke and purge, a blister should be laid on the back of
the neck. Throughout the complaint, the steams of warm vinegar, or of water in
which there is a large lump of lime slacking (which is supposed to be a
solvent) may be drawn into the throat; warm teas, and soaking the feet, may be
used to restore the perspiration to the surface.

CHAP. XIII. THE MUMPS.
CONTAGION is the cause of this complaint.

Symptoms. It makes its appearance with the usual febrile symptoms, of chills
succeeding heat, and quickened pulse; this is shortly followed by a swelling,
at the corner of the lower jaw, of a moveable glandular nature; in a little
time it diffuses itself over the whole neck; sometimes both sides are affected.
It continues increasing till about the fourth day, and then declines with the
fever. As the swelling recedes, some tumor is apt to take place in the testes
of males, and in the breasts of women. Sometimes when this has not taken place,
or when it has been repelled by imprudent applications, the fever has
continued, or increased with delirium.

Management. The patient should be kept upon a low vegetable diet, and not
expose himself to cold. The above in general will be sufficient, but when the
circumstance mentioned takes place, it will be necessary to direct something
more than the above for (...)

Cure. We should apply warm stewed bitter herbs, or warm bread and milk
poultices to the parts; and if fever and delirium be considerable, the patient
should be bled if he be able to bear bleeding; otherwise a puke should be the
only evacuant, viz. fifteen grains of ipecacuana, more or less, according to
the patient's age. Besides this or these, it may be necessary to apply a
blister to the back of the neck. In slighter cases the puke and fomentations
will be sufficient. In all cases, costiveness should be prevented by clysters,
castor oil, or salts.

CHAP. XIV. PLEURISY OR INFLAMMATION OF THE INTERNAL PARTS OF THE BREAST.
THE end of winter, spring and beginning of summer are the usual times that
this disease is prevalent; all ages and most constitutions are liable to it,
but the phlethoric, and those of a rustic constitution, who have seen twenty
years, and not exceeded sixty, are most liable.

Causes. Cold and heat applied alternately, or unequally, straining or injuring
of the parts, etc.

Symptoms. It usually begins with chills, which are followed by heat, quick,
strong and full pulse, headache, difficult breathing, dry cough at the
beginning, though sometimes it begins moist: toward the end, or after it has
continued, it is always moist, and sometimes a very considerable quantity of
yellow mucus is discharged: this is not unfrequently streaked with blood. Most
frequently, a pungent pain attacks the side^ about the middle of the sixth or
seventh rib, but if the pain should attack any other part of the chest, and
should not be so violent, yet accompanied with the other symptoms, particularly
the full, strong and quick pulse, we are to consider the complaint as the same.

Management. This should be identically the same with what is directed in Chap.
II. only with addition of mucilaginous and syrup drinks to allay the cough; as
of flaxseed, and mallow tea with honey: a little lemon juice will make it very
agreeable.

Cure. From half to two thirds of a pint, or more of blood, should be taken
away on the first appearance, and if the symptoms continue, it may be repeated
in eight hours. After the first bleeding, a dose of salts should be given, and
small doses of the same, or common clysters may be given regularly to prevent
costiveness. Immediately after the patient's first bleeding, a blister should
be applied as near as possible to the pained part, and one of the fever
powders, No. 1. given every hour, beginning after the operation of the salts is
over. If after the blister has drawn, the pulse continues up, and the pain has
not considerably abated, the second bleeding should be immediately made, and if
in half an hour after that, the pain does not give way, a second blister should
be applied on a fresh part, or on the opposite side. The powders should be
continued every two hours. But in general, one bleeding, a blister, the
powders, and keeping an open belly, will be sufficient. Nothing but a
relaxation of the pain and fever, should induce the patient to omit any of the
above remedies, for life and death are pretty certainly fixed to the narrow
compass of a few days. If the pulse is strong, and bleeding has been omitted as
long as six or seven days, it would be then better done than let alone; but if
the pulse flags, and the patient has had a frequent shivering about the last
days, it will then be better, if not the very safety, of the patient, to
forbear. At such a time a blister might be applied without any injury, but if a
suppuration has taken place, it will be of no service; however those who are
not proper judges, had better make the application, lest there might have been
an insufficient inflammation for to suppurate in that time; and with th^^ the
patient may use what will be proper in the last case of every pleurisy when the
cough is troublesome: a tea-spoonful of paregoric in a little flaxseed, or
other tea, once in four or five hours. In the latter stages, it may be
necessary to support the patient's strength with decoctions of bark, and a
light nourishing diet.

Seneca snake root tea, the pleurisy root, or common salt petre taken to one
fourth of an ounce a day, in whey or gruel, may sometimes alone, and often
after a bleeding, remove a pleurisy; but they should only be tried, when the
person cannot procure the above prescribed remedies.

CHAP. XV. BASTARD OR SPURIOUS PLEURISY.
THIS usually attacks the aged, those of a phlegmatic full habit, who have
injured their constitutions by excess of drinking, particularly, and are liable
to the vicissitudes of the weather, from being much exposed.

Cause. The long application of cold, suddenly succeeded by heat, and heating
drinks; this, with the predisposition laid down above, is the chief, if not the
only cause.

Symptoms. It makes its appearance with chills and flushes, which are followed
by a slight fever, with a soft, not very frequent pulse. The heat of the
patient is not usually much increased; a pain affects the side, or breast,
which is not very pungent, but rather dull and extending; a violent pain in the
head, sick stomach and sometimes vomiting, are more or less present. From the
beginning, it is common for a cough, straitened breathing, and spitting of
tough mucus to attend. An erysipelatous redness often appears on the cheeks,
and a looseness attends the advanced stage of the disease. The patient is apt
to be heavy and drowsy; thus though there be a pain in the side, and a fever,
it is easily distinguished from a true inflammatory affection of the breast.

Management. The patient should be kept tolerably warm, his diet should be
light and nourishing, and in the beginning, if the feverish symptoms are not
considerable, he may have weak wine and water for his drink; in the end it will
always be proper, for the patient frequently becomes fainty, and is not able to
take any thing besides. Lemonade may be used, when wine and water cannot be
given for the fever; and when lemons cannot be got, vinegar and water, or cider
and water.

Cure. Bleeding though it may sometimes be proper, as when the patient is of a
more robust habit, and better constitution than what is described above, and
when he has been accustomed to bleeding, and withal the pulse and pain are not
low; yet, it should be used sparingly and cautiously, otherwise, in ninety
cases out of one hundred, it would be injurious. In the beginning it will be
proper to give ten or twelve grains of ipecacuana; or a tea-spoonful of
antimonial wine, every fifteen minutes until it operates; a blister may be put
on at the same time, as near as possible to the pain; the puke may be repeated
once or twice if necessary, and sometimes it will be necessary to lay on
another blister close by the former; twenty grains of jalap, or thirty grains
of rheubarb, or a table-spoonful of castor oil, or four or five grains of
calomel, may be used to remove any costiveness that is present: this should be
attended to throughout.

For the cough, two drachms of gum ammoniac, dissolved by trituration in a
mortar, with half a pint of water, may be given; one table-spoonful every hour:
or an ounce of syrup (commonly called oxymel) of squills, in as much water, may
be given in the same way.

Seneca snake root or pleurisy root tea may be used, if they cannot be
procured; to either of these medicines at night a dozen drops of laudanum may
be added, in order to allay the cough, that the patient may rest; and if the
cough is very frequent in the day, a few drops may be taken every now and then.

Toward the end when the patient grows weak, he should use about sixty drops
of elixir or vitriol a day, and use a decoction of bark or some good bar^^^

Great care will be requisite to prevent the return of this disorder, when the
weather is favorable to produce it.

CHAP. XVI. SPASMODIC STITCH, OR INTERCOSTAL RHEUMATISM.
THIS complaint is prevalent when the changes of weather are frequent, as in
the spring and fall. It usually attacks the young, those under forty years,
those who are of a delicate, effeminate constitution, rather than those of a
broken state of health.

Exposure to cold, more particularly after heat and damp cloudy weather are the
causes.

Symptoms. It begins with a lancinating pain, most frequently about the ribs of
one side; this remits a while, and then returns again, so as almost to make the
patient scream out. After a while it becomes fixed, and does not abate, though
it is apt to extend, and even to change its place, so that the muscles of the
breast are frequently attacked, and there are pains in other parts that point
out a rheumatic affection: with the above a fever, sometimes pretty smart, at
other times less, attends. In most cases the pulse is not strong, but easily
stopped by pressing it, to what it is in true pleurisy. Frequently a cough
attends, which is apt to increase toward the end of the other symptoms, at
which time it is accompanied with spitting of yellow, tough mucus; some degee
of costiveness usually attends, and most of the symptoms are worse at night.

The breathing is not in general affected so much as in pleurisy, little or no
cough attends; the head is usually much affected with pain, and as the pain of
the side declines, the knees or back are sometimes attacked, if not before.

Management. The patient should be kept on a vegetable, moderate diet.

His drink may be warm herb teas.

Cure. If the patient be pretty full of blood, and his pulse tolerably strong,
it will then be prudent and useful to take away half a pint or more of blood. A
blister should be laid over the part, a dose of castor oil, or of fifteen
grains of jalap and as much cream of tartar, should be given to open his
bowels: if the pain continues, some proper sweating medicine should be given,
as four grains of camphor beat up with honey into a bolus, to which two grains
of ipecacuana may be added, this much should be taken every three or four
hours, washing it down with seneca snake root tea, or warm baum tea: or in the
place of these a tea-spoonful of paregoric and twenty drops of antimonial wine,
may be taken every three hours; using plenty of warm tea in the intervals. This
last mixture will be proper for the cough, taken in the same quantity and times.

CHAP. XVII. INFLAMMATION OF THE STOMACH.
CAUSES. External violence, high seasoned food, acrid medicine or poisons; hard
bodies swallowed, as of glass or stone; cold drink, when the body is heated;
distension; from an over quantity of food that is of difficult digestion;
inflammations of the adjacent parts extending to the stomach: besides these
causes, a translation of affection in other disorders are causes; as in the
gout, small pox, measles, St. Anthony's fire; but these require a treatment
connected with the primary affection, which cannot be treated of here.

Symptoms. A violent, pungent, and sometimes throbbing pain at the pit of the
stomach, with burning and painful vomiting; a hiccough, anxiety and difficult
breathing; great weakness; after taking any thing into the stomach, the pain
increases, and it is discharged by vomiting; the pulse is commonly small, hard
and quick.

Management. The patient should be kept from swallowing any thing but mild
drinks, as barley water, milk and water, etc. he should keep himself as still
as possible in a dark room.

Cure. If any thing that is acrid, or that may injure the stomach mechanically,
has been taken in, it should be evacuated as quick as possible, by taking
plenty of warm water, and applying a feather to the throat, to induce immediate
vomiting; but if the vomiting is already considerable, it should not be
solicited after vomiting; if the cause be some acrid, it should be diluted with
mucilaginous drinks, as gum arabic dissolved in water; or oils may be given, as
sweet oil or almonds oil; at the same time it should be counter-acted by a
proper medicine. Thus if it be vitriol, or spirit of salt or aqua fortis, let
the patient take a table-spoonful of salt of tartar, or if he can get none of
that, let him get a piece of chalk and eat it. If it be arsenic, two
tea-spoonfuls of precipitate sulphur may be swallowed. After this, or where
these have not been required from the nature of the cause, the patient should
lose a pint of blood, and in case the pain continues, and the pulse does not
sink and intermit, half as much more may be taken away in eight hours
following; a blister after the first bleeding should be applied to the left
side, and clysters of oil, sugar, milk, and a little salt petre should be
injected every three hours: four grains of sugar of lead in a little water may
be given every two hours the first day: nothing but the medicine mentioned
should be applied by the mouth.

CHAP. XVIII. INFLAMMATION OF THE INTESTINES.
CAUSES. Besides most of the causes of the preceding disease, may be added,
cold applied to the belly: long and violent cholic, and he^^ia, commonly termed
a rupture.

Symptoms. A fixed pain, sometimes spreading over the belly, at other times
fixed about the navel, fever, costiveness and vomiting.

Management. The patient should have light, liquid preparations of vegetables
for food, and his drink should be jelly and water, or apple-water, or lemonade,
or molasses and water with a little vinegar: these or any of them, may be taken
plentifully.

Cure. He should be bled as quick as possible; the quantity should be pretty
large, proportioning it to the habit of the patient; this may be repeated in
eight hours, if the symptoms demand it, and the pulse allow it. After the first
bleeding, a blister should be applied over the pain, and a clyster of oil,
molasses, milk and Glauber salts injected: this may be repeated every three or
four hours with small quantities of salts after the first time: eight grains of
nitre, if it does not excite vomiting, may be given in a little drink every
hour. If the inflammation should suppurate and discharge matter downwards,
nothing should be used but the mildest, nourishing spoon-diet of broths, etc.

CHAP. XIX. ACUTE INFLAMMATION OF THE LIVER.
CAUSES. External violence, from bruises and contusions, especially such as
have occasioned a fructure of the skull at the same time; violent passions,
excessive summer heats, too much exercise, cold applied externally or
internally.

Symptoms. A pungent pain of the right side, shooting up to the shoulder, a
cough for the most part dry, tension of the right side over the liver, hard dry
gums, vomiting, weakness, difficulty of breathing, watching, costiveness,
hiccough, and a hard, full, quickened pulse.

Sometimes there is a difficulty of lying on the left side; sometimes the eyes,
tongue and urine are tinged with bile.

Management. The causes should be attended to, and removed as far as possible.
Light vegetable food, and acid drinks should compose the patient's diet. He
should be kept cool and still.

Cure. The patient should be bled early in the disorder, and this may be
repeated if necessary: a dose of salts should be given to open his bowels,
after which cream of tartar may be used constantly for the same purpose, or
clysters may be used of No. 5. A blister should be applied over the pained
part, after the first bleeding, and after that the parts around may be
frequently fomented with warm stewed herbs, as mallows, horehound, wormwood,
etc. If after the use of these, the fever continues with the pain, the
following pills may be used until they affect the patient's mouth: Calomel
twenty-four grains, tartar emetic two grains, make them up with syrup into
twelve pills: one of which may be taken morning, noon and night.

From the beginning, if the fever be considerable, one of the fever powders,
No. 1. should be given every two hours, except when other medicine is to be
given.

CHAP. XX. OBSTRUCTION OF THE LIVER.
CAUSES. Intermitting and remitting fevers, exposure to frequent colds, fitting
up of nights, obesity, etc.

Symptoms. A dull, heavy sensation and tension of the right side, little or no
fever, difficulty of lying upon the left side, yellow eyes and costiveness.

Management. Avoid or remove the causes, live upon a simple vegetable diet, and
watery drinks.

Cure. If the patient be pretty full, or if accustomed to bleeding, blood
letting may be once performed: ten grains of ipecacuana may be given at the
distance of two or three days, for several times.

The bowels should be kept open by the pills, No. 6. taken regularly so as to
answer the purpose: the side should be frequently fomented with a warm
decoction of bitter herbs, and one of the calomel pills, in chapter xix given every
second night till they affect the gums.

CHAP. XXI. INFLAMMATION OF THE KIDNEYS.
CAUSES. External contusions, violent, long-continued riding, strains of the
back, Spanish flies taken inwardly, or applied outwardly on a blister, stones
that have formed in the cavities of the kidney passing out.

Symptoms. Fever, pain about the part, which may be distinguished from
rheumatism, by the former not being much increased by motion; a retraction of
the testicle on the same side, a numbness of the thigh and leg on the same
side, vomiting, colic pains, costiveness, redness of the urine, and small
discharges of it at a time.

Management. The patient should have plenty of light, mucilaginous drinks, as
flaxseed tea, mallow tea, and gum arabic dissolved in water; these should be
drank warm. His food should be broth^ and vegetables.

Cure. The patient should be bled once or twice, proportioning the quantity to
the age, habit and custom of the patient. The small of the back should be
frequently fomented with warm decoctions of bitter herbs. His bowels should be
opened with a dose of castor oil; and emollient clysters of oil, molasses and
mi^^s should be injected, every two or three hours: besides these, sixty grains
of Glauber salts in lemon juice may be given, every two hours, throughout the
continuance of the heat and fever.

CHAP. XXII. ACUTE RHEUMATISM.
THIS attacks at all seasons, but rarely at any other time than the spring and
fall, when the vicissitudes of weather are great.

Causes. Cold applied to the body, when unusually warm, or cold applied
partially to the body.

Symptoms. A pain affects some of the joints, and sometimes the muscles, so as
to extend from one joint to another. Sometimes almost every joint in the body
is affected, and then the complaint comes on with chills, and fever, with a
strong pulse, for the most part full. In some cases, the fever precedes the
pains, at other times, it is the contrary; the joints affected become red and
swelled: the fever and pains usually increase at night. If the general
affection continues long the patient's senses become somewhat impaired for a
while.

Management. The patient should be kept cool, except when under the operation
of sweating medicine, then he should lie between blankets; he should be kept
from all but light vegetable food, and cool acid or warm herb drinks, which may
be given plentifully; and when the complaint has gone off, he should wear
flannels till warm weather returns, and then use bathing.

Cure. The patient should be instantly bled, as freely as his habit and age
will bear, and his complaint demands; this may be repeated in smaller
quantities, for once or twice in the course of four days, if necessary. After
the first bleeding, a dose of salts should be given, and when that has done
operating, one of the powders, No. 1. should be given, every two ho^^^. If this
does not answer, let him have twelve grains of Dover's powders (which may be
had at the apothecaries shops) for two or three nights, lying then between
blankets. If any pain still continues, it may be looked upon as verging to
chronic rheumatism, and the following may be given: one hundred drops of
volatile tincture of guaiacum, in a little water, three times a day.

In general nothing can be done that will be of service as an outward
application; however, a little Castile soap, dissolved in water, may be used to
satisfy.

In slighter cases the bleeding may be omitted, and the salts with a common
sweat of seneca tea used.

CHAP. XXIII. CHRONIC RHEUMATISM.
THE former disease is apt to terminate in this; especially when the patient is
advanced in years: Cold is the common cause of it.

Symptoms. A pain of some of the joints, or about the junction of the bones,
with a stiffness of the part. No redness or swelling like that from
inflammation affects the part, though after a long continuance, an enlargement
of the joints is apt to take place. Little or no fever attends here, heat
lessens the pain, and cold increases it; quite contrary to what takes place in
the preceding complaint. When the pains fix about the small of the back, the
affection is termed a Lumbago; when about the hip, in which case the patient
becomes somewhat lame, a Sciatica.

Management. The part affected, if possible, should be constantly wrapped in
flannel, the patient should use wine with any food he may choose, which will
agree with his stomach.

Cure. Ninety drops of volatile tincture of guaiacum, should be taken in a
little water, four times a day; if this does not answer, the following pills
may be used till they produce some effect; twelve grains of (...) and twelve
grains of opium, to be made into one dozen pills, one to be taken morning and
evening, washing it down with a large quantity of Virginia snake root, lignum
vitae, or sassafrass tea. Besides these, there are other common remedies, which
are less certain, as a decoction of prickly ash, mustard whey, balsams, etc. In
what is called the sciatica, twelve drops of spirit of turpentine, in a little
honey, taken night and morning, is particularly effectual.

The external remedies in rheumatism, are spirits of camphor, spirits of
hartshorn and oil; oil and spirits of turpentine, electricity applied by
insolation, and drawing sparks; the flesh brush, cold water dashed on. However,
this last is more effectual in cases that are between the inflammatory and
chronic, where one joint is chiefly affected.

CHAP. XXIV. TOOTH ACH.
CAUSES. A general cold, cold air applied to the cheeks in an unusual and
sudden manner, acrids, sweets, or acids applied to the teeth, the acrid matter
of a rotten tooth, extraordinary violence, as in breaking hard substances,
blows, etc. Besides these there are certain disposing causes, under which the
usual exposure we are constantly liable to, is a sufficient cause; as a nerve
being laid bare, by rotting or extraction of a tooth, pregnancy, hysteric
dispositions, etc.

Symptoms. These are various in different circumstances. In the tooth ach that
proceeds from common cold, there are frequently symptoms of a rheumatic
affection of the adjacent parts, the pain extending from the tooth to the face,
and along up to the ^empl, with a throbbing of the arteries, and redness,
sometimes a little swelling of the face, and withal a feverishness. In most
other cases, a violent pain of the tooth, with a little inflammation of the
gum, are the only symptoms, except that about the termination, the (...)
relaxed habits) is apt to swell.

Management. The patient should carefully avoid every cause, and confine
himself to his room. In the case of rheumatic symptoms, his food and drink
should be of the weakest and lightest kind, and a silk handkerchief should be
applied over his face. In the other cases, the face should be wrapped in
flannel, and no change made in the food or drink. The tooth should be stopped
with lint.

Cure. In the first case it will be the best way to aim at the removal of the
cold, by giving a dose of salts, and taking a sweat of weak whey, with a
teaspoonful of salt petre. After this a small blister applied to the part will
be most effectual; or, instead of this, sweating the part with hot herbs, or a
hot stone, wrapped in moist or dry rags, may be useful. In general, in such a
case it will be of little use to apply any thing to the tooth itself, till the
above has been first done, then a little laudanum and spirits may be held in
the mouth. In all the other cases, topical applications are more effectual. The
chief of these are opium, camphor, oil of cloves and other warm essential oils;
with these electricity, burning the tooth, applying a hot iron to the ear, and
many other means, have been at times effectual. But it is often necessary with
these to give small doses of laudanum, and apply a blister, and when these
fail, extracting the tooth; which may be done at any time, by a careful trusty
operator: but if this does not relieve, the pain passing to another tooth, the
patient should not insist upon that being drawn, but commit all to patience.
The best manner of applying topicals is to insert the medicine into the hollow,
and cover it with lint or wax.

CHAP. XXV. THE GOUT.
THE causes of the gout, for better comprehending them, may be placed under
four heads.

1st. The prime causes; which are the use of excessive quantities of high
seasoned animal food, and the liberal use of wine and other spirituous liquors.
These are supposed to produce their effect, by causing an action in the extreme
vessels (which are employed in nutrition) in degree and constancy, above what
they were constructed to bear, so that as soon as the body ceases to yield,
which is at the end of growth, the vessels from being over excited, are
overcome, and suffer an indirect debility, and relaxation.

2d. The predisposing causes; under which a less degree of the above brings on
the complaint, because they aim at the same point: they are, indolence,
hereditary delicacy of the parts that suffer in the gout (from a general
similarity to the parent) and that tendency in the animal economy which
produces a robust and gross habit. These causes would, when they had proceeded
to a certain extent, bring on the gout; but it is seldom the case, that it is
not helped on by what may be called.

3d. The exciting causes; as venery, debauchery, cold applied to the feet,
indigestion, much application of mind, night watching, passions, excessive
evacuations, changing of habits, debilitating diseases, bruises or strains of
the parts that suffer in gout; the use of (...) and acid fruits, etc. All these
act by debilitating generally or topically, and this being always accompanied
with a relaxation, exposes the injured parts to the irritation of the air in an
uncommon manner. The irritation of the air brings about

4th. The proximate or immediate cause; which is a superabundant afflux of the
nervous, or vital principle, to the parts most debilitated or most exposed (to
the common irritations); usually the extremity of the joints, or ball of the
great toe. This afflux of vital principle has two effects. 1st. As there is no
sensation without the presence of this principle, so in the abundance of it,
the sensation is exquisite. 2dly. As there is no circulation without it, and
the circulation is in proportion to it, so, in the abundance of it, the
circulation is increased to inflammation, and the tender parts are forced, and
filled faster than they can propel the blood; hence congestion, redness and
pain of the joint, and in such parts as are not plentifully furnished with
vessels, the muscular fibers are contracted to a spasm.

THE SYMPTOMS OF THE REGULAR GOUT.
A CEASING of the sweat to which the feet have been accustomed, an unusual
coldness of the legs and feet, a frequent numbness, alternating with a
prickling sensation all along the course of the extremities, frequent cramps of
the legs, and a swelling of the veins. Whilst these symptoms take place in the
parts mentioned, the whole body is affected with a degree of torpor and
languor: the functions of the stomach in particular are more or less disturbed,
the appetite is diminished, and flatulency with other symptoms of indigestion
felt. These symptoms take place for some days before the fit of the gout comes
on, but often on the day preceding the fit the appetite becomes greater than
usual: The fit usually begins about three of clock in the morning, with pain
affecting one foot, most commonly at the ball of the great toe, but sometimes
in other parts of the foot; with the coming on of the pain there is usually
more or less of a cold shivering, which as the pain increases gradually gives
way to beat and fever, which lasts as long as the pain does. From the first
attack the pain becomes more violent till the next midnight, after which it
gradually remits, and after continuing about twenty-four hours usually ceases,
with a ^^^ating and sleep.

The next morning after the remission, a swelling and redness is to be
perceived in the part affected, which after continuing some days, gradually
abates.

But though the pain ceases at the end of twenty-four hours, it usually returns
every evening, with less and less violence and fever, and again abates in the
morning: this recurring continues some days, and then goes off very entirely,
till the third, second, or next spring, following. This is the case in the
first attack of the gout; but the returns become more frequent, till at length
after some years the patient is never clear of it, except a month or so in the
summer season: After the gout has continued, the pain does not remain in one
joint, but shifts about until it has attacked almost every joint in the body.

After a fit is over, the patient feels himself recruited in body and mind.

As the gout proceeds, the pains become less severe and more continued, and the
other affections are more considerable, so that the stomach is very much
affected with sickness.

After the first fits of the gout the joints remain ^upple, but in the advanced
state they become stiff and motionless, with earthy concretions.

To those who have suffered much with the gout, a complaint of the kidneys
frequently alternates with the gouty affections.

MANAGEMENT BETWEEN THE FITS.
IF it be early in the complaint, or the patient not debilitated, gentle
continued bodily exercise and a diet of vegetables and milk should be used; but
if the patient is already much injured by it, neither of the above will be
safe. His exercise should then be gestation, for walking would injure the parts
too much, and other exercise would be fatiguing: His diet should be of the most
nourishing vegetables, milk and light meats, which last may be used more and in
proportion to the debility, and if this be considerable, it will be necessary
to use good Madeira, diluted, for drink; otherwise all spirituous liquors
should be abstained from. The causes mentioned should as much as possible be
avoided, and the patient should keep his bowels regular with a little sulphur,
castor oil, lenitive electuary, or any mild opening medicine; which are to be
used at all times to prevent or remove the costiveness.

In general, it will be found useful after a fit not to rise soon, but to keep
warm in bed most of the morning, and to go to bed early.

TREATMENT IN THE FIT.
AT this time very little can be done to advantage. If the patient is vigorous,
and the inflammation and pain considerable, blood-letting may be once
performed, though sparingly. Scarce any thing solid should be taken for diet,
and when the patient has suffered much from want of rest, fifteen drops of
laudanum in one tea-spoonful of spirits of nitre dulcified, may be taken at
night. Applying poultices of bread and milk to the parts, will sometimes give
ease to a small extent, and in a violent case may be tried; carded wool should
always be applied.

When the inflammation has gone off, and a stiffness remains, it will be of
service to use the flesh-brush to rub the parts with, and after the fit to take
regularly some of the preparations of steel, mentioned hereafter.

OF THE ATONIC GOUT, OR GOUT OF THE STOMACH.
IN such patients as have brought the gout on themselves, this peculiarity
seldom happens till late in the disorder, when the system is generally
debilitated, and there is little disposition to inflammation. In such a state
the stomach is usually much debilitated, and liable to be acted upon by a
slighter cause than what would bring on an affection of a joint.

From the above circumstances of debility, general and topical as well as from
the stomach being defended from the application of the common air (which
produces the re-action, or inflammation in the regular gout) it happens that
the gout of the stomach is a very different affection from the regular gout;
being a case of deficient and irregular action of the part, instead of an
inflammation and excessive action as in the regular; and hence requiring very
different remedies.

Symptoms. Loss of appetite, indigestion, flatulency, nausea and vomiting, acid
eructations, pains and cramps in different parts, which yield upon the
discharge of wind; costiveness, though sometimes looseness, colic pains and
hypochondriac symptoms (which consists in a great attention to the slightest
symptoms, and an apprehension of danger) an absence of inflammatory affections
of the joints, and of fever.

Management. The patient's food should be a mixture of animal and vegetable, of
the most nutrient and digestible kind, taken rather at many times than in large
quantities. Wine and water, or spirit and water should be his drink: It will be
of great advantage to keep close to the bed, except when the patient is able,
and the weather good, then he should ride in a carriage daily.

Treatment. Fifteen grains of rust of steel, with as much pounded orange-peel,
may be taken with mint water, or a little spirit of lavender, four or five
times a day.

A tea-spoonful of saline aromatic spirit will also be of service to take a few
times a day.

If indigestion (...) much, fourteen grains of ipecacuana may be given every
five or six days, or large draughts of strong camomile tea, which will
frequently have the same effect.

A third variety of the gout is, when the inflammation has appeared first in
its usual place (the joints) but from improper treatment, bad management,
exposure, and other less observable causes, it leaves the joints, and fixes
upon the stomach or some other part.

This is called the RETROCEDENT GOUT. When the stomach receives the affection,
a great anxiety, sickness and vomiting attend; if the lungs, an asthmatic
affection is the product; if the heart, fainting; if the head, an apoplexy.

When the stomach or bowels are attacked, wine, with spices boiled in it,
should be given plentifully, or if this is not sufficient, spirits with spices
in large doses. In slighter cases, less doses of spirits, in which garlic has
been steeped, may be given; with this the patient's feet may be steeped in a
strong hot mixture of spirits and water, and blisters laid on the ankles;
volatile aromatic spirits, and assafoetida, are also proper to be given, but
they are less powerful than spirits and spices. When the vomiting is
troublesome, it may be encouraged with camomile tea, and afterward restrained
by twenty or thirty drops of laudanum with a dram, of spirits of nitre
dulcified; vitriolic ether and musk are sometimes useful.

When any of the other parts are affected, a blister should be immediately
applied, and the bath of spirits and water applied to the feet. If the patient
is able to bear bleeding, it should be performed when the head or lungs are
affected. In all cases a gentle determination to the surface should be aimed
at, by giving one tea-spoonful of saline aromatic spirits every two hours; or
spirits of nitre dulcified and laudanum every two or three hours. The fourth
and last variety of the gout is the MISPLACED. That is, when the patient,
instead of a regular affection, is immediately (without any preceding affection
of the joints) affected with an inflammation of the lungs, the bladder, or the
lower end of the last gut; in this last it brings on the piles: when it affects
the bladder, it brings on strangury or a difficult discharge of urine. These
affections are to be treated as directed in the chapters for them; remembering
the constitution and situation of the patient.

During every species, costiveness should be removed by three or four grains of
aloes, or twenty-five of rhubarb. And between every affection, the system may
be strengthened by the following medicine; half a wine-glass full of which may
be taken twice a day, at eleven and at four o'clock; port wine, one quart,
rusty iron or iron flakes, one handful, cinnamon one ounce: let them remain one
week and then use them.

Observations. 1st, It appears, that a primary gout is the consequence of a
general injury done to the system; but that the stomach and extremities suffer
chiefly, because the stomach is particularly injured by the prime causes, and
the extremities are more exposed (from their distance from the heart and other
causes) to the irritation of the air, which far exceeds common notice and
opinion.

2dly, It is also plain, that those who are much predisposed to the gout by
hereditary constitution of the parts, cannot possibly escape it; because that
quantity of food which is necessary for nutrition, will produce an action, that
the vessels usually injured in the gout cannot support through life.

3dly, A fit of the gout is a change in the system, which aims at a removal of
the injury; only being unbounded and excessive, not produced by any internal
conscientious power, but by physical laws.

CHAP. XXVI. THE SMALL POX.
THE small pox is of two kinds; the distinct and the confluent: As they demand
a very different treatment, I shall not confound them, but treat of them
separately.

THE DISTINCT SMALL POX.
THE cause of this is a specific contagion.

Symptoms. About eight days after inoculation, and probably the same time after
taking it the natural way, a fever appears of the continued inflammatory kind:
after this has continued about three days, a distinct eruption of small
pimples, like flea-bites, appear on the face; these increase and extend, so
that about the end of the fifth day, the eruption is completed and extended to
the extremities: from the first eruption the fever usually declines, and at the
finishing of the eruption it ceases. During the fever, children are frequently
affected with starting, and if kept warm, with fits.

About the eighth day after the eruption, these pimples have increased to
spheroidal pustules, filled with matter, with a red margin around each.

Before the pustules are quite filled, a swelling of the face takes place,
which subsides as soon as the pustules are filled: a swelling of the wrists and
feet succeeds the above, just in the progression of the eruption; during this
period a sore throat is common.

After the pustules are fully ripe and yellow, they then either pour out the
matter, from a small rupture at their top, or the matter is absorbed, leaving
en empty flat bag: the former is usually the case with those on the face; the
latter with those on the arms and thighs: in this way they decline till they
are perfectly dried up, which takes place, from eight to sixteen days (from the
time they begin to decline) according to size and number of the pustules: pits
are frequently left behind.

Management The patient should be kept cool, both by going into the air, and
thinning his clothing: However, the custom of exposing to bad weather; extreme
cold, and pulling off from children the flannels which they have been long used
to, has occasioned the worst consequences: a medium therefore (...) to
observed. Those who are in a good (...) of health should live chiefly on
vegetables, what meat they do use, should by all means be fresh; but those who
are weakly should not alter their food, so as to weaken themselves, but only
choose such as they always should, viz. digestable mild food. This should be
the management until the fever commences, when they should use nothing but
light spoon aliments, such as barley, gruel, panada, custard, jelly, etc.
Spirituous drinks should be altogether avoided; at the time of the (...) such
drinks as the following may be taken more or less, in proportion to the height
of the fever, viz. lemonade, cream of tartar dissolved in water, and sweetened,
jelly and water, apple-tea, made by pouring boiling water on undressed,
red-streaked apples, sliced very thin; the drink to be sweetened; these drinks,
abstinence, and vegetable food, with the directions for keeping the patient
cool, may be observed until the number of pocks and favor of the disease be
determined, after which they may be gradually relinquished; the exposure first,
and then the others, and the proper habits returned to.

The first week in May is probably the best time for inoculation, in the States
of Pennsylvania, Delaware and Maryland; farther Southward, April; farther
Northward, the latter end of May: but avaricious aims have been the cause of
adopting an earlier season. It is upon the whole, in large towns, safest to
inoculate before teething, but only because of the danger of taking it the
natural way; where that is not to be feared, then from the fifth to the twelfth
year, is far preferable; if any thing be amiss, we can then stand some chance
of rectifying it, by suitable treatment, but with infants we can only deplore
their state, when the complaint takes an unfavourable turn.

Treatment. To those who are pretty hearty, or of a full habit, between the
time of inoculation and fever, two doses of Glauber salts, or cream of tartar,
sufficient to procure four or five stools and not more, may be given: but to
those who are lean or weakly, no purgatives should be given, only costiveness
should be removed by a little cream of tartar, or the pills No. 6. If they have
not a passage every day, this will be necessary; or if they have a passage
every day, and the stools should be hard and difficultly passed, the pills, or
a clyster of oil, sugar, milk and a little scraped Castile soap, which is
probably the best, is to be given.

If at the commencement of the fever, the patient feels much oppression at the
stomach, uneasiness and giddiness, it will be proper to administer an emetic of
two grains of tartar emetic, dissolved in a cup of warm water, or of ten grains
of ipecacuana; at the same time he should have fresh air: when the fever has
commenced, if it runs high, it will be proper to give a dose of salts, which
may be taken at two or three portions: If this does not lessen the fever, take
four grains of tartar emetic, and put them into a quart of apple or other tea;
three table-spoonfuls of this to be given every hour, till the eruption
appears, keeping him cool withal. If the eruption appears numerous, and the
pulse be usually strong, a dose of salts will be of use, as it will bring many
of the pimples to nothing; after this nothing more will be necessary, but to
keep the bowels regular with small doses of any mild medicine.

When the pocks have dried away, if any sore or undulatory motion of the
muscles take place, a few pills of the following form may be given: calomel
twelve grains, opium three grains, honey enough to form them into twelve pills,
one of which may be taken night and morning.

If the arm inflames much, pour cold water on it daily, for ten minutes
together.

N. B. All the above prescriptions of medicine are for grown persons.

THE CONFLUENT SMALL POX.
SYMPTOMS. In this the fever is more violent than in the former, the pulse
being quicker and more contracted; a disposition to coma, or a d^ep drowsiness,
is almost always present with the incipient fever, and a delirium is a frequent
symptom: infants are frequently attacked with fits in the first days; vomiting
is here a common symptom: early in the third day, the pimples break out in
clusters, and these are frequently preceded or accompanied with an
efflorescence like St. Anthony's fire.

When the eruption is completed, it is found to be much more numerous in the
face than on the body: the pocks are less eminent: at the end of the eruption
the fever does not go off, but only remits, to increase with more violence,
when the pocks have acquired their summit; this is called the secondary fever:
The pimples soon turn to vesicles filled with whitish or brown water, instead
of yellow matter, as in the distinct: the pocks are very irregular, and run
into one another in many places^ so as to form one large flat pock, covering
almost the whole face; wherever there is any space between them, it is not
florid, but pale and shrivelled.

The swelling of the face, that sometimes attends the distinct, is here always
present at an earlier period, and rises to a greater height; the discharge of
saliva is generally great about the same time; both subside about the tenth or
eleventh day, counting from the attack of the incipient fever. With infants a
lax is common instead of a salination.

The pocks over the body, though distinct, are generally flat, and upon the
whole, there is a great tendency to putrefaction.

The management of this should be much the same as that directed for the
distinct, except that toward the latter end, when the patient grows weak, and
symptoms of putridity prevail, then the patient should have for drink, sixty
drops of elixir of vitriol, to one pint of spirits and water, or wine and
water, and a moderate degree of warmth should be kept up. Great attention
should be given to keep the room clean, sweet and ventilated, as directed for
the putrid fever.

Treatment. When the symptoms appear as laid down, with considerable fever;
give one sixth of a grain of tartar emetic in apple-tea, or common drink of any
kind, every hour. From the fifth day The day is always reckoned from the attack
of the incipient fever.
onward, till the eruption be completed, give twenty drops of laudanum, every
morning and night, taking care to remove the costiveness it occasions, by
giving cream of tartar, or castor oil daily, if necessary. When the secondary
fever comes on, the same treatment with tartar emetic and laudanum should be
used, until the symptoms of putrefaction and weak pulse take place, then all
should be dropped, for bark and port wine, which may be given every hour, so
that the patient may take a pint of wine and one ounce of bark, from morning
till bed time.

From the eighth day to the eleventh, when the fever is violent, blisters
should be laid on successively, without any respect to the pocks; the wrists,
thighs, back of the neck, and breast, are proper places; when the swelling in
the throat threatens suffocation, a blister should be applied over the throat,
and the throat gargled with a mixture of one dram of elixir of vitriol, to
half a pint of sage tea and a little honey; or instead of this, with vinegar
and water.

If the fits, that usually attack children, happen but once or twice, nothing
need be done but to keep them cool; but if they are frequent, they are likely
to destroy the patient; then as large a dose of laudanum as the child can take,
should be given.

The bark, with the vitriol and water should be continued for a considerable
time after the disease, to strengthen the system, though it should be used in a
less quantity.

CHAP. XXVII. THE CHICKEN POX.
THIS disorder appears to arise from a specific contagion in the air: like the
small pox, it never returns.

Symptoms. The patient is generally, for one or two nights, or nights and days,
affected with fever, which most always is slight: at no certain person, though
perhaps always before the third day, the pocks appear on the face, and over the
body; they are never very numerous, though sometimes pretty large. In the
course of four days they are at their summit, when they are about the size of a
large brister shot, and much of the same form, filled with yellowish or white
water. They sometimes come out successively instead of a great many at once.

Management. The patient should be kept cool, especially when in bed; light
vegetable food, and cooling acid drinks, should be used.

Treatment. If the fever be worthy attention, the bowels should be opened with
a dose of cream of tartar or of salts, every day till it ceases, and the acid
drinks given plentifully.

CHAP. XXVIII. THE MEASLES.
THIS disorder arises from specific contagion, and never has been known to
attack the same person twice.

It usually makes its appearance about January, and again ceases at midsummer.
Nevertheless, it is not altogether adherent to any particular times, for it
continues throughout the year, though less extensively.

Symptoms. It comes on like a common fever, with a cold stage succeeded by a
hot one; a nausea, anxiety and vomiting, are pretty generally attendants.
Sometimes at the beginning, the fever is sharp and violent, but before the
eruption it is most generally so, which happens about the fourth day; with
these a hoarseness, cough, difficult breathing, swelling of the eyelids, acrid
discharge from the eyes and nose, with sneezing take place: generally a
drowsiness attends the beginning. The eruption appears first on the face in
small points like flea-bites, which soon may be observed by ^^ut or feeling, in
clusters, spreading themselves over the whole body; the face appears a little
turgid during the first two days of the eruption, after this, the eruption
changes its color from a scarlet to a brown, and soon goes off very entirely,
leaving (...) scurf. The fever sometimes goes off, when this ^^squamation takes
place, but more commonly continues with the cough for some time after the
disorder has gone through the stages, and not unfrequently the cough and
difficulty of breathing increase toward the end, so as to mark an inflammation
of the lungs. After the desquamation, a lax or sweating usually takes place,
and continues for some time.

Management. The patient should avoid heat, but on the other hand, should not
expose himself so much to the cool air, as in the small pox. He should live on
a low vegetable diet, and cool acid demulcent drinks, such as flaxseed tea,
with lemon juice: barley water boiled with prunes, is also very good,
especially for the cough.

Treatment. If the fever that precedes the eruption is considerable, it will,
in adult patients, be proper to bleed, but in children, a purge or two of salts
will be generally sufficient. From the beginning, the drinks mentioned above
and syrups may be given to allay the cough; but these are seldom sufficient; it
will therefore be necessary, from the time of the eruption, to give one
tea-spoonful of paregoric, twice a day, and two at night in common drink. This
treatment and keeping the bowels open regularly, with gentle medicine, as salts
and manna, in small doses, cream of tartar, castor oil, etc. should be
continued in. When the desquamation or peeling of the skin takes place, if the
difficulty of breathing mentioned in the desorption, comes on, with a strong
pulse; then the patient should be bled freely, and a blister laid afterward on
the side, as in a pleurisy, and with these, one of the powders No. 1. may be
given every two hours, or if it be a child, a sufficient quantity of antimonial
wine, to be taken at intervals of two hours: during such a state the paregoric
should be omitted. If the patient, is unable to bear bleeding, the case then
cannot be very violent; then purging and blistering with the powders may be
used; gentle riding and bark are proper (...) restore the patient when much
reduced.

CHAP. XXIX. THE SCARLET FEVER.
THIS complaint cannot possibly be separated from the putrid sore throat, as
the affection of the throat, eruption of the skin, and low or putrid fever,
which are the chief symptoms, are attendants on both: added to this, the same
contagion will affect one person with what is judged to be the putrid sore
throat, and another with the scarlatina. It is therefore probable that the
scarlatina is only an affection of less magnitude, sometimes owing to the
lenity of the general contagion, and then causing scarlatina universally, and
at other times owing to the diversity of constitutions attacked. Hence, for the
cure, etc. I refer to what I have said of the putrid sore throat, Chap. xi. But
it frequently happens that the scarlatina is so slight as to show no putrid
symptoms but rather inflammatory; then all that will be required will be a
blister to the throat and keeping the bowels open with cream of tartar.

CHAP. XXX. St. ANTHONY's FIRE.
CAUSES. A hereditary disposition thereto, or a peculiar delicacy of the
membrane that suffers the inflammation; passions of the mind, a sudden cooling
of the body after being heated by the sun, spirituous liquors taken freely, hot
drinks or hot baths, checked evacuations, moist air, and perspiration any how
stop^, generally excite the disease in those predisposed.

Symptoms. It commonly comes on with shivering and succeeding heat with fever;
the pulse is generally quick, sometimes hard and full; a confusion of the head
and some degree of delirium frequently attend, but a drowsiness almost always,
which sometimes increases to a comatose state. After these symptoms have
continued from one to three days, a redness most commonly on the face appears,
which increases with a swelling, that turns white, upon pressing it with the
finger. This goes on to increase, though it commonly abates in one part a
little, to increase in another; in this manner it sometimes extends all over
the head, and swells the eyelids, so as to produce temporary blindness.

It is not an uncommon case for blisters to arise on the swelling, filled with
yellow or whitish serum, which break after awhile, and leave the part
underneath blackish, and very ready to turn gangrenous; the skin between these
blisters peels off; matter is sometimes discharged from the eyelids: the
inflammation and fever usually continue about ten days, and then go off; when
the fever goes on violently, and the inflammation extends, it is apt to produce
an apoplexy.

These are the symptoms of a perfect disease, but slighter affections are not
unfrequent, even with little or no fever.

Management. The patient should be kept cool, in proportion to the greatness of
the fever: acid drinks and vegetable diet should be used throughout.

Treatment. When the case agrees with what is laid down above, half a pint or
more of blood should be taken away, which may be repeated, if the habit allow,
and the pulse and inflammation require it: after bleeding, cooling purgatives
should be administered; one ounce of Glauber salts may be divided into four
parts, one of which should be given every two hours, mixing it with lemon
juice, which covers the bad taste.

This practice of administering salts may be followed for some days; they not
only open the bowels, but temperate the heat and fever: in slighter cases
bleeding should be laid aside, and the medicines given as directed.

Whenever there are any symptoms of putrefaction, as a low, weak pulse, dark
coloring of the tongue and mouth, acrid and black spots underneath where the
blisters stood; then all evacuations (except keeping the bowels regular, with a
little rhubarb) should be laid aside, and twelve grains of columbo root given
every hour; when this can be kept on the stomach well, and does not have
sufficient effect, as much bark should be given, and the dose increased as
necessity requires, or as it will fit on the patient: wine and water, and
vitriol and water, made by putting two tea-spoonfuls of elixir of vitriol to a
pint of water, may be drank alternately and freely.

The patient is most always wanting some topical application, for this
physicians have thought that meal sprinkled on the part, is the only proper
application; this, when the inflammation is considerable, fits agreeably, and
has some effect in softening the skin, and if sprinkled on very slightly when
the blisters discharge, it dries up the humor: however patients are not
content with it, therefore apply either of the following with a rag moistened
in it: half a pint of strong tea of camomile flowers, or wormwood tops, fifteen
grains of white vitriol, and a tea-spoonful of laudanum or a strong solution of
alum.

Sometimes from neglect, the part suppurates; then it should be poulticed with
bread and milk till it is ripe, when it should be opened and dressed with lint
spread with wax and oil melted together; this need only be applied over the
sore.

Bark and vitriol, with fresh air, gentle exercise in a carriage in fair
weather, will be proper to brace up the habit in the end.

CHAP. XXXI. THE ESSERA, OR NETTLE RASH.
THIS generally attacks those of a delicate constitution, especially such as
have a fine skin, the excessive irritability of which appears to be a cause of
the disease.

From the above it would appear, that women and children are the chief subjects
of it; which is agreeable to observation.

Symptoms. It usually comes on in the night, producing great restlessness and
itching. In the morning considerable red eminences are to be observed on some
parts of the body, usually about the upper arms, neck, and breast; their forms
are irregular, some being like the stroke of a whip, others like the sting of a
mosqueto. It is not unfrequent for them to disappear in the course of the day,
and return again at night: the time of continuance is various, as they
sometimes continue for a week, and sometimes for a year or more.

They have never been known to have any dangerous effect; the itching being all
that is disagreeable, which at times is so troublesome as to prevent sleep.

Management. The patient should use exercise, bathing, and every proper means
to remove such a delicacy of constitution.

Cure. This has been too little attended to, or perhaps we should ere this,
have discovered some simple medicine that would remove it.

I have seen mercury recommended, and in a few cases which I have treated, it
was always attended with success.

Twelve grains of calomel, and as many of sulphur of antimony, may be made into
a dozen p^^s, one of which may be taken for six nights following, after which
they may be used only twice a-week; if the patient's gums become sore, they
should be omitted: AEthiops mineral is also a proper medicine, twenty grains
may be used every other night for twenty days.

Perhaps if common sulphur was tried every night, it would have an equally good
effect. To guard against the returns of it, bark may be used; and some weeks
after using the medicines prescribed, the cold bath.

CHAP. XXXII. BLEEDING AT THE NOSE.
THOUGH this complaint attends at any age and may trouble any constitution, yet
it does not make the disorder I mean to treat of, except when it attacks young
people, and especially those who are full of blood.

The animal economy finds it proper not to increase the different parts
equally from the time of conception, but increases certain parts successively,
this increase is brought about by a determination of blood to these parts:
hence the different periods of life, that we see fluxes of blood making their
appearance may be easily accounted for: and hence this complaint in the
youthful, and the following complaint immediately after that period.

It requires attention, or it will soon be accompanied with very disagreeable
circumstances.

Symptoms. A headache, redness of the eyes, florid countenance, and throbbing
of the temporal arteries, usually precede for a while before the effusion, but
immediately before it a fullness of the face, and itching at the nose take
place: beside these, frequently more ge(...)toms are observable; as
costiveness, pale (...) of the feet, and shivering^ this is a description which
suits the most perfect state of the complaint.

The quantity of blood discharged is various.

Management. In the time the bleeding comes on the patient should be placed in
a stream of cool air, and be supported erect; he should avoid talking, or
blowing his nose.

In the intervals he should avoid heat, stooping his head, or walking fast,
more especially after eating: his exercise should be gentle and constant, and
this may be partly in riding and walking, and partly in the occupation of his
business, if that be mechanical. The cold bath may be used daily, in which he
may remain some time; this has, beside a bracing property, a tendency to make
the patient lean: a little care should be used in the beginning; no cap should
be worn on the head to keep the water from that part. He should live upon a
vegetable diet chiefly, and use cold water for his constant drink.

Cure. In beginning to treat the patient, if he has not already lost much
blood, a few ounces may be taken from him, a little before the time of the
bleeding's coming on, and ever afterward a dose of salts may be used at the
same time; and it may be observed in general, that it will be necessary to keep
the bowels very regular. If after the salts have been taken, the disposition is
not removed, one of the fever powders, No. 1. may be used every two hours, for
two days, and large quantities of lemon-juice taken between each dose.

When the bleeding comes on, it may be suffered to continue till six ounces
have been discharged, provided the patient be full of blood, but if otherwise,
it should be stopped immediately, by pouring cold water on his head, hands and
testicles, and by drinking cold water; at the same time, using dossils of lint,
dip^^^ a strong solution of alum and water, or in any common astringent, and
applied up the nose; a piece of sponge is sometimes of service; a weak solution
of bluestone has sometimes stopped the bleeding, after other things have
failed. But in many cases neither of the above will answer, then the patient's
life is in danger, and the following simple method may be used by any common
person, who has the least degree of presence of mind; take a needleful of silk,
wax it and tie to one end of it a dossil of well scraped lint, about as large
as a thumb, get a piece of cat-gut string several inches long, grease it a
little, push this cat-gut through the bleeding nostril into the mouth, till you
observe it come out near the throat, lay hold of it with a pair of narrow
pincers or forceps, or in their stead, with a dull pair of scissars, and draw
it till you have both ends in your hands; tie a knot in the end that you have
drawn through, and to this knot fasten your silk and draw back the cat-gut till
you have drawn the dossil of lint against the orifice of the passage that leads
into the throat, then you need only stop up the nostril with another dossil of
lint, which will shut up the passage altogether, and hinder any more blood from
coming out. The hint should be kept in for three or four days.

The cat-gut is only for the purpose of getting the silk through, which is too
limber of itself: In pushing the cat-gut through, you are not to push it
upwards, as the nostrils apparently lead, but directly backward, aiming at the
upper part of the throat ^here it comes out; the nostrils turn at about half an
inch after you have pushed it upwards. By the stated returns of this complaint,
and the habit of the patient as well as by the quantity, you may easily
distinguish it from what is termed, a passive flowing of blood from the nose.

In this complaint, the usual topical applications for the other kind are
sufficient; but with this the cold both may be used, which is an effectual
remedy, from my own experience; with this or without it, tincture (...) iron,
No. 7 may be used.

CHAP. XXXIII. SPITTING OF BLOOD.
CAUSES. Besides the predisposition mentioned in the preceding chapter, we may
consider, as exciting causes, suppressed evacuations, sudden changes of the air
from heavy to lighter, violent efforts, compression in different parts, etc.

Symptoms. After some general disorder, as flatulency, chills, etc. a fullness
is often felt about the chest. From the blood being poured out, an irritation
is made, to relieve which, the patient hawks or coughs, by which means he
discharges a little frothy, reddish, and somewhat saltish spittle; this
sensation often returns again, and the spittle is thrown out of a deeper red.
In this manner the patient usually discharges the blood for some hours or days,
when it ceases for that period. But it sometimes happens, that the rupture is
more considerable, and the pure blood is discharged in such quantities, as to
excite vomiting; in such a case the patient's life is in immediate danger. A
cough usually follows the bleeding, which returns sometimes every week, and so
on at every period between that and a year.

Management. This should be exactly as described for the preceding disorder,
only that the cold bath should not be used, as we have not sufficient
experience to recommend it, and the cold should be here very moderate, a^ when
it is severe, it determines the blood to the lungs, which is to be avoided.

Treatment. If the patient be able to bear it, blood should be taken away,
though not in profusion. As soon as the bleeding takes place, this should be
followed by a dose of Glauber salts. And ever afterward when we apprehend from
the symptoms before described, that the bleeding is about to return, we should
anticipate it by the repetition of the salts, which I have seen attended with
the best success.

When the bleeding is copious, besides the management of exposing the patient
to cool air, let him take a tea-spoonful of common salt, and repeat it when
necessary. This has been often effectual, and may be carried in the person's
pocket, when repeated small bleedings plague him, or ten grains of alum every
hour. In the intervals nitre should be given to reduce and cool the system, ten
grains in flaxseed tea, may be given three or four times a day; after the
commotion has ceased, the country air should be used. It is sometimes necessary
to take a tea-spoonful of paregoric elixir at night, in the morning, and at
noon, to quell the cough.

CHAP. XXXIV. CONSUMPTION.
CAUSES. A hereditary, natural or acquired debility of the lungs, may be looked
upon as causes of this fatal disorder: under such circumstances, almost any
irritation upon those parts will establish the consumption; and it is somewhat
doubtful if any cause will do the same, without the predisposition.

Symptoms. Cough, pain about the breast, spitting of nauseous matter at all
times of the day, which is sometimes streaked with blood; a fever which comes
in at noon, frequently with shivering, and most always with coldness, which
remits toward the afternoon, to exacerbate or renew its violence at night,
continuing with the other affections, and after awhile being followed in its
second fit toward morning with a copious sweat.

The pulse in this fever, which is a hectic, is quick and most generally weak,
though in its first attack some degree of hardness is to be felt. The fever is
always kindled by taking much food at a time. Toward the end of the
consumption, a lax takes place which generally carries off the patient.

Management. The patient should live upon a light digestible diet; milk,
vegetables, spoon-meats, puddings, pies, etc. are proper; these should be taken
in small quantities at a time, and used the oftener, on that account. The teas
and drinks prescribed for fevers, are the proper drinks to be used.

Exercise in a carriage or sailing, are almost indispensably necessary; the
country air is so far preferable to the town, that the former will sometimes
alone perfect a cure, and the latter resist every means. Cold should be guarded
against; and for this as well as other reasons, a flannel shirt should be worn.

Cure. If the patient is not low and thin, he should be bled every week for
three or four times, taking away about a quarter of a pint of blood each time,
till all signs of increased action or hardness are gone from the pulse; if they
give way at the first bleeding no more is to be used. After this, or when this
is not allowable, eight grains of ipecacuana should be given every four days,
for as many times as they appear to be beneficial: when this has been done, the
patient should take twenty drops of elixir of vitriol, early in the morning, at
ten o'clock, and again after the noon fever has abated and before the evening
one has come on. To allay the cough take two ounces of paregoric, two grains of
tartar emetic, or when tartar does not agree, two ounces of the spirits of
nitre dulcified: two small tea-spoonfuls may be used at night, and half that
quantity taken at any time in the day when it is troublesome. When the pain in
the breast is considerable, blisters may be used; a seton should be put in the
side in the beginning.

The bowels should be kept regular, with small dos^^ of castor oil, sulphur,
magnesia, or cream of tartar.

The above prescriptions, although the best and simplest that can be
recommended, frequently fail, and when the disease threatens to resist them, a
sea voyage should be recommended as the only refuge.

It is not unfrequent that the consumption is combined with other affections,
then we must have regard to these affections, or no cure can be expected. But
such cases are so complex, that they require the judgment of an able physician.

CHAP. XXXV. THE PILES.
A LAXITY of the gut affected, natural or acquired, disposes to this complaint,
so much that slight causes bring it about.

The following are found to be the usual causes, viz. much walking or riding,
costiveness, long continuance in an erect posture, strong purges, suppressed,
natural or artificial evacuations; falling down of the gut, drinking large
quantities of watery liquors, grief, obstructions of the liver, pregnancy, high
living, etc.

Symptoms. The symptoms of this disease being not always alike, have made some
variety and distinction of it. Thus there is the blind piles, when the tumor
is not visible; the common piles, when tumors appear without bleeding; and the
bleeding piles, when they discharge blood. However, there are general symptoms
which are common to all; as, a pain and swimming in the head, stupor, sick
stomach with pains in the bowels and back, which frequently precede, and in
some cases a fever also: a sense of fullness and itching are the local symptoms:
these are soon relieved in the bleeding piles, when that takes place, and
frequently the establishment of the tumor is attended with an alleviation of
the symptoms.

Sometimes blood only comes away with the stools; but at other times a
considerable, constant discharge alarms the patient. This affection is apt to
return at stated intervals, and to increase.

Management. All the causes as far as possible are to be avoided, and
temperance is strictly to be observed by the ^^^ethoric; light vegetable food,
and cool acid drinks are proper during the affection. Much attention should be
given to regularity, and especially^ (...) keeping the bowels in a proper
state. In lean pa^^^ a fla(...) is often necessary.

Cure. It is frequently the case, that this discharge is salutary, and
therefore a doubt arises in the minds of some people, about administering
medicines to check it. Hence, whenever the discharge is small, and attended
with benefit, nothing need be done to check it; but whenever it is profuse, it
then threatens a greater injury than it is likely to relieve; then, as well as
when it returns often, it should be checked by applying cloths dipped in cold
water or vinegar to the neck, hands, thighs, and the part itself: if this does
not relieve it, dip a sponge in alum and water, or in a decoction of galls,
and apply it to the part, and if necessary, give twelve grains of ipecacuana in
a little water immediately. When nothing but tumors are present, and they are
painful or large, wash them with the following wash: to half a pint of
lead-water add two tea-spoonfuls of laudanum.

This may be used three or four times a day. Open the bowels in all cases with
sulphur, or sulphur and cream of tartar, mixed in equal quantities with honey^
two tea-spoonfuls may be taken every two hours: in flight cases this is
frequently sufficient alone.

CHAP. XXXVI. IMMODERATE FLOWING OF THE MENSES.
CAUSES. High living, excess in drink and ^^nery, shocks from falls, dancing,
passions, neglecting abstinence in time of menstruating, inflammatory fevers,
other evacuations checked, costiveness, cold applied to the feet, frequent
miscarriages, difficult labors, neglecting to nurse, living too warm, drinking
much tea or coffee, purging, etc.

Symptoms. An immoderate flowing is usually preceded by headache, giddiness,
and difficult breathing, a ^^^^ding immediately precedes the discharge, with
this also a pain in the back, and feverishness frequently attend.

After a large discharge, a general debility ensues; the pulse becomes weak,
the stomach sick, respiration difficult upon the least motion; the feet cold
and swollen, especially toward evening, when a fever takes place of the hectic
kind. Palpitations, fainting, fearfulness, are not uncommon symptoms: the
whites frequently follow.

The above symptoms take place more or less, sooner or later, according to the
profuseness and repetition of the discharge.

Management. The causes of this complaint discover to us, that it may take
place in two states of the system, one when it is over-loaded or plethoric, the
other when it is debilitated; each of which require separate management.

In the former case, cold, abstinence, and cool drinks should be used with
vegetable diet in the intervals: in the latter, good nourishing food, port
wine, and exercise are to be used. In all cases the causes are to be removed or
obviated: motion in time of flowing is to ^e strictly avoided.

Cure. In the intervals the management prescribed will be sufficient.

In the period, the patient should be kept cool; ten grains of alum may be
given every half hour; sponges dipped in cold vinegar, may be applied to the
small of the back, and to the parts, and if this does not answer, ten grains of
ipecacuana may be given in a little water; after this give ten drops of elixir
of vitriol every hour: to correct the laxity that succeeds, ten grains of rust
of iron may be taken four times a day, and in cases of much debility, the
Peruvian bark also.

When the menses return more frequently, or flow more plentifully than natural,
the patient should be on her guard, look for the causes, and obviate them.

CHAP. XXXVII. THE WHITES.
SYMPTOMS. A discharge of whitish mucus flows instead of the menses, or after
them, and continues longer and longer, till it becomes pretty constant.

Treatment. As when this case takes place, debility is generally present, a
nourishing diet may be used, with port wine and water, more or less, in
proportion to the debility, and gentle, regular exercise.

Cure. The steel, as recommended above, is one of the best remedies; with this
topical applications should be made, with a syringe. Decoctions of Peruvian
bark, oak-bark, or galls, are proper.

CHAP. XXXVIII. OBSTRUCTED MENSES.
CAUSES. Cold is one of the most common causes, either when applied to the body
during menstruation, or when it has at a preceding time brought on the
complaint called a cold; diseases of much pain or action in other parts,
debility, excessive evacuations, low passions of the mind, are also causes.

As the disorder is so well marked, I need not mention the symptoms that ensue
in those who have once had the menses, but shall confine myself to the symptoms
that take place in girls who have never had them although they have passed over
the proper time. This is called properly a retention of the menses.

The patient after the age of thirteen, but how long after is uncertain, is
affected with a loss of appetite, sluggishness, lassitude and debility; the
countenance becomes pale or swarthy, and the body universally flaccid, the legs
swell, especially at night, and the belly sometimes swells also, whilst pains
affect the head, back, and other parts: respiration is generally laborious.

Management. It is clear, that neither the management nor the cure can be
conducted on a single plan: In the plethoric, and those who have cold as a
cause, low diet should be prescribed, with thin drinks, cool air, and rest: but
in those emaciated, nourishing food, wine and exercise should be strenuously
enforced.

Cure. In those of the former case, that is, those who are full of blood, or
have much remaining strength, perhaps nothing will relieve sooner than
blood-letting; with this salts may be used, and if the menses do not return at
the usual period, at that very juncture let the patient take four grains of
calomel, and as many of aloes, in a little honey, and repeat the dose next
night if necessary. Those who are emaciated, or have a retention, should take
ten grains of steel every six hours, and a couple of doses of bark daily, till
the period arrives; and then, if necessary, take the boluses as directed. A
decoction of madder has been often used with success.

CHAP. XXXIX. VOMITING OF BLOOD.
CAUSES. Obstructed menses, and other evacuations suppressed; enlargement of
the spleen or liver, erosions of the stomach by poisons, small glass, etc. and
violent straining to vomit.

Symptoms. Some pain about the stomach, anxiety and vomiting of black grumous
blood, without coughing.

Management. The patient who is subject to this should live regularly and
abstemiously, and endeavor by every means to counteract suh causes as admit of
assistance, and use proper medicines for the same purpose. In time of a
discharge, the patient should retire from all close places, into cool and fresh
air.

Cure. Whatever may be the cause, we are to use the same means to stop an
excessive discharge. Besides the treatment mentioned before, we may use gentle
astringent medicines, as ten grains of alum dissolved in water every half hour,
till the vomiting has ceased some time; after which a decoction of oak bark may
be used for some days, in the same quantity, and made in the same manner as the
decoction No. 3.

When an enlargement of the spleen or liver is the cause, little hope remains
of a cure; but the patient should not neglect to try the Virginia sulphur
springs, which are very powerful deobstruents. When suppressed evacuations are
the cause, the means directed for them should be administered; when acrids have
been taken into the stomach, they should be changed if possible, by their
proper antidotes, or enveloped in some mild mucilage, as mucilage of gum
arabic, or in oil, or syrups. When vomiting is the cause, a few drops of
laudanum in mint water, will put a stop to it.

CHAP. XL. DISCHARGE OF BLOOD FROM THE URINARY PASSAGE.
CAUSES. The passage of a stone, hard riding, blows on the small of the back,
suppression of the piles, acrid medicines, as can^^^rides taken internally, or
absorbed from a blister, or some putrid diseases, as the confluent small pox.

Symptoms. A quantity of red or coffee colored blackish urine is discharged,
sometimes with pieces of clodded blood, like a worm, sometimes the blood is
diffused through the urine, and remains so; at other times, it is deposited in
the bottom of the pot; sometimes much pain attends, as when a stone is passing
along the ureters, at other times there is none.

Management. The patient is to be advised to any in a reclined posture, and to
avoid all stimulating (...) and drinks; the causes are to be removed, before a
cure can be expected. Barley, rice, panada, gruel, puddings, and things of this
sort, are to be his nourishment.

Cure. A plenty of mucilaginous drinks are to be used, as barley water,
flaxseed tea, mucilage of gum arabic, mallow tea, etc. and if the discharge
continues, alum whey may be used. In the case of putrid diseases, vitriol and
bark are to be administered freely.

CHAP. XLI. COLD.
CAUSE. Cold applied partially or generally to the body, especially after an
increase of heat.

Symptoms. It frequently makes its appearance with a difficulty of breathing
through the nostrils, a sense of fullness and stoppage there; this is followed
with a pain in the forehead, stiffness and redness of the eyes and discharge
from the nose. When the affection is any worse, the patient is subject to
chills and feverishness, which is considerable toward evening, a hoarseness,
sore throat, cough, flying or fixed pains of different parts, and not
unfrequently some difficulty of respiring.

The cough in the beginning is usually dry, but as the other Symytoms give way,
it becomes moist, more easy, and attended with a discharge of whitish or ^llow
mucus, which is most frequent; this goes ^ff at different periods, according to
the patient's age, state, etc.

Management. The patient should confine himself to the house, in a temperate
room, and live upon vegetables and cool acid mucilaginous drinks, as barley
water or flaxseed tea sweetened and acidulated with lemon juice or vinegar.

Cure. If the feverishness and difficulty of breathing are considerable,
bleeding should not be omitted ^ with or without this, a dose of salts should
be taken, after which sweating should be practiced: one of the powders No. 1.
may be given every ^^^r, washing it (...) drops of antimonial wine, and as many
of paregoric every half hour for eight or ten times. The latter is a good
medicine to take every night to lull the cough, for this purpose, thirty drops
of the wine, and sixty of the elixir may be taken, when the patient is disposed
to rest.

If pains remain in the head, a blister to the temples is the surest relief; if
in the limbs, a tea-spoonful of the volatile or simple tincture of guaiacum may
be taken two or three times a day, in a little water- Ri^ing in good weather,
or sailing, is of great service as soon as the patient can go about.

CHAP. XLII. INFLUENZA.
THE cause of this is a specific contagion, proceeding from some very general
alteration in the air. There is no doubt of its being communicated from one
person to another.

Symptoms. The most common symptoms are those of the common cold described
above, attacking a whole town or neighborhood at once. But that is not its
constant form; for sometimes it puts on the appearance of a pleurisy, with a
strong pulse, at other times a pain in the side with a weak pulse, whilst in a
th^^ case it has produced all the symptoms of a low nervous fever.

Management. This is in general to be directed as in the common cold; but when
it has the form of a low fever, wine and water should be the constant drink.

Cure. In some of the most violent cases, especially when the patient's habit
has been full, it has been necessary and useful to bleed, and blister the
pained part: this latter need never be neglected, where the pain is fixed.
Vomits of ipecacuana, antimonial wine, or ta^^^^ are always serviceable, and
interrupt the disorder sooner than any other medicine. Gentle s^^ating with
whey, and a little antimonial wine is never to be neglected. This is to be used
after vomiting, when that is intended.

The bowels should be kept regular by small doses of caster oil, Glauber salts,
cream of tartar, or jalap. When the cough is troublesome, syrup of squills may
be used, one tea-spoonful every three hours; or what in some cases answers
better, the following mixture; paregoric elixir one tea-spoonful, antimonial
wine twenty drops; this may be taken twice or three times, in the course of a
day. Honey and vinegar boiled together, spermaceti and loaf sugar, extract of
liquorice, etc. are frequently useful to take in the mouth every quarter of an
hour.

In the case of a low fever, wine and bark are to be given freely, after giving
a gentle dose of ipecacuana. If the stomach refuses bark, elixir of vitriol is
to be used in its stead, ten or fifteen drops every hour.

Riding or sai^ing is here as useful as in the former case.

CHAP. XLIII. FLUX.
SYMPTOMS. Sometimes a fever makes the attack, at other times the bowels are
primarily affected; first, with costiveness and flatulency, then with gripes
and frequent painful efforts to stool, when nothing of a natural sort is
discharged, but slime of a whitish, bloody, or blackish color, in considerable
quantities.

In some few instances a lax has preceded. Whatever is voided of the natural
kind, is generally in small hard balls.

The stomach in general is disordered, and that from the beginning; but it goes
off as the complaint proceeds downwards, which it generally does, till all is
fixed in the lower end of the last gut, where it produces that troublesome
effort of it called tenesmus. The feverish symptoms continue a considerable
time, remitting and then acceding again.

Whenever the disease takes a putrid turn, which it is apt to do, it may be
known by the foetor and blackness of the discharges, a lowness of the pulse and
general debility.

Management. Great attention should be paid to cleanliness, by removing the
chamber furniture, and shifting the bed clothes often; the patient should live
upon digestible vegetables, as rice, barley, etc. and milk preparations, as
thickened milk, light puddings, chicken water, and light broths may also be
used, if the patient is fond of them. And for drinks, teas, jelly and water,
and apple water; which may be taken milk warm.

Cure. To procure regular natural stools, is half the cure; for which purpose,
a table-spoonful of castor oil is to be given every hour, till it produces that
effect; this may be repeated every other day, for several times, as the patient
may require; after this, if the patient is very sick, eight grains of
ipecacuana may be given; after which two grains of ipecacuana may be
administered every two hours, so as not to interfere with taking the oil, as
long as the fever lasts. After the use of these medicines for some time,
laudunum may be given to relieve the pain, fifteen drops morning and night,
mixed up with two grains of ipecacuana.

If the above medicines are not handy, or if there is any objection to them,
the following may be used, a dose of salts and manna, once or twice in the
beginning, after which, put two grains of tartar emetic, or a table-spoonful of
antimonial wine in a quart of apple tea, and take it in small quantities, every
quarter of an hour, so as to consume the whole in a day; after taking it till
the fever is removed, then use the laudanum. When the complaint has a putrid
turn, as well as to remove the debility after a common case, twelve grains of
columbo root should be taken every two or three hours.

If the disease leaves a looseness, a decoction of logwood or tormentil should
be used.

CHAP. XLIV. APOPLEXY.
THIS disorder most commonly attacks the aged, such as have large heads, short
necks, corpulent habits, and indolent dispositions, who have fed high, and used
much strong drink. If, in addition to these, they have had a suppression of any
evacuation, as the piles, they can scarce expect to escape an apoplexy.

Symptoms. Sometimes a headache and swimming of the eyes, with other affections
of the head precede; at other times, it suddenly attacks the patient as he
reclines his head, or makes some effort, with a loss of internal and external
sense, an almost total deprivation of voluntary motion. The patient's face
often becomes flushed and swollen, his eyes red, his pulse full and slow, his
breathing somewhat difficult, with snoring.

The time that this state lasts, is uncertain; sometimes the patient comes to
his senses in a few hours, with a vomiting and sweat, at other times he lays
days, and frequently never recovers.

Management. The patient should be laid on a bed with his head raised as high
as it conveniently can; his neck cloth should be stripped off, and he should be
placed in a cool room. If the fit continues long, a little water may be poured
down his throat, if possible, twice or three times a day; when he is on the
recovery, his diet should be as light as possible.

There are some cases which may be termed apoplexy, which demand treatment only
from the surgeon, as when it depends upon a fracture of the skull.

Cure. The patient should be bled as freely as his constitution will allow:
this may be done at different times, rather than at once. After bleeding, a
clyster of Castile soap, dissolved in water, should be given, one dram of
soap to a pint of water, or instead of that, two table-spoonfuls of antimonial
wine in as much water. These may be used every six hours, for several times.

If these do not bring him to himself, a large blister should be applied to the
back of his neck, and sinapisms made of mustard, vinegar, and crumbs of bread,
applied to the soles of his feet. As soon as the patient is able to swallow a
pill, six grains of aloes, and as much soap made into a bolus or pills, should
be given him every day, so as to keep his bowels in regular motion.

Gentle exercise should soon be used, and increased till the patient is
perfectly well: proper exercise and abstinence are the only securities against
a return. When the disorder ends in a palsy, which it sometimes does, the cure
directed for palsy is to be followed.

Lethargy and Coma, which are species of this disorder, are to be treated in
the same way, having respect to the degree of the disorder and the patient's
habit, and directing the evacuations in proportion to them.

CHAP. XLV. PALSY.
CAUSES. Compression of a nerve in its origin of course, certain narcotics
taken internally, exhalations from lead and arsenic in their preparations,
excessive venery, old age, etc.

Symptoms. A loss of sensation or ability of motion in the part affected, which
is sometimes one half of the patient, as the right side, or from the hips
downwards; at other times, only a small part is affected, as the hand, the arm,
the leg.

Management. This is to be according to the patient's habit: If he is full, a
low diet is to be used; if he is low, a stimulating diet and spirituous drinks
should be used. The causes are, if possible, to be removed.

Cure. In full habits it is often necessary to purge with jalap, or aloes, and
sometimes even to let blood: when these have been used, and likewise when they
have not been necessary, stimulating medicines are to be used. A table-spoonful
of mustard seed may be the first, which will give the patient a gentle
vomiting; after this, any of the following may be tried, as they may best suit:
from one to two tea-spoonfuls of volatile tincture of guaiacum in water, three
times a day; or ten drops of tincture of cantharides, three times a day in
broth or mucilage; ten drops of spirit of turpentine in honey, three times
a day; infusions of horseradish and mustard; electricity; frictions; external
applications of spirit of sal ammoniac and oil; applications of flies, made by
putting a lump of blister-plaister to twice as much common wax and oil
plaster; and lastly, by drinking the water of Berkley springs, which is
probably as effectual as any.

CHAP. XLVI. FAINTING.
CAUSES. Excessive exertions, heat, large evacuations, excessive passions, as
fear, anger, joy, etc. suddenly depriving the body of any compression,
distension, or pain, that it has been for some time accustomed to, violent
pain, affections of the stomach, disagreeable smells, sights, etc.

Symptoms. Sometimes a languor, an anxiety, a giddiness and dimness precede; at
other times the fainting comes on suddenly; the patient turns pale, sinks away,
and appears dead; the pulse being either imperceptible, or very low; the
breathing in the same state.

A cold sweat often breaks out, and stands in drops upon the patient's
forehead, which is as cold as a corpse. After lying a few minutes in that
state, the patient begins to recover, and vomits, or is sick at the stomach.

Management. The patient should be laid out on a hard bed, in a stream of cool
air. If the cause requires attention, it is to be removed as quick as possible.

Cure. The patient should have his face sprinkled with cold water, and his
hands, arms, and legs rubbed in the direction of the circulation, that is,
toward the heart. Hartshorn should be applied to the nose and temples, and
twenty or thirty drops given internally. As soon as the patient begins to
recover, a little good wine should be given him, and if much debility remains
afterward, it should be removed by bark.

CHAP. XLVII. DYSPEPSY, OR CONFIRMED INDIGESTION.
CAUSES. The large use of coffee, tea, or any warm watery drinks, of tobacco,
ardent spirits, opium, bitters, spices, and acids; putrescent food,
over-eating, frequent unnecessary vomiting or purging: some disorders, as
intermittent fevers, fluxes, etc. An indolent life, much application of mind,
excessive venery, long exposure, without exercise, to cold moist air.

Symptoms. The great variety of symptoms in this affection together with the
causes, is the reason that no two persons are identically alike affected; but
nevertheless the general or fundamental symptoms are always alike; these I
shall set down; a loss of appetite, distensions of the stomach with wind,
eructations after eating especially, heart-burn, sometimes a vomiting, frequent
pains about the stomach, and often a dejected mind.

Management. Avoid all the causes, use the most digestible meat in small
quantities at a time, avoid all flatulent vegetables, use wine and water,
brandy and water, or porter, if it will fit well on the stomach; use gentle,
constant, and varied exercise, taking care to avoid exposure in cold or damp
weather.

Cure. This is either palliative or radical; the latter is not to be expected
in a short time, nor at all, unless with great attention.

The palliative consists in removing the present disagreeable feelings from
time to time.

The most troublesome symptoms are the wind and acid on the stomach, and the
costiveness: for the wind and acid, a little magnesia, chalk or limewater,
with some essence of mint, should be taken occasionally.

For the costiveness, the patient should be provided with a box of pills made
with jalap or rhubarb; or with extract of white walnut bark, these may be taken
occasionally; riding over agreeble country seats, is one of the most effectual
remedies against a dejected mind.

For the radical cure, we are to attempt the removal of the debility in the
fibers of the stomach; for which purpose the waters of Berkley springs, or of
any chalybeute springs, are the most promising: when these cannot be used, any
of the following medicines may be used, as shall best suit. Half a wine glass
full three times a day, of the tincture No. 7. or two tea-spoonfuls of No. 8.
in a little water, or in spirit and water, three times a day; or twelve grains
of columbo root three or four times a day; or a table-spoonful of the tincture
of bark, No. 4. three times a day.

CHAP. XLVIII. LOCKED JAW.
CAUSES. Sudden application of cold to the body when warm and much relaxed;
lacerations of the tendons or nerves of the foot, and of some other parts;
exposure of the muscles to the air, after the skin has been taken off by a
gangrene or otherwise.

Symptoms. A stiffness of the lower jaw, and pain^ about the breast and back
generally precede, and increase till the jaw becomes firmly closed, and the
muscles of the back, or of the fore-parts, are violently constricted, so as to
bend the patient into a bow; after this state has continued for some time, he
is sezied with convulsions, in which he is generally carried off.

Management, If any substance is lodged in the parts primarily affected, it
should be removed immediately: the patient should be kept warm, and fed upon
such food as can be got down. In some cases, it would be advisable to draw a
lower tooth, to make a passage for the food; wine and water is the most proper
drink.

Cure. It will be proper to remove a toe, or any small part, if that be the
place of the wound, and to dress this, or whatever part may be hurt, with a
strong suppurating salve, as basilicon (which is composed of rosin and wax,
with a sufficiency of oil to soften it) having first sprinkled it with red
precipitate: or if these things are not to be had, a little warm oil of
turpentine.

The patient's bowels should be opened with castor oil, or with jalap, and kept
open; after this he should have one dram of strong mercurial ointment rubbed
into his thighs and arms, morning, noon and (...), till he spits freely: after
this it may be used every other day, so as just to keep up a spitting for a
week or more, if the symptoms continue. A pill of one grain of opium may be
given frequently to ease the pain. If the patient grows weak, he should take
the bark as frequently as he possibly can, and in as great quantities as his
stomach will bear, without raising his pulse too much. It will be proper to
continue the medicines in smaller quantities, for some time after the affection
has gone off.

IF the sore is brought in the beginning to suppurate, the locked Jaw need not
be feared.

CHAP. XLIX. EPILEPSY, OR COMMON FITS.
CAUSES. Wounds, and bony protuberan^^s of the skull; ossification of the
membranes of the brain; acrimony of the fluids from contagion, degeneracy, etc.
passions, as anger, fear; strong imagination of disagreeable objects, and the
sight of such; congestions of blood in the brain, produced by a plethoric
state, by long continued sun-heat on the head; by intoxication, surfeit, etc.
irritations proceeding from worms: teething; splinters in the flesh; fractured
bones; stones in the kidney; the matter of ulcers; poisons, etc. and lastly,
large evacuations of blood.

It will readily appear, that many of the above causes do not produce fits
generally; and hence there must be a predisposition in those, in whom they will
occasion them. A predisposition consists either in a great mobility of the
muscular system, or in a relaxed state of the vessels of the brain, which
allows of their being easily forced beyond their power, and admitting of ^tion.

Symptoms. Sometimes the patient feels indisposed for some time before the
attack, with headache, giddiness, fullness of the head, sluggishness, etc. at
other times the fit attacks without warning; the person falls down, and is
variously agitated, sometimes one side more than the other; his tongue is often
thrust out of his mouth, and by that means is bit almost or quite through:
after continuing some minutes in this state, his convulsions cease, and he lies
some time in a sleepy state, and then returns to himself, not knowing what has
passed.

Management. It will be proper to hold the patient, so as to keep him from
hurting himself, and to put a piece of thick leather between his teeth, to keep
him from injuring his tongue. It is seldom or never necessary to prescribe any
diet for the patient, except in the intervals, when it is to be suited to his
state. If fullness is the cause of the fits, or he is of a full habit, a low
vegetable diet, with hard exercise, should be used; but for a contrary state, a
nourishing diet and constant gentle exercise is to be used. The causes should
^^possible be removed by operations or medicines, suited to the cause.

Cure. In full habits, a bleeding will be proper during the fit, or preceding
it. However, if they frequently return, it will not do to bleed every time, but
give a dose of salts in its stead, at the time the patient expects the return.
Besides this, very little can be done, except to adhere strictly to the
management directed, and to have an issue put in the back of the neck.

In those of thin habits, when several fits return quickly after one and the
other, that is in one day, it will be proper to give twenty drops of laudanum;
to have him bathed in warm water, and a warm milk and water clyster injected
two or three times a day. All this may be repeated if necessary, in six or
eight hours after.

But the chief thing consists in removing the mobility or irritability
mentioned in the cause. For this, (...), steel, and the cold bath are proper;
they sh(...) used a long while, with proper exercise and die(...) fits
proceeding from some of the above causes, as fr^^ irritations, the removal of
the cause is all that is required. But it is lamentable, that some of the
causes cannot be removed; as that from bony protuberances into the brain, etc.
for such there is no remedy. But it is very probable, that the number of fits
will be greatly lessened by temperance, and avoiding extremes on either hand.

CHAP. L. St. VITUS's DANCE.
THIS is a convulsive affection, partly under the influence of the will: It
affects the patient's leg or arm, or both. It makes him limp along, and in
taking a cup of water, or applying it to his mouth, he usually performs some
uncommon gestures, carrying it quickly one way and then another, before he gets
it to his mouth. It is apt to terminate in palsy. Children from eight to twelve
are the subjects of it.

Cure. The patient should live sparingly, and be purged if he is full. Besides
this, cold bathing and a vomit of ipecacuana, taken two or three times, will be
of service. Sometimes electricity is of service.

CHAP. LI. PALPITATION OF THE HEART.
(...) not when this is a symptom, but only when (...) it is a primary
affection, that it belongs to this ^^^d.

CAUSES. Obstructions in the large blood vessels, excessive irritability or
mobility of the heart, affections of the mind; and excessive evacuations.

Management. The patient should live on a nourishing diet, if he is weak
habitually, or has been weakened by disorder; much motion, sudden starts,
straining, and all exposure should be avoided.

Cure. When it is certain that an obstruction in the large vessels is the
cause, there can be no cure expected, only palliative, and that by avoiding all
excess and extremes.

In the other cases, strengthening the habit with bark, steel, wine, and gentle
riding, are what wi^^ prove effectual to remove it; and for a temporary
medicine, pills of asafoetida, or a few drops of laudanum, may be used.

CHAP. LII. ASTHMA.
BY this I do not mean every difficulty of breathing, but only that which
returns periodically, depending upon a certain peculiar constitution of the
lungs. It usually observes the changes of weather in its returns, and seldom or
never goes off entirely.

Symptoms. It often begins with a tightness across the breast, flatulency, and
impediment in respiration, which continues until the patient can scarcely get
sufficient breath to live. Sometimes a large quantity of frothy spit is
discharged, at other times little or none. Whenever any phlegm is discharged,
which the patient generally makes many efforts to do, it is attended with
relief.

Management. The patient should use light food, such as will not produce
flatulency; his drink should be of the cooling kind.

He should be in a place where there is a (...) mission of air, yet not exposed
to cold.

Cure. A vomit of ipecacuana should be given (...) the beginning; after which
twenty drops of laudan^^ in a little mint water: this may be repeated in six or
eight hours, if necessary.

The bowels should be immediately opened, and kept open with common clysters.

If much fever attends the asthma, it may be proper to take away some blood, if
the patient is sufficiently able to bear it; and also to lay a blister to the
back. Gentle riding is proper, after the fit has passed over. As tea and coffee
are supposed to be injurious to asthmatics, they may use milk and water in
their stead.

CHAP. LIII. HOOPING COUGH.
THIS often begins like a common cold, but proceeds on till the cough becomes
more like a convulsion: the patient's breath is so forced out of his lungs,
that it returns with a whizzing or hoop, after which he often pukes, and finds
relief. After some time there is a considerable discharge of mucus.

Management. The patient, if full, should live on a low diet for some time:
milk in its various preparations is proper, and should form the chief of the
patient's diet. Gentle riding is of service in good weather.

Cure. Gentle pukes of ipecacuana, or tartar emetic, should be given every two
or three days for several times; after which, small doses of antimonial wine
every night: the bowels should be kept open with cream of tartar, or jalap.
When the cough has continued for some time, and the patient grows weak, he
should take bark daily.

A blister is sometimes necessary, when the patient's ^^^^^ing becomes much
interrupted, or when the re^^^^^ coughing are violent and frequent.

CHAP. LIVE. CHOLIC.
CAUSES. Costiveness, cold applied to the belly or feet, indigestible food,
acrids, etc.

Symptoms. Pain in the belly, usually about the navel, with costiveness,
flatulency, and often vomiting.

Cure. When much fever attends, it will be prudent to bleed; but when there is
nothing but a quick or frequent pulse, we need not order bleeding, but
endeavor to open the bowels with a common clyster, or with a spoonful of
castor oil given every three hour^ till it operates; after which ten drops of
laudanum may be given in some mint water, every hour, for four times if
necessary. If the pain does not abate for this, the patient should be put into
a tub of warm water for half an hour.

If the stomach does not bear the oil, let the patient take a quarter of an
ounce of cream of tartar, and fifteen or twenty grains of jalap. The opening
medicines should be often repeated in less doses, to prevent a relapse, and
remove the costiveness, which the laudanum occasions; salts and manna, or manna
and senna, are also very good purges.

The patient should use riding, to prevent returns, and avoid all food that has
a tendency to flatulency, or to produce costiveness.

CHAP. LV. CHOLERA MORBUS, OR VOMITING AND PURGING OF BILE.
THIS violent disorder happens at the end of summer, usually after loading the
stomach with acid fruits.

Cure. The patient should take large doses of ^^^^momile, or balm, or sage tea,
(...) stomach; after which he should take ten drops of laudanum, in some mint
or cinnamon water every half hour, for five or six times if necessary. If this
does not have the desired effect, a blister should be laid on the breast, and a
large bundle of mint, stewed in wine or spirit, laid over and about it. The
patient should be kept as warm as he can, so as not to be disagreeable. Great
care should be taken to avoid the night air, and acid fruits, which rather
promote the secretion of bile, than correct it when secreted.

This same disorder, with very little variety, is very common to children in
large towns. They should be immediately carried out into the country air,
without waiting for an alteration of the disorder, and also dipped in water fresh
from the well. For a medicine, they may have, if five years old, thirty drops
of laudanum put into half of the mixture, No. 2. One tea-spoonful of this and
one of weak mint water, may be taken every half hour, for three or four times:
the mint as above may be immediately applied to the stomach: but the chief
dependence is to be put in port wine, given every hour, and increasing the
dose; one tea-spoonful is enough to begin with. After the disorder has gone
off, bark or columbo, should be taken to strengthen the stomach.

CHAP. LVI. LAX, OR LOOSENESS.
CAUSES. Over-eating, bad food or water, large quantities of sweets or acids,
poisons, over-purging, bile in the summer time, matter discharged into the
intestines, cold applied to the belly or feet, teething, passions of the mind,
etc.

Management. The causes as far as possible should be ^^^bind, the patient
should avoid damp or cold air, by pressing warm, as with flannel next the skin;
all (...) that has a laxative quality, should be avoided. Sago, rice, milk,
eggs, light broths, and digestible meats should be used; for drink, wine and
water, and warm teas, are proper, as sage, balm, mint, etc.

Cure. To perform this, we should keep up a free perspiration, by giving three
times a day, half a grain of opium, with one grain of ipecacuana: let the
patient lie down for one hour after taking this. After using this prescription
for some days, astringents are to be used, as ten or fifteen grains of
tormentil root twice a day, or thirty grains of gum kino twice a day, or oak
bark; made into a decoction, and used in the same quantities as the Peruvian
bark, or six grains of alum every two hours.

CHAP. LVII. HYSTERICS.
CAUSES. Passions of the mind, especially grief, large evacuations, obstructed
menses, great irregularities of any kind. These scarce ever fail to bring it
on, in those subject or predisposed to it.

Symptoms. Some disorder is generally felt in the belly, which is succeeded by
the sensation of a ball rising up till it gets fixed in the throat; with this,
the patient is also wreathed to and fro by convulsions, which cease after some
minutes, to return again. In the intervals, the patient sometimes lies in a
sleepy state, at other times comes to herself and talks. In this manner they
continue for some time.

Management. The patient should be kept from hurting herself during the fit;
her food should be of the lightest kinds. If she is full, nothing but water
drinks should be used, but if otherwise, she should have wine and water:
exercise is of material consequence to prevent relapses.

Cure. When the patient is of a full habit, or when the affection proceeds from
obstructed menses provided this does not proceed from debility) some blood
should be taken away, after which the bowels should be opened with a common
clyster. If the convulsions still continue, ten drops of laudanum should be
given in some sage tea, or mint water, which may be repeated three or four
times if necessary. In lean pa^^^ts, a tea-spoonful of the tincture of
asafoetida given three or four times a day, is what is generally used;
sometimes a small puke of ipecacuana will put an end to the fits. Those who are
in this latter case, should use bark, steel or bitters, with a nourishing diet,
and gentle exercise, to prevent returns; whilst those who are in the contrary
state, should live abstemiously, heap their bowels upon, and use much exercise.

CHAP. LVIII. BITE OF A MAD DOG.
SYMPTOMS. The wound festers, and after some time, seldom under a week or two,
the patient becomes languid and dejected. He then begins to dread water, and
cannot swallow it without great agonies and convulsions of the face; after some
time he cannot bear the sight of it. He dozes, and every now and then starts
from his slumber; and sometimes raves so as to need confinement.

Cure. The wound should be cut out, if it is on a part that admits of it; if
not, let it be filled with gun powder, and this burned; after which it should
be kept open for a month, by sprinkling it with red precipitate, and dressing
it with a salve made with wax, oil and rosin. But if this has been neglected,
there is no way left, but to salivate the patient, by rubbing one dram of
mercurial ointment on him every six hours till he spits freely; after which it
may be applied every other night, so as to keep up a plentiful spitting for a
week or ten days. This, if done in time, will often prevent the affection.

CHAP. LIX. DROPSY.
CAUSES. Obstructions of the liver, compression of the blood vessels from any
cause, large evacuations, suppressed natural evacuations, cold and moisture
long applied, hard drinking, general debility, particular debility of what is
called the lymphatic system, rupture of a lymphatic, etc.

Symptoms. A suppression of urine, drought, swelling of the belly, or the body
in general, which usually retains the impression of the finger; toward the end
fevers come on with a looseness, which puts a period to the patient's miserable
life.

Management. The patient should live upon light digestible food, and observe
the greatest regularity: his drink should be wine and water, if he is thin or
debilitated: gentle exercise should be constantly used.

Cure. It will be very well in the beginning, if the patient's state admits of
it, to give two or three small purges, composed of twenty grains of jalap, with
a quarter of an ounce of cream of tartar: if this does not answer, we should
try medicines that promote the urinary secretion; for which purpose two grains
of powdered squills may be given, twice a day: or half an ounce of cream of
tartar dissolved in a quart of water, may be taken in the course of the
morning. An infusion of horseradish and garlic, in spirit, has been sometimes
of use; also strong cider, iron flakes, and mustard seed put together.

From ten to twenty drops of an infusion of tobacco, in a little mint-water,
twice a day, have been used with success: also a tea-spoonful of saltpeter in
a little gin, twice a day.

If none of the above medicines have the desired effect, there is but little
chance of a recovery. However, after every thing else has been tried to no
purpose, rubbing the belly, when the dropsy affects that part, with warm oil
for a long while, every day, before a fire, has proved effectual.

Bitters and steel are always useful, and should be taken with the other
medicines, only at another hour.

There is a kind of dropsy, which affects only the cavity of the breast, which
is known by the (...) the water makes, when the patient turns over; by its
affecting the pulse so as to make it irregular in its strokes; by its affecting
the respiration, and disturbing the patient in the night with a sensation of
oppression. It is to be treated as the other dropsies.

CHAP. LX. RICKETS.
SYMPTOMS. It makes its appearance generally between the ninth and
twenty-fourth month, in the following manner; the child becomes sedate, and
grows lean, whilst the head grows somewhat out of form; the teeth come out
slowly, turn black, and fall out: in a little time the child becomes altogether
misshapen, some parts growing whilst others pine away: the stools are liquid;
and after a considerable time, a fever comes on, which continues till it puts
an end to the pitiable object.

But when it is not so bad, the child recovers as he grows, till he recovers
all but his shape.

Management. The child should not be kept longer than usual at the breast, he
should have a portion of meat for his diet, much tea should be avoided: he
should be carried out every day for exercise, when the weather permits, and
great attention should be paid to keeping him clean

Cure. If the weather is not very cold, let the child be dipped every morning
in water immediately from the well: give him a tea-spoonful of the tincture No.
7. three or four times a day, and let him take two or three grains of rhubarb,
when costive.

Bark is also a good medicine, if the child can be prevailed on to take it.

If there is much acid on the stomach, give a little crabs eyes, or magnesia.

CHAP. LXI. JAUNDICE.
CAUSES. Concretions of the bile stopping up the dust, tumors, spasms of the
gut into which the bile is emptied, as in cholic and obstructions of the liver.

Symptoms. An universal yellowness which begins in the white of the eyes,
whitish stools, and pains about the right side, and sometimes a swelling at the
same place.

Management. The patient should live mostly on vegetables, except when very
thin. Gentle exercise should be constantly used; the drink should be wine and
water, when in the above state, but if full, nothing but water should be used.
The patient should carefully avoid cold and moisture.

Cure. A gentle emetic should be tried, and if it is of service, or does not do
harm, it should be repeated; this is best suited where there are gall-stones:
but if the liver be obstructed, the patient should take one grain of calomel,
every night and morning, till his gums feel sore. When much pain attends,
twelve or fifteen drops of laudanum may be given twice a day.

Bitters are often useful; also elixir of vitriol, to forty drops a day. Soap
has sometimes been useful, taken in pills; but the chief dependence is to be
put in diet and exercise.

When there is any fever, the saline mixture, No. 2. should be used as there
directed.

PRESCRIPTIONS.
FEVER POWDERS. No. 1.
TAKE one hundred grains of clean salt petre, and one grain of tartar emetic;
beat the salt fine, and mix the tartar well with it: divide it into five
powders.

One of these is generally given every two hours, in a cup of water or tea.

SALINE MIXTURE. No. 2.
Take two tea-spoonfuls of salt of tartar, or salt of wormwood, dissolve it in
six table-spoonfuls of water, and add lemon or lime juice to it, or pure
vinegar gradually, until it ceases to bubble; sweeten it. Two table-spoonfuls
every hour is generally the dose.

DECOCTION OF BARK. No. 3.
To one ounce of bark add half a gallon of water, and boil it in about two or
three hours to three gills; strain it through a coarse rag whilst hot.

Dose: Two table-spoonfuls every two hours.

TINCTURE OF BARK. No. 4.
Pour a quart of Port or Madeira wine on two ounces of bark; in six days it
will be fit for use.

Dose. A small wine-glass full from two to six times a day.

MILD CLYSTER. No. 5.
To one pint of milk add of lard or oil, molasses, and Glauber or table salt,
each one table-spoonful: warm it to the heat of blood, and use it at once.

COMMON LAXATIVE PILLS. No. 6.
Take thirty-six grains of aloes, and twenty-four of Castile soap: make them
into twelve pills with a little honey: one or two are a dose.

TINCTURE OF STEEL OR IRON. N. 7.
On a handful of the flakes that fly off round the anvil (in a blacksmith's
shop) pour a quart of Port wine; let it stand a few weeks and then use half a
wine-glass full, once, twice, or three times a day.

BITTERS. No. 8.
On an ounce of gentian root, finely cut, and half an ounce of orange peel,
pour a pint of good brandy: let them stand five days, and then use about two
tea-spoonfuls in a little water, three times a day.

DOSES.
Laudanum. Tart. Emetic. Ipecacuana. For Drops. Grains. Grains. a grown person
10 to 25 2 to 4 8 to 18 a youth of 12 4 to 8 1 to 2 6 to 10 a child of 3 2 to 4
1 to 1 4 to 6 a babe 1 to 1 -- 1 to 2

EXPLANATION OF DIFFICULT WORDS.
Chalybeate. That which is impregnated with iron. Coma. A disordered state like
sleep. Congestion. A collection of humors. Contusion. Pressure, squeeze,
crush. Constricted. Drawn together, bound. Debility. Feebleness, weakness.
Decoction. That which is made by boiling. Delirium. A confusion of the internal
senses. Demulcent. Softening. Desquamation. A peeling off. Exacerbate.
Sharpening up, increase. Efflorescence. An appearance of ruddy spots.
Exhalation. Vapor, fume. Eminence. Raised above a level. E^^ctution. A
belching. F^^ices. The posterior cavity of the mouth. Flaccid. Relaxed, loose.
Gestation. Passive exercise, as riding. Grumous. Clodded. Intermittent. With an
interval. Laceratiou. Tare, rend. Mucilaginous. Jelly-like, slimy, viscous.
Narcotic. That which destroys sense and stupifies. Nausea. Sickness at the
stomach. Obesity. Fatness. Ossify. To turn to bone. Palliative. That which
mitigates, lessens. Peripneumonia. Inflammation round the lungs. Pustules.
Pimples with matter in them. Radically. From the root, the bottom. Remit. To
lessen, or cease partially. Respiration. The act of breathing. Sedate. Given to
inactivity, quiet. Sloughs. Mortified spots. Spheroidal. Like a sphere.
Suppurate. To turn to matter. Topical. Confined to a place or part. Torper.
Slowness. Turgid. Swelled, bloated. Undulate. To proceed like waves.
Ventilated. Exposed to the wind. Vesicles. Pimples with water in them, like
bladders.
CONTENTS OF THE FAMILY ADVISER.
APOPLEXY Page. 78 Asthma Page. 87 Bleeding at the nose Page. 62 Bite of a mad
dog Page. 92 Catarrh. See cold and influenza. Croup or Hives Page. 28 Chicken
Pox Page. 55 Consumption Page. 66 Cold Page. 74 Cholic Page. 88 Cholera morbus,
or vomiting and purging of bile Page. 89 Discharge of blood from the urinary
passage Page. 73 Dyspepsia, or Indigestion Page. 81 Dropsies Page. 92 Doses
Page. 97 Essera, or Nettle Rash Page. 61 Epilepsy, or Common Fits Page. 84
Fever, Inflammatory Page. 6 -- Nervous Page. 8 -- Putrid Page. 11 -- Remittent
Page. 14 -- Intermittent Page. 16 -- Hectic Page. 19 -- Scarlet Page. 58 Flux
Page. 76 Fainting Page. 80 Gout, Regular Page. 45 -- Atonic Page. 47 --
Misplaced Page. 49 -- Retrocedent ib. Hives Page. 28 Hooping Cough Page. 88
Hysterics Page. 91 Inflammation of the eyes Page. 21 -- of the Brain Page. 23
-- of the Stomach Page. 35 -- of the Intestines Page. 36 -- of the Liver Page.
37 -- of the Kidneys Page. 39 Influenza Page. 75 Jaundice Page. 94 Locked Jaw
Page. 82 Lax or Looseness Page. 90 Mumps Page. 29 Measles Page. 56 Menses,
Profuse Page. 68 -- Obstructed Page. 71 Obstructed Liver Page. 38 Pleurisy,
true Page. 30 -- Bastard Page. 32 Piles Page. 68 Palsy Page. 79 Palpitation of
the heart Page. 86 Prescriptions Page. 95 Putrid Sore Throat Page. 26 Quincy
Page. 25 Rheumatism, Intercostal Page. 34 -- Acute Page. 40 -- Chronic Page. 41
Rickets Page. 94 Sciatica Page. 41 Small Pox Distinct Page. 50 -- Confluent
Page. 53 St. Anthony's fire Page. 58 Spitting of Blood Page. 64 St. Vitus's
Dance Page. 86 Tooth ach Page. 4^ Vomiting of Blood Page. 7^ Whites Page. 7^


FINIS.
PRIMITIVE PHYSIC: OR, AN EASY AND NATURAL METHOD OF CURING MOST DISEASES.

BY JOHN WESLEY, M. A.

Homo sum; humani nihil a me alienum puto. THE TWENTY-FOURTH EDITION, REVISED
AND CORRECTED.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HENRY TUCKNISS, NO. 25, CHURCH-ALLEY, AND SOLD BY
JOHN DICKINS, NO. 44, NORTH SECOND STREET, NEAR ARCH STREET. 1795.

PREFACE.
WHEN man came first out of the hands of the great Creator, clothed in body as
well as in soul, with immortality and incorruption, there was no place for
physic, or the art of healing. As he knew no sin, so he knew no pain, no
sickness, weakness, or bodily disorder. The habitation wherein the angelic
mind, the Divinae particula Aurae abode, though originally formed out of the
dust of the earth was liable to no decay. It had no seeds of corruption or
dissolution within itself. And there was nothing without to injure it: Heaven
and earth and all the hosts of them were mild, benign and friendly to human
nature. The entire creation was at peace with man, so long as man was at peace
with his Creator. So that well might the morning stars sing together, and all
the sons of God shout for joy.

2. But since man rebelled against the Sovereign of heaven and earth, how
entirely is the scene changed! The incorruptible frame has put on corruption,
the immortal has put on mortality. The seeds of weakness and pain. of sickness
and death, are now lodged in our inmost substance; whence a thousand disorders
continually spring, even without the aid of external violence. And how is the
number of these increased by every thing round about us! The heavens, the
earth, and all things contained therein, conspire to punish the rebels against
their Creator. The sun and moon shed unwholesome influences from above; the
earth exhales poisonous damps from beneath; the beasts of the field, the birds
of the air, the fishes of the sea, are in a state of hostility: the air itself
that surrounds us on every side, is replete with the shafts of death: yea, the
food we eat, daily saps the foundation of the life which cannot be sustained
without it. So has the Lord of all secured the execution of his decree, -- Dust
thou art, and unto dust thou shall return.

3. But can there nothing be found to lessen those inconveniences, which
cannot be wholly removed? To soften the evils of life, and prevent in part the
sickness and pain to which we are continually exposed? Without question there
may. One grand preventative of pain and sickness of various kinds, seems
intimated by the great Author of nature in the very sentence that intails death
upon us: In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return to the
ground. The power of exercise, both to preserve and restore health, is greater
than can well be conceived; especially in those who add temperance thereto; who
if they do not confine themselves altogether to eat either "bread or the herb
of the field" (which God does not require them to do) yet steadily observe both
that kind and measure of food, which experience shows to be most friendly to
strength and health.

4. It is probable, physic, as well as religion, was in the first ages chiefly
traditional: every father delivering down to his sons, what he had himself in
like manner received, concerning the manner of healing both outward hurts, and
the diseases incident to each climate, and the medicines which were of the
greatest efficacy for the cure of each disorder. It is certain, this is the
method wherein the art of healing is preserved among the Americans to this day.
Their diseases are exceeding few; nor do they often occur, by reason of their
continual exercise, and (till of late) universal temperance. But if any are
sick, or bit by a serpent, or torn by a wild beast, the fathers immediately
tell their children what remedy to apply. And it is rare that the patient
suffers long; those medicines being quick, as well as, generally, infallible.

5. Hence it was, perhaps, that the ancients, not only of Greece and Rome, but
even of barbarous nations, usually assigned physic a divine original. And
indeed it was a natural thought, that HE who had taught it to the very beasts
and birds, the Cretan Stag, the Egyptian Ibis, could not be wanting to teach
man, Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altae: Yea, sometimes even by
those meaner creatures: for it was easy to infer, "If this will heal that
creature, whose flesh is nearly of the same texture with mine, then in a
parallel case it will heal me." The trial was made: the cure was wrought: and
experience and physic grew up together.

6. As to the manner of using the medicines here set down, I should advise, As
soon as you know your distemper (which is very easy, unless in a complication
of disorders, and then you would do well to apply to a physician that fears
God) First, Use the first of the remedies for that disease, which occurs in the
ensuing collection; (unless some other of them be easier to be had, and then it
may do just as well). Secondly, After a competent time, if it takes no effect,
use the second, the third, and so on. I have purposely set down (in most cases)
several remedies for each disorder; not only because all are not equally easy
to be procured at all times, and in all places: but likewise the medicine that
cures one man, will not always cure another of the same distemper. Nor will it
cure the sme man at all times. Therefore it was necessary to have a variety.
However I have subjoined the letter (I) to those medicines which some think
infallible. Thirdly, Observe all the time the greatest exactness in your
regimen or manner of living. Abstain from all mixed, all high-seasoned food.
Use plain diet, easy of digestion; and this as sparingly as you can, consistent
with ease and strength. Drink only water, if it agrees with your stomach; if
not, good, clear small beer. Use as much exercise daily in the open air, as you
can without weariness. Sup at six or seven on the lightest food; go to bed
early, and rise betimes. To persevere with steadiness in this course, is often
more than half the cure. Above all, add to the rest (for it is not labor lost)
that old unfashionable medicine, prayer. And have faith in God who kills and
makes alive, who brings down to the grave, and brings up.

7. For the sake of those who desire, through the blessing of God, to retain
the health which they have recovered, I have added a few plain, easy rules,
chiefly transcribed from Dr. Cheyne.

I. 1. The air we breathe is of great consequence to our health. Those who have
been long abroad in easterly or northerly winds, should drink some thin and
warm liquor going to bed, or a draught of toast and water.

2. Tender people should have those who lie with them, or are much about them,
sound, sweet, and healthy.

3. Every one that would preserve health, should be as clean and sweet as
possible in their houses, clothes, and furniture.

II. 1. The great rule of eating and drinking, is, To suit the quality and
quantity of the food to the strength of our digestion; to take always such a
sort and such a measure of food, as fits light and easy on the stomach.

2. All pickled, or smoked, or salted food, and all high-seasoned, are alone
unfit for aliment.

3. Nothing conduces more to health, than abstinence and plain food, with due
labor.

4. For studious persons, about eight ounces of animal food, and twelve of
vegetable, in twenty four hours, are sufficient.

5. Water, though the wholesomest of all drinks, yet if used largely in time at
digestion, is injurious.

6. Strong, and more especially spirituous liquors, are a certain, though slow,
poison, unless well diluted, and cautiously used.

7. Experience shows, there is very seldom any danger in leaving them off all
at once; unless in time of particular diseases, as of debility.

8. Strong liquors do not prevent the mischiefs of a surfeit, nor carry it off
so safely as water.

9. Malt liquors (except clear small beer, or small ale, of a due age) are
exceeding hurtful to tender persons.

10. Coffee and tea are extremely hurtful to persons who have weak nerves.

III 1. All persons should eat very light suppers; and that two or three hours
before going to bed.

2. To go to bed about nine, and rise at five, should be a general practice.

IV. 1. A due degree of exercise is indispensably necessary to health and long
life.

2. Walking is the best exercise for those who are able to bear it; riding for
those who are not. The open air, when the weather is fair contributes much to
the benefit of exercise.

3. We may strengthen any weak part of the body by constant exercise. Thus the
lungs may be strengthened by moderate speaking; the digestion and the nerves,
by riding; the arms and hams, by strongly rubbing them daily.

4. The studious ought to have stated times for exercise, at least two or three
hours a day: the one half of this before dinner, the other before going to bed.

5. They should frequently shave, and frequently wash their feet in cold water.

6. Those who read or write much, should learn to do it chiefly standing;
otherwise it will impair their health.

7. The fewer clothes any one uses, by day or night, the hardier he will be;
but the habit must be begun in youth.

8. Exercise, first, should be always on an empty stomach; secondly, should
never be continued to weariness; thirdly, after it, we should take care to cool
by degrees: otherwise we shall catch cold.

9. The flesh-brush is a most useful exercise, especially to strengthen any
part that is weak.

10. Cold bathing is of great advantage to health: it prevents abundance of
diseases. It promotes perspiration, helps the circulation of the blood, and
prevents the danger of catching cold. Tender people should pour water upon the
head before they go in, and walk in swiftly. To jump in with the head foremost,
is too great a shock to nature. It is best to use it immediately after rising.

V. 1. Costiveness cannot long consist with health. Therefore care should be
taken to remove it at the beginning by a gentle medicine; and when it is
removed, to prevent its return, by soft, cool, open diet; as of vegetables,
acid or sweet.

2. Obstructed perspiration (vulgarly called catching ^old) is one great source
of diseases. Whenever there appears the least sign of this, let it be removed
by gentle sweats, or purges.

VI. 1. The passions have a greater influence on health, than most people are
aware of.

2. All violent and sudden passions dispose to, or actually throw people into,
acute diseases.

3. The slow and lasting passions, such as grief and hopeless love, bring on
chronic diseases, and low fevers.

4. Till the passion which caused the disease, is calmed, medicine is applied
in vain.

5. The love of God, as it is the sovereign remedy of all miseries, so in
particular it effectually prevents all the bodily disorders the passions
introduce, by keeping the passions themselves within due bounds. And by the
unspeakable joy, and perfect calm, serenity, and tranquillity it gives the
mind, it becomes the most powerful of all the means of health and long life.

LONDON, June, 11, 1747.
TO THE MEMBERS OF THE Methodist Episcopal Church.
Friends and Brethren,
THE grand interests of your souls will ever lie near our hearts; but we cannot
be unmindful of your bodies: In several parts of this extensive country, the
climate, and in others the food, is unwholesome: and frequently, the physicians
are few, some of them unskilful, and all of them beyond the reach of your
temporal abilities. A few small publications excepted, little has been done by
physical books, in order to remove these inconveniences: and even those have
been written in Europe, and do therefore partake of the confined ideas of the
writers, who could not possibly be fully acquainted with the peculiarities of
the various diseases incident to a people that inhabit a country so remote from
theirs.

Simple remedies are in general the most safe for simple disorders, and
sometimes do wonders under the blessing of God. In this view we present to you
now the PRIMITIVE PHYSIC, published by our much honored friend JOHN WESLEY.
But the difference being in many respects great between this country and
England, in regard to climate, the constitution of patients, and even the
qualities of the same simples, -- we saw it necessary for you, to have it
revised by physicians practicing in this country, who at our request have added
cautionary and explanatory notes where they were necessary, with some
additional receipts suitable to the climate.

In this state we lay the publication before you, and earnestly recommend it to
you

As we apply all the profits of our books to charitable purposes, and the
promoting the work of God, we think we have some right to entreat you (except
in particular cases) to buy only our books, which are recommended by the
conference, and signed with our signatures: and as we intend to print our books
in future WITHIN THE STATES, and on a much larger scale than we have hitherto
done, we trust we shall be able soon to supply you with as many of the choicest
of our publications, as the time and temporal abilities of those of you, who do
not live a life of study, will require.

We remain, dear brethren, as ever,

Your faithful pastors, Thomas Coke, Francis Asbury.

A Collection of Receipts.
[N. B. We would inform our readers, that the receipts and notes enclosed in
brackets, as this is, are inserted by the physicians who revised the copy for
this impression; and also, that the prescriptions marked * are better than the
others.]

1. Abortion [In the first case, the cold bath used two or three times a week,
from the beginning to the sixth month of pregnancy, is deemed effectual -- In
the latter case, bleeding at the arm in the fourth and seventh months may be
used.]
(to prevent).
* WOMEN of a wea^^^ relaxed habit should use solid food, avoiding great
quantities of tea, and other weak and watery liquors. They should go soon to
bed, and rise early; and take frequent exercise, but avoid fatigue.

If of a full habit, they ought to use a spare diet, and chiefly of the
vegetable kind, avoiding strong liquors, and every thing that may tend to heat
the body, or increase the quantity of blood.

In the first case, take daily half a pint of a decoction of lignum vitae;
boiling an ounce of it in a quart of water for five minutes.

In the latter case, give half a dram of powdered nitre, in a cup of
water gruel, every five or six hours: in both cases she should sleep on a hard
mattrass and be kept cool and quiet. The bowels should be kept regular by a
pill of white walnut extract.

2. For an Ague. An ague is an intermitting fever, each fit of which is
preceded by a cold shivering, and goes off in a sweat.

Go into the cold bath just before the cold fit.

Nothing tends more to prolong an ague, than indulging a lazy indolent
disposition. The patient ought therefore between the fits to take as much
exercise as he can bear; and to use a light diet, and for common drink, Port
wine and water is the most proper.

* When all other means fail, give blue vitriol, from one grain to two grains,
in the absence of the fit, and repeat it three or four times in twenty-four
hours.

Or, boil yarrow in new milk, till it is tender enough to spread as a plaster.
An hour before the cold fit, apply this to the wrists, and let it be on till
the hot fit is over. If another fit comes, use a fresh plaster. This often
cures a quartan:

* Or, put a tea-spoonful of salt of tartar into a large glass of spring water,
and drink it by little and little. Repeat the same dose the next two days,
before the time of the fit:

* Or, a large spoonful of powdered camo^^^^ ^owers:

* Or, a tea spoonful of the spirits of hartshorn in a glass of water.

Or, eat a small lemon, rind and all.

* In the hot fit, if violent, take eight or ten drops of laudanum: if costive,
with an Anderson's pill.

* Dr. Lind says, an ague is certainly cured by taking from ten to twenty drops
of laudanum, with two drachms of syrup of poppies, in any warm liquid, half an
hour after the heat begins.

* It is proper to take a gentle vomit, and sometimes a purge, before you use
any of these medicines. If a vomit is taken two hours before the fit is
expected, it generally prevents that fit, and sometimes cures an ague:
especially in children. -- It is also proper to repeat the medicine (whatever
it be) about a week after, in order to prevent a relapse. Do not take any purge
soon after. -- The daily use of the flesh-brush, and frequent cold bathing, are
of great use to prevent relapses.

* Children have been cured by wearing a waist-coat, in which bark was quilted.

[Those fevers which abate their violence at times, that there appears an
absence of the fever for a certain period between two fits, are called
intermittents, says Galen. The length of the period determines the name, as
quotidian, tertian, double tertian, quartan. The spring intermittents seldom
need the grand specific remedy, viz. The Peruvian bark, in this climate, as by
administering a vomit of twenty grains of ipecacuana, or of eight grains of the
former and one of tartar emetic mixed for a grown person, the succeeding heat
of the season effects the cure, and often without medicine. The fall
intermittents seldom put on a regular form at first in adults, but are
generally remitting fevers; but even though they approach nearer to a continual
fever, the patient seldom needs bleeding, and perhaps never in regular
intermittents. In either case a vomit as before mentioned, the first
opportunity in remitting, and two hours before the fit in an intermitting
fever, with warm diluting drinks in the time of the fit, and when intermitting
regularly, the bark may be applied after the operation of the vomit, and the
fit is over. Children generally need only to be purged before the use of the
bark, with jalap or rhubarb: the dose of these may be thirty grains for a grown
person, and half the quantity for one (...) years old, and in proportion. After
the fever ^^^^larly intermits, and the stomach has been cleansed and the body
kept open, the Peruvian bark may be (...) (unless some inflammation or
obstruction prevent) Immediately after the fit, two ounces, and often one is
generally sufficient, thus: -- Divide an ounce of powder of the bark into
twelve doses; let the sick man or woman take one every two hours between the
fits, and continue them after the return of the next; or -- (...) an ounce of
the bark in a pint and a half of water gently down to a pint, strain off the
liquid, and take a wine-glass full every two hours; or -- To an ounce of the
bark in powder add four or five spoonfuls of proof spirit and a pint of boiling
water, let them infuse two or three days; to use as the former. -- But it is
best in substance when it can be taken.]

3. St. Anthony's Fire. St. Anthony's fire is a fever attended with a red and
painful swelling, full of pimples, which afterward turn into small blisters,
on the face or some other part of the body. The ^^^^er the eruption is, the
less danger. Let your diet be (...) gruel, or barley-broth, with roasted apples.

* Take a glass of tar-water warm, in bed, every hour, washing the part with
the same.

Tar-water is made thus. -- Put a gallon of cold water to a quart of Norway
tar. Stir them together with a flat stick for five or six minutes. After it has
stood covered for three days, pour off the water clear, bottle and cork it.

Or, take a decoction of elder leaves, as a sweat; applying to the part a cloth
dipped in lime water, mixed with a little camphorated spirits of wine.

Limewater is made thus. -- Infuse a pound of good quick lime in six quarts of
spring water for twenty-four hours. Decant and keep it for use.

* Or, take two or three gentle purges. -- No acute fever bears repeated purges
better than this, especially when it affects the head: meantime boil a handful
of sage, two handfuls of elder leaves (or bark) and an ounce of alum in two
quarts of forge-water, to a pint. Wash with this every night. -- See extract
from Dr. Tissot.

If the pulse be low and the spirits sunk, nourishing broths and a little negus
may be given to advantage: Pressing the inflammation with greasy ointments,
(...), etc. is very improper.

Bathing the feet and legs in warm water is serviceable, and often relieves the
patient much. In Scotland the common people cover the part with a linen cloth
covered with meal.

4. The Apoplexy. An apoplexy is a total loss of all sense and voluntary
motion, ^^^^only attended with a strong pulse, hard breathing and ^^tting.

* To prevent, use the cold bath, and drink only water.

In the fit, put a handful of salt into a pint of cold water, and if possible
pour it down the throat of the patient. He will quickly come to himself. So
will one who seems dead by a fall. But send for a good physician immediately.

If the fit be soon after a meal, vomit and bleed.

* A seton in the neck, with low diet, has often prevented a relapse.

* There is a wide difference between the sanguineous and serous apoplexy; the
latter is often followed by a palsy. -- The former is distinguished by the
countenance appearing florid; the face swelled or puffed up; and the
blood vessels, especially about the neck and temples, are turgid; the pulse
beats strong; the eyes are prominent and fixed; and the breathing is difficult,
and performed with a snorting. This invades more suddenly than the serous
apoplexy. Use large bleedings from the arm or neck; bathe the feet in warm
water; cupping on the back of the head, with deep scarification. The garters
should be tied very tight to lessen the motion of the blood from the lower
extremities.

* A scruple of nitre may be given in water, every thee or four hours.

* When the patient is so far recovered as to be able to swallow, let him take
a strong purge; but if this cannot be effected, a clyster should be thrown up
with plenty of fresh butter, and a large spoonful of common salt in it.

In the serous apoplexy, the pulse is not so strong, the countenance is less
florid, and not attended with so great a difficulty of breathing. Here bleeding
is not so necessary, but a vomit of three grains of emetic tartar may be given,
and afterward a purge as before, and a blister applied to the back of the neck.

This apoplexy is generally preceded by an unusual heaviness, giddiness, and
drowsiness.

5. Canine Appetite. An insatiable desire of eating.

"If it be without vomiting, is often cured by a small bit of bread dipped in
wine, and applied to the nostrils." Dr. Schomberg.

6. The Asthma. An asthma is a difficulty of breathing, returning (...), from a
disorder in the lungs. In the common (...) asthma, the patient spits much.

Take a pint of cold water every morning, washing the head therein immediately
after, and using the cold bath once a fortnight:

Or, cut an ounce of stick liquorice into slices. Steep this in a quart of
water, four and twenty hours, and use it, when you are worse than usual, as
common drink. I have known this give much ease.

Or, half pint of tar-water, twice a day.

Or, live a fortnight on boiled carrots only. It seldom fails:

Or, take from ten to twenty drops of elixir of vitriol, in a glass of water,
three or four times a day.

Elixir of vitriol is made thus. -- Drop gradually four ounces of strong oil of
vitriol into a pint of spirits of wine, or brandy: let it stand three days, and
add to it ginger sliced, half an ounce, and Jamaica pepper, whole, one ounce.
In three days more it is fit for use.

Or, into a quart of boiling water, put a tea-spoonful of balsamic ether,
receive the steam into the lungs, through a fumigator, twice a day.

Balsamic ether is made thus. -- Put four ounces of spirits of wine, and one
ounce of balsam of tolu, into a vial, with one ounce of ether. Keep it well
corked. But it will not keep above a week.

For present relief, vomit with twelve grains of ipecacuana.

7. A Dry or Convulsive Asthma.
Juice of radishes relieves much: so does a cup of strong coffee: or, garlic,
either raw, or preserved, or in syrup:

Or, drink a pint of new milk morning and evening. -- This has cured an
inveterate asthma.

Or, beat fine saffron small, and take eight or ten grains every night. --
Tried.

Take from three to five grains of ipecacuana every week. Do this, if need be,
for a month or six weeks. Five grains usually vomit. In a violent fit, take
fifteen grains.

In any asthma, the best drink is apple-water; that is, boiling water poured on
sliced apples.

The food should be light and easy of digestion. Ripe fruits baked, boiled, or
roasted, are very proper; but strong liquors of all kinds, especially beer or
ale, are hurtful. If any supper is taken, it should be very light.

* All disorders of the breasts are much relieved by keeping the feet warm, and
promoting perspiration. Exercise is also of very great importance; so that the
patient should take as much every day, as his strength will bear. Issues are
found in general to be of great service.

Dr. Smyth, in his Formulae, recommends mustard-whey as common drink, in the
moist asthma; and a decoction of the madder-root to promote spitting.

The decoction is made thus. -- Boil one ounce of ^^^der, and two drachms of
mace, in three pints of water, to two pints, then strain it, and take a
tea-cupful three or four times a day.

8. To cure Baldness.
Rub the part morning and evening, with onions, till it is red; and rub it
afterward with honey. Or wash it with a decoction of box-wood: Tried. Or,
electrify it daily.

9. Bleeding at the Nose (to prevent).
Dissolve two scruples of nitre in half a pint of water, and take a tea-cupful
every hour, if the patient is plethoric.

* To cure it, apply to the neck behind and on each side, a cloth dipped in cold
water:

Or, put the legs and arms in cold water:

Or, wash the temples, nose, and neck with vinegar:

Or, snuff up vinegar and water.

* Or, foment the legs and arms with it:

Or, steep a linen rag in sharp vinegar, burn it, and blow it up the nose with
a quill:

* Or, apply tents made of soft lint dipped in cold water, strongly impregnated
with a solution of alum, and introduced within the nostrils quite through to
their posterior apertures.

Or, dissolve an ounce of alum powdered, in a pint of vinegar; apply a cloth,
dipped in this, to the temples, steeping the feet in warm water.

In a violent case, go into a pond or river. Tried. -- See extract from Dr.
Tissot.

10. Bleeding of a Wound.
Make two or three tight ligatures toward the l^^er part of each joint: slacken
them gradually:

Or, apply tops of nettles bruised:

Or, strew on it the ashes of a linen rag, dipped in sharp vinegar and burnt:

Or, take ripe puff-balls. Break them warily, and save the powder. Strew this
on the wound and bind it on. I. -- This will stop the bleeding of an amputated
limb.

[Or, take of blue vitriol and alum each an ounce and a half, boil them in a
pint of water till the salts are dissolved, then filter the liquid and add a
dram of the oil of vitriol; a soft rag may be dipped in this, and applied up
the nose; or any bleeding we can come at. -- Buchan. -- Or, use the agaric of
the oak.]

11. Spitting of Blood. (...) a table-spoonful of fine common s^l^ every
morning fast (...) tea-spoonful every three hours, until the bleeding stops.]

Take two spoonfuls of juice of nettles every morning, and a large cup of
decoction of nettles at night. for a week: Tried.

Or, three spoonfuls of sage-juice in a little honey. This presently stops
either spitting or vomiting blood: Tried.

Or, twenty grains of alum in water every two hours.

12. Vomiting of Blood.
Take two spoonfuls of nettle juice.

( This also dissolves blood coagulated in the stomach.) -- Tried.

Or, take as much salt petre, as will lie upon half a crown, dissolved in a
glass of cold water, two or three times a day.

13. To dissolve coagulated Blood.
Bind on the part for some hours, (...) of ^^ack soap and crumbs of white bread:

Or, grated root of burdock spread on a rag: renew this twice a day.

14. Blisters,
On the feet, occasioned by walking, are cured by drawing a needle full of
worsted through them, clip it off at both ends, and leave it till the skin
peels off.

15. Biles.
Apply a little Venice turpentine:

Or, an equal quantity of soap and brown sugar well mixed.

Or, a plaster of honey and wheat flour:

* Or, of figs:

Or, a little saffron in a white bread poultice.

-- It Is proper to purge also.

16. Hard Breasts
Apply turnips roasted till soft, then mashed and mixed with a little oil of
roses. Change this twice a day, keeping the breast very warm with flannel.

17. Sore Breasts and Swelled.
* Apply lead water.

Or, boil a handful of camomile and as much mallows in milk and water. Foment
with it between two flannels, as hot as can be borne, every twelve hours. It
also dissolves any knot or swelling in any part, where there is no inflammation.

18. A Bruise.
Immediately apply treacle spread on brown paper: Tried.

Or, apply a plaster of chopped parsley mixed with b^^^dy

Or, electrify the part. This is the quickest cure of all.

19. To prevent Swelling from a Bruise.
* Immediately apply a cloth, five or six times doubled, dipped in cold water,
and new dipped when it grows warm: Tried.

20. A Burn or Scald.
If it be but skin deep, immediately plunge the part in cold water, keep it in
an hour, if not well before. Perhaps four or five hours: Tried.

Or, electrify it. If this can be done presently, it totally cures the most
desperate burn.

Or, if the part cannot be dipped, apply a cloth four times doubled, dipped in cold
water, changing it when it grows warm.

21. A deep Burn or Scald.
* Apply inner rind of elder well mixed with fresh butter. When this is bound on
with a rag, plunge the part into cold water. This will suspend the pain till
the medicine heals.

Or, mix limewater and sweet oil, to the thick^^^^ of cream, apply it with a
feather several times a-day^ This is the most effectual application I ever met
with.

Or, put twenty-five drops of Goullard's extract (...) lead, to half a pint of
rainwater; dip linen rage in it and apply them to the part affected. This is
particularly serviceable if the burn is near the eyes.

22. A Cancer. A cancer is a hard, round, uneven, painful swelling, of a (...)
or lea^^^ color, the veins round which seem ready to (...) commonly with a
swelling as big as a peace which (...) give much pain, nor change the (...)

* Dissolve four grains of white arsenic in a pint (...) water, one
table-spoonful every morning in molasses (...) milk must be taken.

23. Chilblains (to prevent).
* Wear socks of Chamois leather, or silk.

Bathe the feet often in cold water, and when this is done, apply a turnip
poultice.

24. Children.
* To prevent the rickets, tenderness, and weakness, dip them in cold water
every morning, at least till they are eight or nine months old.

No roller should ever be put round their bodies, nor any stays used. Instead
of them, when they are put into short petticoats, put a waistcoat under their
frocks.

Let them go barefooted and bare-headed till they are three or four years old
at least.

It Is best to wean a child when seven months old, if it be disposed to rickets.
It should lie in the cradle at least a year.

No child should touch any spirituous or fermented liquor, before two years
old. Their drink should be water. Tea they should never taste till ten or
twelve years old. Milk, milk-porridge, and water gruel, are the proper
breakfasts for children.

25. Chin-Cough, or Hooping-Cough.
Rub the feet thoroughly with hogs lard, before the fire at going to bed, and
keep the child warm therein: Tried.

Or, rub the back, at lying down, with old rum. It seldom fails:

Or, give a spoonful of juice of pennyroyal, mixed with brown sugar candy,
twice a day:

Or, half a pint of milk, warm from the cow, with the quantity of a nutmeg of
conserve of roses diss^^^^ in it every morning.

Or, dissolve a scruple of salt of tartar in a quarter of a pint of clear
water: add to it ten grains of finely powdered cochineal, and sweeten it with
loaf-sugar.

Give a child within the year, the fourth part of a spoonful of this, four
times a day, with a spoonful of barley-water after it. Give a child two years
old, half a spoonful: a child above four years old, a spoonful. Boiled apples
put into warm milk may be his chief food. This relieves in twenty-four hours,
and cures in five or six days.

* Or take two grains of tartar emetic, and half a dram of prepared crabs
claws powdered: let them be mixed very well together.

One grain, one grain and a half, or two grains of this composition, may be
added to five or six grains of magnesia, and given in a small spoonful of milk
and water in the forenoon, between breakfast and dinner, to a child a year old.

* At night, if the fever is very high, half the former dose of this powder may
be given, with from five to ten grains of nitre.

In desperate cases, change of air will have a good effect.

26. Cholera Morbus: i. e. Flux and Vomiting of Bile. [After the bowels are
well emptied by large and frequently repeated draughts of the 1st and 2d
prescriptions under this (...), instant relief, in an extreme low fainty state,
may be on^^^d by taking from 25 to 30 drops of liquid la^d^^^^ in a (...) of
mint tea. This is a dose for grown person^^ if ^^des (...) of age, it must be
proportioned accordingly.]

* Boil a chicken an hour in two gallons of water, and drink of this till the
vomiting ceases:

Or, decoction of rice, or barley, or toasted oaten-bread.

* If the pain is very severe, steep the belly with flannels dipped in spirits
and water.

* The third day after the cure, take ten or fifteen grains of rhubarb.

27. Chops in Women's Nipples.
Apply balsam of sugar:

* Or, apply butter of wax, which speedily heals them.

28. Chopped Hands (to prevent).
Wash them with flour of mustard.

* Or, in bran and water boiled together.

29. (To Cure.)
Wash them with soft soap, mixed with red sand: Tried.

Or, wash them in sugar and water: Tried.

30. Chopped Lips.
Apply a little sal prunellae.

31. A Cold.
Drink a pint of cold water lying down in bed: Tried.

Or, a spoonful of treacle in half a pint of water: Tried.

Or, to one spoonful of oatmeal, and one spoonful of honey, add a piece of
butter, the bigness of a nutmeg: pour on gradually near a pint of boiling
water: drink this lying down in bed.

32. A Cold in the Head.
Pare very thin the yellow rind of an orange. (...) up (...) out, and thurst a
roll into each no(...)

33. The Cholic (in the Fit).
Drink of camomile tea:

Or, take from thirty to forty grains of yellow (...) of oranges, dried and
powdered in a glass of water.

* Or, take from five to six drops of oil of aniseed on a lump of sugar.

* Or, apply outwardly a bag of hot oats (...)

* Or, steep the legs in hot water a quarter of an hour:

* Or, take as much Daffy's elixir as will presently purge. This relieves the
most violent cholic in an hour or two.

Daffy's elixir is made thus: -- Sena two ounces, jalap one ounce, coriander
seed half an ounce; Geneva, or proof spirit, three pints; let them digest seven
days; strain^ and add loaf sugar four ounces.

34. The Dry Cholic (to prevent).
Drink ginger tea.

35. Cholic in Children. [Children subject to daily and severe cholic pains
should take the breast sparingly, and chiefly be fed on simple chicken broth.
Strong mallows-root tea, taken every now and then, is an excellent medicine in
this complaint.]

Give a scruple of powdered aniseed in their (...) Tried.

Or, small doses of magnesia.

* Or, a dram of anisated tincture of rhubarb, ^^^^ry three hours till it
operates.

36. Bilious Cholic. This is generally attended with vomiting a greenish or
(...) matter, with feverish-heat, violent that a bitter taste (...) at mouth,
and little and high-colored urine.

Drink warm lemonade:

Or, give a spoonful of castor oil. Take one table spoonful of castor oil,
mixed with a spoonful of lemon-juice or sharp vinegar sweetened, every hour,
until it purges. This is a safe, easy, and effectual purge, do^ only in all
those complaints where the bowels are the sent of disease, but also in the
intermitting and remitting bilious fevers incident to warm climates.]


37. An Habitual Cholic.
* Wear a thin, soft flannel on the part.

38. An Hysteric Cholic. Is attended with a violent pain about the pit of the
stomach, with great sinking of the spirits, and often with greatly (...)
vomitings.

Mrs. Watts, by using the cold bath two and twenty times in a month, was
entirely cured of an hysteric cholic, fits, and convulsive motions, continual
sweatings and vomiting, wandering pains in her limbs and head, with total loss
of appetite.

* Take 10, 15, or 20 drops of balsam of Peru on fine sugar: if need be, twice
or thrice a day:

Or, in extremity, boil three ounces of burdock-seed in water, which give as a
clyster:

* Or, twenty drops of laudanum, in any proper clyster; which gives instant
ease.

[In this disorder there often is such a vomiting, that no medicine for the
present can be contained on the stomach long enough to be advantageous. A
little warm water may be given at first; then cover the sick with an
extraordinary quantity of bed-clothes; ^^hes she becomes warm, the vomiting
ceases; then a (...) of opium may be taken, and if the complaints (...) and
relieved thereby in half an hour, it may be repeated. -- A day or two after a
warm purge should be taken. Tried.]

39. A Nervous Cholic This some term the dry belly-ach. It often continues
several days, with little urine, and obstinate costiveness.
.
Use the cold bath daily for three or four weeks:

40. Cholic from the Fumes of Lead, or White Lead, Verdigrease, etc.
In the fit, drink fresh melted butter, and then vomit with warm water:

* To prevent or cure. Breakfast daily on fat broth, and use oil of sweet
almonds frequently.

Smelters of metals, plumbers, etc. may be in a good measure preserved from the
poisonous fumes that surround them, by breathing through cloth or flannel
mufflers twice or thrice doubled, dipped in a solution of sea salt, or salt of
tartar, and then dried. These mufflers might also be of great use in many
similar cases.

41. Windy Cholic.
Parched peace eaten freely, have had the most happy effects, when all other
means have failed.

42. To prevent the ill Effects of Cold. A cholic with purging, some term the
watery ^^^pes.
.
The moment a person gets into a house, with (...) hands or feet quite chilled,
let him put them into a vessel of water, as cold as can be got, and hold them
there till they begin to glow. This they will do into minute or two. This
method likewise effectually prevents chilblains.

43. A Consumption.
One in a deep consumption was advised to drink nothing but water, and eat
nothing but water gruel, without salt or sugar. In three months time he was
perfectly well.

Take no food but new butter-milk, churned in a bottle, and white bread. -- I
have known this successful.

Or, use as common drink, spring water, and new milk, each a quart; and
sugar candy two ounces.

Or, boil two handfuls of sorrel in a pint of whey. Strain it, and drink a
glass thrice a day: Tried.

Or, turn a pint of skimmed milk, with half a pint of small beer. Boil in this
whey about twenty ivy-leaves, and two or three sprigs of hyssop. Drink half
over night, the rest in the morning. Do this, if needful, for two months daily.
-- This has cured in a desperate case: Tried.

Or, take a cow-heel from the tripe-house ready ^ressed, two quarts of new
milk, two ounces of hartshorn shavings, two ounces of isinglass, a quarter of a
pound of sugar candy, and a race of ginger. Put all these in a pot; and set
them in an oven after the ^read is drawn. Let it continue there till the oven
is (...) cold; and let the patient live on this. -- I have (...) this cure a
deep consumption more than once.

Or, every morning cut up a little turf of fresh earth, and lying down, breathe
into the hole for a quarter of an hour -- I have known a deep consumption mixed
thus.

"Mr. Masters, of Evesham, was so far gone in a consumption, that he could not
stand alone. I advised him to lose six ounces of blood every day for a
fortnight, if he lived so long; and then every other day, then every third day;
then every fifth day, for the same time. In three months he was well." -- (Dr.
Dover.) Tried. This prescription will not be safe if any case, but where the
pulse continues pretty strong, and there are signs of inflammation.

Or, throw frankincense on burning coals, and receive the smoke daily through a
proper tube into the lungs: Tried.

Or, take in for a quarter of an hour, morning and evening, the steam of white
rosin and beeswax, boiling on a hot fire-shovel. This has cured one who was in
the third stage of a consumption.

Or, the steam of sweet spirit of vitriol dropped into warm water.

Or, take morning and evening, a tea-spoonful of white rosin powdered and mixed
with honey. -- This cured one in less than a month, who was very near death.

Or, drink thrice a day two spoonfuls of juice of watercresses. -- This has
cured a deep consumption.

In the last stage, suck an healthy woman daily. Tried by my Father.

* For diet, use milk and apples, or water gruel made with fine flour. Drink
cyder-whey, barley-water sharpened with lemon-juice, or apple-water.

So long as the tickling cough continues, chew well and swallow a mouthful or
two, of a biscuit or crust of bread, twice a day. If you cannnot swallow it,
spit it out. This will always shorten the fit, and would often prevent a
consumption. See extract from Dr. Tissot, page 33.

44. Convulsions.
Use the cold bath:

* Or, take a tea-spoonful of valerian root po^^^^ed, in a cup of water, every
evening.

* Or, half a dram of misselto powdered every s^^ hours, drinking after it a
draught of strong infu^^^^ thereof.

45. Convulsions in Children.
Scrape piony-roots fresh dug. Apply what you have scraped off to the soles
of the feet. It helps immediately. Tried.

46. Convulsions in the Bowels of Children.
Give a child a quarter old, a spoonful of the juice of pellitory of the wall,
two or three times a day. It goes through at once, but purges no more. Use the
syrup, if the juice cannot be had.

47. Corns (to prevent).
Frequently wash the feet in cold water.

48. Corns (to cure).
Apply fresh every morning the yeast of small beer, (...) on a rag:

Or, after paring them close, apply bruised ivy^^^^ daily, and in fifteen days
they will drop out: (...).

(...) corns are cured by a pitch plaster.

All are greatly eased by steeping the feet in hot wa^^^ wherein oatmeal is
boiled. This also helps dry (...)ot feet.

49. Costiveness.
(...) early every morning:

Or, boil in a pint and a half of broth, half a handful of mallow-leaves chopped:
strain this and drink (...) before you out any thing else. Do this frequently
(...)

Or, breakfast twice a week or oftener, on water gruel with currants: Tried.

* Or, take the bigness of a large nutmeg of cream of tartar mixed with honey,
as often as you need.

* Or, take daily two hours before dinner, a small tea-cupful of stewed prunes:

Or, use for common drink, water, or treacle-beer, impregnated with fixed air:

Or, live upon bread, made of wheat-flour, with all the bran in it.

Or, boil an ounce and a half of tamarinds in three pints of water to a quart.
In this strained, when cold, infuse all night two drachms of sena, and one
dram of red rose leaves. Drink a cup every morning when costive. -- See Dr.
Tissot.

50. A Cough.
Make a hole through a lemon, and fill it with honey. Roast it, and catch the
juice. Take a tea-spoonful of this frequently: Tried.

[Or, take a table spoonful of molasses each night and morning, and drink in
common, molasses and water: Tried.]

Or, take Spanish liquorice two ounces, salt of tartar half an ounce; boil the
liquorice in three pints of water to a quart. Add the salt to it when it is
blood-warm. Drink two spoonfuls of this every two hours. It seldom fails;
Tried. -- I have known this cure (...) inveterate moist asthma.

Or, at lying down keep a little stick-liquori^^ like horseradish, between the
cheek and the gums. -- I believe this never fails.

Or, peel and slice a large turnip, spread ^^arfe su^^^ between the slices, and
let it stand in a (...) till (...) the juice drains down. Take a spoonful of
this (...) for you cough:

Or, take a spoonful of syrup of ho^^hound, ^^^ning and evening: Tried.

Or, take from fifteen to twenty drops of elixir of vitriol, in a glass of
water, thrice a day. This is useful when the cough is attended with
costiveness, and relaxation of the stomach and lungs.

Or, powder an ounce of spermaceti fine. Work it in a marble mortar with the
yolk of a new-land egg. Mix them in a pint of white wine and take a small glass
every three hours.

Or, drink water whitened with oat-meal four times a day.

Or, keep a piece of barley-sugar, or sugar candy constantly in the mouth.

51. Violent Coughing from a sharp and thin Rheum.
Work into old conserve of roses, as much as you can of pure frankincense
powdered as fine as possible. Take a bolus of this twice or thrice a day. It
eases presently, and cures in two or three weeks.

Or, take half a grain of the inspissated milky juice of sowthistle, once or
twice a day. It has the anodyne and antispasmodic properties of opium, without
its narcotic effects. Or, it may be made into laudanum, in the same manner that
opium is, and five or six drops taken on a lump of sugar, thrice a day. The
milky juice of all the sowthistles, dandelions, and lettuces, have nearly the
same virtues.

* Or, use milk-diet as much as possible.

52. The Cramp (to prevent).
Tie four garter smooth and tight under your knee at going to bed: I never knew
this fail.

Or, take half a pint of tar-water, morning and evening:

* Or, be electrified through the part that uses to be (...) prevents it for a
month (...).

Or, to one ounce and a half of spirits of turpentine, add flour of brimstone
and sulphur vivum, of each half an ounce; smell to it at night, three or four
times.

53. The Cramp (to cure).
* Chafe the part with hungary-water:

Or, hold a roll of brimstone in your hand. I have frequently done this with
success.

54. A Cut.
Keep it closed with your thumb a quarter of an hour. Then double a rag five or
six times; dip it in cold water, and bind it on: Tried.

55. Deafness.
Be electrified through the ear: Tried.

Or, use the cold bath:

Or, put a little salt into the ear:

Or, drop into it a tea-spoonful of salt water:

* Or, three or four drops of onion-juice, at lying down, and stop it with a
little wool.

56. Deafness from Wax.
* Syringe the ear with warm water: Tried.

57. Deafness with a dry Ear.
* Mix brandy and sweet oil: dip black wool in this, and put it into the ear.
When it grows dry, wash it and in brandy: dip it and put it in again.

58 Delivery.
After delivery in childbirth, the mother's milk is the only proper purge for
the child. Let it begin to suck ten or twelve hours after the birth.

59. A Diabetes. A diabetes is a frequent and large discharge of pale and
sweetish urine, attended with a constant thirst, and a wasting of the whole
body.

Drink wine boiled with ginger, as much and as often as your strength will
bear. Let your drink be milk and water. All milk-meats are good:

* Or, drink three or four times a day, a quarter of a pint of alum posset,
putting three drachms of alum to four pints of milk. it seldom fails to cure in
eight or ten days. (Dr. Mead.)

60. The Dropsy. A dropsy is a preternatural collection of water in the head,
breast, belly, or all over the body. It is attended with a continual thirst.
The parts swelled pits if you press it with your fingers. The urine is pale and
little.

Use the cold bath daily, after purging:

* Or, rub the swelled parts with salled-oil by a warm hand, at least an hour a
day. This has done wonders in some cases:

Or, cover the whole belly with a large new sponge dipped in strong limewater,
and then squeezed out. This bound on often cures, even without any sensible
evacuation of water.

Or, apply green dock-leaves to the joints and soles of the feet, changing them
once a day.

Or, mix half an ounce of amber with a quart of wine-vinegar. Heat a brick
(only not red hot) and put it into a tub. Pour them upon it, and hold the parts
swelled over the smoke, covering the tub close to keep in the smoke. The water
will come out incredibly, and the patient be cured: Tried.

Or, eat a crust of bread every morning fasting: Tried.

Or, mix a pound of the coarsest sugar with a pint of juice of pellitory of the
wall, bruised in a marble mortar. Boil it as long as any scum rises. When cool,
bottle and cork it. If very bad, take three spoonfuls at night, and two in the
morning. It seldon fails: Tried.

Or, make tea of roots of dwarf elder. It works by urine. Every twelve or
fourteen minutes (that is, after every discharge) drink a tea-cup full. -- I
have known a dropsy cured by this in twelve hours time.

One was cured, by taking a dram of nitre every morning in a little ale.

Tar-water drank twice a day has cured many; so has an infusion of juniper
berries roasted, and made into a liquor like coffee:

Or, three spoonfuls of the juice of leeks, or elder-leaves: Tried.

* Or, half a pint of decoction of butchers broom (intermixing purges twice or
thrice a week). The proper purge is ten grains of jalap, with six of powdered
ginger. It may be increased or lessened according to the strength of the
patient.

Or, of the decoction of the tops of oak-boughs. This cured an inveterate
dropsy in fifteen days:

Or, take sena, cream of tartar and jalap, half an ounce of each. Mix them, and
take half a dram every morning in broth. It usually cures in twenty days.
This is nearly the same with Dr. Ward's powder. I suppose he took it from
hence. He says it seldom fa^^, either in the watery or windy dropsy.

Or, steep half an ounce of jalap in a quartern of Geneva for twelve hours.
Draw it off. Divide it into three parts, and take it every other morning. Then
put a large spoonful of syrup of marsh mallows two half a pint of stale beer,
and when it has boiled a ^^^le, cool it, and drink it at lying down in bed. Do
(...) three times. This has cured many.

Or, be electrified: This cures dropsies supposed incurable.

How amazingly little is yet known, even of the human body! Have not dropsical
persons been continually advised to abstain from drink as much as possile? But
how can we reconcile thi^ with the following undeniable facts, published in the
medical transactions?

Jane Roberts, aged twenty, was at last constrained to take to her bed by a
confirmed ascites anasarca. In this desperate case, she drank as much as she
would, first of small beer; and when that failed, of thin milk. After a while
her skin cracked in many places: and she continued drinking and leaking till
she was quite well.

A middle-aged man in the west of England, drank every day five or six quarts
of cider: and without any other medicine, was totally cured in a few weeks time
of a dropsy long supposed to be incurable.

A farmer aged seventy, in a confirmed ascites, was given over for dead. Being
desperate, he drank three quarts of cold water, every four and twenty hours.
His whole food meantime was sea-biscuit, sometimes with a little butter. For
sixteen days he seemed worse. Then he discharged for near a week a vast
quantity of water, and was s^^n free from his disease, which never retained.

61. Drowned.
Rub the trunk of the body all over with hot salt. It frequently recovers them
that seem dead. -- See extract from Dr. Tissot, page 150.

And blow into the lungs.

62. The Ear-Ach, without Inflammation.
Rub the ear hard a quarter of an hour: Tried.

* Or, be electrified:

Or, put in a roasted fig, or onion, as hot as may be: Tried.

Or, blow the smoke of tobacco strongly into it.

But if the ear-ach is caused by an inflammation of the uvula, it is cured in
two or three hours, by receiving into the mouth the steam of bruised hemp seed,
boiled in water.

63. Ear-Ach from Cold.
Boil rue, or rosemary, or garlic, and let the steam go into the ear through a
funnel.

64. Ear-Ach from Heat.
Apply cloths four times doubled and dipped in cold water, changing them when
warm, for half an hour.

65. Hard-Wax in the Ear,
Is best dissolved by warm water.

66. Eyes bleared.
Drop into them the juice of crab-apples.

67. A Blood-shot Eye.
* Apply linen rags dipped in cold water two or (...) hours:

Or, blow in white sugar candy, finely po^^^

Or, apply boiled hyssop as a poultiet. Th(...) wonderful efficacy.

68. A bruise in the Eye.
^^ply as a plaster, conserve of roses.

69. Clouds flying before the Eye.
Take a dram of powdered betony every morning.

* Or, be electrified.

70. Blindness,
Is often cured by cold bathing:

Or, by electrifying: Tried. This has cured even a gutta serena of twenty-four
years standing.

71. Dull Sight.
Drop in two or three drops of juice of rotten apples often.

72. Films.
Mix juice of ground ivy, with a little honey, and two or three grains of
bay salt. -- Drop it in, morning and evening.

73. Hot or sharp Humors.
Apply a few drops of double-refined sugar, melted in brandy: Tried.

Or, boil a handful of bramble-leaves, with a little alum, in a quart of
spring water, to a pint. Drop this frequently into the eye. This likewise cures
can^^^ or any sores.

Or, lay a thin slice of raw beef on the nape of the (...). Tried.

74. Eyes or Eyelids inflamed.
Apply as a poultice, boiled, roasted, or rotten apples, warm.

Or, wormwood-tops with the yolk of an egg: This will hardly fail.

* Or, beat up the white of an egg with two spoonfuls of white rose water, into
a white froth. Apply this on a fine rag, changing it so that it may not grow
dry, till the eye or eyelid is well: Tried.

* Or, dissolve an ounce of fine gum arabic in two or three spoonfuls of spring
water; put a drop into the inner corner of the eye, from the point of a
hair-pencil, four or five times a day. At the same time take as much salt petre
as will lie upon a sixpence, dissolved in a glass of water, three or four
times a day; abstaining from all strong liquids as much as possible, till
cured. -- White bread poultices, applied to the eyes in an inflamed state,
frequently occasion total blindness.

* After the inflammation is subsided, if weakness still remains, dip a finger
in the white copperas eye-water, and rub round the eye, three or four times a
day. -- N. B. All acrid eye-waters, and powders, put into the eyes when they
are inflamed, horribly increase both the pain and inflammation.

75. A Lachrymal Fistula. This disorder in the inner corner of the eye, causes
the tears to flow involuntarily. When it is confirmed; only a sur^^^^ can cure
it.

Apply a poultice of fine leaves of rue:

Or, wash the eye morning and evening with a decoction of quince-leaves.

76. Pearl in the Eye.
Apply a drop of juice of celandine with a (...) thrice a day:

* Or, dissolve a little sal ammoniac in rose-^^^^^ Keep this three days in a
copper vessel. Drop (...) a day into the eye.

Or, reduce separately, to the finest powder possible, in equal weight of
loaf-sugar, cream of tartar, and ^ole ammoniac; mix them together, and put a
little unto the eye (without blowing it in) three or four times a day.

77. Sore Eyes.
Drink eyebright tea, and wash the eyes with it.

78. An excellent Eye-Water.
* Put half an ounce of lapis calaminaris powdered, into half a pint of French
white wine, and as much white rose water: drop a drop or two into the corner of
the eye. It cures soreness, weakness, and most diseases of the eyes. I have
known it cure total blindness.

79. Another.
* Boil very lightly one tea-spoonful of white copper as scraped, and three
spoonfuls of white salt in three pints of spring water. When cold, bottle it in
large vials without straining. Take up the vial softly, and put a drop or two
in the eye morning and evening.

It answers the intention of almost all the preceding medicines: it takes away
redness, or any soreness whatever: it (...) pearls, rheums, and often blindness
itself.

80. Another.
(...) and strain ground ivy, celandine, and daisies, for equal quantity: add a
little rose water and loaf-sugar, Drop a drop or two at a time in the eye, and
it takes away all manner of inflammation, smarting, itching, spots, webs, or
any other disorder whatsoever, yea, though the sight were almost gone.

81. An Eye-water,
which was used by Sir Stephen Fox, when he was sixty years of age, and could
hardly see with the help of spectacles; but hereby in some time he recovered
his sight, and could read the smallest print without spectacles, till above
eighty.

Take six ounces of rectified spirits of wine, dissolve in it one dram of
camphire, then add two small handfuls of dried elder flowers. In twenty-four
hours after it is infused, it is ready for use. Take out a little in a
tea-spoon: dip your finger in it, and bathe your forehead, over your eyes, and
each temple with it several times, morning and night, and twice more in the day
constantly. Meantime dip a soft rag in dead small beer, new milk warm, and daub
each eye a dozen times gently, morning and evening.

If it is a watery humor, you may with your finger wet the eyelids two or
three times a-piece: but be sure to shut your eyes, or it makes them smart and
burn excessively. If you have the toothache or swelled face, rub it well in on
the part, and it will take away the pain. It will cure any bruise also, if used
immediately: Tried.

It will cure any inflammation in the eyes.

82. Weak Eyes.
* Wash the head daily with cold water: Tried.

[Or, take of white vitriol half a dram, rose-^^^ter six ounces to dissolve
it, and filter the water^ to touch the eye often. -- The temples and around the
eye^ may be touched with camphorated spirits.

N. B. If the eyes are inflamed, the patient should be blooded or purged; and
if necessary, blisters behind the ears, or a seton to the back of the neck.]

83. Fainting on letting Blood,
Is prevented by taking before it some good broth:

* Or, by lying on the bed, during the operation.

84. The falling Sickness. In the Falling Sickness, the patient falls to the
ground, either quite stiff, or convulsed all over utterly senseless gnashing of
his teeth, and foaming at the mouth.

Be electrified: Tried.

* Or, use the cold bath for a month daily:

Or, take a tea-spoonful of piony-root dried and grated fine, morning and
evening, for three months:

* Or half a spoonful of valerian root powdered. -- It often cures in twice
taking:

Or, half a pint of tar-water, morning and evening, for three months:

Or, a glass of juice of pellitory of the wall, every morning: Tried.

Or, take five or six drops of laudanum fasting, for six or seven mornings.
This has cured many:

* Or, use an entire milk-diet for three months: It seldom fails.

Or, leaves of assarabacca powdered. -- This is the famous Major's snuff.

One who is subject to the falling sickness, may prevent a fit if he feels it
coming, by this simple experiment. Let him always carry with him a piece of
metal as broad (...) he is able to hold between his teeth, when his jaws (...)
stretched to the utmost. When he feels the fit approaching, let him immediately
put this between his (...), so as to keep his jaws at their utmost stretch.
(...) about a minute this will bring him quite to himself, and prevent the fit
for that time.

If one put this metal between the teeth of one that is of the fit, and force
them open, till his jaws are at the utmost stretch, the fit will immediately go
off, and the patient very soon recover.

85. The falling of the Fundament.
Boil a handful of red rose-leaves in a quarter of a pint of red wine: dip a
cloth in it, and apply it as hot as can be borne. Do this till all is used [Oil
or grease the ends of the fingers well, and reduce it immediately by a gentle
continued pressure on the part. This (...) always easily be done as soon as the
accident happens.]
.

86. A falling down of the Womb,
May be cured in the manner last mentioned:

* Or, wear a pessory of cork, and take twice a day a tea-cupful of the
decoction of the bark, with ten drops of elixir of vitriol.

87. Extreme Fat.
* Use a total vegetable diet. I know one who was entirely cured of this, by
living a year thus. She breakfasted and supped on milk and water (with bread)
and dined on turnips, carrots, or other roots, drinking water.

88. A Fever.
(In the beginning of any fever, if the stomach is uneasy, vomit; if the
bowels, purge; if the pulse be hard, full or strong, bleed).

Drink a pint and a half of cold water lying down in bed: I never knew it do
hurt.

* Or, thin water gruel sweetened with honey, with one or two drachms of nitre
in each quart.

The best of all julaps in a fever is this: Toast a large thin slice of bread,
without burning; put it hot into a pint of cold water: then set it on the (...)
is pretty hot. In a dry heat it may be given cold, in a moist heat, warm; the
more largely the better: -- Tried.

Or, for a change, use pippin or wood sorrel tea: or pippin posset drink: or
wood sorrel posset drink.

(To prevent catching any infectious fever, do not breathe near the face of the
sick person, neither swallow your spittle while in the room. Infection seizes
the stomach first).

* Or, use Dr. Boerhaave's fever-powder, viz. Eight ounces of nitre, a quarter
of an ounce of camphire, half a quarter of an ounce of saffron, and eight
grains of cochineal. These are to be powdered, mixed together, and kept dry in a
bottle. Ten grains taken on going to bed abates feverish heat, and procures
rest. Ten grains are to be taken every three or four hours for a continued
fever.

89. A High Fever,
Attended with a delirium and vigilia, has been cured by plunging into cold
water; which is a safe and sure remedy in the beginning of any fever.

Such a delirium is often cured by applying to the top of the head, a treacle
plaster: Tried.

90. A Fever with Pains in the Limbs.
Take twenty drops of spirits of hartshorn in a cup of water twice or thrice in
twenty four hours:

Or, drink largely of cinquefoil tea.

91. Rash Fever.
Drink every hour a spoonful of juice of ground ivy. It often cures in
twenty-four hours. -- Use the decoction when you have not the juice.

92. A Slow Fever.
Use the cold bath for two or three weeks daily.

[In putrid or nervous fevers, though they do not intermit, yet after proper
evacuations, the bark may be advantageously given, thus: Take of the powder of
the bark two ounces, orange-peel an ounce and a half, Virginia snake-root three
drachms, English saffron four scruples, Cochineal two scruples; infuse them in
twenty ounces of best distilled spirits: and the sick may take from a dram to
half an ounce occasionally in his lucid intervals. -- Huxham. -- Tried.]

93. A Worm Fever.
Boil a handful of rue and wormwood in water; foment the belly with the
decoction, and apply the boiled herbs as a poultice; repeat the application
night and morning. This frequently brings away worms from children, who will
take no internal medicine; and is likewise serviceable, if the fever be of the
putrid kind.

94. A Fistula.
Wash muscle shells clean: burn them to powder; sift them fine; mix them with
hogs-lard; spread it on clean washed leather, and apply it. This cured one that
was thought to be at the point of death.

N. B. This cures the piles.

Or, have a vessel so contrived, that you may sit with the part in cold water,
a quarter of an hour every morning. I have known a Gentleman of seventy years
cured hereby.

Or, put a large stone of unslacked lime into four quarts of water, let it
stand one night; take four ounces of roch-alum, and four ounces of white
copper^s, calcine them to dryness, then powder them as fine as possible: take
three pints of the above water, and put the powder into it, and boil it for
half an hour, then let it cool and bottle it for use. Let the fistula be
syringed with this often, a little warm; and make a tent to fit the place, and
dip it in the water, and apply it twice a day. Cover it over with a plaster of
diaculum.

This water will destroy the callosity of the edges of the fistula, which
otherwise would prevent its healing, and if managed as above, will heal it up
at the same time; but an operation is the only certain means.

95. To destroy Fleas and Bugs.
Cover the floor of the room with leaves of alder, gathered while the dew hangs
upon them: adhering to these, they are killed thereby.

Or, powder stavesacre, and sprinkle it on the body, or on the bed.

96. Phlegm,
To prevent or cure, take a spoonful of warm water, the first thing in the
morning.

97. Flooding (in Lying-in).
Cover the body with cloths dipped in vinegar and water, changing them as they
grow warm. Drink cooling, acid liquors.

This is a complaint which is never to be thought little of. Sometimes a
violent flooding comes on before delivery; and the only way to save both the
mother (...) child, is to deliver the woman immediately: which being done, the
flooding will generally cease. Sometimes a slight flooding comes on some weeks
before labor; and here, if the patient be kept cool, her diet light, and small
doses of nitre often repeated (an ounce divided into thirty parts, and one
given every four hours) she will frequently go her full time and do well: but
if it should become excessive, delivery should be effected as soon as may be.

* If a flooding should come on after delivery, the patient should be laid with
her head low, kept cool, and be in all respects treated as for an excessive
flux of the menses. Linen cloths which have been wrung out of vinegar and
water, should be applied to the belly, the loins, and the thighs. These must be
changed as they grow dry; and may be discontinued as soon as the flooding
abates. Sometimes the following mixture will do great things, viz. syrup of
poppies, two ounces; acid elixir of vitriol one dram. Mix, and take two
table-spoonfuls every hour. But large doses of nitre given often (a scruple
every hour) is generally the most efficacious. But when all other things seem
to have no effect, cold water dashed upon the patient's belly will stop the
flooding immediately.

98. A Flux.
Receive the smoke of turpentine cast on burning coals. This cures also the
bloody flux, and the falling of the fundament.

Or, put a large brown toast into three quarts of water, with a dram of
cochineal powdered, and a dram of salt of wormwood. Drink it all in as short
a time as you conveniently can.

This rarely fails to cure all fluxes, cholera morbus, yea, and inflammations
of the bowels: Tried.

Or, Take a spoonful of plantane-seed bruised, morning and evening, till it
stops:

* Or, tea grains of ipecacuana, three mornings successively. It is likewise
excellent as a sudorific.

Or, boil four ounces of rasped logwood, or fresh logwood chips, in three
quarts of water to two; strain it and drink a quarter of a pint, sweetened with
loaf-sugar, warm, twice a day. It both binds and heals:

Or, take a small tea-cupful of it every hour: this is to be used in the end of
the complaint.

Or, boil the fat of a breast of mutton in a quart of water for an hour. Drink
the broth as soon as you can conveniently. This will cure the most inveterate
flux: Tried. -- See extract from Dr. Tissot, page 124.

99. A Bloody Flux.
[Is attended with a fever, griping, or great pain in the intestines. -- As
this fever is nature's effort to discharge some offensive matter by stool,
therefore often it will be necessary to assist her by bleeding and purging, or
laxative medicines; or else it will be unsafe to stop the flux, but when the
former medicines have been used with mutton broth; the drink may be water
boiled with one fourth milk, and drank cold. In old dysenteries, fruit and milk
may be a proper diet: Tried.]

Or, take a large apple, and at the top pick out all the core, and fill up the
place with a piece of honeycomb (the honey being strained out) roast the apple
in embers, and eat it, and this will stop the flux immediately:

Or, grated rhubarb, as much as lies on a shilling, with half as much of grated
nutmeg, in a glass of white wine, at lying down^ every other night: Tried.

Or, take-four drops of laudanum, and apply to the belly a poultice of wormwood
and red roses boiled in milk.

In a dysentery, the worst of all fluxes, feed on rice, ^^oup, sago, and
sometimes ba^^^tea; but no flesh.

To ^^p it, take a spoonful of ^^et melted over a slow fire. Do not let blood.

Or. A person was cured in one day, by feeding on (...) milk, and sitting a
quarter of an hour in a shallow (...), having in it warm water three inches
deep. -- See extract from Dr. Tissot, page 125.

100. To prevent (or stop a beginning) Gangrene.
Foment continually with vinegar, in which dross of iron (either sparks or
clinkers) has been boiled.

101. The Gout in the Stomach.
"Dissolve two drachms of Venice treacle in a glass of mountain wine. After
drinking it, go to bed. You will be easier in two hours, and well in sixteen."
(Dr. Dover.)

Or, boil a pugil A Pugil is as much as you can take up between your thumb and
two fore-fingers.
^f tansey in a quarter of a pint of mountain. Drink (...) bed. I believe this
never fails.

* To prevent its return, dissolve half an ounce of gum guaiacum in two ounces
of sal volatile. Take a tea-spoonful of this every morning in a glass of
spring water.

This helps any sharp pain in the stomach. -- Dr. Boerhaave.

N. B. I knew a gentleman who was cured many times, by a large draught of cold
water.

102. The Gout in the Foot or Hand.
Apply a raw, lean beef-stake. Change it once in twelve hours, till cured:
Tried.

103. The Gout in any Limb. Regard them not who say, the gout ought not to be
cured. They mean, it cannot. I know it cannot by their regular prescription.
But I have known it cured in many cases, without any ill effects following. I
have cured myself several times.

Rub the part with warm treacle, and then bind (...) a flannel smeared
therewith. Repeat this, if need be once in twelve hours.

This has cured an inveterate gout in thirty-^six hours.

Or, drink a pint of strong infusion of elder-b^^^^, dry or green, morning and
evening. This has cured inveterate gouts.

Or, at six in the evening, undress, and wrap yourself up in blankets. Then put
your legs up to the knees in water, as hot as you can bear it. As it cools, let
hot water be poured in, so as to keep you in a strong sweat till ten. Then go
into a bed well warmed, and sweat till morning. -- I have known this cure an
inveterate gout, in a person above sixty, who lived eleven years after. -- The
very matter of the gout is frequently destroyed by a steady use of Mynsicht's
elixir of vitriol.

[Or, take gum guaiacum four ounces, salt petre two ounces, dissolve them
fourteen days in two pounds of Jamaica spirits; take two spoonfuls morning and
evening. But the grand medicine will be temperance and exercise.]

104. The Gravel.
Eat largely of spinach:

Or, drink largely of warm water sweetened with honey:

Or, of pellitory of the wall tea, so sweetened:

Or, infuse an ounce of wild parsley seeds in a pint of white wine for twelve
days. Drink a glass of it fasting, three months. To prevent its return,
breakfast for three months on agrimony tea. It entirely cured me twenty years
ago, nor have I had the least symptom of it since.

105. The Green Sickness. [Is known by a depraved appetite, shortness of
breath, pallid countenance, soft swelling of the body, palpitation of the
^^^art and retention of the menses.]

Take a cup of decoction of lignum guaiacum, (commonly called lignum vitae)
morning and evening^

Or, grind together into a fine powder three ounces of the finest
steel-filings, and two ounces of red sugar candy. Take from a scruple to half a
dram every morning, I. -- See Dr. Tissot.

106. To kill Animalcula that cause the Gums to waste away from the Teeth.
Gargle thrice a day with salt and water.

107. To make the Hair grow.
Wash it every night with a strong decoction of rosemary. Dry it with flannel:
Tried.

108. The Headache.
Rub the head for a quarter of an hour: Tried.

Or, be electrified: Tried.

Or, apply to each temple the thin yellow rind of a lemon, newly pared off:

* Or, pour upon the palm of the hand a little brandy and some zest Zest is the
juice of the peel squeezed out.
of lemon, and hold it to the forehead:

Or, a little ether:

Or, if you have catched cold, boil a handful of rosemary in a quart of water.
Put this in a mug, and hold your head (covered with a napkin) over the steam,
as hot as you can bear. Repeat this till the pain ceases: Tried.

Or, snuff up the nose camphorated spirits of lavender:

Or, a little juice of horseradish.

109. A Chronical Headache.
Keep your feet in warm water, a quarter of an hour before you go to bed, for
two or three weeks: Tried.

Or, wear tender hemlock leaves under the feet, changing them daily:

* Or, order a tea-kettle of cold water to be poured on your head, every
morning, in a slender stream:

Or, take a large tea-cupful of carduus tea, without sugar, fasting, for six or
seven mornings: Tried.

110. Headache from Heat.
Apply to the forehead cloths dipped in cold water, for an hour: Tried.

111. A nervous Headache.
Dry and powder an ounce of marjoram and half an ounce of assarabacca: mix them
and take them as snuff, keeping the ears and throat warm. This is of great use
even in a cancer: but it will suffice to take a small pinch every other night,
lying down in bed.

112. A violent Headache.
Take of white wine vinegar and water, each three spoonfuls; with half a
spoonful of hungary-water. Apply this twice a day to the eyelids and temples.

113. A Hemicrania. This is a headache which affects but one side of the head.

Use cold bathing.

Or, apply to that part of the head shaved, a blister.

114. Stoppage in the Head.
Snuff up juice of primrose, keeping the head warm.

115. The Heart-Burning. A sharp, gnawing pain in the orifice of the stomach.

Drink a pint of cold water: Tried.

Or, drink slowly decoction of camomile flowers:

Or, chew five or six pepper-corns a little: then swallow them:

Or, chew fennel or parsley, and swallow your spittle. -- Sometimes a vomit is
needful.

Or, a piece of Spanish liquorice.

116. The Hiccup (to prevent).
Infuse a scruple of musk in a quart of mountain wine, and take a small glass
every morning.

117. (To cure.)
Swallow a mouthful of water, stopping the mouth and ears: Tried.

Or, take any thing that makes you sneeze:

Or, two or three preserved damsons:

* Or three drops of oil of cinnamon, on a lump of sugar: Tried.

Or, ten drops of chemical oil of amber dropped on sugar, and then mixed with a
little water.

118. Hoarseness.
Rub the soles of the feet before the fire, with garlic and lard well beaten
together, over night. The hoarseness will be gone next morning: Tried.

Or, take a pint of cold water lying down:

Or, swallow slowly the juice of radishes:

Or, half a pint of mustard-whey, lying down?

Or, a tea-spoonful of conserve of roses, every night: Tried.

Or, dry nettle-roots in an oven. Then powder them finely, and mix with an
equal quantity of treacle. Take a tea-spoonful of this twice a day:

Or, boil a large handful of wheat-bran in a quart of water; strain, and
sweeten it with honey. Sip of it frequently.

119. Hypochondriac and Hysteric Disorders.
Exercise, and a little good wine. Five grains of asafoetida, twice a day.

Or, Cold bathing. In the absence of an attack.


120. The Jaundice.
Wear leaves of celandine upon, and under the feet:

Or, take a small pill of Castile soap every morning, for eight or ten days:
Tried.

Or, beat the white of an egg thin: take it morning and evening in a glass of
water, I.

Or, half a pint of strong decoction of nettles: Or, of burdock-leaves.

Or, boil three ounces of burdock-root, in two quarts of water to three pints.
Drink a tea-cupful of this every morning.

121. Jaundice in Children.
* Take half an ounce of fine rhubarb, powdered. Mix with it thoroughly, by
beating, two handfuls of good well cleansed currants. Of this give a
tea-spoonful every morning.

122. The Iliac Passion. In this violent kind of cholic the excrements are
supposed to be thrown up by the mouth in vomiting.

* Apply warm flannels soaked in spirits of wine:

Or, hold a live puppy constantly on the belly. (Dr. Sydenham.)

Or, immerge up to the breast in a warm bath:

Or, take, ounce by ounce, a pound and a half of quicksilver. -- See Dr.
Tissot, page 120.

Inflammations in general are more certainly abated by smart purging than by
bleeding [Besides the use of the first, second, and third prescriptions under
this head, take castor oil, as directed in the note to Bilious Cholic.]
.

123. An Imposthume.
* Put the white of two leeks in a wet cloth, and so roast them in ashes, but
not too much. Stamp them in a mortar with a little hog's grease. Spread it
thick, plaister-wise, and apply, changing it every hour, till all the matter be
come out. I.

124. The Itch. This distemper is nothing but a kind of very small lice, which
burrow under the skin. Therefore inward medicines are absolutely needless. --
Is it possible any physician should be ignorant of this?

Wash the parts affected with strong rum: Tried.

Or, anoint them with black soap.

* Or, steep a shirt half an hour in a quart of water, mixed with half an ounce
of powdered brimstone. Dry it slowly, and wear it five or six days. Sometimes
it needs repeating: Tried.

Or, beat together the juice of two or three lemons, with the same quantity of
oil of roses. Anoint the parts affected. It cures in two or three times using.

125. The King's Evil. It commonly appears first, by the thickness of the lips,
or so (...) humor in the eyes then come hard swellings, in the neck ch^^y;
then running sores.

Take as much cream of tartar as lies on a sixpence, every morning and evening:

Or, drink for six weeks half a pint of a strong decoction of devil's bit:
Tried.

Or, use the diet drink, as in the article Scorbutic Sores. I have known this
cure one whose breast was as full of holes as an honeycomb:

Or, set a quart of honey by the fire to melt. When it is cold, strew into it a
pound and a half of quicklime beat very fine, and sifted through a hair-sive.
Stir this about till it boil up of itself into a hard lump. Beat it when cold,
very fine, and sift it as before. Take of this as much as lies on a shilling,
in a glass of water, every morning fasting, an hour before breakfast, at four
in the afternoon, and at going to bed:

Or, make a leaf of dried burdock into a pint of tea. Take half a pint twice a
day, for four months. I have known this cure hundreds.

The best purge for the king's evil is tincture of jalap, which is made thus:
-- Jalap in powder, three ounces; Geneva, or proof spirits, one pint. Let them
infuse seven days. A tea-spoonful or two is sufficient for a child ten years
old, in a morning fasting; and repeated once a week, so as to keep the stomach
and bowels clean, will frequently cure the king's evil. But all violent purges,
or when repeated too often, are pernicious.

126. Lameness, from a fixed Contraction of the parts. [Anoint the part well
with sweet oil, and rub it in with the hand, continuing the friction for half
an hour or an hour, every night and morning, until well.

Or, bind the caul of a newly killed animal close on the part; to be repeated
if necessary.]



Beat the yolk of a new-laid egg very thin, and by a spoonful at a time, add
and beat up with it three ounces of water. Rub this gently into the parts for a
few minutes, three or four times a day.

127. Legs Inflamed.
Apply fuller's earth spread on brown paper. It seldom fails:

Or, bruised turnips.

128. Legs sore and running.
Wash them in brandy, and apply alder-leaves, changing them twice a day. This
will dry up all the sores, though the legs were like an honeycomb: Tried.

Or, poultice them with rotten apples; Tried. But take also three or four
purges.

129. Leprosy. In this disease, the skin in many parts is covered with rough,
whitish scaly pustules; and if these are rubbed off, with a kind of scaly scurf.

Use the cold bath:

Or, wash in the sea, often and long:

Or, mix well an ounce of pomatum, a dram of powdered brimstone, and half an
ounce of sal prunellae; and anoint the parts so long as there is need:

Or, add a pint of juice of house-leek, and half a pint of verjuice, to a pint
and a half of posset drink. Drink this in twenty-four hours: -- It often cures
the quinsy, and white swellings on the joints:

Or, drink half a pint of cellery-whey, morning and evening. This has cured in
a most desperate case:

Or, drink for a month a decoction of burdock-leaves, morning and evening:
Tried.

130. Lethargy. [A lethargy is a constant inclination to doze, or be asleep,
with little or no fever.]

Snuff strong vinegar up the nose:

Or, take half a pint of decoction of water-cre^^e^, morning and evening.

131. Lice (to kill).
Sprinkle Spanish snuff over the head.

Or, wash it with a decoction of amaranth.

132. For one seemingly killed with Lightning, a Damp, or suffocated.
* Plunge him immediately into cold water:

* Or, blow strongly with bellows down his throat. This may recover a person
seemingly drowned. It is still better if a strong man blows into his mouth.

133. Lues Venerea.
Take an ounce of quicksilver every morning, and a spoonful of aqua sulphurata
in a glass of water, at five in the afternoon. I have known a person cured by
this, when supposed to be at the point of death, who had been infected by a
foul nurse, before she was a year old.

I insert this for the sake of such innocent sufferers.

134. Lunacy.
Give decoction of agrimony four times a day:

Or, rub the head several times a day with vinegar in which ground ivy leaves
have been infused:

* Or, take daily an ounce of distilled vinegar:

Or, boil juice of ground ivy with sweet oil and white wine into an ointment.
Shave the head, anoint it therewith, and chafe it in warm every other day for
three weeks. Bruise also the leaves, and bind them on the head, and give three
spoonfuls of the juice warm every morning. This generally cures melancholy.

The juice alone, taken twice a day, will cure.

Or, electrify: Tried.

135. Raging Madness.
Apply to the head, cloths dipped in cold water: It is a sure rule that all mad
men are cowards, and may be conquered by binding only, without beating. (Dr.
Mead.) He also observes, that blistering the head does more harm than good.
Keep the head close shaved, and frequently wash it with vinegar.


* Or, set the patient with his head under a great water-fall, as long as his
strength will bear: Or, pour water on his head out of a tea-kettle:

Or, let him eat nothing but apples for a month:

Or, nothing but bread and milk: Tried.

136. The Bite of a Mad Dog.
Plunge into cold water daily for twenty days, and keep as long under it as
possible. -- This has cured, even after the hydrophobia was begun. If this be
really a nervous disorder, what wonder if it should be cured by cold bathing?


Or, mix ashes of trefoil with hog's lard, and anoint the part as soon as
possible. Repeat it twice or thrice at six hours distance. This has cured many:
and particularly a dog bit on the nose by a mad dog.

Or, mix a pound of salt with a quart of water. Squeeze, bathe, and wash the
wound with this for an hour. Then bind some salt upon it for twelve hours.

N. B. The author of this receipt was bit six times by mad dogs, and always
cured himself by this means.

Or, mix powdered liver-wort, four drachms: black pepper, two drachms: Divide
this into four parts, and take one in warm milk for four mornings fasting. Dr.
Mead affirms he never knew this fail: But it has sometimes failed.

Or, take two or three spoonfuls of the juice of rib-wort, morning and evening,
as soon as possible after the bite. Repeat this for two or three changes of the
moon. It has not been known to fail.

[To prevent the disorder in those who have been bitten; -- Cauterize the
wound, and dress it twice a day with digestive, and once a day with mercurial
ointment. Tissot. Wash the wound well, and dress it every day with salt. Keep
the wound open 40 days.]

137. The Measles. This distemper is always preceded by a violent cough, (...)
days before the red spots come out.

Immediately consult an honest physician:

* Drink only thin water gruel, or milk and water, the more the better; or
toast and water.

If the cough be very troublesome, take frequently a spoonful of barley-water
sweetened with oil of new almonds newly drawn, mixed with syrup of maidenhair.

* After the measles, take three or four purges, and for some weeks take care
of catching cold, use light diet, and drink barley-water, instead of
malt-drink. See extract from Dr. Tissot, page 82.

138. Menses Obstructed.
Be electrified: Tried.

Or, take half a pint of strong decoction of pennyroyal, every night at going
to bed:

Or, boil five large heads of hemp, in a pint of water, to half. Strain it, and
drink it at going to bed, two or three nights. I^ seldom fails: Tried.

* Or, take from three to four grains of calomel, in (...) for two or three
nights, taking care not to catch (...). It purges: Tried.

Let any of these medicines be used at the regular times as near as (...) be
judged. -- See Dr. Tissot.

139 Menses Profuse.
Drink nothing but cold water, with a spoonful of fine flour stirred in it. At
that time drink a glass of the coldest water you can get, and apply a thick
cloth dipped in cold water:

Or, put the feet into cold water:

Or, apply a sponge dipped in red wine and vinegar:

Or, bleed in the arm. Stop the orifice often with the finger, and then (...)
it bleed again:

Or, boil four or five leaves of the red holy-oak in a pint of milk, with a
small quantity of sugar. Drink this in the morning; if the person can afford
it, she may add a tea-spoonful of balm of Gilead. This does not often fail:

* Or, reduce to a fine powder half an ounce of alum, with a quarter of an
ounce of dragon's blood. In a violent case, take a quarter of a dram every
half hour. It scarce ever fails to stop the flux, before half an ounce is
taken. This also cures the whites.

[If the strength will admit, take a little blood from the arm; the body should
be kept loose. Let her take a tea-cupful of alum-whey every three or four hours
-- made thus: Put two drachms of powdered alum into a pint of milk, boil it
till the curd is well separated, then strain off the whey and bottle it. The
like medicine in floodings, and in the whites, has been found often useful:
Tried.]

140. To resolve coagulated Milk.
Cover the woman with a table-cloth, and hold a pan of hot water, just under
her breast; then stroke it three or four minutes. Do this twice a day, till it
is cured.

141. To increase Milk.
Drink a pint of water going to bed:

Or, drink largely of pottage made with lentils.

142. To make Milk agree with the Stomach.
If it lie heavy, put a little salt in it; if it cur^^^ sugar. For bilious
persons mix it with water.

143. A Mortification (to stop).
* Apply a poultice of flour, honey, and water, with a little yeast.

[A gangrene is when any part of the body, from the violence of the
inflammation is not actually dead, but is in a state of dying. -- Galen.

The inflammation should be abated by bleeding, if the fever admit, and by
cooling, opening medicines; the parts around touched with vinegar, limewater,
or camphorated spirits, and scarified. Apply a poultice of biscuit of fine
wheat flour boiled with milk to the gangrened part, and take the bark freely.

N. B. No oily substance should ever touch a bone, sound or unsound, but foul
bones should be dressed with spirits, as tincture of myrrh, etc.]

144. Nervous Disorders.
When the nerves perform their office too languidly, a good air is the first
requisite. The patient also should rise early, and as soon as the dew is off
the ground, walk: let his breakfast be mother of thyme tea, gathered in June,
using half as much as we do of common tea. When the nerves are too sen^ible,
let the person breathe a proper air, let him eat veal, chickens, or mutton.
Vegetable should be eat sparingly; the most innocent is the French bean; and
the best spot, the turnip. Avoid all sauces. Sometimes he may breakfast upon a
quarter of an ounce of the powder of valerian root infu^ed in hot water, to
which he may add cream and sugar. Tea is not proper. When the person finds an
uncommon oppression let him take a large spoonful of the tincture of valerian
root.

This tincture should be made thus: Cut to pieces six ounces of wild valerian
root, gathered in June, and fresh (...). Bruise it by a few strokes in a
mortar, that the pieces may be split, but it should not be beat into powder:
(...) it this into a quart of strong white wine; cork the bottle and let it
stand three weeks, shaking it every day; then press it out and filter the
tincture through paper.

N. B. The true wild valerian has no bad smell: if it has, cats have urined
upon it, which they will do, if they can come at it.

But I am firmly persuaded, there is no remedy in nature for nervous disorders
of every kind, comparable to the proper and constant use of the electrical
machine.

145. Nettle Rash. A slight fever, (which sometimes lasts for weeks or months)
attended with itching and smarting, and an eruption just like that occasioned
by nettles. In Georgia, we called it the prickly heat.

Rub the parts strongly with parsley.

146. Old Age.
Take tar-water morning and evening: Tried.

Or, decoction of nettles: either of these will probably renew the strength for
some years:

Or, be electrified daily:

Or, chew cinnamon daily, and swallow your spittle.

147. An old stubborn Pain in the Back.
Steep root of water-fern in water, till the water becomes thick and clammy.
Then rub the parts there with morning and evening:

Or, apply a plaster, and take daily balsam of (...) pivi.

148. The Palsy. A palsy is the loss of motion or feeling, or both, in any
particular part of the body.

Be electrified daily for three months, from the places where the nerves
spring, which are brought to the paralytic part -- If the parts beneath the
head are affected, the fault is in the spinal marrow. If half the body, half
the marrow is touched.

Or, use the cold bath if you are under fifty, rubbing and sweating after it:

Or, shred white onions and bake them gently in an earthen pot, till they are
soft: spread a thick plaster of this, and apply it to the benumbed part, all
over the side, if need be. -- I have known this cure a person of seventy-five
years old.

Or, take tar-water, morning and evening:

Or, boil white and red sage, a handful of each in a quart of white wine.
Strain and bottle it. Take a small glass morning and evening.

This helps all nervous disorders.

Or, take a tea-spoonful of powdered sage lying down in bed.

149. Palsy of the Hands.
Wash them often in decoction of sage, as hot as you can bear:

Or, boil a handful of elder-leaves, or, two or three spoonfuls of mustard seed
in a quart of water. Wash (...) in this, as hot as may be.

150. Palsy of the Mouth.
* After purging well, chew mustard seed often:

Or, gargle with juice of wood-sage,

151. Palsy from working with white Lead or Verdigrease.
Use warm baths and a milk-diet.

152. The Palpitation, or Beating of the Heart.
Apply outwardly a rag dipped in vinegar:

O, be electrified: Tried.

Or, take a decoction of mother's wort every night.

153. Phlegm (see Phlegm).

154. The Piles (to prevent).
Wash the parts daily with cold water.

155. The Piles (to cure).
Apply warm treacle:

Or, a poultice of boiled brook-lime. It seldom fails:

Or, varnish. It perfectly cures both the blind and bleeding piles: Tried.

Or, fumigate with vinegar, wherein red hot flints have been quenched. This
softens even schirrhous tumors.

[Take flour of sulphur, half an ounce; cream of tartar, half an ounce;
conserve of roses an ounce, with syrup enough to make an electuary; take the
bulk of a nutmeg thrice a day, and touch the parts with the following linament.
Take burnt cork, two ounces; digestive ointment, half an ounce; ^i^ seed oil
enough to make it into a linament: Tried.]

156. The inward Piles.
Swallow a pill of pitch, fasting. One pill usually cures the bleeding piles:

Or, eat a large leek, boiled:

Or, take twice a day, as much as lies on a shilling of the thin skins of
walnuts, powdered.

157. Violent bleeding Pile^
Lightly boil juice of nettles, with a little (...) take two ounces. It seldom
needs repeating.

158 The Pleurisy. A ple^risy is a fever attended with a violent pain in the
side, and a pulse remarkably hard.

Use a decoction of nettles: and apply the boiled herb hot, as a poultice. I
never knew it fail.

Or, a plaster of flour of brimstone and white of an egg: Tried. -- See Dr.
Tissot. page 38.

In disorders of this kind, Dr. Huxham advises, "Sip almost continually thin
whey, barley-water, or hyssop tea, sharpened with lemon-juice; or vinegar and
water. If the spitting stop suddenly, take a little vomit. Likewise camphorated
vinegar, with syrup of elder or rasberries is good. To appease the ^^^^h take
often, a little at a time of roasted apples, of strawberries, rasberries, or
currants."

[There is also a bastard pleurisy, which is an inflammation of the muscles
among the ribs, attended with little or no fever. In the true pleurisy the pain
is greatest in inspiration, and is most perceived when the unaffected side is
lain on, attended with a constant fever, short cough, and sometimes a spitting
of blood; these symptoms do not attend the bastard pleurisy. This last disorder
seldom needs bleeding, as does the true pleurisy; the work is better done by a
vomit and acidulated barley-water. but the pleurisies in North America do not
admit of such large bleedings as in Europe, nor can the patients bear such
large doses of medicines: the diet in the true pleurisy should be slender, cool
and diluting: a bladder filled with warm milk and water, applied to the side,
may be renewed when cool: he may drink a decoction of seneca rattle-snake-root,
etc.

There are also pains in the sides which are mostly from phlegm, and are carried
off by warm diluting drinks, where bleeding would be hurtful, especially in the
fall of the year.]

159. To one Poisoned.
* Let one poisoned by arsenic, dissolve a quarter of an ounce of salt of
tartar in a pint of water, and drink every quarter of an hour as much as he
can, till he is well.

* Let one poisoned by opium, take thirty drops of elixir of vitriol, every
quarter of an hour, till the drowsiness or wildness ceases:

* Or, take a spoonful of lemon-juice, every half hour.

* Let one poisoned with mercury sublimate, dissolve an ounce of salt of tartar
in a gallon of water, and drink largely of it. This will entirely destroy the
force of the poison, if it be used soon.

Nothing cures the African poison, but a decoction of the roots of the
sensitive plant.

160. Polypus in the Nose.
* Powder a lump of alum, and snuff it up frequently. Then dissolve powdered
alum in brandy: dip lint therein, and apply it at going to bed.

161. A Prick or cut that festers.
Apply turpentine.

162. Ptyalism. A continual Spitting.

A very violent and stubborn disorder of this (...) was cured by chewing
perpetually a little dry br^a^ly and swallowing it with the spittle.

163. An easy Purge.
Drink a pint of warmish water fasting, walking afit:

Or, a soft egg with a tea-spoonful of salt.

Or, infuse from half a dram to two drachms of damask rose-leaves dried, in
half a pint of warm water, for twelve hours, and take it:

* Or, infuse three drachms of sena, and a scruple of salt of tartar, in half a
pint of river-water for twelve hours. Then strain and take it in the morning.

Wild-ash is a plant of the very same nature as sena. Its leaves taken in the
same quantity purge full as well, and do not gripe as sena does. It is
therefore preferable to that which is brought from Turkey or Italy.

The wild-ash is called in the north of England, round-tree, quicken,
quick-beam, or wiggan-tree. The leaves should be gathered when the tree is in
flower.

164. A stronger Purge.
Drink half a pint of strong decoction of dock-root:

* Or, two drachms of the powdered root of monks rhubarb, with a scruple of
ginger.

165. The Quinsy. The quinsy is a fever, attended with difficulty of
swallowing, and often of breathing.

Apply a large white-bread toast, half an inch thick, dipped in brandy, to the
crown of the head, till it dries:

Or, bleed, purge and blister.

166. Quinsy of the Breast. This is known by a sudden unaccountable pain and
difficulty of breathing, seizing a person in the night, or on any violent
motion.

Take from eight to twenty drops of laudanum, lying down in bed:

Or, make an issue in the thigh.

167. The Rheumatism. Rheumatical pains are generally most violent as soon as
you are warm in bed.

To prevent. Wear washed wool under the feet.

To cure. Use the cold bath, with rubbing and sweating:

Or, apply warm steams:

Or, rub in warm treacle, and apply to the part brown paper smeared therewith:
change it in twelve hours: Tried.

Or, drink half a pint of tar-water, morning and evening:

Or, steep six or seven cloves of garlic, in half a pint of white wine. Drink
it lying down. It sweats, and frequently cures at once.

* Or, take two cloves of garlic, and one dram of gum ammoniacum; beat them
together in a marble mortar, with a little water, so as to make three boluses.
Take one of them night and morning, and drink sassafras ten freely:

* Or, mix flour of brimstone with honey, in equal quantities. Take three
spoonfuls at night, two in the morning, and one afterward, morning and
evening, till cured. This succeeds oftener than any remedy I have found:

Or, live on new milk whey and white bread for fourteen days. This has cured in
a desperate (...):

Or, pound the green stalks of English rhubarb, in May or June, with an equal
quantity of lump-ssa^^. Take the quantity of a nutmeg of this three or four
times a day. This seldom fails. -- See extract from Dr. Tissot, page 61.

In a stubborn rheumatism, let your diet be barley-gruel, with currants,
roasted apples, fresh whey, and light pudding.

[Rub an ounce of camphire, with two ounces of Florence oil, in a mortar, till
the camphire be entirely dissolved, to rub the parts affected. -- Buchan.]

* Take of Florence oil, an ounce; spirit of hartshorn, half an ounce; shake
them together. Pringle says, a flannel moistened with this, and applied to the
pained part in rheumatism, or to the throat in quinsy, is generally
efficacious.]

168. To restore the Strength after a Rheumatism.
Make a strong broth of cow heels, and wash the parts with it warm twice a day.
It has restored one who was quite a cripple, having no strength left either in
his leg, thigh, or loins.

* Or, mix gum guiacum (in powder) with honey or treacle: take two or three
tea-spoonfuls (or as much as you can bear without purging) twice or thrice a
day. This is the best medicine I have met with for the chronic rheumatism:

* Or, dissolve one ounce of gum guaiacum in three ounces of spirits of wine.
Take sixty or eighty drops on loaf sugar two or three times a day. -- This is
Dr. Hill's essence of bardana.

* Or, drop thirty drops of volatile tincture of guaiacum on a lump of sugar,
and take this in a glass of water every four hours. It usually cures in a day:
Tried.

169. Rickets [In the rickets the child is emaciated, except the head knees and
belly, which are swelled, and the ribs are depressed.]
(to prevent or cure).
* Wash the child every morning in cold water.

170. Ring-Worms. Vulgarly called tetters.

Apply rotten apples: Or, pounded garlic:

Or, rub them with the juice of house-leek^

Or, wash them with hungary-water camphorated ^

Or, twice a day with oil of sweet almonds and oil of tartar mixed.

171. A Rupture. [A rupture, if old and irreducible, is to be submitted to, and
can only be alleviated by suspension in a bag-truss made of soft linen. If
recent, its reduction should be attempted instantly by gentle continued
pressure on the part: this is best done by the person's own b^^^is, while his
body is thrown into a recumbent posture. If this does not succeed, try the last
article under this head, and if the rupture still cannot be replaced, but a
considerable degree of pain come^ on, with sickness at the stomach, and fever,
draw a pint of blood from the arm, and if the person's strength will at all
admit it, repeat it again in six hours, take one table-spoonful of castor oil
every hour until it works, continue the use of t^^ above mentioned article, and
inject a pint of the decoction of mallows or camomile in milk and water,
strained and well sweetened with brown sugar as a clyster.

If after twelve or fourteen hours, all these methods fail either to return the
rupture (...) procure stools, and the pain and sickness (...) stomach rather
increase, with a beginning restlessness, the case becomes highly alarming and
dangerous, and no time into ^^^ost: steep: quarter of an ounce of strong
tobacco in a pint of b^^^ing wat^^ an hour, strain it off and inject it as a
clyster. (...) may cause great sickness and faintness, so as to alarm the
bystanders not a little, but is not dangerous, and will frequently succeed
when every thing else fails.

After the rupture is reduced, a well-fitted steel truss should afterward be
(...) worn, and the omission of it for an hour, while in an erect posture, may
be fatal.

It is strongly recommended in every recent case of this kind, to call in a
physician of experience as early after the accident as possible, as a
chirurgical operation may be absolutely necessary to save the person's life.
The above directions are intended (...) for those who cannot be benefited by
the immediate at^^^^^nce of a physician of skill and reputation, no other
should (...) trusted to in a case of so much importance.]



Foment with hot aqua vitae for two hours.

Or, take agrimony, spleen-wort, Solomon's-seal, strawberry-roots, a handful of
each; pick and wash them well; stamp, and boil them two hours, in two quarts of
white wine in a vessel close stopped. Strain, and drink a large glass of this
every morning, and an hour after, drink another. It commonly cures in a
fortnight. A good truss mean time is of great use.

"I place," says Dr^ Riviere, "a bread plank sloping from the side of the bed
to the ground. On this I lay the patient upon pillows, with his head downward.
Then I foment the part for half an hour, with cloths four times doubled,
steeped in cold water, gently touching it with my fingers. Afterward I bind on
it, many times doubled, a cloth shaped like a triangle, wet in cold water. --
The gut is generally restored to its place in a few hours. If not, I repeat the
operation twice a day, and in two or three days the disease is cured."

172. A Rupture in Children.
Keep its bowels open with rhubarb and apply a soft band.

173. A Scald Head.
Apply daily white wine-vinegar: Tried.

Or, a little blue ointment.

After the cure, give two or three gentle purges.

If a proper regard was paid to cleanliness in the head and apparel of
children, the scald-head would seldom be seen.

174. The Sciatica, The sciatica is a violent pain in the hip, chiefly in the
joint of the thigh bone.

Is certainly cured by a purge taken in a few hours after it begins:

Or, use cold bathing, and sweat, together with the fresh brush twice a day:

Or, boil nettles till soft. Foment with the liquor, then apply the herb as a
poultice. -- I have known this cure a sciatica of forty-five years standing:

Or, apply nettles bruised in a mortar:

Or, a mud made of powdered pitcoal and warm water. This frequently cures
sores, weakness of limbs, most disorders of the legs, swelling and stiffness of
the joints. It cured a swelling of the elbow-joint, though accompanied with a
fistula, arising from a caries of the bone. See extract from Dr. Tissot, page
66.

175. Inflammation or swelling of the Scrotum.
Apply lead water.

176 A Scorbutic Atrophy. Such a degree of the scurvy as causes the fresh to
waste away like a consumption.

Use cold bathing: -- Which also cures all scorbutic pains.

177. Scorbutic Gums.
* Wash them daily with a decoction of the peruvian bark, adding a little
tincture of roses, with a solution of myrrh.

* [Wash them with cold water, then with tincture of red roses, with as much
sweet spirit of salt mixed with it as can be conveniently borne: Boerhaave. Or,
wash them with tincture of myrrh: Tried.]

178. Scorbutic Sores.
A diet drink. -- Put half a pound of fresh shaved lignum guaiacum (called by
the block-makers lignum vitae) and half an ounce of sena into an earthen pot
that holds six quarts; add five quarts of soft water and lute the pot close.
Set this in a kettle of cold water, and put it over a fire, till it has boiled
three hours. Let it stand in the kettle till cold. When it has stood one night,
drink daily half a pint, new milk warm, in the morning, fasting, and at four in
the afternoon. Wash with a little of it. In three months all the sores will be
dried up: Tried.

179. The Scurvy. The scurvy is known by heaviness of body, weariness,
rottenness of gums, and yellow, lead, or violet-coloured spots on the legs or
arms.

N. B. A scurvy attended with costiveness (which is most common) is termed a
hot scurvy: one attended with looseness, a cold scurvy.



Live on turnips for a month:

Or, take tar-water, morning and evening, for three months:

Or, three spoonfuls of nettle-juice every morning: Tried.

Or, decoction of burdock. Boil three ounces of the dried root in two quarts of
water to three pints. Take half a pint daily: unless it purges too much, if so,
take less. A decoction of the leaves (boiling one leaf four minutes in a quart
of water) has the same effect:

Or, take a cupful of the juice of goose-grass, in a morning, fasting, for a
month: it is frequently called hariff, or cleavers. Last year I knew many
persons cured by it.

Or, pound into a pulp, of Seville oranges, sliced, rind and all, and
powdered-sugar, equal quantities. Take a tea-spoonful three or four times a
day: Tried.

Or, squeeze the juice of half a Seville orange into a pint of milk over the
fire. Sweeten the whey with loaf-sugar, and drink it every morning, new milk
warm. To make any whey, milk should be skimmed, after it is boiled.

* Or, pour three quarts of boiling water, on a quart of ground malt: stir them
well, and let the mixture stand covered close, for four hours: strain it off,
and use this as common drink: in hot weather, brew this fresh every day. It
will hardly fail.

Or, take morning and evening, a spoonful or two of lemon juice and sugar. "It
is a precious remedy, and well tried." -- Dr. Mackbride.

Water and garden cresses, mustard and juice of scurvy grass, help in a cold
scurvy.

When there is a continual salt taste in the mouth, take a pint of limewater
morning and evening.

180. A Broken Shin.
Bind a dry oak-leaf upon it:

Or, put on a bit of white paper moistened with spittle. It will stay on till
the place is well: Tried.

This cures a cut also.

181. Shingles. A kind of Ring-Worm, which encircles the body like a ^olt, of a
hand's breadth.

* Drink seawater every morning for a week; toward the close, bathe also:

Or, apply pounded garlic.

[It is necessary that the body should be purged and kept loose, then touch the
part twice a day with the following: Take mustard seed powdered fine, and best
writing ink, as much as will make it into a linament: Tried.]

182. Sickishness in the Morning.
Eat nothing after six in the evening:

Or, drink half a pint of water impregnated with f^^^ed air.

183. Sinews shrunk.
Rub them with warm oil.

184. Skin rubbed off.
Apply pounded all-heal. -- It seldom needs repeating.

Or, a bit of white paper with spittle.

185. Smallpox.
Drink largely of toast and water.

Or, let your whole food be milk and water mixed with a little white bread:
Tried.

Or, milk and apples.

Take care to have a free, pure and cool air. Therefore open the casement every
day: only do not let it chill the patient.

"There may be pustules a second time, coming out and ripening like the
smallpox, but it is barely a cutaneous disorder.

"In violent cases, bleed in the foot; bathe the legs in warm water, twice or
thrice a day, before and at the eruption; and apply boiled turnips to the feet.
Never keep the head too hot.

* "In very low depressed cases, wine may be given: and if the pustules lie
buried in the skin, a gentle vomit. In many cases a gentle purge of manna,
cream of tartar, or rhubarb.

"In the crude ichorose smallpox, a dish of coffee now and then, with a little
thick milk in it, has often quieted the vexations cough.

"After the incrustation is formed, change the sick: but let it be with very
dry, warm linen." Dr. Huxham.

186. A long running Sore in the Back,
Was entirely cured by eating betony in every thing:

Or, take every morning two or three spoonfuls of nettle-juice, and apply
nettles bruised in a mortar, to the patt. This cures any old sore or ulcer. I.

187. A Sore Leg.
Bind a diaculum plaster, an inch broad, round the leg, just above the sore,
and foment it morning and evening, with hot water.

Any sore is healed by a plaster of mutton-suit: even though it fester or
breed proud flesh.

188. A Sore Mouth.
Apply the white of an egg beat up with loaf-sugar:

Or, gargle with the juice of cinquefoil:

* Or, boil together a pound of treacle, three yolks of eggs, an ounce of bole
ammoniac, and the quantity of a nutmeg of alum, a quarter of an hour. Apply
this to the sore part: Tried.

189. A Sore Throat.
Take a pint of cold water lying down in bed: Tried.

Or, apply a chin-stay of roasted figs:

* Or, a flannel sprinkled with spirits of hartshorn to the throat, rubbing
hungary-water on the top of the head: Tried.

Or, snuff a little honey up the nose.

An old sore throat was cured by living wholly upon apples and apple-water.

* Lay nitre and loaf-sugar mixed on the tongue.

190. A putrid Sore Throat.
Lay on the tongue a lump of sugar dipped in brandy: Tried.

[This fatal disorder, especially among young children, begins with an ague and
sore throat, sometimes a gangrene is begun in the palate, or near it in twelve
(...), and it sometimes kills in twenty-four hours; a vomit should be given as
soon as the disorder is known, and occasionally repeated, the body kept loose;
a gargle used of barley-water and honey (or honey of roses) and salt petre; and
when the gangrene is discovered, the mouth-water should be made as strong as
the patient can bear it, with volatile spirits of sal ammoniac, or some other
volatile spirits; and the little patient often have his mouth washed with it,
and solicited to drink barley-water, and take a preparation of the bark; Tried.]

191. A Sprain.
* Hold the part in very cold water for two hours: Tried.

* Or, apply cloths dipped therein, four times doubled, for two hours, changing
them as they grow warm:

* Or, bathe it in good crab-verjuice:

* Or, boil bran in wine-vinegar to a poultice. Apply this warm, and renew it
once in twelve hours.

192. A venomous Sting.
Apply the juice of honey-suckle leaves:

Or, a poultice of bruised plantane and honey:

Or, take inwardly, one dram of black currant-leaves powdered. It is an
excellent counter-poison.

193. The sting of a Be.
Apply honey.

194. Sting of a Nettle.
Rub the part with juice of nettles.

195. Sting of a Wasp.
Rub the part with the bruised leaves of house-le^k, watercresses, or rue:

Or, apply treacle, or sweet oil:

Or, bruised onions, or garlic.

196. Sting of a Be or Wasp in the Eye.
Apply carduus bruised, with the white of an egg: renew it if it grows dry.

197. Sting in the Gullet.
Beat well together, with a spoon, some honey and sweet oil with a little
vinegar; swallow a spoonful every minute till ease is procured.

198. A Stitch in the Side.
Apply treacle spread on a hot toast: Tried.

199. Accidental Sickness, or Pain in the Stomach.
Vomit with a quart of warm water.

200. Pain in the Stomach from bad Digestion.
Take fasting, or in the fit, half a pint of camomile-tea. Do this five or six
mornings:

Or, drink the juice of half a large lemon immediately after dinner, every day.
-- Dr. Mead.

* Or, from twenty to forty drops of elixir of vitriol in sage-tea, twice or
thrice a day:

Or, in the fit a glass full of vinegar:

* Or, take two or three tea-spoonfuls of stomachic-tincture, in a glass of
water, thrice a day.

The tincture is made thus: Gentian-root sliced, one ounce: orange-peel dried,
half an ounce; cochineal, fifteen grains; of proof brandy, one pint: in three
or four days it is fit for use. -- This is useful in all disorders that arise
from a relaxed stomach.

201. Choleric hot Pains in the Stomach.
Take half a pint of decoction of ground ivy with a tea-spoonful of the powder
of it, five or six mornings. I.

202. Coldness of the Stomach.
Take a spoonful of the syrup of the juice of carduus benedictus, fasting, for
three or four mornings: I.

Or, chew a leaf of carduus every morning, and swallow the spittle: Tried.

203. Pain in the Stomach, with Coldness and Wind.
Swallow five or six corns of white pepper, for six or seven mornings: Tried.

204. Stone (to prevent).
Eat a crust of dry bread every morning: Tried.

Or, drink a pint of warm water daily, just before dinner. After discharging
one stone, this will prevent the generating of another. Stoop down and raise
yourself up again. If you feel pain as if cut through the middle, the pain is
not from the stone, but rheumatism. Beware of costiveness. Use no violent
diuretics. Mead is a proper drink.

Or, slice a large onion; pour half a pint of warm water upon it. After it has
stood twelve hours, drink the water. Do this every morning till you are well.

205. In a raging Fit.
Beat onions into a pulp and apply them as a poultice, to the back, or to the
groin. It gives speedy ease in the most racking pain: Tried.

Or, apply heated parsley.

206. Stone (to ease or cure).
Boil half a pound of parsnips in a quart of water. Drink a glass of this,
morning and evening, and use no other drink all the day. -- It usually cures in
six weeks:

"Or, take morning and evening, a tea-spoonful of onions, calcined in a
fire-shovel into white ashes, in white wine. An ounce will often dissolve the
stone."

Or, take a tea-spoonful of violet-seed powdered, morning and evening. It both
wastes the stone, and brings it away.

Or, drink largely of water impregnated with fixed air. [Some have been much
relieved by drinking a pint of cold water fasting in the morning, and again at
bedtime at night.]


Those who have not a convenient apparatus, may substitute the following
method: Dissolve fifteen grains of salt of tartar in six spoonfuls of water, to
which add as much water, acidulated with oil of vitriol, as will acutralize the
salt. They are to be gradualy mixed with each other, so as to prevent the
effervescence o^ dissipation of the fixed air, as much as possible.

207. Stone in the Kidneys.
Boil an ounce of common thistle-root, and (...) drachms of liquorice, in a
pint of water. Drink half of it every morning.

208. Stoppage in the Kidneys.
Take decoction, or juice, or syrup of ground ivy, morning and evening:

Or, half a pint of tar-water.

Or, twelve grains of salt of amber in a little water.

209. The Stranguary.
Sit over the steam of warm water:

Or, drink largely of decoction of turnips, sweetened with clarified honey:

Or, of warm lemonade: Tried.

* Or, dissolve half an ounce of saltpeter in a quart of water; drink a glass
of it every hour.

210. Sunburn (smarting).
Wash the face with sage-tea.

211. A fresh surfeit.
Take about a nutmeg of the green tops of wormwood.

212. To stop profuse Sweating.
* Mix an ounce of tincture of peruvian bark, with half an ounce of spirit of
vitriol. Take a tea-spoonful morning and night, in a glass of water.

213. Swelled Glands in the Neck.
* Take seawater every other day.

214. Indolent Swellings,
Are often cured by warm steams.

215. Soft and flabby Swellings.
Pump cold water on them daily:

Or, use constant frictions: or, proper bandages.

216. A white Swelling (on the Joints).
Hold the part half an hour every morning, under a pump or cock. This cures
also pains in the joints. It seldom fails: Tried.

Or, pour on it daily a stream of warm water:

Or, a stream of cold water one day, and warm the next, and so on by turns:

Use these remedies at first, if possible. It is likewise proper to intermix
gentle purges, to prevent a relapse:

Or, boiled nettles.

217. To dissolve white or hard Swellings.
Take white roses, elder-flowers, leaves of fox-glove, and of St. John's-wort,
a handful of each: mix them with hog's-lard, and make an ointment.

Or, hold them morning and evening in the steam of vinegar, poured on red-hot
flints.

218. To fasten the Teeth.
Put powdered alum, the quantity of a nutmeg, in a quart of spring water, for
twenty-four hours. Then strain the water and gargle with it:

Or, gargle often with phyllerea-leaves boiled with a little alum in
forge-water.

219. To clean the Teeth.
* Rub them with ashes of burnt bread.

220. To prevent the Toothache.
* Wash the mouth with cold water every morning, and rinse them after every
meal.

221. To cure the Toothache.
Be electrified through the teeth: Tried.

Or, apply to the aching tooth an artificial magnet:

Or, rub the cheek a quarter of an hour:

Or, lay roasted parings of turnips, as hot as may be, behind the ear:

Or, put a leaf of betoney, bruised, up the nose:

Or, lay bruised or boiled nettles to the cheek: Tried.

Or, lay a clove of garlic on the tooth:

Or, hold a slice of apple, slightly boiled, between the teeth: Tried.

Or, dissolve a dram of crude sal ammoniac in two drachms of lemon juice; wet
cotton herein and apply:

Or, keep the feet in warm water, and rub them well with bran, just before
bedtime: Tried.

The first twenty teeth generally last till the sixth or seventh year. After
that till the fourteenth or fifteenth ear, they fall out one by one, and are
succeeded by others.

The sheding of the teeth is wisely intended, and brought about in a singular
manner. Their hardness will not admit of distention like other parts of the
body. Hence, after an enlargement of the jaw bone, the original teeth are no
longer able to fill up the cavities of it. They must stand unsupported by each
other, and leave spaces between them. Under the first teeth therefore is placed
a new set, which by constantly pressing upon their roots, rob them of their
nourishment, and finally push them out of their sockets.

222. Toothache from cold Air.
Keep the mouth full of warm water.

223. Teeth set on Edge.
Rub the tops of the teeth with a dry towel.

There is no such thing as worms in the teeth. Children's using coral, is
always useless, often hurtful.

"Forcing the teeth into order is always dangerous. Filing is generally hurtful.

"All rough and cutting powders destroy the teeth: so do all common tinctures.

"Sweetmeats are apt to hurt the teeth, if the mouth be not rinsed after them.
-- Cracking nuts often breaks off the enamel: so does biting thread in two.

* "Constant use of tooth-picks is a bad practice: constant smoking of tobacco
destroys many good sets of teeth." Mr. Beardmore.

224. Extreme Thirst (without a Fever).
Drink spring water, in which a little sal prunellae is dissolved.

225. Pain in the Testicles.
Apply pellitory of the wall beaten up into a poultice, changing it morning and
evening.

226. Testicles inflamed.
Boil bean-flour, in three parts water, one part vinegar.

227. To draw out Thorns, Splinters and Bones.
Apply nettle-roots and salt:

Or, turpentine spread on leather.

228. Thrush. Little white ulcers in the mouth.

Mix juice of celandine with honey, to the thickness of cream. Infuse a little
powdered saffron: let this simmer a while and scum it: apply it (where needed)
with a feather. At the same time give eight or ten grains of rhubarb; to a
grown person, twenty:

Or, take an ounce of clarified honey; having scummed off all the dross from
it, put in a dram of roch-alum, finely powdered, and stir them well together.
Let the child's mouth be rubbed well with this, five or six times a day, with a
bit of rag tied upon the end of a stick: and even though it be the thorough
thrush, it will cure it in a few days. I never knew it fail.

[As they generally proceed from too hot a regimen, or the child being deprived
of its mother's milk, or from acid humors, the child should be purged. Five
grains of rhubarb and thirty of magnesia alba may be rabbed together, and
divided into six doses, one of which should be given every four hours. Then
take fine honey, an ounce; borax, a dram: burnt alum half a dram;
rose water, two drachms: mix them to touch the parts with: Buchan.]

229. Tonsils swelled.
Wash them with lavender-water.

230. Torpor; or, Numbness of the Limbs.
Use the cold bath, with rubbing and sweating.

231. Twisting of the Guts.
Use injection of tobacco smoke.

232. Tympany; or, Windy Dropsy.
Use the cold bath with purges intermixed:

Or, mix the juice of leeks and of elder. Take two or three spoonfuls of this,
morning and evening: Tried.

Or, eat a few parched peace every hour.

233. A Vein or Sinew cut.
Apply the inner green rind of hazel fresh scraped.

234 The Vertigo, or Swimming in the Head.
* Take a vomit or two:

* Or, use the cold bath for a month:

Or, in a May morning, about sunrise, snuff up daily the dew that is on the
mallow-leaves:

Or, apply to the top of the head, shaven, a plaister^ of flour of brimstone,
and whites of eggs: Tried.

Or, take every morning half a dram of mustard^ seed:

Or, mix together one part of salt of tartar, wi^^ three parts of cream of
tartar. Take a tea-spoonful in a glass of water, every morning, fasting. This
is serviceable when the vertigo springs from acid, tough phlegm in the stomach.

235. Vigilia, Inability to Sleep.
Apply to the forehead, for two hours, cloths four times doubled and dipped in
cold water. I have known this applied to a lying-in woman, and her life saved
thereby:

Or, take a grain or two of camphire.

Asafoetida, from ten to thirty grains, likewise will in most cases answer.

236. Bite of a Viper or Rattle-Snake.
Apply bruised garlic:

Or, rub the place immediately with common oil. -- Quere; Would not the same
cure the bite of a mad dog? Would it not be worth while to make the trial on a
dog?

[Or, take a quantity of hore-hound, bruise it well in a mortar, and squeeze
out the juice; likewise plantane in like manner: a table-spoonful of these
liquids mixed together in equal quantities, is to be taken every three hours
till the infection is done, and the beaten herbs are for a poultice to the
part, having first cleansed it well:

Or, apply the liver and guts of the serpent to the wound. Good in the bite of
any serpent.]

237. To prevent the Bite of a Viper.
Rub the hands with the juice of radishes.

238. An Ulcer.
Dry and powder a walnut-leaf, and strew it on, and ^^y another walnut-leaf on
that: Tried.

Or, boil walnut-tree leaves in water with a little sugar. Apply a cloth dipped
in this, changing it once (...) two days. This has done wonder^^

Or, foment morning and evening with a decoction of walnut tree leaves, and
bind the leaves on. This has cured foul bones; yea, and a leprosy: Tried.

239. Ulcer in the Bladder or Kidneys.
Take a decoction of agrimony thrice a day:

Or, decoction, powder, or syrup of horse-tail.

240. Ulcer in the Gum or Jaw.
Apply honey of roses sharpened with spirit of vitriol:

Or, fill the whites of eggs boiled hard and slit, with myrrh and sugar candy
powdered. Tie them up, and hang them on sticks lying across a glass. A liquid
distills, with which anoint the sores often in a day.

241. A Fistulous Ulcer.
Apply wood-betony bruised, changing it daily.

242. A Bleeding varicous Ulcer in the Leg.
Was cured only by constant cold bathing.

243. A Malignant Ulcer.
Foment morning and evening, with a decoction (...) mint. Then sprinkle on it
finely powdered rue:

Or, burn to ashes (but not too long) the gross sta^^ on which the red
coleworts grow. Make a plai^^^ with this and fresh butter. Change it once a day:

* Or, apply a poultice of boiled parsnips. T^^ will cure even when the bone is
foul:

Or, be electrified daily: Tried

244. An easy and safe Vomit.
Pour a dish of tea on twenty grains of ipecacuanha. You may sweeten it if you
please. When it has stood four or five minutes, pour the tea clear off, and
drink it.

245. To stop Vomiting.
Apply a large onion slit across the grain, to the pit of the stomach: Tried.

* Or, take a spoonful of lemon-juice and six grains of salt of tartar.

246. Bloody Urine.
Take twice a day a pint of decoction of agrimony:

Or, of decoction of yarrow.

247. Urine by Drops with Heat and Pain.
Drink nothing but lemonade: Tried.

Or, beat up the pulp of five or six roasted apples with near a quart of water.
Take it at lying down. It commonly cures before morning.

248. Involuntary Urine.
Use the cold bath:

Or, take a spoonful of powdered agrimony in a little water, morning and
evening:

Or, a quarter of a pint of alum posset drink every night:

Or, foment with rose-leaves and plantane-leaves, boiled in a smith's
forge-water. Then apply plasters of alum and bole ammoniac, made up of oil and
vinegar:

Or, apply a blister to the os sacrum. This seldom ^ails.

249. Sharp Urine.
Take two spoonfuls of fresh juice of ground ivy.

250. Suppression of Urine,
Is sometimes relieved by bleeding:

Or, drink largely of warm lemonade: Tried.

Or, a scruple of nitre, every two hours:

Or, take a spoonful of juice of lemons sweetened with syrup of violets.

251. Uvula This is usually called the palate of the mouth.
inflamed.
Gargle with a decoction of beaten hemp seed:

Or, with a decoction of dandelion:

Or, touch it frequently with camphorated spirits of wine.

252. Uvula relaxed.
Bruise the veins of a cabbage-leaf, and lay it hot on the crown of the head:
repeat, if needed, in two hours. I never knew it fail.

* Or, gargle with an infusion of mustard seed.

253. Warts.
Rub them daily with a radish:

Or, with juice of marigold-flowers: it will hardly fail:

Or, water in which sal ammoniac is dissolved:

Or, apply bruised purslain as a poultice, changing it twice a day. It cures in
seven or eight days.

254. Weakness in the Ankles.
Hold them in cold water a quarter of an hour morning and evening.

255. A soft Wen.
Wrap leaves of sorrel in a wet paper, and roast them in the embers. Mix it
with finely sifted ashes into a poultice. Apply this w^^m daily.

Dr. Riviere says, "I cured a wen as big as a large fist, thus: I made an
instrument of hard wood, like the stone with which the painters grind their
colors on a marble. With this I rubbed it half an hour twice a day. Then I
laid on a suppurating plaster very hot which I kept on four or five days. The
wen suppurated and was opened. Afterward all the substance of it turned into
matter, and was evacuated. Thus I have cured many since."

256. The Whites.
Live chastely. Feed sparingly. Use exercise constantly. Sleep moderately, but
never lying on your back.

Or, boil four or five leaves of the white holy-oak in a pint of milk with a
little sugar. Then add a tea-spoonful of balm of Gilead. Drink this every
morning. -- It rarely fails:

Or, make Venice turpentine, flour, and fine sugar, equal quantities, into
small pills. Take three or four of these morning and evening. This also cures
most pains in the back:

Or, take yellow rosin, powdered, one ounce; conserve of roses, half an ounce;
powdered rhubarb, three drachms; syrup, a sufficient quantity to make an
electuary. Take a large tea-spoonful of this twice a day, in a cup of
comfrey-root ^ea.

Or, in a quarter of a pint of water wherein three drachms of tamarinds and a
dram of lentish-wood has been boiled: when cold, infuse sena, one dram,
coriander-seed and liquorice a dram and a half of each. Let them stand all
night. Strain the liquor in the morning, and drink it daily two hours before
(...)

257. A Whitlow.
Apply treacle: Tried.

Or, honey and flour: Tried.

Or, a poultice of chewed bread. Shift it once a day:

Or, a poultice of powdered pit-coal, and warm water.

258. Worms. A child may be known to have the worms, by ch(...) paleness,
hollow eyes, itching at the nose, starting in sleep, (...) an unusual stinking
breath -- Worms are never found in children that live wholly upon milk.

Take two tea-spoonfuls of brandy sweetened with loaf-sugar:

Or, a spoonful of juice of lemons; or two spoonfuls of nettle-juice:

Or, boil four ounces of quicksilver an hour in a quart of clear water. Pour it
off and bottle it up. You may use the same quicksilver again and again. Use
this for common drink: or at least, night and morning, for a week or two. Then
purge off the dead worms with fifteen or sixteen grains of jalap.

Or, take two tea-spoonfuls of worm seed, mixed with treacle, for six mornings:

Or, one, two, or three drachms of powdered fern-root, boiled in mead. This
kills both the flat and round worms. Repeat the medicine from time to time.

Or, dissolve an ounce of hepatic aloes, in a pint of strong decoction of rue.
Take a tea-spoonful or two, in a morning fasting. This destroys both round
wor^^, and ascarides:

* Or, give one tea-spoonful of syrup of bear's (...) at bed time, and one or
two in the morning for (...) or three succeeding days, to children between two
(...) six years of age; regulating the dose according to (...) strength of the
patient.

Syrup of bear's-foot is made thus: -- Sprinkle the green leaves with vinegar,
stamp and strain out the juice, and add to it a sufficient quantity of coarse
sugar. This is the most powerful medicine for long round worms.

Bruising the green leaves of bear's-foot, and smelling often at them,
sometimes expels worms:

Or, mix and reduce to a fine powder, equal parts of rhubarb, scammony, and
calomel, with as much double refined sugar, as is equal to the weight of all
the other ingredients. The dose for a child, is from six grains to twelve, once
or twice a week. An adult may take from twenty grains to forty, for a dose.

Or, boil half an ounce of aloes, powdered, with a few sprigs of rue, wormwood,
and camomile, in half a pint of gall, to the consistency of a plaster: spread
this on thin leather, and apply it to the stomach, changing it every twelve
hours, for three days; then take fifteen grains of jalap, and it will bring
vast quantities of worms away, some burst and some alive. This will cure, when
no internal medicine avails. See extract from Dr. Tissot, page 145.

[Or, take ten grains of camomile, thirty grains of rhubarb, and as much finely
powdered chalk, or oyster-shells, for six powders when rubbed together; one to
be taken every morning, noon, and night; for a child five years old. Keep him
from cold water. Take two drachms of quicksilver, boil it in half a pint of
water till half is consumed, pour off the liquor and give him half a table
spoonful thrice a day, and lay by the quicksilver.]

259. Wounds.
(...) you have not an honest Surgeon at Hand,

^^ply juice or powder of yarrow: I.

Or, bind leaves of ground ivy upon it:

Or, wood-betony bruised. This quickly heals even (...) veins and sinews, and
draws out thorns and splinters:

Or, keep the part in cold water for an hour, keeping the wound closed with
your thumb. Then bind on the thin skin of an egg-shell for days or weeks, till
it falls off of itself. Regard not, though it prick or shoot for a time.

260. Inward Wounds.
Infuse yarrow twelve hours in warm water. Take a cup of this four times a day.

261. Putrid Wounds.
Wash them morning and evening with warm decoction of agrimony. If they heal
too soon, and a matter gathers underneath, apply a poultice of the leaves
pounded, changing them once a day till well:

* Or, apply a carrot-poultice; but if a gangrene comes on, apply a wheat-flour
poultice (after it has been by the fire, till it begins to ferment) nearly
cold. It will not fail.

[One of the best poultices for separating or suppurating, will be found to be
made of biscuit of fine wheat flour, boiled in milk: and most additions or
refinements on it only lessen its value; sometimes it may be proper to touch it
over with a little sweet oil or fresh butter; and in extreme pain, in other
cases, with liquid laudanum.]

262. Wounded Tendons.
Boil comfrey-roots to a thick mucilage or jelly, (...) apply this as a
poultice, changing it once a day.

263. To open a Wound that is clo^^ too soon.
Apply bruised centaury.

264. Daffy's Elixir.
Take of the best sena, guaiacum, liquorice sliced small, aniseeds,
coriander-seeds, and elicampane-root, each half an ounce; raisins of the sun,
stoned, a quarter of a pound: let them all be bruised, and put into a quart of
the best brandy. Let it stand by the fire for a few days, then strain it. --
See page 27.

265. Turlington's Balsam.
Take of balsam of Peru, balsam of Tolu, Angelica-root, and calamus-root, of
each half an ounce; gum storax in tears, and dragon's-blood, of each one ounce;
gum Benjamin, an ounce and a half; hepatic aloes and frankincense, of each two
drachms; let the roots be sliced thin, and the gums bruised; and put all the
ingredients into a quart of spirits of wine; set the bottle by the fire in a
moderate heat for eight or ten days then strain it for use.

This is indeed a most excellent medicine, for man or beast, and for any fresh
wound. I know of none like it.

266. Stoughton's Drops.
Take gentian-root, one ounce; cochineal and saffron, one dram; rhubarb, two
drachms; the lesser cardamom-seed, grains of paradise, zedoary, snake-root, of
each half an ounce; galengale one ounce; slice the roots, and bruise the seeds;
then infuse them in a quart (...) the best brandy, and add the rinds of four
Seville ^^anges. When it has stood eight days, clear it off; (...) ^ut a pint
and a half more of brandy to the same ingredients till their virtue is drawn
out. This is ^^^^^ly helpful in disorders of the stomach. -- See sto^^chic
tincture, page 82.

267. Dr. James's Powders.
Instead of giving half a crown a packet for these powders, you may, at any
druggist's get Dr. Hardwick's fever-powder, for a shilling an ounce, which (if
it be not the same) will answer just the same end.

COLD-BATHING
Cures Young Children of CONVULSIONS* Cutaneous inflammations, pimples, and
scabs Gravel Inflammation of the ears, navel, and mouth Rickets* Suppression of
urine Vomiting Want of sleep.


It prevents the Growth of Hereditary Apoplexies Asthmas Blindness Consumptions
Deafness Gout King's evil Melancholy Palsies Rheumatism* Stone.


It frequently cures every Nervous, And this, I apprehend, accounts for its
frequently curing the bite of a mad dog, especially if it be repeated for
twenty or thirty days successively.
and every Paralytic Disorder: in particular, Ague of every sort* Atrophy
Coagulated blood after bruises Convulsions* Convulsive pains Epilepsy* Hysteric
pains Incubus Involuntary stool or urine Lameness (Old) leprosy Lethargy Loss
of appetite Nephritic pains Pain in the back, joints, stomach Rheumatism
(chronic)* Rickets* Rupture Suffocations Sciatica Surfeits (at the beginning)
Scorbutic pains Swelling on the joints Torpor of the limbs, even when the use
of them is lost Tetanus* Tympany Vertigo St. Vitus's dance Vigilia Varicous
Ulcers The Whites.


* Wise parents should dip their children in cold water every morning, till
they are three quarters old; and afterward their hands and feet.

* Washing the head every morning in cold water, prevents rheums, and cures old
head-achs, and fore (...)

Water Drinking generally prevents

* Apoplexies, convulsions, gout, historic (...) madness, palsies, stone,
trembling.

To this children should be used from their era^^^^

The best water to drink, especially for those (...) are much troubled with the
wind, is rainwater. After it has settled, draw it off clear into another
vessel, and it will keep sweet for a long time.

Electrifying, in a proper manner, cures Blindness Blood extravasated
Bronchocele Burns or scalds Coldness in the feet Contraction of the limbs
Convulsions Cramp Deafness* Falling sickness Feet violently disordered Felons
Fistula lachrymalis Fits Ganglions Gout Headache Involuntary motion of the
eyelids Knots in the flesh Lameness Wasting Weakness of the legs Restores bulk
and fullness to wasted limbs Locked jaws or joints Leprosy Menstrual
obstructions Ophthalmia Pain in the stomach Palsy* Palpitation of the heart
Rheumatism* Ring-worms Sciatica Shingles Sinews shrunk Spasms Stiff joints
Sprain, however old Sore throat Toothache* Ulcers Wens.


Drawing sparks removes those tumors on the eyelids, called barley corns, by
exciting local inflammation, and promoting suppuration.

Nor have I yet known one single instance, wherein it has done harm: so that I
cannot but doubt the veracity of those who have affirmed the contrary. Dr. De
Haen positively affirms, "it can do no hurt in any case:" that is unless the
shock be immoderately strong.

Fasting-spittle outwardly applied every morning, has sometimes relieved, and
sometimes cured Blindness Contracted sinews from a cut Corns (mixed with chewed
bread and applied every morning) Cuts (fresh) Deafness Eyelids, red and
inflamed Scorbutic tetters Sore legs Warts.


Taken inwardly, it relieves or cures Asthmas Cancers Falling sickness Gout
Gravel King's evil Leprosy Palsy Rheumatism Scurvy Stone Swelled liver.


The best way is, to eat about an ounce of (...) bread, or sea-biscuit, every
morning, fasting (...) three hours after, This should be done, (...) born
cases, for a month or six weeks.

CONTENTS.
ABORTION to prevent No. 1 For an Ague No. 2 St. Anthony's Fire No. 3 Apoplexy
No. 4 Canine Appetite No. 5 The Asthma No. 6 A Dry or Convulsive Asthma No. 7
To cure Baldness No. 8 Bleeding at the Nose (to prevent) No. 9 Bleeding of a
Wound No. 10 Spitting Blood No. 11 Vomiting Blood No. 12 To dissolve coagulated
Blood No. 13 Blisters No. 14 Biles No. 15 Hard Breasts No. 16 Sore Breads and
Swelled No. 17 A Bruise No. 18 To prevent Swelling from a Bruise No. 19 A Burn
or Scald No. 20 A deep Burn or Scald No. 21 A Cancer No. ^^ Chilblains (to
prevent) etc. No. ^^ Children No. ^^ Chin-Cough, or Hooping-Cough No. ^^
Cholera Morbus, i. e. Flux and Vomiting No. ^^ Chops in Women's Nipples No. ^^
Chopped Hands (to prevent) No. ^^ -- (to cure) No. ^^ Chopped Lips No. ^^ A Cold
No. ^^ A Cold in the head No. ^^ The cholic (in the Fit) No. ^^ The Dry Cholic
(to prevent No. 34 Cholic in Children No. 35 Bilious Cholic No. 36 An Habitual
Cholic No. 37 An Hysteric Cholic No. 38 A Nervous Cholic No. 39 Cholic from the
Fumes of Lead, White Lead, Verdigrease, etc. No. 40 Windy Cholic No. 41 To
prevent the ill Effects of Cold No. 42 A Consumption No. 43 Convulsions No. 44
Convulsions in Children No. 45 Convulsions in the Bowels of Children No. 46
Corns (to prevent) No. 47 -- (to cure) No. 48 Costiveness No. 49 A Cough No. 50
Violent Cough from a sharp and thin Rheum No. 51 The Cramp (to prevent) No. 52
-- (to cure) No. 53 A Cut No. 54 Deafness No. 55 Deafness from Wax No. 56
Deafness with a dry ear No. 57 Delivery No. 58 A (...) No. 59 T(...) No. 60
(...) No. 61 The Ear-Ach, without Inflammation No. 62 Ear-Ach from Cold No. 63
Ear-Ach from Heat No. 64 Hard Wax in the Ear No. 65 Eyes bleared No. 66 (...)
Eye No. 67 (...) in the Eye No. 68 (...)ing before the Eye No. 69 (...) No. 70
Dull sight No. 71 Films No. 72 Hot or (...) Humors No. 73 Eyes or Eyelids
inflamed No. 74 Lachrymal Fistula No. 75 Pearl in the Eye No. 76 Sore Eyes No.
77 An excellent Eye-Water No. 78 Another No. 79 Another No. 80 An Eye-Water,
etc. No. 81 Weak Eyes No. 82 Fainting on letting Blood No. 83 The Falling
Sickness No. 84 The falling of the Fundament No. 85 The falling down of the
Womb No. 86 Extreme Fat No. 87 A Fever No. 88 A high Fever No. 89 Fever with
Pains in the Limbs No. 90 A rash Fever No. 91 A slow Fever No. 92 A Worm Fever
No. 93 A Fistula No. 94 To destroy Fleas and Bugs No. ^^ Phlegm No. ^^ Flooding
(in Lying-in) No. ^^ A Flux No. ^^ A Bloody Flux No. ^^ To prevent (or stop a
beginning) Gangrene No. 100 The Gout in the Stomach No. 101 The Gout in the
Foot or Hand No. ^^^ The Gout in any Limb No. ^^^ The Gravel No. ^^^ The Green
Sickness No. ^^^ To kill Animalcula that cause the Gums to (...) away from the
Teeth No. ^^6 To make the Hair grow No. ^^^ The Headache No. ^^^ A Chronical
Headache No. ^^^ Headache from Heat No. ^^^ A Nervous Headache No. ^^^ A
^^^lent Headache No. ^^^ A Hemicrania No. 113 Stoppage in the Head No. 114 The
Heart-burning No. 115 The Hiccup (to prevent) No. 116 -- ((...)) No. 117
Hoarseness No. 118 Hypochondriac and Hysteric Disorders No. 119 The Jaundice
No. 120 Jaundice in Children No. 121 The Iliac Passion No. 122 An Imposthume
No. 123 The Itch No. 124 The King's Evil No. 125 Lameness from a fixed
Contraction of the Parts No. 126 Legs inflamed No. 127 Legs sore and running
No. 128 Leprosy No. 129 Lethargy No. 130 Lice (to kill) No. 131 For one
seemingly killed with Lightning, a Damp, or suffocated No. 132 (...) Venerea
No. 133 ^^macy No. 134 ^^ging Madness No. 135 The Bite of a Mad Dog No. 136
(...) No. 137 Menses obstructed No. 138 (...) No. 139 ^o resolve coagulated
Milk No. 140 To increase Milk No. 141 To make Milk agree with the Stomach No.
142 A Mortification (to stop) No. 143 (...) Disorders No. 144 (...) Rash No.
145 (...) No. 146 (...) stubborn Pain in the Back No. 147 (...) No. 148 (...)
Hands No. 149 (...) of the Mouth No. 150 Palsy (...)king with White Lead or
Ver^^^^ No. 151 The Palpitation, or Beating of the Heart No. 152 Phlegm (see
Phlegm) No. 153 The Piles (to prevent) No. 154 The Piles (to cure) No. 155 The
inward Piles No. 156 Violent Bleeding Piles No. 157 The Pleurisy No. 158 To one
Poisoned No. 159 Polypus in the Nose No. 160 A Prick or Cut that festers No.
161 Ptyalism No. 162 An easy Purge No. 163 A stronger Purge No. 164 The Quinsy
No. 165 A Quinsy of the Breast No. 166 The Rheumatism No. 167 To restore the
Strength after a Rheumatism No. 168 Rickets (to prevent or cure) No. 169
Ring-Worms No. 170 A Rupture No. 171 A Rupture in Children No. 172 A scald Head
No. 175 The Sciatica No. ^^^ Inflammation or Swelling of the Scrotum No. ^^^ A
Scorbutic Atrophy No. ^^6 Scorbutic Gums No. ^^^ Scorbutic Sores No. ^^^ The
Scurvy No. ^^^ A broken Shin No. ^^^ Shingles No. ^^^ Sick^^ness in the Morning
No. ^8^ Sinews shrunk No. ^^^ Skin rubbed off No. ^^^ Smallpox No. ^^^ A long
running Sore in the Back No. ^^^ A Sore Leg No. ^^^ A Sore Mouth No. ^^^ A Sore
Throat No. 189 A putrid Sore Throat No. 190 A Sprain No. 191 A venomous Sting
No. 192 Sting of a Be No. 193 Sting of a Nettle No. 194 Sting of a Wasp No.
195 Sting of a Be or Wasp in the Eye No. 196 Sting in the Gullet No. 197 A
Stitch in the Side No. 198 Accidental Sickness, or Pain in the Stomach No. 199
Pain in the stomach from bad Digestion No. 200 Choleric hot Pains in the
Stomach No. 201 Coldness of the Stomach No. 202 Pain in the Stomach with
Coldness and Wind No. 203 Stone to (to prevent) No. 204 In a raging Fit No. 205
Stone (to ease or cure) No. 206 Stone in the Kidneys No. 207 Stoppage in the
Kidneys No. 208 The Stranguary No. 209 Sunburn (smarting) No. 210 A fresh
Surfeit No. 211 To stop profuse Sweating No. 212 Swelled Glands in the Neck No.
213 Indolent swellings No. 214 ^oft and flabby Swellings No. 215 (...) white
Swelling (on the Joints) No. 216 (...) dissolve white or hard Swellings No. 217
To fast^ the Teeth No. 218 To clean the Teeth No. 219 To prevent the Toothache
No. 220 To cure the Toothache No. 221 Toothache from cold Air No. 222 Teeth set
on Edge No. 223 ^^^reme Thirst (without a Fever) No. 224 (...) in the Testicles
No. 225 (...) ^^^^med No. 226 (...) Thorns, Splinters, and Bones No. 227 (...)
No. 228 (...) No. 229 (...) Numbness of the Limbs No. 230 During of the Guts
No. 2^^ (...)ndy Dropsy No. 23^ A Vein or Sinew cut No. 233 The Vertigo, or
Swimming in the Head No. 234 Vigilia, Inability to Sleep No. 235 Bite of a
Viper or Rattle-Snake No. 236 To prevent the Bite of a Viper No. 237 An Ulcer
No. 238 Ulcer in the Bladder or Kidneys No. 239 Ulcer in the Gum or Jaw No. 240
A Fistulous Ulcer No. 241 A Bleeding varicous Ulcer in the Leg No. 242 A
malignant Ulcer No. 243 An easy and safe Vomit No. 244 To stop Vomiting No. 245
Bloody Urine No. 246 Urine by Drops with Heat and Pain No. 247 Involuntary
Urine No. 248 Sharp Urine No. 249 Suppression of Urine No. 250 Uvula inflamed
No. 251 Uvula relaxed No. 252 Warts No. 253 Weakness in the Ankles No. 254 A
soft Wen No. 255 The Whites No. 256 A Whitlow No. 257 Worms No. 258 Wounds No.
259 Inward Wounds No. 260 Putrid Wounds No. 261 Wounded Tendons No. 262 To open
a Wound that is closed too soon No. 263 Daffy's Elixir No. 264 Turlington's
Balsam No. 265 Stoughton's Drops No. 266 Dr. James's Powders No. 267


THE END.
THE FOLLOWING BOOKS, ARE PUBLISHED BY John Dickins, No. 50, North
Second-street, near Arch-street, PHILADELPHIA; For the Use of the Methodist
Societies in the United States of America; AND THE PROFITS THEREOF APPLIED FOR
THE General Benefit of the said Societies.

Sold by the Publisher, and the Ministers and Preachers in the several Circuits.

THE Rev. Mr. John Wesley's Notes on the New Testament, in three volumes, well
bound, 17s. -- The same lettered, 18s. 6d.

The Arminian Magazine, vols. Is It and IId, at ^^^s. per volume.

Thomas a Kempis bound, 2s.

The Form of Discipline for the Methodist Church, as revised at the General
Conference, 1792; with Treatises on Predestination, Perseverance, Christian
Perfection, Baptism, etc. all bound together, 4s. 5d.

The Experience and Travels of Mr. Freeborn Garrettion, well bound, 3s.

A Pocket Hymn Book, containing three hundred Hymns, well bound and lettered,
3s. 9d.

An Extract on Infant Baptism, stitched, 9d.

Children's Instruction, stitched, 6d.

The excellent Works of the Rev. Mr. John Fletcher, published one volume at a
time; the whole will consist of about six or seven volumes; the Is It, IId,
IIIrd, IVth, and Vth volumes now published, well bound and lettered, at 5s. 7d.
per volume.

An Abridgment of Mrs. Rowe's Devout Exercises of the Heart, bound, 1s. 10d.

A Funeral Discourse on the Death of that great divine, the Rev. John Wesley,
stitched, 11d.

The Saints Everlasting Rest, well bound, 5s. 7d.

Minutes of the Methodist Conferences, 5d.

The Is It volume of Mr. Francis Asbury's Journal, 5s. 7.

A Tract on Slavery, 6d.

The Rev. John Wesley's Journal, vol. 1st, 5s. 7d.

The Rev. John Wesley's Life, handsomely bound and lettered, 7s. 6d. -- N. B.
Some of the British copies of this Life, in a larger type, have been sold in
America, bound, at 15s.

The Family Adviser and Primitive Physic, bound, 3s. 9d.

Extract from Law's Serious Call to a devout and holy Life, bound, 3s. 9d.

Spiritual Letters, etc. by the Rev. John Fletcher, 5s. 7d.

Appeal to Matter of Fact and Common Sense, by the Rev. John Fletcher, 5s. 3d.

Sermons by the Rev. John Wesley, published one volume at a time, the Is It and
IId. volumes published at 5s. 2d. each.

Doddridge's Sermons to Young People, full bound, 3s. 6d.

A Scriptural Catechism, 5d.

As the Profits of these Books are for the general Benefit of the Methodist
Societies, it is humbly recommended to the Members of the said Societies, that
they will purchase no Books which we publish, of any other person than the
aforesaid JOHN DICKINS, or the Methodist Ministers and Preachers in the several
Circuits, or such Persons as sell them by their Consent:


