AN ORATION, DELIVERED IN THE BENEVOLENT CONGREGATIONAL MEETING HOUSE, ON THE
FOURTH OF JULY, A. D. 1796, IN COMMEMORATION OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY PAUL ALLEN, JUN. A. B.

PROVIDENCE: PRINTED BY CARTER AND WILKINSON, AND SOLD AT THEIR BOOK-STORE.
1796.

To the CITIZENS of the Town of PROVIDENCE.
GENTLEMEN,
IN Compliance with the polite Request of your Committee, a Copy of the Oration
which was Yesterday delivered is transmitted to the Press.

PAUL ALLEN, jun.
Providence, July 5, 1796.
AN ORATION.
Materies superabat opus.
FELLOW-CITIZENS,
WE are once more summoned together, to celebrate the glorious day that gave
birth to the liberties of our country. AEras of national independence should
ever be preserved and recorded in the memory of man. Like the scars of an aged
patriot, they bring back to view the toil and bloodshed by which our freedom
was acquired, and consequently remind us how sacredly we ought to preserve it.
Vain, very vain, would it be to relate our magnanimous struggles against the
arbitrary power of Great Britain. Rhetoric and poetry have united to embellish
the theme, till panegyric itself has been exhausted. Let us then relinquish a
subject too brilliant to derive splendor from any encomiums we can bestow upon
it, and take a short survey of those principles that guided our politicians in
the cabinet, and our heroes in the field.

Ingenious writers have done more injury to the cause of freedom by their pens,
than tyrants by their swords. The desperate incision rouses the nerves, and
collects the vigor of the constitution; but it is the gilded pill that lulls
and stupifies the sense. Writers of ordinary capacities may well be excused.
Innovations, however small, loom large to the eye of the mind, when seen
through the misty medium of prejudice and passion. But a man who can meanly
prostitute eminent abilities, and cringe before the throne of a tyrant,
deserves to be banished from the earth.

It has been represented, that man, when he wanders a savage in the forest,
enjoys certain rights incompatible with the very existence of society. Often
has the mind been bewildered by the sorcery of metaphysics. Man, in his rude
undisciplined state, cannot enjoy a more perfect equality of rights, than he
does in a state of well regulated society. Parental authority must be every
where the same -- it is necessary for the support and preservation of the
child. -- How then can savages be released from these eternal laws, unless they
grow like vegetables from the ground? Let us not be led away by these meteors
of the fancy. Natural rights are those rights which a man can enjoy in a state
of society, without injury to others. If we wander further than this in quest
of them, we search not among mankind, but in the world our fancy has created.
Deriving their existence from Heaven, they are and ever must be paramount to
all human laws and obligations. A legislative act violating these fundamental
principles, is totally void, and expires in its conception. Reason, and honor,
and virtue, require that such a tyrannical act should be immediately trampled
under foot. What is the bond that binds us to government? The protection of our
natural rights. Consequently the moment legislators violate this trust, we are
no longer objects of obedience. Far be it from me to depreciate the value of
our excellent constitution. May the people preserve it as the Romans preserved
their household gods -- may they guard it against the attacks of those who
would bury it in the ruins of their country. Yet a constitution, however
superb, when compared with natural right, dwindles into nothing. I revere the
majestic architecture of the universe, as infinitely superior to the temporary
habitations of men.

Some have remarked, that between true taste and liberty there is a close and
intimate connection. This may in part be true, but the one is by no means a
standard of the other. Rome, when her literary fame was coextensive with the
terror of her arms, did not enjoy so large a portion of civil freedom, as she
did when the simple senate met beneath the shade of an oak. The absurd doctrine
of the divine right of kings, and of passive obedience, was maintained in
England when literature was in its zenith, but before the dawnings of liberty
reddened in the sky. It may be the interest of a despot to swell the tide of
national prosperity. Agriculture may be encouraged, arts patronized, commerce
promoted, works of genius rewarded, and yet we cannot infer that the great body
of the people are contented and happy. No; we must first ask the farmer, the
merchant, the mechanic, if they enjoy unmolested the fruits of their own
industry?

Property constitutes the very basis of civil jurisprudence. Without it, we
should be pitiful pensioners on the bounty of the world, lost to all sense of
virtue, and the sacred impulse of honor. Self-interest, the strongest of all
obligations, would no longer bind us to the soil of our country. The factious
demagogue might wield at will the whole force and authority of the state.
Surely then property is the only thing that can guard us against the approaches
of aristocracy, and diffuse a spirit of equality amongst all classes of
citizens. We are not now treading the fairy fields of romance. Need I recur to
the most splendid nations of antiquity, or of modern times, for examples? They
thicken around me on every side, and to select one in particular would be an
injury to the rest.

Representation and taxation are so nearly allied, that to adopt the one, and
reject the other, would be the completest system of slavery. Aristocracy, with
all its horrors, would be better than a government unequally represented.
Hereditary legislators proceed with caution and slowness from one step of
tyranny to another, lest they break the mysterious charm that lulls the eyes of
liberty to sleep. But representatives partially elected, conscious that they
are not responsible for their actions, can prostrate without sear or remorse
the honor and glory of the nation. Long have these sentiments resounded in the
Parliament of Great Britain. Chatham and Cambden stood forth the advocates of
the cause against the minions of power and satellites of despotism. They were
disregarded, and mark the consequence, America was independent.

Here then a great and magnificent spectacle breaks in upon the view. A mighty
nation rising in arms to recover her natural rights, and boldly braving the
storm of regal ambition. Let it be recorded to the immortal honor of
Rhode Island, that she was the first who dared to resist the sway of British
usurpation. The arbitrary stamp act was first rejected by this State, alone and
unassisted (then a colony in subjugation to England) and at a time when every
thing wore the face of desperation. Denounced as rebels by Parliament, we made
our solemn appeal to heaven, and found security in arms. From one end of the
continent to the other, we beheld carnage and death, without a single spot for
humanity to rest on. America's dearest sons fell in the contest, and bit the
dust of the earth. The seats of innocence were consumed -- the fields of the
husbandman desolated -- nay, even the sanctity of temples was profaned. The
horns of the altar afforded no refuge to the miserable fugitive -- At length,
after an ineffectual resistance, we were joined by the great and powerful
empire of France. From this period our affairs began to exhibit a more splendid
appearance. The armies of the two nations fought, bled and conquered, under the
standard of liberty. Our heroes who fell in this glorious campaign have already
received the most honorable testimony of public applause. Bunker's Hill, and
the heights of Quebec, shall remain the lasting monuments of their glory.
Laurels of unfading renown shall bloom round their sepulchers, and thicken over
the consecrated earth. The plains of York-Town will be remembered with pleasure
by republicans -- by tyrants with a sting of regret.

Already has the tongue of the orator, and the pen of the poet, done signal
justice to the character of WASHINGTON. In contemplating this wonderful man, we
are at a loss which most to admire -- the dignified firmness of his political
measures, or the brilliancy of his martial achievements. He once fought our
battles -- he now guides our councils. Though he no longer tra^els in the light
of arms, or the splendor of conquest, still he holds the most important
station that freedom can bestow. I will be bold to assert, notwithstanding the
clamours of party rage, that he has discharged the functions of his office with
honor to himself -- with satisfaction to the country. The rays of disappointed
faction, like the rays of the moon, may brighten, but never can burn him.
Perhaps the mighty pillar, and the sculptured obelisk, may never perpetuate his
name; but while the human heart shall throb with gratitude, the glory of
WASHINGTON shall remain. -- His companions in arms, animated by so glorious an
example, by their united exertions redeemed this land from foreign vassalage.

I do not repeat the injuries we have received, to awaken the jealous sense of
national antipathy. Republicans are too apt to glow with rapture when ^^athemas
and invectives are thundered against foreign nations. Original merit is built
on its own adamant. Reproach is seldom connected with reform. Wicked ministers
may be censured, but the character of a nation should be spared. To forgive,
and be forgiven, is a principle recorded in holy writ, which if it had been
found in the works of some pagan author, would have been regarded by many as
the most celebrated maxim of ancient philosophers. What though Britain has
desolated our fields, and ravaged our plains; the injury is great, but the
display of our magnanimity is greater. Savages themselves, when revenge is
satisfied, bury the hatchet of resentment. Shall civilized nations be outdone?
The voice of reason and humanity must be silent. Let us then no longer suffer
our minds to be deluded by the trappings of eloquence. Let us banish from our
bosoms this mock patriotism, and let our sympathy be extensive as the miseries
of mankind.

Of all constitutions which the ingenuity of man has ever invented, ours is the
most transcendently excellent. It was not the mysterious offspring of chance.
It was not extorted from the hands of a monarch, or presented to the public
with the insolence of a gift. No; it was the productive effort of calm,
deliberate and enlightened discussion. Reason has taught this simple, universal
truth, that a government calculated to promote the general felicity, must be
referred to the tribunal of man. A man who would struggle against and oppose
the laws which he or his representatives have enacted, would not be satisfied
even though an angel were commissioned from heaven to frame a constitution.
This principle guided the guardians of our liberties when they formed our
government, and let me add, this alone breaks the spell of aristocracy. Yes,
the impassible forest, the magic castle, and the enchanted knight, vanish into
nothing. -- The mind of man travels forth amidst the majesty of creation. He
feels the primaeval dignity of his nature. He no longer venerates a star, or
deifies a garter. Well then might the champion of despotism declare, that the
age of chivalry was gone. Burke.
Government, says this writer, is a contract between those who are living,
those who are dead, and those who are to be born. The absurdity of a contract
existing between parties who never can meet together, either for the purpose of
confirming or dissolving it, is unworthy of notice. Under the benign patronage
of our constitution, our national prosperity is increased beyond all
calculation. The farmer walks round his spot of earth, and says, this is mine.
How different from him who resigns the hard earnings of his labor, to swell
the pomp and pride of an insolent aristocracy. Agriculture has been carried to
such an extent, as to satisfy not only the numerous calls of our countrymen,
but likewise to support such armies in Europe as were never known since the
days of Xerxes' expedition. May not this country then in time become the
granary of Europe? Our commerce is almost as extensive as the ocean. The gold
of Africa, the spices and the purple of India, have introduced the glitter of
opulence, the elegance of refinement, and the parade of national prosperity.

Glorious and magnificent as our present situation may be, uninterrupted repose
is not the lot of humanity. Foreign war may threaten us with dissolution. It is
not enough to have ramparts to frown contempt on our enemies. We must meet them
in the field of glory and conquest. A standing army is the prerogative of
despotism. Mercenary plunderers can feel no heart-attaching bond that unites
them to the people. Under the specious pretext of repelling foreign invasion,
the sword of military terror is continually hung over their heads. A well
organized militia is the sentinel of a free state. Born under the same laws,
and united by the same endearing ties of social affection to their country with
the rest of the community, to rise in rebellion against government would be
worse than parricide. Europe may boast her hirelings of slaughter -- China may
repose her confidence in her inaccessible ramparts -- while America, superior
to all, exults in the native valor of her citizens. -- If ever foreign nations
should dare to invade our rights, the present occasion affords a convincing
proof that a well disciplined militia is our best rampart and safeguard.

Feeble indeed are all civil institutions, if the minds of the people are not
informed. Righteous legislators will ever be supported by the good sense of
their constituents, but they must first know what their rights are, before they
can determine whatever they are violated. The establishment of national
schools, therefore, is a duty society owes to its members; otherwise the rude,
uninformed multitude, may rise and sweep away the liberties of the continent.
To give an instance that must come home to the feelings of every heart; America
has afforded a melancholy proof that she is not superior to the clamor of
party. Faction has dared to stalk abroad at noon day, and has denounced with
her thousand tongues our legislators to the nation. Nothing but a general
diffusion of political knowledge prevented the people from rising into action.
They saw the iniquity of the charge -- they turned aside in silent contempt.
But this evil, I hope and trust, is of a temporary duration. Faction, like the
phoenix, may fan the fire of public resentment, which shall finally consume her
to ashes. This demonstrates the truth of that grand moral maxim, that the
father of a family confers the greatest obligation to society, when his
children are educated in principles of virtue. The sense of humanity should
beat with the first pulsations of the heart. Common experience shows this to be
true, and inspiration cannot tell us any more. Why need I insist on the
necessity of education, when I address the respectable citizens of
Rhode Island? Yonder University is held in high estimation by our sister
States, and may one day shine like the morning star amongst the smaller
constellations of science.

While we deprecate the exertions that have been made to overturn the
constitution, the efforts of an enlightened class of citizens to support it are
entitled to honorable remembrance.

Gentlemen of the Cincinnati,

Amidst all the tumult that has been raised against government, it is some
consolation to find a society who venerate the principles, who be^r the
escutcheons of freedom. During a long and arduous war, you maintained an
illustrious and honorable part. When our great national leader bid an eternal
adieu to the army entrusted to his char^e, and relinquished the storms of war
for the peaceful bowers of Mount-Vernon, you first formed this respectable
order. The same affections which throbbed in your bosoms at that moment, still
continue undiminished. Be careful to cultivate that tree which has been watered
by your blood. Remember the name of the venerable patriot you have assumed, who
conquered in the field, and then retired to his farm, amidst the smiles of
heaven, and the benedictions of Rome. Remember that harmony links the universe
together. While you continue to support the laws, with a decent respect for the
rights of the people, may your glory remain long as the trees shall bloom in
the spring, or the clouds fly over the firmament.

It is a fact no less astonishing than true, that tyranny carries its own
remedy with it. Nations tormented for ages on the fiery couch of oppression,
acquire a force and vigor, superior to the torture. Can it be supposed that
France, when the principles of her government were developed, could reason on
them with all the calmness of a philosopher, retired from the business, the
hurry and the tumult of the world? Reason is slow and timid in all her
operations. Instinct, that emanation from heaven, that mirror of God himself,
hurries us into action. On this ground, the proceedings of the French may be
justified. I will not affect to disguise the truth; in many, many instances,
the feelings of humanity have been wounded. While mankind rejoice at the
demolition of the Bastile, they will mourn for the catastrophe of Louis. But
France has arisen l^ke the fabled giant Antaeus.
of antiquity, more glorious from her fall. Let de^potism hear and tremble,
that amidst all the storms of war, and rage of contending parties, she has
formed a constitution -- a constitution that promises to diffuse light and joy
to millions and millions of men.

But what shall we say of the wise and powerful government of England? Behold
the wretched Muir, Margarot and Gerrald, those martyrs of liberty, who embarked
in the cause of parliamentary reform, condemned by a venal and prostituted
court to pine out a miserable existence on the barren and gloomy shores of
New-Holland, remote from their friends and all the tender attachments of family
connexions. What are these but the forebodings of a revolution? Methinks I see
the majestic spirits of a Russel and a Sydney walking the earth, and mourning
that their posterity should so basely r^linquish those rights which they
purchased with the price of their existence. Rest, ye venerable shades; freedom
is still triumphant. The last efforts of tyranny, like those of a dying
monster, are always most violent.

In contemplating such august spectacles, the fancy seems wafted on the wing of
inspiration. This may be enthusiasm, but it is enthusiasm in the cause of man.
To be calm and disinterested, when objects of such magnitude are at stake, is
treason against the law of nature. Times may change -- empires may be subverted
-- creation itself may burn to ashes -- but liberty is eternal. Let us, then,
hail the period as approaching, when despotism shall be precipitated like
Lucifer from heaven, and mankind acknowledge no other sovereign but the
Sovereign of the Universe.

FINIS.

