THE ROYAL CAPTIVES: A FRAGMENT OF SECRET HISTORY* COPIED FROM AN OLD
MANUSCRIPT, BY ANN YEARSLEY.

VOLUME I.

Dear spirit of refinement!
From where thou have chosen thy pure celestial dwelling descend!
From thee, bright form of innocence,
Fly the brutal shadows that darken the bosom of man.
Thine are the grand, the energetic, the invisible;
Thou art the soul of the world!
Vide Page 89. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL.

M,DCC,XCV.

PREFACE.
"To be, or not to be, that is the question.'
WHEN Shakespeare wrote this line, he had lost sight of congregated nature;
since, to exist, or not to exist, can never be a question from existing
substance.

Was Henry, or was not Henry, may be a question, to which, if the following
sheets find approbation, I may give, in future, the best answer I am capable
of. If rejected by the few I value, my work is done. I love fame, though I have
only heard her whispers; am sensible she incites toward the wonderful, the
great and good; and that authors, who affect to despise her, are cowards,
insincere, and guilty of profanation; yet there is vast difference in being her
lover and her slave. For me, I confess myself not deaf to, nor independent of
the voice of the world, except in those enraptured moments when bewitching
fancy renders me insensible to the real dependencies of life. In poesy, I am
her slave; in prose, I wish her to be mine. In private sorrow, she has, through
a gloomy passage of twenty years, proved my enchanting friend. None may condemn
me; nature herself drew delusion in the desert where I was beloved by fancy,
before I was alive to fame, and tasted more delight than I have since found in
the midst of proud society, where favor falls heavily on the heart from the
hand of arrogance.

Readers, who are not wearied with the perusal of these volumes, will wish
Henry had led them a little further. To those kind spirits, I would plead the
shortness of life and the abruptness with which it often ends. The pause Henry
makes in the MS. is not that of death, but sudden illness, and I took the
advantage. One of my motives for publishing the work unfinished, is, that the
world may speak of me as I am, whilst I have power to hear. The clouds that
hang over my fortunes intervene between me and the public. I incessantly
struggle to dissipate them, feel those struggles vain, and shall drop in the
effort -- This consolation I shall, however, bear with me to the verge of life,
that to those who have guided me by the sacred and lambent flame of friendship,
my memory will be dear, and that whilst malice feebly breathes, truth will
boldly pronounce,

ANN YEARSLEY.

THE ROYAL CAPTIVES.
Isle of St. M*****, 18th June, 1685, dated from the Castle -- at night.
TORN from the visions hope had been flattering me with, I was plunged into
this dreary abode. In the fourth room on my left, I saw, by the glimmering of a
lamp, the Marquis D****. He was reading; dejection had robbed his eyes of their
brilliancy, his features were fixed by despair -- I paused -- One of the
guards, I thought, looked sorrowfully at the Marquis, who, raising his eyes
toward heaven, exclaimed, "O merciful God! how long must I bear this thirst?"
-- A sigh broke from my bosom, but it availed not my friend, I was conducted to
my cell, and left, in awful silence, to gloomy meditation; yet pity, heavenly
pity! had touched the strongest fiber of my heart, and I forgot, for some
moments, I came here to die. After a night of weariness, I arose; the sun had
not gilded the grates of my prison, nor had the lark indulged her first
rapture, when the groan of anguish left the burdened heart of some one near me
-- I listened -- silence ensued, and after an interval of near ten minutes
heard a door unlock -- It was the door of the Marquis.

"Deadly draught! Bitter! Bitter to an extreme!" were his words. I felt agony
not to be expressed, grew wild with horror, and knocked loudly on the inside of
the door of my prison. It was opened by a soldier, in whose countenance were
discernible the tumultuous traits of unfinished murder.

"What would you have, sir? -- speak quickly -- the commandant would reprove me
did he know I obey unnecessary curiosity -- "

"Surely thou could not do it; (said I, looking at him with amazement) if he
is not yet dead, permit me to see him."

"Whom would you see?"

"That gentleman in the fourth room."

"He must die, sir. Nine days have elapsed since the lettre of death arrived.
-- He must drink" --

"Poison!" (interrupting him.)

"Yes, sir; the draught of sleep -- he will feel little pain."

"How long has he been imprisoned here?"

"He was here before I came -- I know not his offense -- we only attend to
guard-hours; prisoners must not converse with us, nor dare we make enquiries;
if we did, we could do no good, for our own lives are not worth much here."

"O Heaven! (I exclaimed,) is it possible those who boast the name of christian
should thus revel in cruelty! -- Lead me to the Marquis."

The soldier seemed irresolute; I slipped a purse into his hand; he was
conquered, and left me near the bed of my friend; slumber, innocent as that of
infancy, was gathering on his face, he raised his heavy eyes toward mine.

"From whence are you come" --

"Ah, my dear friend! do you not know me?"

"Is it, can it be my dear Henry?"

"Yes, it is that unfortunate victim of designing power."

"And come you here to seek a grave?"

"My dear Marquis, kings will be obeyed; how long have you lingered here?"

"You may remember the night when I attempted your rescue: I found you noble,
and without the tedious enquiries of who or what you were, disinterestedly
loved you, our intimacy was of short continuance, I embarked for France the
next morning, nor had I time to tell you my real name and quality -- my breath
grows short -- I long to sleep -- take those papers, conceal them, do not
forget me -- I had a sister." --

He became lethargic, as he named his sister. I attempted at first to rouse
him. Heavy sleep rendered him motionless, and I began to think my effort cruel,
when the soldier who had listened at the entrance of a long and gloomy passage,
returned; prudence whispering the danger of his seeing the papers of my friend,
I concealed them in my bosom, and hurried to my apartment.

Wherefore are we virtuous! or why are the votaries of virtue not more numerous
in the world? my friend, my lamented friend, was one of her singular adorers:
he lived beloved, he dies neglected! Give me, just heaven, the opportunity of
avenging his fate, and take me to thy mercy! thus I feebly exclaimed, without
reflecting that the doors of liberty were for ever closed on me!

Throwing myself down, I endeavored to collect my scattered ideas, and to
reconcile my mind to the assemblage of mournful circumstances in which I found
myself suddenly enveloped. Sullen are the rigid precepts of proud philosopy! we
practice appearances, we are stubborn in concealing our richest emotions, we
assume above the vulgar, and we even bear with us to the grave the treasures of
the soul! yet, nature freezes at dissolution, man is least trained in deception
when he owns himself unwilling to undergo the great change -- During the hour
of sleep, fancy, in broken lineaments, brought the Marquis to my view, yielding
to the power of death -- Had not its terrors made sick my yielding spirit?

Awakened by some voices near me, I opened my eyes on two of the guards and a
Cordelier.

"Leave me with your prisoner," said the latter, "I will confess him. Should
his love of truth throw a light on the combinations of France; I have orders
for some little indulgence from the King."

" Vive le Roi!" replied the guards, and respectfully retired.

"God be with us, my son," said the good father.

"Eternally! reverend monk."

"Shrift, shrift!"

"I honor my king, love my country, and never conceal the emotions of my soul
from my mistress or my friend."

"Know you that you are accused of conspiring against monarchy, of associating
with the enemies of the king, and of concealing memorials which immediately
concern the state?"

"Leave me to my fate!" I cried.

"Rash and ill advised youth! reflect on the value of existence, sport not
wantonly with that power who willed thee into being."

"That power, Holy Father, now whispers here; I have given thee the energies of
nature, pervert them not!" in pronouncing these words, I laid my hand on my
heart, and Heaven is my witness, it beat firmly in unison; the Cordelier paused
-- I thought he appeared a little ashamed of his mission.

"The king will bless thy youth with luxury. and thy age with honor, so thou
but yield his foes to justice."

"Bid him banish his ministers."

"Irreverend and disloyal!"

"Deceived old man!"

"Thou will undergo the torture."

"I expect it."

"Will thou not reveal thy friends?"

"Yes, tear my heart from its hold. Thou will find their impression there --
away!"

The Cordelier looked full in my face, his eyes met mine, and I fancied a
languid smile stealing across his features; but as he held his cloak over his
mouth, I could not discern, nor was it of moment to me, by what ideas he was
animated.

But I soon blushed at the recollection of my rough manner, concluded it
unworthly his resigned and sacred character, and began a more gentle apology
when he abruptly withdrew. -- My last moment seemed now to approach -- I
pondered seriously on death, my anxions, my curious soul could pierce no
further, I was incapable of wishing for immortality. Love drew me back to the
world, while I vainly struggled to look forward to the grave. Lost in
meditating on life's broken prospects, I stood, with folded arms, leaning
against the wall, when my door was hastily unlocked, the guards entered, and I
prepared to follow them to the place of execution.

"How happy you are!" said one of them.

"Trifle not with my feelings -- lead on."

"The holy Cordelier has procured you the freedom of the castle, but you must
not pass the court gate."

They bowed, and left me astonished; here has comfort taken one step for me,
said I to myself, who knows but she may take another.

Each moment brings event, and on mankind
Unbosoms her deep store of bliss or woe.
Year follows year so strongly drawn by fate,
We barely view them ere they hurry on
Beyond our ken of soul. --
Recovering, I flew to the door of the Marquis, and listening, heard him
breathe -- Joy revisited my bosom: love and gratitude arose for the Cordelier,
and hope began busily to combine her images within my late desolated mind.
Hope! thou dear, delusive power! how frequently do thou charm and deceive,
yet how eagerly art thou indulged by poor humanity! I now ranged through the
awful passages of this tremendous prison, my ears were saluted by varied
sounds, but mostly by sounds of sorrow -- the Marquis still breathed in the
most profound sleep.

After having wandered back to my solitary cell, I cautiously took one of his
unsealed papers from my bosom: it was a letter addressed to the duke of B****,
from my late guardian the count de Marsan, a fragment of which ran thus:

"Your intriguing enemy, le chancellor de Tellier, not contented with
persecuting you and the unfortunate Henry, has contrived to render many of the
noblesse suspected. Three were accordingly arrested yesterday -- remain where
you are." Here were names mentioned which where most dear to me; but when the
letter was written, or how it was to reach the duke of B**** I could not learn:
ideas of past happiness now crowded on my memory, my imagination grew fervent,
and the bars of my prison seemed to press upon my brain! "O my father! must I
never see thee more! Where art thou, my long-loved Emily? Just heaven! for what
mysterious purpose am I preserved!" -- The hapless Marquis was not in a state
for interrogation, all was a chaos within me, till burdened with wild and
improbable conjectures, I yielded to repose.

Dawn no sooner appeared, than the dismal clanking of chains proclaimed the
uprising of the gloomy inhabitants of the castle. I again waited at the door of
the Marquis, in hope of hearing him breathe: I heard him not; the hour of the
morning was yet but early, and I endeavored to console myself. Not knowing a
spot within these walls that could afford me happiness, I was returning to my
wretched apartment, when I met the soldier in the passage who had yesterday
administered to the thirst of my friend. He held a cup full of a pale liquor,
which seemed to congeal, as he stood, with its own somniferous properties.

"Does the Marquis live?"

"He lives, and has called for more drink. My painful task was yesterday but
half finished, and in this draught lies sleep eternal -- Yet, go to him,
Monsieur, persuade him to put off the last hour by refraining; for when he
drinks he dies!"

Forgetful of my situation, I rudely seized the arm of the soldier, stared him
wildly in the face, and saw his eyes swimming in tears -- still I gazed with
silent horror.

Ah, Monsieur! it is not the unhappy Malnor would destroy the Marquis! Deeply
do I violate my feelings as a man; but should I refuse this execrable office, I
must expire on the rack; nor would my death avail your friend. All here, who
are supposed to be on the part of the state, are, from necessity, executioners.
Go, request him not to drink -- and yet -- if he should refuse, the little
remnant of his life will be miserable -- He must never drink more."

"'It Is too much," said I eagerly, and from sudden impulse dashed the cup on the
earth.

"What have you done! my life is gone!"

Brought to desperation, I panted with tumultuous and varied emotion.

"Give him water that he may revive -- Fly, my good friend?"

"I must give him nothing -- I have nothing to give, each victim is allowed but
two draughts of powst. The commandant deals it out: I can procure no more."

"Say thou have given it him."

"And how will that serve?"

"Say he is dead."

"How bury him?"

I was foiled. -- The poor soldier now appeared as one condemned by me: yet I
secretly exulted in the effort of saving my beloved friend. After looking for
some moments at each other, I recollected myself so far as to desire him to be
secret; again gave him gold, and he left me with a sigh that indicated more
resignation than remorse. Instead of going to the Marquis, I staggered to my
cell. Terror, amazement, and pity conspired to raise an anarchy in my bosom --
Where, at such a moment could my spirit find resource? I kneeled and implored
the Ruler of the world. Lost in fervor, I was found by the generous Cordelier.

"May the Creator hear thee! was his salutation.

I arose and accosted him with the purest affection; his venerable beard
concealed half his face, his cowl obscured his eyes, yet I heard his language
with delight.

"O, my father! save my friend. He who rescued me from death lies in yonder
cell, doomed, in a few hours, to tremble in its last agonies! -- Where shall I
lose my memory, Cordelier? existence is becoming a burden!"

My wild ravings shocked the Cordelier. He reproved me gently, led my
imagination through the universe, and dispassionately proved that nature being
eternally at work, she must destroy equally as she renews; adding, "I know not
thy friend -- whoever he is, will thou for his sake give up the secret
reformers of the nation?"

"No. I know no reformer; the few friends I have are noble."

"Then he must die."

"Die! unfeeling wretch! how dare thou, how dare thy king sport so easily
with the life of man? Is this thy piety?"

"Be calm, my son; ungoverned passion makes virtue unamiable, and if thy
stubbornness is to thee a virtue, preserve it in the inmost recesses of thy
soul, but suffer it not to dwindle into childish impatience, which can never
profit mankind nor thee."

Strange force of deserved reproof! I blushed, my confusion owned the Cordelier
just, veneration resumed its place, and I mournfully expostulated, "Ah, my
father! to suffer my distraction, you must be acquainted with the mind of the
dying Marquis D****."

"The Marquis D****!" said you? "where? O! where is he?"

"In the fourth cell on the left."

"Art thou in this dreadful habitation!"

Perceiving he was fainting, I caught him in my arms.

"O my brother!" said he, with a heavy sigh, as I placed him on a low bench,
"is it possible after the troubles we have known I must meet thee here!"

I hastily informed him of the state of his brother. And found him equally a
stranger with myself to the cause of his imprisonment. In few words, the
Cordelier informed me, that had I been more flexible to his political
solicitations, I should have been an object of his contempt.

"I officiate here in heavenly purposes, confessing those who are to die: in
some future hour you will know me better -- lead me to my brother!" I conducted
him forward; to the guards he announced the holy power of the church -- they
withdrew -- and we found the Marquis in a heavy sleep. The Cordelier fell on
his neck, the big tears dropped on the face of the unresisting sleeper, who
once raised his eyes, met those of his brother and fell back from the fraternal
embrace. Lethargy hung on his senses: we could not rouse him, he looked around,
rolling his eyes with a vacant glare. It was now the hour when the commandant
of the castle came to visit the victims who were soon to die: He approached,
attended by the dejected Malnor.

Finely shaped, easy of deportment, and carelessly polite, displaying a gold
snuff box in his hand, he directed his enquiries to Malnor.

"The gentleman is not quite gone, you say, Malnor? -- Corderlier, I suppose
you have prepared him?"

"His hands are cold -- but his temples are yet warm."

"Well; let him lie undisturbed."

At the conclusion of this speech, the fellow took snuff with as much ease as
he would have performed the same action at an opera; I stood silently enraged.
Happily the Cordelier's face was concealed, as he was kneeling at the side of
the bed, holding his forehead with both hands, while his tears and sighs were
mistaken by the gay commandant for devotion. Sanguinary power! by what infernal
appellation art thou adorned who can inure the heart to cruelty! Habit had
frozen the feelings of this wretch; who after congratulating Malnor, on the
little alteration produced by the draught in the placid countenance of the
Marquis, gave orders for his interment at the midnight succeeding his
departure, in the private burial ground.

Malnor, who was conscious of having but half completed the work of death,
trembled at the order, bowed, but made no reply to the obdurate superior; who
by chance looked at me, expressed himself happy on seeing me at the castle, and
retired (singing an air of Voitures,) to visit other victims who were under
condemnation.

"Rise holy father! fruitless are thy tears! heavy despondency enervates thy
spirit."

Without heeding me, the Cordelier gazed with agony on the Marquis, then
turning to Malnor, feebly articulated,

"Have thou a brother?"

The abrupt question discomposed Malnor -- sympathy shone in the tear he
endeavored to hide.

"I have a sister and an aged father," replied, he, "who bewail my loss, while
I am confined here under an accusation of which I am guiltless; ^he governor
has thought proper to prolong my life, for the purpose of administering the
fatal potion to those who are the victims of the state."

"Will thou be my friend?" cried the Cordelier -- "Art thou possessed of any
means that will revive my brother?"

"To what purpose would you restore him," said Malnor, "heard you not the order
of the Superior? Momentary restoration would but increase the pangs of
struggling nature."

"Save him but for this night! tomorrow may be the season of mercy! I will
hasten to the chancellor le Tellier, who is with his son Louvois, on the
island, throw myself at his feet, and whatever be the crime of the Marquis, the
chancellor will surely grant him life, on condition that he seclude himself
from the world for ever."

The Cordelier waited no reply, but left us hastily.

Malnor informed me, that the physician of the castle could furnish antidotes
whose strong power would expel the fumes of the chilling poison; "not,"
continued he, "that your friend can immediately recover, but the weight will
gradually descend from the oppressed brain, as the stomach feels relief."

"Fly to the physician, my good Malnor, buy his silence with this gold, and let
us force this victim to taste the cordial of life!"

"I go," said Malnor, "but remember, if the Cordelier brings not his pardon,
your friendship will be cruelty; man, naturally wishes to die without pain:
when can the Marquis die with less?"

Reason and philosophy strengthened the maxims of Malnor; yet, I bad him be
swift and leave the event to Heaven. Thirty hours had the Marquis lain in a
death-like stupor. -- The soldier hastened to find the physician, and I waited,
with painful anxiety, the Cordelier's return. Too soon he arrived, with
distraction in his countenance.

"Ah, my friend! I have been received with insolence, the Marquis is pronounced
a traitor, and all the indulgence I can obtain is to inter him with his
ancestors, in the chapel of St.*****. I kneeled, implored and exhorted the
chancellor le Tellier, to beware of destroying the noble subjects of France; I
did not confess the unfortunate Marquis was my brother, since the loss of my
liberty could not alleviate his afflictions. -- 'Go,' said the proud minister,
'before you can arrive at the castle, he will be no more, so trifling a
sacrifice cannot secure the peace of my sovereign; more must expiate their
disloyalty with their lives, when drawn from their hiding places; you have here
an order for the interment of the Marquis, the favor is granted you. Bending
myself, incapable of language to thank him for such a favor, I sorrowfully left
his presence -- Does my brother live? -- I fear not -- the commandant is
apprised of the indulgence granted me by the chancellor, and has himself
ordered a covered carriage to convey the body of the Marquis to the chapel:
such is his fate. But for you, my dear friend, I have brought a habit exactly
like my own: Put it on, conceal your face in the cowl, and follow the body of
my brother through those fatal doors. The deception will not be known. I can
loiter in the cell, under pretense of devotion with the prisoners, till the
guards are changed, and then pass unnoticed."

Malnor returned at this moment, but no physician.

"No, my good Cordelier," said I, "that brave soldier stands in danger of the
rack: give him the habit, he may pass for a Cordelier in following the Marquis,
and my anxious soul will stand acquitted of his fate."

"Preserve thy life at this hour, under the sanction of my office; I may at
some future period preserve Malnor."

But the entreaties of the Cordelier were unavailing: I only requested him to
conceal himself in my cell, that two Cordeliers might not at once be seen near
the Marquis; he obeyed, and Malnor ventured the awful crisis; we could now
discern no pulse, life seemed to have retreated from the object of our cares,
while we were contriving to secure it. Our tears, the last tribute of
affection, fell on his senseless bosom, and he was conveyed through the eastern
aisle to the carriage that waited for the solemn purpose, while Malnor followed
with the certificate of interment in his hand; and fortunately passed the
guards unquestioned.

The fear, the danger of Malnor's departure, threw the Cordelier and myself
into silent stupidity, we were nearly breathless with apprehension -- while
every step, every little noise, sounded like thunder to our affrighted senses,
the Cordelier sat himself down on my little bed, and found some relief for his
troubled heart in a stood of tears; I attempted not to comfort him, a
respectful silence better suited his excess of affliction. -- The commandant's
bell rang, the Cordelier was rouzed to a thought of safety. He embraced, and
left me to fulfill his duty with those in the distant parts of the castle, who
were penitent from terror, and wished for his consolation.

I had been five years a miserable wanderer in barbarous climes. Dragged from
my friends, my father and the woman I adored; on my return could gain no
information of those beloved objects, and while seeking them in every part of
France, was arrested and thrown into this prison on the eighteenth of June, as
I have above recorded. Though I had known so little of the Cordelier, and of
his brother the Marquis, I felt a faint hope, from the letter I had already
seen, that some information might at a future period be gained from the former.

Eternal Creator! be thou the guardian of Emily! Whisper the danger of erring
youth! bless her visions with chaste delight, and breathe thy wondrous
influence on her soul, gently as air wafts the dew of the morning!

Hourly struggling to forget that charming creature, I sank wearied with each
day, and arose with the dawn to love and despair. Carried into the intellectual
fields of the past by the power of memory, I sat on my little stone window seat
till the clock at midnight struck one -- one, and no more! -- what a warning
does it leave on the mind! -- my meditations were broken, I prepared for
repose, when I saw a paper lying on the floor, I eagerly carried my eye to the
subscription, without glancing at the contents -- It was EMILY, my dearest
Emily? -- Pressing her name to my lips with a rapture that in a moment bore me
above the sense of my imprisonment, I hurried hastily round my cell, nor once
recollected in my transport, that wherever my Emily was, I could not be! -- I
was too full of pleasure to sit down cooly to the enjoyment of it; my breath
grew short, my heart fluttered, and I again opened the paper, as if fearful of
increasing the wild emotions that had already so expanded my lovesick soul. --
I, at last, with tears trembling in my eyes, read --

"Cruel Cordelier!

"You have disappointed my warmest wishes, the failure of your appointment, at
twelve last night, has robbed me of hope -- I was at the garden gate from
eleven till one, and have taken a final adieu of happiness, since it was in
your power alone to bless

Your affectionate EMILY."


Here was distraction! -- Ye who have felt the anguish of disastrous love! Ye
whose sighs have been unpitied, while the hand of fate has secretly torn your
bosoms, mourn with me!

For Emily had my prayer arose! With Emily had I hoped to taste the joys of
pure affection; where now is her heart? where her exalted sentiments, where her
gentle vows, where those soft endearments with which she once soothed me, till
transport threw affliction from my bosom? -- All is this vile Cordelier's --
The dreadful work of seducing her once-spotless mind was reserved for him,
while I, through every vicissitude, have been vainly nursing her image, till it
is become incorporated with my being -- Lovely, faithless maid! how bitter have
thou made my remaining hours!

I lamented the discovery -- railed at the Cordelier, resolved to hate Emily,
or, which was more congenial to the violence that raged within me, resolved to
make her mine at the expense of my honor; should chance ever afford me the
revengeful opportunity. What fantastic ideas were these for a man in my
situation! Yet, so does the human mind often amuse itself with trifles, while
laboring under great calamity; I ought to have delivered the papers belonging
to the Marquis to his brother. It had been driven from my memory by the dismal
events which had filled the preceding day. Little regret was now occasioned by
this reflection. The friendship of the Cordelier no longer gave me pleasure.
Love was banished from my soul, and vice seized the heart that had enthroned an
angel! -- I sickened with ingratitude, I grew impure: -- Wonderful is the
mechanism of nature, unsearchable the human mind. Love that gives birth to
every virtue, to delicacy, sentiment, and the nameless graces that gild the
world, left me a prey to the poisoned passions of evil, else how could I hate
the Cordelier only because he was beloved by Emily?

Morning arose more joyless than I had ever known it, and a confusion of voices
poured through the passage -- I sat in my cell sullenly daring the worst, when I
heard the name of Malnor hastily pronounced -- Doors, which I had not heard
sound since my confinement, were now thrown open, and I found, by the
increasing din, that the guards were advancing toward the cell of the departed
Marquis. The Governor's voice grew distinct; he mentioned me, and I fancied
myself a devoted victim to the escape of Malnor. While I feigned a repose, my
senses could not taste, the Governor found me reclined on the bed of
wretchedness, ordered the guards to retire and accosted me politely, --

"Sir, can you command me in any thing that will oblige you?"

"Sir, I have a lively sense of the honor you do me, and thank you most
sincerely," replied I, with a troubled look -- He gazed attentively in my face
-- I felt as if Malnor could be seen through my eyes, and blushed at a
deception so laudable in itself. Had the Governor seized this moment of
feeling, and boldly dared me with the question, I should firmly have confessed
a conduct which gave me secret pleasure; but happily that moment passed on, and
the blush left my cheek as my emotions subsided.

"You are distressed, Sir, said the Governor; I am equally so, but for very
different reasons. You will be treated with lenity; I have orders for its being
so. The cause of your confinement is perhaps unknown to you, for the intrigues
of the cabinet are inexplicable, and it may afford you but little consolation
to know your imprisonment will last for ever!"

I shuddered at the word.

"I know mankind, am acquainted, well acquainted with the passions, and since
you may despair of ever returning to the world, I will, from that very despair,
hope for the honor of your confidence; in return, I offer you mine."

What floods of thought came pouring on my soul at this declaration! I could
form nothing clear -- All my powers were enveloped by a gloom, through which I
could not discern one ray of hope; enclosed for ever! cut off so suddenly from
society, and no object to pursue, whose excellence could lead me progressively
from the black temptations forming around! The Governor hoped much from my
despair; he did suppose I had already prepared myself for villainy, and that
the banished Emily had drawn after her my whole train of virtues. His proposal
came well-timed -- It was seasonably abrupt, couched in language frank and
easy, and I exchanged my faith with him, a faith that had no principle for its
basis, a friendship uncemented by truth. The Governor bargained only with my
despair.

After some little pause, he mentioned the escape of Malnor, adding, "the
soldier was poor, I made him useful from his necessity, he was by nature too
humane for my purposes, and if I only could be informed how he left the castle,
I should not much regret his loss."

"What was his crime, sir?" said I with perturbation; "Of no magnitude --
Almost nothing. He was only met conducting a royal fugitive through the woods,
whose name and quality we believe him to be a stranger to, but fearing he
should have discerned too much, we kept him a prisoner."

"Did he never own himself acquainted with his employer? or did you never put
him to the question?"

"We strained him a little, but his honest simplicity convinced us he was
ignorant of saving a man whose existence at this moment causes inquietude in
the bosom of our king -- I shall use every means to detect him, though he
deserves a better fate."

Politely wishing me a good morning, the Governor withdrew, and left me to the
motifying thought, that, Malnor alone could have informed me of my father; and,
as if Providence meant to sport with me, I had been the instrument of his
escape -- My father! my injured father! -- But what have I to do with tender
ideas! Why should I indulge the soft affections? There exists not an object in
the universe who will own itself in sympathy with me. No! I am forgot,
despised, rejected, I have been indulging only the vision of love. I have
cherished only an image while another possesses the substance. I have cheated
myself; my force of soul is gone! and I am too enervated ever to look up the
rugged heights of virtue.

Thus I raved awhile, and to those joyless murmurs succeeded confused plans of
vengeance. " Last night at the garden gate" did Emily wait, and not wait, for
me! Where is the garden gate? Hastily opening the letter a second time, I read
it over with care, but the silent messenger had gained no new intelligence. The
date was prior to my confinement; and how the letter came into my apartment was
with me an undetermined point. It was probable the Cordelier had unknowingly
dropped it; but how could Emily form an assignation? Why did she not still love
me? What had I done? I was only become unfortunate! -- Yes -- Heaven chose to
render me unhappy. Emily chose the Cordelier should make her faithless --
Woman! Woman! why were thou created! In the great journey of life, man
frequently passes by the bliss he had long pursued; either he is insensible to
its near approach, or, from some fatal timidity fears to seize it. There was a
time I could have been as favored as this Cordelier, but that hour is gone --
Here am I to remain for ever! These meditations availed me not, apathy was the
sole comfort that offered.

From this period I was treated with respect by the guards, and with indulgence
by the Governor; the latter, in confidence, conducted me into several
apartments of the castle, hitherto concealed. Many noble and majestic forms,
who seemed dignified by woe, appeared to my view; among others, a masculine
figure caught my attention, his features and his attitude, as I looked at him,
suffered no change, all were uniformly resolved.

Mild resignation, (wiser than despair,)
Subdued the sigh, and checked the fruitless tear.
Vengeance no longer could his bosom warm,
His passions withered in his dauntless form.
Hope left his heart, yet patience met the rod,
And proved the man a particle of God.
We fixed our eyes on each other; our silence was interesting to the heart:
bowing with that mournful reverence, which is ever due to dignified misery, I
reluctantly followed the Governor. Some apartments, which were situated on the
south side of the castle, I perceived he did not incline I should enter.
Naturally, I wished to enter them, so prevalent is the mind to hunger after
what it is denied; but, for this time, I was obliged to forego my curiosity,
and to be satisfied with what the Governor chose to afford. I quietly followed
him, and he led me through a subterraneous passage, arched, and glittering
(...), full of unwholesome droppings. The time was noon, yet so horribly dark
was this passage, (...) a lamp was kept burning, and feeble was the luster it
gave.

We stopped at the end of this long vault, and my conductor made me observe a
small door so finely contrived, and so shadowed by the artist, that it wore the
resemblance of Gothic stone, and appeared but as an entire part of this ancient
structure. I should have passed it unperceived, had not the Governor flipped
back a private spring, and opened it to awaken my curiosity. We descended by a
flight of steps. The air that met us was cold, damp, and of that sickly kind
which bursts from a newly opened tomb. I began to think the Governor had a
design upon my life, and resolved, if so, he should buy it; my surmise was
unjust. Finding we had at length reached the floor, and discerning no glimpse
of day, I enquired in what part of the castle we were, and for what purpose
this horrid dungeon was designed. The Governor informed me it was an apartment
seldom occupied, and never but by those who were under the necessity of taking
an abrupt leave. While he was speaking, I fancied there was a rustling noise
behind me, I started, the Governor smiled, asked me if I was afraid of rats; at
the same moment, removing some massy bars, he threw back the shutter of a
little window, or rather hole, which opened on the ocean. It was strongly
grated with iron; the space from the sea, which was not above two ^oises, was
formed of solid rock, which served as a bulwark to the foundations of the
castle, and against whose foot the billows continually wasted their force.
Hence could no human voice ascend to society: the lamentations of death were
but whispers here, and here might famine perform, unmolested, her slow and
awful work. -- When a brave man falls in battle, the glory of his deeds shine
through his disastrous fate, and his friends feel a consolation in the
retrospect of his conduct -- But here oblivion fed in all her native darkness,
and quietly prolonged the horrors of her victim.

Trembling with terror, I hastened toward the stone stairs by which we had
descended, and left the Governor to replace the window-shutter by himself, as
he best understood the work. In hurrying up the stairs, I saw a small wire
lying in the dust, I caught it up undiscovered by the Governor -- it drew a
miniature after it, which was rusted and disfigured, and which, caution, at
this moment, not suffering me to look at, I eagerly thrust into my pocket.

The Governor having made the window secure, I waited for him to lead me
through further discoveries. As I stood on the last stair, a deep groan I was
certain, stole upon my ear; I again descended in haste, fearing the Governor
might have hurt himself with the bar. I met him coming up quite unconcerned,
and when I mentioned the circumstance, was told, with the utmost sang froid,
that groans would become more familiar to me as I became a more constant and
peaceful inhabitant of the castle. Death is invisible in his labors, said I to
myself; silence may benefit, complainings will not avail me.

"I can lounge no longer with you now," said the Governor. "Do me the favor of
dining with me. If your taste for pleasure is adapted to mine, you may be
happy; if not, you may, with little exertion, create misery for yourself. I
leave you to your choice, for whatever be your pursuit, you shall not interrupt
mine. I mean not to be impolite, Monsieur, I only treat you with frankness,
that I may, in the shortest manner, be understood."

"Do with me as you please, I once revered the excellence of human nature, I
now am ready to exclaim with Brutus, O virtue! I have adored thee,
At last I fear thou art but a name!
Guilt is fashionable, beauty wears it, I can adapt my taste to hers. --

"To whose?" said the Governor, laughing at my vehemence.

"To -- " I looked at him wildly for a moment.

"Come, come, your whole soul has some time or other been dissolved by
tenderness -- You are jealous, I suppose, or angry with the beloved object --
Come, we will dine as happily as we can; if I can procure you any blessing,
(but that of liberty,) I will not withold it from you."

Thou art a master of the passions, the springs of the heart are thine, and
knowledge, I fear, has been bought by thee at an inestimable price!

Reflecting thus, I followed my conductor, who scated me at a splendid table,
where luxurious viands and exhilerating wines conspired, for the hour, to chase
sorrow from the soul. Ease and charming conviviality sat on the brow of the
Governor -- At that moment, surrounded by fainting wretches who had no cause to
waft his name to the gates of heaven, he talked of men and things. Observing he
was in a communicative mood, I respectfully requested him to give me his
history -- Smiling, with the utmost good humor, he replied,

"You lay early exactions on my friendship, but you will find in Dormoud a mind
that shrinks from nothing: a miser creeps cautiously through the circles of
mankind, observes the variety of action performed by individuals, seeks only
one gratification, dallies only with those from whom he may cull the golden
harvest; and returns laden to his dark chamber, where he gives a loose to those
transports his treasure excites; the rapture his own; the heap his universe --
I am that miser."

"'It Is impossible!" said I, while my eyes roved over the splendour and
magnificence of taste with which we were surrounded.

"I am that miser," continued he. "I have deceived and laughed at the world
from which I have accumulated every hour. My nerve of intellect is strong. I
have used it to one sole purpose."

"And to what purpose?"

"Pleasure -- I am a cormorant in pleasure. I know no enjoyment in gold further
than it has been exchanged for happy purposes. Truth, principle, virtue, all
those sounds, of which the selfdenying appear to be so fond, I consider as
restraints for which we need not design ourselves -- To give happiness to our
fellow creatures is all we ought to live for. I, therefore, lulled the artless,
humoured the weak, soothed the languishment of lovely woman, and thought myself
justified; with these feelings, Monsieur, I own I might have been blessed, but
the ambition of general conquest too soon mingled itself with my passions, and
the moment I raised my eyes from the humble valley of delight toward its
dangerous summit, I became more and more restless through every gradation, and
such must be the effect with all who early pursue pleasure. Too often I found
exalted souls on which I could not act; beings who possessed a power repulsive
to all my machinations; happy in themselves, I could not draw them from
reserve; they noticed me not, or heard me only with indications of contempt.
Hating the mind that had power thus to raise itself above me, I scorned to
adore it; consequently you may conceive me seeking pleasure from weaker
objects. My passions were high, my form not disagreeable, my education had been
fashionable, I was methodised into address, and every rule deemed polite was
mine. With these advantages, I approached the court; here formed by nature for
voluptuousness, I expanded my views: I looked on Louis as my equal in the field
of gallantry. I observed the pageantry of the great, and pronounced it the
gilding of hearts like my own. Profusion, humility with man, and attention to
woman, soon procured me access to the circles of the highest fashion, and
Larissa, the charming Larissa, ranked me in the suite of her admirers.

"Hid in elegant gardens, at a small distance from court, this beloved
favorite of Louis was, on account of the factions gathering over France, too
frequently neglected by the Monarch, yet her power was great, her fascination
irresistible; at least I felt it so, and with my usual beneficence of temper,
resolved to alleviate the tender dejection Larissa might feel in the absence of
the king. Gold she could not be in want of, and strange as my purpose may seem,
I wished to gain her through the more gentle avenues of sentiment. This prelude
I soon found unnecessary; Larissa had long forsaken, or had never possessed the
angelic delicacy which secures the mind of man. I rivalled Louis, and was a
short time enraptured with Larissa.

"The duke of B**** taking me one day aside, told me I had long engaged his
notice.

"I have but one recommendation, my Lord duke," bowing as I recommended myself.

"What is that Monsieur Dormoud?"

"Affection for the duke of B****, I will lure his mistress to his arms, or
kill his enemy, I wear a smile and I wear a sword." --

"Agreed, I will employ you, in return command my interest with the king."

"On further intimacy, I found the duke had indulged himself more in the social
virtues (I must use that word) than in capacious pleasure; he was tender,
humane, unsuspecting, full of courage and as full of pity. Such a character the
world deems amiable, for me it contained materials on which I resolved to erect
my fabric of ambition. We made long excursion over the country, and I was
walking one day with him near Rochelle, in the forest of ****, a sigh stole
from his heart, and he addressed me in a melancholy tone."

"Monsieur Dormoud, in the friendship I have for you, is lost the sense of
inequality. I would repose my cares in your bosom: sated with splendour,
fatigued with state, and disturbed by the growing commotions of France, I
languish for softer enjoyments. My rank, my character, my firmest resolutions
have proved insufficient to shield me from the impressions of beauty. I love!
Dormoud, I love without hope, and without strength to disengage myself."

"Name the fair enslaver, my lord duke, Dormoud may assist you."

"Ah, my friend! I am not myself acquainted with her name; hunting in this
forest of ****, my horse, in full spirit, carried me from my friends and
retinue; I did not regret the incident, while I enjoyed the view of a fine
country, I rode on till my horse again caught the sound of the horn, when
gazing around at the romantic wildness of nature, I saw a lovely maid without
sense or motion lying on the turf; her steed had thrown her, and coursed it
through the thickets, as if rejoiced to have left behind him his charming
mistress; instantaneously alighting, I raised her from the earth; innocence
pleaded in her languid features: I softy laid my lips to her cheek with all the
adoration due to heavenly purity; and, holding her to my bosom, impatiently
watched the dawn of light that should break from her eyes -- She opened them,
my soul drank their fires till my peace was lost! Abashed and blushing to find
herself in the arms of a man, her senses had nearly once more forsook her.
Respectfully loosing her from my throbbing heart, I stood motionless and
incapable of an explanation. "Where am I," said she, drawing her hand cross her
forehead, "can you, sir, say how come I here?"

"She hesitated as if endeavoring to rouse the powers of memory; I related the
situation in which I found her; relieving her apprehension by most solemn
assurances of honor -- How lovely is woman when unartful! my friends were
near, the hounds awakened echo from the hills to proclaim their approach. I
felt for the reputation of the lady; my friends were men of fashion and
gallantry, who never took leisure to reflect, or draw from the blended snare of
passion and habit that sublime veneration claimed by the unsullied mind. The
delicacy of the gentle maid took the alarm; her horse had not appeared, nor
could I quit her to seek him; hastily casting her eyes over the plain, as if
wishing some other protector, she incoherently apologized -- and, half
breathless, concluded, "Yonder, Sir, is a house, belonging to my father's
verderer. I give you much uneasiness, I perceive you are as much confused as I
am; will you be content with my poor thanks? they are grateful -- I will ever
think of you with esteem."

"Unwilling to reveal my rank, I struggled with my emotions; caught her look of
gratitude, hung on her voice as she bade me farewell, and setting spurs to my
horse, rejoined my friends" -- here the duke paused.

"You have power," said I, "and power alone is sufficient to accomplish every
wish in France."

"The heart must be soothed, Dormoud. Love disdains the fetters of power: I
would not rudely seize the blessing, which is only valuable when mutually
exchanged."

"I laughed at his scruples, and resolved to behold the beauty, of which the
duke gave me so inflaming a picture. -- He resumed.

"Can you procure me, or advise me how to gain an interview with my fair
conqueror?"

"I will think of it, my lord, but am this evening engaged."

"With your politic mistress, Larissa, I suppose -- beware Dormoud! -- Should
our jealous monarch surprise you, you will never please a king's favorite more;
and, if proving to you, the ingratitude, coarseness, and insensibility of
Larissa, will timely secure you from so dangerous an amor, I will display
those defects in that enchantress."

"My pride was wounded; to share her affections with a king, was secretly my
glory; to find her universal in her objects humbled me.

"The duke smiled, enjoyed my confusion, and, carelessly drawing from his
pocket a billet-doux, read: "To the duke of B.
"Louis is indisposed, and ordered, by his physician, to reside a few weeks at
Versailles; le cheval a bien fourni sa carriere, je ne veux pas qu'on me
trompe, vous etes un bon second; the great Conde is gone, the cardinal is with
the king: il faut donner quelques momens a la joye et a l'amour, oui, j'aime;
allons a

LARISSA."




"Did you obey this summons, my lord?"

"Call it an invitation," said the duke, smiling at the abruptness of my
question, "I perceive you do not wish for an affirmative; but would Dormoud
have refused," continued he, with an air of triumph.

"Hate, jealousy, and revenge began to kindle within me; the duke diverted
himself at my expense, rallied, laughed, trifled with my sullenness, and with
the utmost indifference went on; Fair without virtue, without peace she is great,
False in her love, inhuman in her hate;
So early trained in falsehood's baneful school,
She charms alike the monarch and the fool.


"Imagining myself pointed at, I burned with rage, yet was obliged to be
silent. I had entangled the duke in the web of confidence, but dared not oppose
him; Larissa had ensnared the king, while she was raising me to a summit, from
which I could look down on powerless virtue, and often was the honest pride of
worth insulted by my contempt. But the duke was yet my superior -- Politely
wishing me a fair evening, he left me. I stole to Larissa. Reclined in her
farthest apartment, adorned but with the loveliness of a dishabille, she arose
and welcomed me after the manner of France. All was still, save soft music in
an antichamber, the sounds of which were calculated to melt the soul to the
latest ebb of languishment; and thus dissolved with unattended beauty, who
could soar beyond the scene? Yet, my assurances and proofs of fidelity and love
appeared inadequate to Larissa's affection. I patiently heard her gentle
reprovings, felt them just, but endeavored to remind her, that mutual happiness
could only be born of mutual faith, that love alone was the source of
constancy, and that various passions ran round the heart of man in such regular
rotation, that he could not either love or hate, longer than the influence of
the then reigning passion was dealt to him. Whether the opinion of Larissa
varied from my theory; or, whether she wisely judged that love is not eternal,
and that mutual faith dies away, we know not how -- I was at a loss to
determine. I was only certain, that as I sat listening to her chidings, the
sound of the music seemed to labor into harshness and discordance, not did
Larissa herself appear so attractive as I thought she might, if dressed by the
cooler hand of prudence.

"Ah, Larissa!" said I, "with an involuntary peevishness, if lovely woman would
preserve her empire, she must be virtuous!"

"What malicious demon could put such an awkward sentence into my mouth at
such a moment? Larissa was fired, she upbraided me with obligations; despised
my mercenary passion, hated, smiled, wept, again soothed me by her softness,
and was convinced I was her slave."

In spite of my cares I could not help smiling at Dormoud's pleasantry. He
continued --

"Aye, aye, Monsieur, we may boast supremaey, rely on our strength, and
endeavor to lessen woman, but we are her dupes, why? -- because her powers are
light, delicate, and exquisitely wrought; ours slow, obtuse, solid and
considerate; while man is plodding how to creep after event, woman trifles with
him, dazzles his judgment, skips over him, and seizes her point with agility --
fools that we are!"

What stoic could confine his muscles of risibility at this harangue of
Dormoud, so full of nature, truth, and self-mortification? He proceeded. --

"Aurora now threw her blushes into the apartment of Larissa; they suddenly
tinged the cheek of my fair mistress, mine caught the glow, and I retired. On
passing through the garden where the flowers, unheedful of erring man, threw
their odours to the sun, I was met by a page, who surveyed me with silent
curiosity. Passing him with feigned composure, I hastened from a spot where
danger was awake; on this single moment hung the fate of Larissa. But man was
made to go forward, not one shall go back through his yesterday. Wise is he who
makes use of the hour and resolves to be blessed, I had left Larissa, convinced I
had left her to new and ever-changing wishes, equally flexible with the ties
that held me when near her. The tender vows I had breathed in her bosom were
dissolved in the past moment; no trace remained of her late-bewildering power
in a mind naturally prone to inconstancy. The duke of B**** was no advocate for
Larissa or licentious pleasure; his power was great with the king, and with the
thinking part of France, and often would he imperceptibly lead the Monarch from
the fascinations of a mistress, who, on account of her mean extraction, hated
the noblesse. Larissa had her intervals of conquest; her arts were those of
circumvention, and she (...) ^he duke while she blinded the the enamoured
Monarch. I had early renounced moral obligation; my heart was unawed. I loved
pleasure; my vices were but individually dangerous: I was not set up as an
example for a nation, but kings seldom know how to value merit, when, like an
angel, it stands warning their desires. The machinations of Larissa against the
duke did not prolong her empire; her dye was cast. Louis returned; his illness
had been slight, his cares returned; he treated them, as all men should treat
care, a proof of which I will give you in his gallant style. This letter was
written, on the eve of his arrival, to Larissa, who impatiently expected to see
the king in a few hours, languishing at her feet; she favored me with a copy.
I will favor you with the lesson it may afford."

"I thank you, sir: your manner of instruction is new." -- Great inconsistence
I thought appeared in Dormoud. -- He read -- 4th MAY.
"I am recovered, dear Larissa, and am only a little sorry I return not to a
heart once offered me and gratefully accepted; with me I wished Larissa to lose
every desire of change. Could lovely woman be secured by splendor, you had
still been mine. My hope arose from self-love. Charming Larissa, I own in
impossibilities. I acquit you, and throw your inconstancy on the grand
versatility of nature. When was man chained to your sex by gratitude? Have I
not loved, and left more than you? Agreeable to your taste, you prefer **** to
a king. I blame you not; we delight in change; may the happiness of Larissa
keep pace with the swift emotions of her heart when it pursues new objects.

I am, "L****."




"With this billet, the generous monarch sent presents to Larissa, worthly his
magnificence, wishing her to seek an asylum far from the dangerous pleasures of
royalty. Larissa depended on the charms of her person, looked forward to new
victories, left the scene of past delight with indifference, and, in a few
years, sank pale and dejected within the walls of poverty. Better had it been
for Larissa, had she early sheltered her beauties and her virtue in the bosom
of humble worth. Spotless would have been her morning, glorious her meridian,
and she would have sank in the evening of life, like a sun whose warmth had
cheered the world, and whose departing rays we mourn."

I could no longer conceal my astonishment. I applauded the language and fine
comparisons of Dormoud, a man who had professed himself an unprincipled
voluptuary! -- Encouraged by his frankness, I interrupted him by remarking what
I thought inconsistent, but he was truly paced in the ways of men, and
proceeded:

"Mine is the language of the world; my theory is for others, my practice for
myself; every human being is distinct, and it invariably is seen through the
universe, that no two persons shall move in a parallel line. Single in feeling,
diversified in idea, and totally opposite in mental power, the train of one
man's action shall not serve another. -- I reason like a moralist. I have that
privilege. I am not a moralist further than precept serves my turn; such is
every man, and he deceives when he persuades you he is attempting at more -- No
farther can human nature go, though many sacrifice more to the opinions of
society than I do. For the reasons I have given, the fate of Larissa afforded
no lesson for me, and I only mean to say, what Larissa might have been, had her
train of action been what it was not. Infamy has planted her cannon against the
reputation of woman; man is secured by the laws himself has made; yet, there is
a wonderful fallacy in his system of virtue, when he pockets ten thousand
pounds from a friend, merely for sharing in his wife's dishonor and his own."

Dormoud possessed every art of fascination, he lulled inquietude. I found
relief in his sophistry. He helped to establish the late perversion of my
principles. How feeble would a charming woman prove, while attending to him
with sensibilty till her soul dissolved! Dangerous ability! He had in history
related an incident concerning Emily -- Emily was the lovely maid found by the
duke in the forest; I knew it, and silently invoked heaven to protect her,
though false to me.

"The mother of Larissa," continued he, "was a servant in the convent of
St.***: the kitchen afforded her good living, filled her with good spirits, and
good spirits led her after a well-meaning friar, to whom Louis, etc. etc. was
indebted for Larissa."

"It may be difficult, (said I) to rufuse the offers of royalty, but mankind
will ever prefer humble innocence to the sullied charms of a king's mistress."

"No, no, Sir you mistake -- You speculate contrary to practice; innocence may
sleep for ever in her humble vale. Who seeks her friendship? Who drinks the
fragrance of her breath? Who wraps her miseries in the mantle of peace?

"The mistress of a king has power -- Many dependencies hang on a tarnished
link -- Many would acquire riches, but few possess them, by an acquaintance
with innocence. Yet a court mistress, disgraced, when met in the walk of
private life, all will avoid. When Larissa fell from her summit, I fled from
her endearments; unwilling to appear near the court where power was changing
hands. New incidents and new troubles arose; the Fronde, an anti-ministerial
party, daily gained strenth, the Minister disagreed with Turenne, and many
brave men who had seemed listless while their Sovereign was happy, now gathered
round the helm to guide him through his troubles. Among the latter class was my
quondam friend the duke. If I could have loved strong virtue under any shape, I
should have admired and pitied his attachment to his king. I loved not his
amiable qualities, though I resolved to love and to possess his mistress.

"Though I had been observed by the king's page in the garden of Larissa, his
majesty never took notice of me as a rival. Perhaps he thought me too
contemptible, or, not esteeming Larissa enough to depend on her for happiness,
pleasantly left us to try how long we could love. After she had set off for
less brilliant scenes, I returned, and continued to promote my interest at
court, by flattering those I despised, and fawning on those who mistook
servility for respect* But the duke had irritated me. He had asserted that
Dormoud was too far currupted ever to be reclaimed by friendship or example,
and had for some time avoided me in public. Sensible that one of us must go
down the wind of favor, I was not long hesitating; my actions wore deeper dye
than those of the duke. He might have ruined me with truth. Virtue had rendered
his soul too dignified to enter into a competition with Dormoud, whose mines
were working at the foundations of his perfection. In plunging him from his
heights, truth was not on my side, cunning and chance gave me success. -- Louis
had secrets, the multitude had no right to search for them, they were the
secrets of necessity; the duke knew this, was faithful to his monarch,
concealed his faults, revered his virtues, and breathed his public fame.

"This noble conduct, trusted to itself, became the food of those who prey on
garbage. The chanceller le Tellier viewed him with a jealous eye. That wily
politician had been entrusted by the queen-regent with a secret of the greatest
importance, and the handsome deportment, together with the abilities of the
duke, made the statesman tremble lest the latter should supplant him. -- I was
employed to pry into the springs of action that were hourly moving, and
particularly ordered to render the duke unpopular. He had in some affairs
managed part of the state revenues. The magnificence of Louis brought his
coffers low; for the exhausted sums I blamed the duke, and for the late
disgrace of ministers condemned him. Murmurs arose. Supported in secret by the
chancellor, I grew bolder in my assertions, and loudly criminated a man to
whose excellence I never could arrive. He saw my artifice, was too brave to
soothe, contemned me too much to upbraid, and after treating me with silent,
though ineffable scorn, left the field of princely favors to more greedy
strugglers, and retired to the Netherlands, resolving to forget his hopeless
passion and his king.

"Envy will follow for ever the character that has once gained an eminence over
her horde. Ask her why a wise man leaves the noisy circle? Her answer will be
"to indulge his pride, his discontent, his avarice, or his imbecility. He is,
in brief, welcome to retire. He no longer adores or fears me." But ask the wise
man why he leaves the world! and he will reply, "I have tasted joy, I have
tasted sorrow; I have been despised and respected; loved, was beloved in
return; and now, having lost the objects I adored; see a futility in life to
which I cannot descend."

"I do not," continued the governor, "mean to prove that these were exactly the
sentiments of the duke; but, I can assure you, that his departure did not cure
the chancellor; for his jealousy, his envy, with some other fears arising from
state intrigue, followed the duke; and should he now be found, his death alone,
I believe, would hush the cares his existence causes in the bosoms of le
Tellier and the king -- but there are a few more who are equally burdensome,
and that must be taken off -- Your glass waits you, Monsieur, drink to the
oblivion of care; a more commodious apartment is preparing for you in the fifth
range toward the the east; and after giving you every assurance of my favor,
consistent with my situation, I will, when you please, conduct you to repose."

Observing Dormoud made a full pause, as if hesitating whether he should
conside further in his new acquaintance, I arose, thanked him for his candor,
as he conducted me to my chamber, and was much consoled by his repeated
asseverations of future friendship. Where is the man, whose fancy, grown sick
with sorrow, will not exaggerate the image of comfort, and raise her pigmy joy
too high for his attachment? It is ever so: imagination is too strong in her
coloring. I was revived by Dormoud, and forgot the dreadful sentence of
imprisonment for ever. Why, said I to myself, is this man a villain! Why should
he boastingly violate those duties the self-denying struggle to fulfill!

Dear spirit of refinement, from wherever thou have chosen thy pure celestial
dwelling, descend, touch the coarser powers of Dormoud, and lead thy fair ideas
through the corrupted region of his mind! From thee, bright form of innocence,
fly the brutal shadows that darken the bosom of man. Thine are the grand, the
energetic, the invisible! Thou art the soul of the world!

But what have I to do with refinement? Have I not lost Emily? A long fit of
abstraction fell on my mind as this question, prompted by despair, suggested
itself -- I sat some moments gazing at the waning candle, and at last put my
hand in my pocket, with an intent to reperuse the fatal note I had found, when,
to my astonishment, I drew forth the picture of my mother! Saluting it -- I
felt it cold. -- "Angel! thou art cold -- lifeless as I one day must be!" --
Strange as my description may appear, I thought the picture varied its looks as
the emotions of my soul were impatient or resigned. The filth and rust it had
accumulated in the steps of the dungeon I had visited with Dormoud, was in my
pocket worn off, and the animated features spoke directly to my heart. "All is
over," continued I, walking hastily, "a few months or weeks, and then!"
(throwing myself down on a sopha recently prepared for me in this elegant
room.) "Here I am to remain for ever! -- but how came my mother's dear
resemblance to this dismal dwelling? Is this an abode for so much beauty? It is
impossible she can herself be here! I will not think it. And yet I heard a
groan near that horrid dungeon! Good God defend her! Hold me from madness!
Where shall I go!" -- Imagination seemed to go out at this last idea, like an
extinguished flame, and I fell into a sudden insensibility. How long I lay in
this swoon or slumber, (I know not which) I could not recollect. When I
recovered, a coldness had pervaded my whole frame -- I was spiritless and
feeble; all my unavailing though unruly passion had subsided, and I calmly
reflected, that life could not in this dreadful scene be of long continuance.
That strong sympathy, inherent in man, which makes him feel for others, works
upon his own heart in a state of seclusion. He naturally wishes to lighten the
burden of his sorrows, and to share the pity he had lent the world. The idea
of dying here unlamented and unknown, the more agonizing thought that my mother
might be somewhere near me, inclined me to devise some expedient, by which a
knowledge of our fate might reach society. For this purpose, I resolved to
throw together some transactions of my past life, and after enclosing the
picture, which was encircled by the name of my mother, in the midst of my
little history, to throw the packet into the sea.

The days of my infancy were spent in the forest of --, near Rochelle, under
the gentle tuition of an harmless peasant, who cheerfully saw his flocks
grazing round the hills, while his wife, after feeding her poultry, and
gathering in their eggs, taught me my primer, and progressively my bible.
"Without reading good books," said this amiable rustic, "little master can
never know the world." I fancied at last, my mistress improved herself as
rapidly as she taught me. From this humble scene I was soon removed. A chariot,
the first I had ever seen, came one morning to carry me from the humble cot of
Jannette Froville, but I was not willing to go. I sat down, took my tame kid in
my lap, and watched my nurse, as she wandered round the house to collect my
clothes. The tears rolled so swiftly through her eyes, she hardly could discern
what she sought: nor did the coachman and servants appear to me half so manly
in their taudry liveries, as my dear plebeian Froville, who had so often taken
me on his knee, and warmed my infant hands in his bosom on a frosty morning,
while he pressed his ruddy lips to my cheek. "No," said I, "the chariot shall
go back till Jannette has done crying."

"We must not drive back without you," replied the coachman.

"I would fain stay here till the lambs are weaned; besides, my kid will pine
to death."

All my childish objections were overruled. Farmer Froville and his wife
Jannette wept and prayed over me, and I was at last, with much reluctance,
parted from all I then held dear, except my little tame kid, to whom I had
given the name of Mayo, and who I earnestly requested should be my companion in
the chariot. This was discussed elaborately by the servants; the coachman
scorned to be the coachman of a kid, and the footman gave a supercilious smile
at my idea of his riding behind one; but I resolved to be master in this case.
I had no sense of blessings in future, my heart was palpitating with its
present affections; I had enough to struggle with, without being troubled with
the impertinence of these men, and conquered them only by (what they called)
sullen obstinacy. The chariot rolled away -- my eyes kept in view the house of
Jannette, where health and innocence had fostered me; it gradually receded; she
waved her handkerchief, I saw her no more. The tuft of trees that stood near
our orchard, under which our sheep had gathered at noon, were rapidly passed
by, and Mayo, though he loved me best, gave a farewell cry to his fleecy
companions. Happy! happy scene! Thy joys were many, and thy evils few.

Our journey was long, the servants were dull; I was melancholy, and my kid, I
believe, would rather have been skipping from rock to rock, than shut up with a
fellow-traveller, so inimical to his lively nature. Our conductors, however,
grew cheerful on entering the capacious domains of their master, of whom they
spoke with reverence and love, and whose name was count de Marsan. This
nobleman was ready to receive me. He threw open the chariot door, caught me in
his arms, and would have carried me into his house, but I was holding Mayo by a
blue ribbon, which was twisted round my hand. Finding himself tacitly condemned
to carry us both, he applauded my tenderness, and set me gently on my feet.

"Jannette Froville told me she was not my mother. Are you my father, that you
kiss me so?"

"I am not," said the gentleman, but while I exist, you shall not want a father.

"And will you provide for little Mayo?"

"I will love Mayo, because you love him -- you must be educated; your kid
shall be fed."

"I can read my bible, sir. Is not that education, is not that enough?"

"I will show you our large parks, the deer, the great canal; with me you shall
observe the rising and setting of the sun and moon; still you may read your
bible."

I was contented.

After being led through the variegated scenes that presented themselves in
succession to my dazzled imagination, taught to observe the opening buds of
nature, tints of the flower, bark, and paintings in the gallery, I was
carressed, treated with sweatmeats, and sent to the first school in Ro^helle.
Here, after acquiring the love of some of my school-fellows by my gentleness,
and the fear of the refractory by my severity, I sat down quietly to my
studies, and dearly did I soon prize the hours of meditation! -- Nineteen
summer suns had glided away, when I returned to my guardian, full of vigor,
and free from vice. This inestimable friend possessed every accomplishment. He
was polite, but he was sincere. While he charmed by his manners, he enforced
that probity which dignifies man. I loved him. He pointed my strong ideas. He
watched over my mind as its powers expanded; from the fallacy of conjecture he
led me to demonstration; from the heat of prejudice to serenity of judgment;
from superstition to morality; and while he held to my reason the volume of the
world, taught me to pity the feeble.

"Life is short, the poor pittance of seventy years is not worth being a
villain for: what matters it if your neighbor lay interred in a splendid tomb.
Sleep you with innocence: look behind you through the tracts of time, a vast
desert of unnumbered ages lies open in the retrospect. Through this desert have
your forefathers journeyed on, till wearied with years and sorrow, they sank
from the walk of man. You must leave them where they fell, and you are to go
only a little further, where you will find eternal rest. Whatever you may
encounter between the cradle and the grave, be not dismayed. The universe is in
endless motion, every moment big with innumerable events, which came not in
slow succession, but bursting forcibly from a revolving and unknown cause, fly
over this orb with diversified influence: should you be plunged into
disagreeable circumstances, from those very circumstances may another be at
that moment rising to the summit of his good fortune; so may your neighbor's
inconvenience prove beneficial to you.

None can know the eternal purpose of existence; but there is a grand
equilibrium preserved by one mighty chain of dependencies. Look then at the
universe; limit not the view of your soul to one hemisphere; and ask your
reason, if, in such awful revolutions of worlds and their inhabitants, pain or
pleasure must not constitutionally affect you. Be ever fearless; yield
reluctantly to the passions, increase the regions of the mind, and know that as
you have no will to resist the power of death, death can be no evil further
than it affects the imagination. To sleep, to go through various changes, or to
wak^ everlastingly, is equally independent of your will. Therefor, cheerfully
trust the future, only dread the act that may wound your established rectitude
of thought!"

I bowed to my dear instructor, my youthful heart held his admonitions; they
grew with my years -- Hills, rocks, rivers, the waving of the woods, and
fertility of the vales, yielded transport to my unsullied mind: and as I thus
revelled silently in the rich exuberance of nature, I felt myself capable of
the wildest adoration. Blessed is the mind that early feels the influence of
instruction! Soon, much too soon, came manhood with his hardy privileges. I
panted to strike upon the world as a meritorious character. Rural imagery
enchanted my fancy, while the voice of fame seemed to call me from afar. Divine
is the origin of fame! she breathes the desire of immortality into the soul of
man.

My Guardian had mentioned two amiable sons whom I never had the pleasure of
knowing. They were educated at St. Omers, under the care of an affectionate
uncle, who had adopted them as equal heirs to his vast fortune. A letter
arrived, in which the youths requested the permission of their father to
accompany the duke of B**** who was then going abroad. The count, with apparent
regret, sacrificed his tenderness to the glory and improvement of his children,
and received their acknowledgments. The dignity of language observed by those
young gentlemen warmed my attentive soul, as I listened ^o their prayers,
breathed for the preservation of their beloved parent. To Em^^y, who was
receiving her education in the convent of St. ***** they ^^^t tokens of
fraternal love. I blushed at the idea of spending life idly.

My guardian was a man of the first distinction in France, he disapproved much
of the constitution of his country, but he was brave, and firm to attachments
he had once formed. Combinations, plots, and reiterated murmurs prevailed over
the kingdom. Lettres de cachet were considered as the most odious mark of
audacious tyranny, while the farming of land in the interior parts, occasioned,
among the lower class of people, the most acute penury. My guardian, as an
individual, had no power of ^evoking the statutes, nor had he the wish of
assassinating his king, merely because he was thrown as an hereditary and
guiltless emblem of order into the lap of pre-eminence. Law is the cement of
society. Law forms degrees of power, and by necessary gradation, power sinks to
the cottage from the throne. Nor must power be suffered to sport wantonly on
that dangerous summit; while she sits soberly, her influence is nourishing, and
millions bask in her well-regulated favors. Without her, order, so beloved, so
cherished by mankind, cannot exist; and a king, that thing so hated, so feared,
so reverenced and so loved, is but by accident as a common watchman; and
whether society be awakened to its duties by many watchmen, or by one, is not
worthy the discussion of the wise. The duke of B**** had taken the ministerial
side from policy, and was now preparing to leave it -- He visited my guardian;
I was introduced; the duke appeared struck by my figure. I was not less so with
him: his gallant deportment, his persuasive eloquence, darted enthusiasm through
my frame, and I secretly wished to share his glory; when he took leave, I
followed him insensibly along the court. My hat fell from my hand, without
perceiving it; I walked till an attendant delivered it to me, and received my
thanks; when, at the sound of my voice, the duke looked back, my eyes were
fixed on, he politely demanded if his power could serve me?

"Take me with you," replied I eagerly, "let me fight for you, let me die when
you die!"

"Gallant youth, have you reflected on the horrors of war: have you reconciled
yourself to the shame of defeat, have you taught your heart to restrain the
exultation of victory? All are dangerous to the untried soldier; the advantages
of conquest are too often converted into cruelty, and defeat has many sorrows;
among which, ill-timed shame is not the least: return, consult the count de
Marsan, you shall hear from me, you deserve not neglect."

How noble was this frankness in one who was unversed in courtly ceremony, or,
at least, had forgotten it! -- The duke departed.

"May I go to the wars?" said I to my guardian, on entering the parlour --
"Will you grieve? Promise me you will not, and I will immediately prepare for
the field. But, my dear, my kind parent, for so I must call you, if my company
or conversation can soften your hours, I will not go -- No, my heart is fully
devoted to you, and claims no superior object -- Ah! sir, where may I find your
equal in this uneven world?" My guardian was affected: he could not resolve, at
that moment, to part with me, but promised to inform my friends of my
inclination, and requested me to be satisfied with his assiduities and his
truth.

"I am not capable of doubting you, my excellent monitor; yet, tell me, O tell
me, where I may find my father!"

"Be not precipitate; you may prove the destruction of yourself and friends:
beware of dangerous curiosity; you may one day know your father" -- (here my
guardian sighed deeply.) "He may press you to his bosom. -- He cannot love you
more than I do." Saying this, while a tear stole down his cheek, he retired.

Man must sacrifice hourly for his existence. -- He must bid his wishes die as
they arise: they grow by being fed, till, in the multiplicity, peace is lost,
since not one in the three can, during his short period of time, be fulfilled.
I was obliged to forego my thirst for military honor, together with the desire
of knowing my father -- I took my Seneca, and read my cares away.

Reading gently lulls the perturbed spirit, yet, we frequently feel an
impatience arising from disappointment or despair, which too forcibly withdraws
us from this best blessing. In conversing with the venerable sage, whose spirit
whispers through every line, we become reconciled to unpleasant circumstances.
In running back we learn, that the brave and good have ever felt in common with
mankind.

When evening approached, a carriage, driving hastily through the court, rouzed
me from my meditations; my guardian ran to the door, and a beautiful girl
sprang to his arms -- It was Emily. -- I had also advanced, but stepped back
that I might lay no restraint on endearments so tender and sacred. Amidst
broken expressions of joy and enquiries, which waited no reply, the father
ushered his lovely daughter to an apartment adjoining that I had entered; her
brothers became the subject of her first enquiries: my guardian gave her a
brief account of their intended route with the duke of B****, when she replied,
"I hoped to have found my brothers here, my dear father; my self-love perhaps
blinded my reason -- I could not improve them, I could not teach them the hard
lessons of the world."

Finding myself under the necessity of over-hearing the conversation of Emily
and her father, I immediately took my hat and strolled down the garden; not
that I was uninterested in any delight my guardian could taste, but I thought
it unmanly to remain within hearing of two persons, who were pouring out their
sentiments, unconscious of my situation -- delicacy is due to all. Chance
directed my steps to a bower of woodbines. -- I threw myself on the bank, and
sighed for a father into whose bosom I might rush, as Emily did to my
guardian's. The whole expanse was full of beauty, it waited for the melting
touch of a Claude-Loraine, before whom nature ever lay in charming luxuriance.
I was contrasting the lily with the rose, when my guardian, who had lightly ran
over the turf, accosted me. -- I enquired why his sons did not accompany his
late illustrious visitor, he told me the duke only came to see me.

"But come, my dear young friend, I have a guest to whom I must introduce you:
she is worthy your protection, and to your honor I could for ever confide my
Emily."

I congratulated this worthy man on the treasures he possessed in his children.
-- He introduced me; and I saluted Emily with an agitation never felt before.
Her conversation was directed to her father; my ear hung on her accents, my
eyes on her face, till she suddenly threw a glance that struck me to the soul.
Abashed, I turned toward the window, while a significant silence heightened
the confusion of my senses: -- Yes, there are delicious moments, when silence
must be felt, and the heart swells with that fine delirium which arises from
the hope of being secretly understood! -- Yet -- what did I wish Emily to
understand? -- I had never before seen her: my feelings had not progressively
grown into love, nor had there been time for creating esteem in the bosom of
the charming maid; what then were my wishes? -- I had but one, it was that of
for ever listening while she stole my peace. -- Night summoned me to retire
either to my books or rest -- I chose the former. Hence hoary adviser! said I,
throwing the venerable Antoninus from my hand; thou art much too cold; my heart
is burning! Happy had I been could my strength of mind have proved sufficient
to oppose this languor ere it grew oppressive! My judgment, my understanding,
and even my thirst for glory were weakened: So was I formed, and my internal
conflicts I fear will end but with my life!

Ye who would surmount the pleasing melancholy of the tender passion, seek not
solitude! her shades are delusive! Peace is not within them! There will the
image of your soul engross you; from thence will the world and its boisterous
attendants be shutout, and you will feed on the delicious poisons of memory
till you languish life away! -- I was restless through the night, arose in the
morning before the family were moving, and roved over the adjacent hills: The
dew lurked glistening in the bosom of the cowslip, the birds broke not their
song at my approach, my heart was grateful for its existence: the words of my
guardian " to your honor I could for ever confide my Emily," were impressed
deeply on my mind. Was there not a warning in the generous sentiment? Yes! He
had suddenly appealed, he had made a league with my honor for the future
security of his deserving child! His boundless confidence proved the estimate
he had formed of my principles, and ought to have given me delight. On the
contrary, I saw difficulties rising from the noble candor of the father, to
check my infant passion for the daughter; he had bequeathed her to my honor,
not to my affection.

O, how industrious is the human mind in creating self affliction, and refining
on it by the force of imagination, till we no longer struggle with unutterable
love, but willingly sing to rest! Under this sickness of the fancy does many a
tender and delicate maid droop like a chilled flower!

Ruminating thus on the feebleness of nature, I had strayed -- I had insensibly
strayed to the brow of a declivity, down whose sloping verdure no human foot
had passed: I endeavored to descend, but was obstructed in my wanderings by a
huge rock, on whose rough and aged sides the goats played wantonly; conceiving
it impassable, I paused a few moments, drinking the ecstasy of infant day, and
was about to return, when I saw a pale smoke arise seemingly from the entrails
of this tremendous precipice. All was still, save the melody of the groves; and
my fancy was purified by the sweet salubrity around, nor was pity the weakest
of my sensations: I imagined the smoke must ascend from the cabin of some
miserable woodman, whose hard fate confined him to this sequestered dwelling;
an amiable wife, perhaps unoffending children, suffer with him, said I to
myself, and why must the harmless peasant sigh in vain for the necessaries of
life? Impressed by the workings of compassion, I again attempted to find an
oblique passage -- the effort was unavailing, my way was cut off by the horrid
projections of the rock, and the smoke gradually dying away, ceased to direct
my curious eyes; I sat myself down, lamenting the calamities of innumerable
beings, who, fixed by natural neces^^ty, distant from the pale of society, pine
unpitied and unseen in want even of frugal blessings. The languishments
peculiar to the votaries of luxury are by the rustic villager unfelt, but, as a
forfeit for his stronger joys, he often needs both food and raiment. I looked
up to the sun.

Bright comforter! the feeble and the aged love thee! the wise and the foolish
love thee! thy mighty master commands thee to bless the shepherd and the king,
the pomegranate and the acorn are welcome to thy rays!

I had not gazed long on the luminary of the world, when I saw a ladder rising
slowly toward the summit of the rock; I arose hastily and concealed myself
behind some shrubs, that I might not terrify, by my unexpected appearance, the
solitary adventurer, who, I supposed, was ascending. A tall majestic figure
alighted on the turf, kneeled, and gave his morning orisons to the Father of
ages. I could have thrown myself at his feet. Reverence withheld me -- Where
was the infidel who dared to intrude in a moment so sublime! From the place of
my concealment, I traced him to a neighboring rivulet, whose murmurs were
invitations to her thirsty visitor. He stopped, drank, filled a bottle hastily
with the refreshing element; and, after plucking a few wild berries from the
humble bushes, returned to his ladder. Soon as he was below the surface of the
earth, I ran in a bending attitude, s^ized the top of the ladder, and, how^ver
rude the action might immediately appear, descended, before he had time to
remove it from the rock. Amazement and displeasure darkened the features of the
stranger; he boldly shook me by the breast, and declared his readiness to take
my life or guard his own.

"Impertinent curiosity, Sir," said, I, "has no place in my bosom; I feel a
nobler sentiment. I own I did not expect to meet a man of your demeanor, but I
expected to find affliction, and resolved to soften it."

"Generous youth!" (loosing me from his manly grasp) "you have met affliction
with all her attendant horrors! -- but leave me! -- take advantage of the means
by which you have descended, or you may involve yourself with one long devoted
to destruction: leave me, young man, or you will be undone!"

These words were uttered with an emphasis, which, instead of daunting my
resolves, interested my affections; I saw no danger, and if I had, nothing but
the positive command of this recluse should have forced me from him.

"The rules of honor and politeness oblige me to retire, Sir, if you so
earnestly wish it. -- Adieu! -- My heart feels oppressed at leaving you thus:
believe me I would rather embrace danger in assisting you."

The stranger paused; cast his eyes toward a cavern in the distant part of the
rock, and was lost in hesitation. -- Seizing the momentary silence, I continued
--

"If the cause of your seclusion from mankind be of an atrocious nature, my
bosom shall be the grave of human frailty; I will swear never to divulge your
affairs, though the color of them may oblige me immediately to forsake you."

"I am no villain," (returned he) I am only the victim of tyranny and
misfortune. Such had fate designed me before my infant eyes were open to the
light. I am sensible of your not having power to injure me, and am only fearful
of your sharing my hapless destiny. -- Be not alarmed, I am an exile from the
social joys of man, but let us not anticipate evil -- You afford me a faint
delight, a delight which I may never taste again; we will not therefore
embitter transient happiness by poor distrust." Endeavoring to appear
self-collected, he took me by the hand. --

"Come with me, you shall behold the accommodations of a prince: you shall
learn that royalty is the trapping of fools, given by adulation and worn in
vain by mortal beings; yes, you shall be convinced that a prince, stripped of
his gaudy appendages, is but the sport of misery."

An obedience, which owed nothing to my will, influenced my motions. I followed
involuntarily, without once replying to my unknown monitor. We entered the
cave; his little fire had not entirely spent itself; the embers gathered
brightness from the contrasting gloom, but not sufficient to direct my eye to
the end of this cavern. Looking round with pensive curiosity, I saw no royal
accommodations, except a small picture of the king of France in a niche, rudely
formed by nature in the rock. Perceiving it had arrested my attention, he was
much agitated, and wildly exclaimed, "Ah, sir! kings should have no brothers!"

Seating himself on the damp gravel, of which the floor of this lonely
habitation was composed, he was for some minutes, silent and forgetful of my
presence, nor could I obtrude a single enquiry on a subject which affected him
so deeply. I at length made some incoherent remarks on the difficulty he must
experience in procuring food. --

"Yonder," pointing down an eminence, "lives my provider." -- I did not
comprehend him; but, leading me from the entrance of the cave to a more
eligible spot, he made me discern a little hut near the seashore, and resumed
his story --

"There dwells a simple fisherman, who, seeking a strayed lamb, his children
had tamely bred up in his cottage, met me by chance as I was wildly roving
through the wood, my sword was in my hand, despair and horror in my whole
deportment; his timidity brought me to a recollection, that man is only amiable
when impressed by the influence of social love. I banished his dismay, and he
procured me food."

"What great occurrence brought you to this scene of misery, why not fly from a
solitude, incompatible with an exalted mind?"

"You know me not; my hours were early marked, and every step I take is not in
the common path of man. The scene before me is sorrowfully distinguished, but I
have reason to suppose it will be short."

I now conjectured this stranger must have been convicted of treason, and that
a price was set on his head: I never conceived what we politically term treason
to be a sin against the Deity, and was still resolved secretly to bear him in
the arms of friendship to every comfort heaven had allotted me.

"For reasons of state have I been a prisoner from my birth. I was born in the
year 1638.

"Through my days of childhood, I knew no affliction but that kind of restraint
which seems more watchful than severe. I was not even sensible of my being a
state prisoner, as it was impossible for me to be guilty of a crime. I believed
my tutor to be my real father; my education was equal to that of the dauphin. I
was not sensible of rough ambition, but I became the prey of generous love: my
tutor had a friend of the house of B****, who visited, and brought with him a
sister. Noble sentiments, elegance of manner, and beauty, were hers. The
impression she was formed to make was mine; an impression only to be erased by
death! -- I for some months languished in silence for the lovely maid. I dared
not hope. The vigilance of my tutor increased with my years, and I daily became
sensible that I was held in fetters, though invisible to my comprehension was
the power who ruled me. The walls of the garden, in which I was used to range,
were raised to a terrific height, and so many precautions taken, that a gloom
was thrown over the scene of my infant joys -- I became melancholy -- the
beautiful Eleanora perceived it, and endeavored to alleviate the sadness she
could not cure. During her stay, (which was intended for some months) with my
tutor, she charmed, while she increased the tumults of my soul. Unable to tear
her from my heart, or suppress its emotions, I one day threw myself at her
feet, and breathed the strain of love. The moment was precious -- I could
promise myself but few, and passionately appealed to her pity; pity she
bestowed, but female delicacy started objections and fears in her inexperienced
bosom. She offered me her esteem; nay, more, her inviolable friendship, and my
eager soul exulted in the testimonies she gave of both. But who shall set
bounds to mutual attachment; Who quench the ever-burning flame of sympathy! We
loved, adored, and while my tutor was called to ***** on political affairs, I
gave my parole of honor to his substitute, bribed him profusely, and the
charming Eleanora became mine by a private marriage. From this union sprang
inexpressible delight, transport hoarded but in remembrance; for, oh! my real
treasures are no more! --

A pause, in which memory, I feared, was too powerful, succeeded those
complainings -- I willingly gave him a tear. When did tears relieve the
sufferer for whom they fall? -- He proceeded --

"The delicate state of my dear Eleanora soon made a removal necessary. I
gloried in the approaching event, but was distracted how to conceal it. My
wife, with that magnanimity which ever supports virtue, was willing to dare the
censure of the world for the man she loved, in denying her marriage; I could
not yield to this idea. I could not so meanly stab refinement, and resolved to
declare myself to her brother, when he should next visit my tutor.

"The duke of B**** was possessed of true grandeur. He stood aloof from the
contagion of prejudice, while she led her blinded victims through the world.
His soul, independent and alone, formed her system of thought, and to him I
revealed our marriage -- "Generous virtue (said this noble friend, will ever be
the basis of my sister's happiness. Dearly as I love her, she has increased her
value, by giving me such a brother. I will share your cares, and you shall
share my fortune."

"After embracing me with affection, he thanked me for my confidence, and swore
never to abuse it. My wife returned to his seat in the country, where my son
was born. But, unhappily, a domestic had heard this last conversation, and flew
with it to the ear of my tutor, whose terrors I thought quite unnecessary to
the occasion. He questioned me on the subject: I questioned him in return; and
as I found he had gained knowledge of the affair, did not deny it. Almighty
love gave me intrepidity. I would not have exchanged the tender names of
husband and of father for the crown of France! Ah, sir! short was my fond
exultation! only a few months had passed on when the duke came hastily, spent
with fatigue, and dissolved in tears, to inform me his sister was, with my
infant son, conveyed from his mansion by an order of state, and the only
consolation afforded him, was the assurance that both should be provided for
within the pales of nobility, but must never more be mine. Snatching the sword
of the duke, (whom I shall henceforth term my brother,) I ran to my tutor, and
seizing him with all the madness of a man grown desperate by injuries, demanded
an explanation of his mysterious conduct -- Opening his bosom, he stood before
me, dauntles in his trust, and venerable in virtue, but silent! -- Silent as
the grave! nor could the fear of death, though I too rudely threatened him,
extort the cause of my wrongs -- I could not kill him! I had long loved him!
and he appeared to me, at this moment, like something divine, though
pre-eminently wretched! -- Conquered by his looks, I threw myself down, and
burst into tears! My tutor kneeled, wept over me, and echoed back my sighs, but
stubbornly suppressed every other expression. While indulging this dreadful
anguish, we were surrounded by the guards, who had entered the house purposely
to convey us into strict confinement. I now grew obstinate with despair. Life
had lost its value, and I felt only for this worthy man, who was to languish in
prison with me; his loyalty and truth availed him not. After feebly struggling
with age and fetters, he felt himself dying. My heart was torn with the mingled
agony of impatience, sorrow, and indignation, as I beheld him sinking from me.
Nightly did I hang over him, watch his broken slumbers, and indulged some
little comfort when he opened his eyes. He was sensible of my affection -- I
had been formed by him, and he prized the heart himself had rendered incapable
of disguise. As I bathed his pillow with my tears, he addressed me in a faint
voice:"

"Names and titles are sounds; I never made you acquainted with them: I swore
never to do it whilst I lived, but I have made you acquainted with yourself; I
have taught you to observe the futility of human action, and the feebleness of
your nature. I now warn you to resist ambition; her snares are spreading for
you. Yield her dominion to others -- You are too good to be her slave. -- I
must leave you, and the only regret I feel at this awful moment is, that I must
leave you here; but your life, I have reason to think, will he held sacred
during the life of Louis XIV. Should he die childless, forget not my warnings.
Numberless joys spring from the bosom of the world for those who can enjoy them
in obscurity. Adieu! my dear Henry! Should you in time know the secret of your
birth, keep that knowledge to yourself; by appearing ignorant, you may be most
safe. Do not practice deceit; but every man has a right to be silent on his own
affairs. Tranquillity, that has ever gilded my unimpassioned hours, now falls
sweetly on my senses. When I awake to new existence, my Creator will not make
me miserable. Unheedful of human opinion, to him alone I am resigned -- Once
more! Once more! Farewell for ever!"

"Pressing my hand gently, he looked benignly in my face, and yielded to nature
all she could claim from him.

"To describe the horrors that stared on my afflicted spirit, at this dreadful
separation, is impossible! My fancy became wild, and brought none but ugly
images. Suicide seemed to offer itself as my sole conductor to everlasting rest
-- And where will my Eleanora find a comforter! said I, striking the
candlestick suddenly on the floor. The noise I made, alarmed the sentinel, who
stood at the outside of the door; he rushed in, and finding the chamber in
darkness, called aloud to his companions, who entering, saw me sitting near the
corpse of my dear departed monitor.

"No indignity was offered me; two gentlemen were appointed to attend my
person, and to accompany me from that place of confinement, where he breathed
his last, to a more eligible one, after a dismal chasm in my life of nineteen
years.

"The vessel in which we embarked, was pursued by heavy storms; and after
struggling five days and nights with the tempestuous elements, grew crazed; her
rudder being splintered, was entirely washed away; her mainmast went by the
board; she had sprung a-leak; all hands were in turn summoned to the pumps;
and, on heaving the lead, our soundings were only eight fathoms from land.
Night came on, darkness increased our terrors. I was suffered freely to assist
in the tremendous scene; but the roaring of the sea, the shrieks of the wind in
the rigging, together with the prayers and blasphemies of the crew, struck me
with such amazement, that (ignorant whose order to obey, or what rope to pull)
I leaned on one of the hencoops, and waited the moment that should plunge us in
the deep. Before I left the cabin, I had secured a sword, and fixed it to my
belt, in which I had concealed a small casket, given me by my tutor, a few
hours before he departed. Except these articles, and this resemblance of Louis,
I had nothing of value. Night passed away, and dawn presented to our view yon
huge promontory, which you can with ease discern to the westward, and of which
we hoped to gain some craggy part; but, from its foot runs out, beneath the
waters, invisible rocks, unknown to the most skilful mariner. There our vessel
resigned her violent motion for some moments -- there, she lay trembling on the
waves like a dying bird, and beneath a rude swell of water, went down for ever!
Clasping the hen-coop, I was beat against the rock -- I knew no more! All was
calm when I opened my eyes, as I lay on the beach; no vessel appeared, no
companion hailed me -- I gazed around, my eyes felt heavily; I was not grateful
for existence, but looked wishfully at the remorseless ocean, which had drank
my friends. How vacant is the mind when the objects lately moving around us,
are suddenly gone for ever! No prayer, no unavailing murmur escaped my lips;
such is the stupidity of man when bewildered by great extremes. I had sat
pensively on the beach for some hours, the billows left me, and my hen-coop;
none of my ship-mates appeared; but my appetite for life, security, and food,
gradually awakened, and at length grew acute. Not knowing where to find the
latter, I was met by the fisherman, whose cabin is small, and family numerous;
nor would a residence beneath his roof be compatible with my fortune or his
safety. His head might answer for his friendship to me. My brother, the duke of
B****, if still at Paris, will be secret and faithful. To him I have written a
brief account of my situation. The fisherman has ventured in his skiff to
convey my letters. I have promised to reward him, and only wait his return,
when I shall quit my native land for ever. I am now forty years old, and am a
stranger to the world!"

I now concluded my unknown friend to be of distinguished rank: he wished to
know my place of residence, and by what accident I had discovered his retreat.

I related my morning excursion, begged him to command me, if I could assist
him; and added,

"I must leave you, amiable and unfortunate stranger. I am dear to the
worthiest of men, and should feel regret in causing him one moment's pain:
suffer me to see you once more! I will not prove obtrusive; but I would
encounter many evils to prove myself deserving your confidence. Say I may again
privately visit you in this comfortless asylum, so unworthy its inhabitant."

A melancholy smile spread itself over the face of this afflicted recluse; he
replied:

"Go, generous youth! persevere in the path of virtue! you will prove a
blessing to your parents! In three days I expect my honest fisherman, you may
command the interval; I will expect you here."

Raising my hand respectfully to his lips, he bade me adieu. I ascended by his
ladder, and hastened back to relieve my guardian, whose alarms at my absence, I
knew, would be powerful.

Wearied and thoughtful with this day's adventure, I at last got home. Surprise
at my early departure in the morning, mixed with joy at my arrival, were
visible in the countenance and manner of my guardian. He questioned me mildly:
I did not think myself at liberty to declare the concerns of an individual, who
had, from true nobleness of soul, confided in me. Emily ran from the garden,
where she had been selecting a bouquette, and with innocent frankness, declared
herself happy at my return.

"Here" (said she, presenting me the flowers she had culled with taste) "I
offer you the tribute of the day, friend of my father! they must one day die!
and why not die with you?"

Endeavoring to assume tranquillity of manner, specious, because my heart was
not tranquil, I accepted, and placed the fragrant gift in my bosom.

"I will wear your flowers, and only wish those emblems of beauty could live
for ever."

"You are kind: my father informs me, your mind is noble, your principles pure,
but why do you fly me? my brothers would not have left me so long; I must soon
return to my convent, why did you not show me the irregular charms of this
romantic country?

The midnight vesper, bead, or full-ton'd choir,
Whose mournful symphony is heavy sighs
Of death-devoted maids: resounds not here!
Then lead me through the vale where insects sip
Rich nectar from the buds of spring, and sleep
Unseen in myriads on the crocus' leaf
Filled with the genial banquet, there the soul
Grows wild with heavenly rapture! Nature there
Spreads wide her general sympathy! O come
And view with me the slow'ry-footed morn
Blush with the glories of her rising God!
As the pure orb of light draws the vapors from their parent earth, and
converts them by his effulgence into blessings; so did this charming girl
incorporate my soul with hers, till it became refined even to anguish. Her
eyes, full of innocence, were fixed on my face as she repeated those lines with
enthusiasm; the eyes of her father shone with the tear of fond delight; and he
happily relieved my unbecoming silence, by requesting Emily to favor him with
the author she had quoted.

"The book is very old, my dear sir, the works of my author have been extant
for ages; I sat on your bed of violets, I read him there; I gazed on the gaudy
tulip, her lesson was mine; imagination carried me through the variegated mead.
All nature taught me there! In a word, my dearest father, I have been from you
so long, and am so lately returned to your bosom, that I could rise on the
clouds, and diffuse the harmony I feel!"

"But the author, Emily, has not so particularly favored me."

I fancied my guardian meant to be good-naturedly severe on his cheerful
daughter, but she replied with quickness. -- "O yes, my lord, in various ways;
solitude is the nurse of contemplation, and fancy is officious in the absence
of our friends. Whilst I was composing those few lines in your garden, you,
perhaps, were forming serious plans of future happiness, and as it is
impossible for a generous man to exist merely for himself, you sat in awful
solemnity, twirling one thumb over the other, looking steadfastly at the fire,
and studying for the hour, what delicacy you should provide for my dinner, or
what gown would best suit your dear Emily at a ball."

What fine touches affection wore in this reply! Her father, regarding her with
complacency, said --

"My lively girl, your heart is now full, exhilated and unrestrained: but when
you leave your convent for worldly scenes, you will, you must, unfortunately,
be taught reserve: yet, I charge you, my Emily, never to pursue the worst
methods of your sex; never practice reserve till it arrive at deceit, nor
poison your blameless mind with affectation."

"Fear it not, my lord; artifice is not necessary as the world in general think
it, nor is affectation lovely; good manners are due to society, artifice
enslaves its possessor, and affectation is disgusting."

Emily had confused my ideas, or had given birth to new images in my laboring
mind; I could not converse collectedly, I sat lost in thought; she was
insensible of my infatuation and of her own power.

"Why are you studious, sir, why are you not like me; lively, happy, grateful
for the happiness you receive, and resigned to transient affliction? All will
pass away; my confessor has often enjoined me never to repine at woe, nor exult
in the rare visitation of coy felicity. My father will grieve if you grieve,
nor can I be truly blessed -- I pray you be happy with us."

"Surely I need not solicit when Emily implores," added my guardian; "the
language of nature excels the finished periods of rhetoric, and the sensible
mind sets a value on simplicity."

"Think me not regardless of your care, my dear friend," said I; "nor fancy me
obdurate to the gentle, yet keen remonstrance of your Emily -- But Oh! what a
world of agony is found
Within my single bosom!


"Beware! Beware of indulging wishes, the gratification of which perhaps ought
never to be attained; I ask not the cause of your inquietude. I am certain it
will be regulated by, or sacrificed to virtue; so will you gain the peace you
deserve. I do not wonder at your silent manner; it is merely the effect of
habit, habit of education, and education of natural necessity: you have the
habits of reflection even externally, because you are the child of solitude:
but certainly, when the soul expands to taste the joys of sympathetic
friendship, the clouds of secret anguish are shook off, as the moon from her
pure cheek shakes unwholesome dews."

I apologized to this excellent man!

"We will not be pressingly impolite," rejoined Emily, "but if you are not
engaged, I will finish the piece of embroidery begun in my convent, and you
shall read to us: my father has invited, for tomorrow, a large party of his
most valuable friends; we will try to cheer you, and in return, you must
promise to throw this sober sadness to those who are willing to accept it: for
my part, I know not one who would think your gift an obligation."

I was ashamed of giving pain to minds so noble and attentive -- We turned to
lively topics, and my friends were happy. Resolving never to embitter their
felicity by an ill-timed chagrin, which might be construed into haughty
reserve, I withdrew for the night.

Honor! -- What art thou? Who gave thee being in the mind of man? And why,
once wanting thee, is woman lost? On thy strong and everlasting base friendship
may erect her noblest structure! From thy altar may faultless love breathe its
flame to Heaven! Sighs of mingled souls, by absence torn, are ever heard in
whispering echos from thy hallowed shrine! The sacrifice once offered thee, is
incense purer in an angel's face than all the odours of the balmy east! Thou!
mild spirit of the good! wilt forbid the charming Emily to love a man who knows
not his parents; who is perhaps an orphan or foundling, and whose fortunes are
undecided; -- nor shall thou be profane! I will not indulge those weak
affections! I will not entangle her artless mind in the fascinations of blind
unwarrantable love! Oh Emily! be happy! May thou never be subdued but by the
unequalled ecstasy of loving and of being beloved; whilst honor holds its
sanction over thy beauties. Give me, thou mighty Maker of the human heart,
fortitude equal to these self-denying torments! Conflicts like these bring
anguish too acute for feeble man!

Thus did I reason and resolve; and quickly did I forget my reason and
resolutions, when gazing on Emily.

On the following morn, devoted to festivity, the halls began to sound, the
gates were thrown open, the row of aged oaks, which shaded the great walk to my
guardian's noble edifice, were pleasingly adorned with festoons of
wild-flowers, and variegated lamps, intended to shed a colored luster on the
coming night.

The equipages were brilliant, visitants numerous, and each appeared to vie
with their generous host in polite hilarity.

Among the many, came a gentleman, announced by the name of Rederique, son of a
Spanish nobleman. I found, near the conclusion of the evening, he had not been
invited, but had brought recommendations from some of my guardian's friends at
*****. I saw him alight, as I stood at my window; his form was elegant, his
dress superb, his deportment bold -- How much more engaging, said I to myself,
is thy lively air than this cold despondency that hangs on me! -- Recollecting
I should appear negligent in suffering my guardian to seek me, I left my
apartment. The company had taken their seats when I entered; Roderique had
chosen that next Emily; I sat opposite to him. He surveyed me attentively; I
heeded him not; my languishing soul was breathing its wishes toward the
lovelier object near him: I forgot all around her. Roderique, during the day,
endeavored to engross the conversation of Emily. Who would not have felt the
same desire? Good humor prevailing, and separation not thought of, our guests
began to study amusement. -- Religion, politics, and impracticable theory
employed the mental powers of the old, and the young sat down to music. Several
ladies played with that facility which harmonises the mind, and renders it
yielding to any impression of the moment; but when Emily commanded the
trembling strings! sympathetic softness enervated the soul: The doors of memory
opened to her key, and the image, late forgotten, gently arose before the
object it had once adored! All yielded to the enchantment of Emily, who
awakened reflection with its joys and sorrows. Roderique grew familiar,
pronounced her performance divine; declared himself superlatively blessed; and
looking obliquely at me, pronounced the man a brute who could wear a joyless
countenance while such beauty and skill united in consoling him -- Emily did
not hear, or did not regard him, when he requested her to play "The charms of
womankind." Respect and despair kept me at a distance.

"I will play," said Emily, "a little piece written by a friend of mine, who is
now in the convent, to whom I must soon return." -- "Heaven forbid," replied
Roderique, with more quickness than good manners -- "I beg pardon, Miss! let me
not interrupt you, or deprive the company of pleasure only in your power to
bestow."

"The lady I mention," continued Emily, addressing herself to me, after
silently bending to Roderique, is one of the loveliest creatures nature ever
formed; but she is full of secret sorrow -- pensive, like you, my worthy
friend."

"With feigned composure, I replied; "This gentleman wishes you to play; on me,
the harp of Jesse could not have half your power."

"Then I will play, and you shall reward me with a smile, so seldom worn, and
so highly prized by my father and me."

She sang and played -- Here dimly burns the wasting spark of life!
Whilst doomed to wander through the gloomy shade!
For ever lost, as gentle Henry's wife;
For ever kneeling to the saints for aid.
His image meets me even before the cross,
Reproves my prayer when I would chase his form;
Points to his heart still bleeding for my loss,
And seems to ask me if my vows are warm.
Ah, no! thou art my heaven! invented joy
Of dreaming monks could never charm like thee.
Haste! haste! and with thee bring my blooming boy;
Dissolve those grates, and set thy mourner free.


Slowly flowed those pathetic lines, while sympathy melted the hearts of the
hearers. A tear glided from the eye of Emily as she sang. I had the audacity
silently to wipe it away; but, suddenly remembering how much I had resolved,
stepped back to my seat.

When the music ceased, Roderique attempted to lead the conversation on
splendour, fashion, pleasure, and beauty. He dully expatiated; his language
boasted not that condensed keenness which could denote him capable of enjoying
happiness of any kind in an exquisite degree. Emily entertained us with many
little anecdotes, and described the innocent employments invented by the nuns,
to alleviate a life of seclusion, with so much native eloquence, that trifles
were made to charm.

"Yet, do all they can," said she, "the incessant gloom habitually forms the
mind to views of death, till cheerfulness almost appears unnatural: indeed, it
is a question, whether sadness, through every state, is not most predominant.
Cheerfulness is not born so soon, it seldom visits us uninvited; every little
art in society is used to prolong its stay; and at last, it leaves us to sit
down, with memory, and mourn the past. For my part, I would rather be
innocently cheerful, than sublimely grave."

"None but prudes will contradict you," I replied.

"But my ungoverned vivacity, a short time since, had like to have taught me a
lesson -- Nothing would serve but a ride in the morning -- my abbess
expostulated, raised her shoulders, and shook her head, to convince me she
detested (...) liveliness. I promised much in the name of my dear father; and I
positively, sir, must (...) back some pretty present; for after wasting half my
own good humor in awakening that of the lady abbess, she suffered me to ride
in the forest, attended by her own footman. We had not rode above an hour, my
horse in spirits, and myself as happy as the birds around, when we were crossed
by a pack of hounds.

"My horse ran away with me, I lost the servant, and lost myself in the woods,
where I was thrown on the turf; the fright was too much at the moment, I could
not recover myself, and how long I lay is of no consequence now; if it was, I
could not tell you; but I remember to have awakened, unhurt, in the arms of an
elderly gentleman, whom I could have loved as a father, because he treated me
with respectful tenderness. The blundering footman, instead of traversing the
forest, rode home, merely to say I was lost. On this doleful adventure, my
abbess has for ever set her great seal, so that if I remain twenty years in the
convent, I shall never get another ride in the forest."

From Emily's description of her gallant preserver, the count, her father, knew
him to be the duke of B****, who had lately visited us incog. and who had not
seen her since her infancy: he rallied his daughter, who lamented the feeble
returns she had made her illustrious friend.

Roderique was possessed of a large share of effrontery, over which he wore the
semblance of placidity: this coolness of manner, which affects perpetual
complacence, is well adapted to the ceremonious circles of polished society, in
which no p^re emotion of the soul is suffered to appear. From behind this mask,
supercilious vanity often hurls her shaft at the modest mind, who receives it,
and struggles to conceal the pang, while the laugh goes round at the expense of
sensibility. But here Roderique should have chosen a more noble manner of
cherishing the tender blossom of friendship, which spontaneously sought a place
in his bosom. He sat, though night was far advanced, as if resolved I should
leave him master of the social field. The respect I owed Emily and her father,
forced me to obey. I was slowly taking leave, when this witty gentleman
enquired, sneeringly, "if I was not afraid of spirits?" --

"Not if they happen to be gaily dressed," replied I with sang froid.

"Suppose you should meet one dressed like me, Monsieur?"

"I could not surely fear so delicate a form!"

"I am happy to hear you have so much cour^ge; I only meant civilly to inform
you, that I walk in my sleep -- Hah, hah, hah!"

"It should be the care of some loving friend, sir, to cure you of that
troublesome trick." --

Roderique frowned -- I continued --

"Were you to be led only once into our horsepond, think you would ever after
lie quiet in a warmer place."

"And who," said he fiercely, would have the bravery to lead me there?"

"Your nurse." --

Roderique looked down, played with his watchchain, and Emily politely wished
us a good night.

In spite of my resolves, and all the self-denying rules I had prescribed to my
heart, I felt a pleasure in not leaving her with our new guest.

My guardian commended me to repose. I went to seek it; but love, and the
inhabitant of the rock, alternately struggled with my senses. I arose with the
sun, turned to my books, and lingered out the moments, in perusing the
following manuscript, which I found by chance.

My reader may skip it over if he pleases, it having no connection with the
story of my life.

AN ORIGINAL: OR, THE ELEGY OF LAURA, TUNED TO THE HARP OF APOLLO.
The lovely Laura early was beguiled
By genius and by hope -- she mourned her lot;
Saw splendour rise beyond her native wild,
Panted for fame, and rashly left her cot.
A neigh'bring sage had taught the maid to spell,
Yea, often would wander with her over the lawn;
Talk much of heaven, but ever more of hell,
And bad her shun of vice the fatal dawn.
To lull the cares of age, she often would read:
The Hermit loved her; but her daring soul
Already scorned the bank and flowery mead:
Her vivid fancy stretched from pole to pole.
Taste she acquired; yet, to what end? her mind
Was forced to run the backward path of sense --
Range its internal worlds in hopes to find,
What naught but philosophic truths dispense.
Yet, contemplation did her soul enlarge;
Sun, moon, and stars, invited her to soar.
The bright-hair'd god smiled on his lovely charge;
He gave her genius, he could give no more.
But, ah! with genius, destiny appeared;
Frowning, she swiftly chased the thoughtless maid.
The hermit sought the bower her hands had reared,
And silent died when Laura left the shade.
Awhile the harmless damsel journey'd on;
Her healthful breath gave fragrance to the gale.
She sung with fervor to the morning sun,
And with unusual ardor left the vale.
The well-known hills were passed; the sun was drowned
Amid the weeping beauties of the west.
Her spirits fail; the barren prospect round,
Was in the faded blue of evening dressed.
Silent, less joyful, and more slowly still,
She strays over lawns bespangled with the dew.
The moon shone dimly from her eastern hill,
The virgin sighed, and feared her hope untrue.
When late, near home, the cheerless face of night
Wore no dismay: often as the bleating lamb
Had wandered, Laura feared no guilty sprite,
But brought the rover to his anxious dam.
Now did she sigh, when to the fleecy fold
Remembrance glided back -- no roof appeared!
On her soft form the breath of night grew cold;
The love-born Philomel alone was heard.
She trembled -- who at morn could trip away!
Scorning the lowly home and yielding clod!
In vain each shepherd tuned his artless lay,
She sought a path her fathers never trod.
What stung her soul? Was it vain thirst of fame?
Or that bright spark with dear refinement fraught?
So deeply buried, none discerned the flame:
Felt, though expressless, powerful though untaught!
With Laura, This was not meant to be Petrarch's Laura; the bard seems to have
thoughtlessly struck on the same name, in the beginning of her elegy. -- Note
of the editor.
in yon grove of nodding pines,
I hailed the precept of each hoary fire;
With her I wept over Petrarch's hopeless lines,
And mourned the pang of delicate desire.
Me did she choose from forth the rural throng;
No wealth had I, nor was my heart untrue.
Nature's great ecstacy inspired my song;
That song to gentle friendship ever due!
Friendship! give me, thou god of mighty fire,
A blaze more fierce than spirit ever has known:
Bid all thy lightnings keenly touch my lyre,
When I would make a kindred soul my own.
When Laura left me in my native vale,
I would not follow her in search of fame;
Back to my herd I turned, with sorrow pale,
Nor prized the withering glories of a name.
By her was rich Lycaon's seat espied,
Blushing, she lingered at the massy gate;
The miser did her melting power deride;
And scorn and insult hurled her on her fate.
Her little purse, yet swelled with useful gold,
(The hermit gave it at his cottage door,)
An heaven-born greatness every blush controlled;
She was not mean, nor miserably poor.
Yet, panting quick for comfort! -- Deserts wide
Before her lay. -- She mourned unfeeling power;
Remembered home; turned from the gate and sighed,
Whilst on her bosom beat the unpitying shower.
Behind her, from the watery waste afar,
Arose the howling storm; old oaks were torn --
Through heavens high region rolled the awful car,
In which were h^lls and bursting thunders borne.
A rock there was, whose brow for ever frowned,
On murmuring billows never known to sleep:
Beneath whose fo^^, by samphire wildly crowned,
The shades of death sit on the gloomy deep.
They revel high, when victims of despair
Rush down, through hopeless love or cureless pride;
New borrors stiffen in their weedy hair,
And thrice they lave their heads amid the tide.
Pity! thou pensive angel! break the air --
Ah! throw thy brightest beam on human woe!
Guide i^-st^r'd Laura from the danger near --
Ah, save her! save her! from the depth below.
Vain was my prayer! from off the dreadful height,
Trembling bewildered, the too-hapless maid,
Scared by the terrors of relentless night,
On the cold breast of watery death was laid.
Her troubled sigh bursted above the wave;
Sinking, she c^^^'d aloud on mighty fame --
Who sent her swans fair Laura's lay to save;
They snatched her numbers, and preserved her name.
Fame struck awhile young Laura's simple lyre;
Deaf were the gay, whilst angels paused above;
The chords were strained to virtue and desire,
To lambent friendship, and to ardent love.
But poesy never touched the frozen breast!
Enraged, the tuneful goddess sought the skies,
Convinced that genius has no place of rest;
Short of her native heaven the cherub dies!
There, through the vast empyrium fame was heard,
And Laura summoned to support her song;
The shivering spirit from the sea appeared,
And Phoebus stood amid the azure throng.
Thus spoke the God, "This spirit, fire, I crowned
"With music's charm, the moment of its birth;
"Yet malice, envy, ignorance confound,
"Thy beauties, Jove, and blast my power on "earth.
"No valued offerings on my altar burn;
"Oppression strikes my children with despair;
"From yon hard world, my vot'ries weeping turn;
"Their food is sorrow, and their drink a tear.
"Why rule the vulgar many? why obscured
"My fervent vot'ries, speak, indulgent power?
"Why was fair Laura, (by my voice allured)
"Thus sunk, overwhelmed beneath the nightly shower?"
The thunders murmured, and the vaults of heaven
Shook, whilst the Father of the world proclaimed:
"Thy favorites, Phoebus, from the earth are driven,
"But here, through endless ages, are they named.
"Thy worshippers are mine" -- The powerful God
In color'd lightenings wrapped, alone withdrew;
Phoebus adored the Ruler's gracious nod,
And down, to find young Laura's patron, flew.
No patron had she found; one night of woe
Quenched in her breast all nature could inspire.
The god looked wildly on the wave below,
And from his forehead shook indignant fire.
"Harlus," he cried, "with me my Laura weep;
"Thy gentle spirit heard not when she sung,
"Or now she had not wandered in the deep,
"Her chords untwisted, and her lyre unstrung.
"My beams shone lovely on Aurora's brow,
"I left her blushing, seized my seat of day;
"The eastern world did to my glories bow,
"My coursers blazed, I marked their radiant way.
"Mild genius trembling, wisdom pale, I saw;
"Each passed with silent pride, Lycaon's door;
"Mourning that miser only just by law,
"Nourished by famine, and with riches poor.
"My fires grew languid at Lycaon's view;
"Skies round me darkened, till my zenith gained;
"Here I beheld thee, to my interest true,
"Embrace the pensive bard that never complained.
"Thou steady, great, disinterested mind!
"Soother of guiltless anguish near thee hurled!
"Swayed by no censure, by no knave confined,
"Scorning to swell the roarings of the world,
"Private thy virtues; yet from pole to pole,
"Phoebus will chaunt the hymn to Harlus due;
"Oppose the waves of envy, as they roll,
"'Mid time's swift billows keep thy truth in view.
"Over the wild main through every humble vale,
"The child of melody thy worth shall sound;
"And even yon mountain bard arrest the gale
"That waits my chariot wheel the universe around.
"Granting he sleeps, ere thou unwearied prove
"Of life's great scene, ah! cheer his pensive ghost,
"By owning friendship yields to none but love,
"And heavenly friendship is the poet's boast.
"My Laura sighed for thee, had thou been near,
"Thy manly arm had borne her from the storm;
"Within thy bosom sheltered from despair,
"Thy heart had cheered her, for thy heart is warm."
Thus sang the flaming god -- the valleys rung
From where my lambs lay basking in his ray;
I climbed the rock, enraptured as he sung,
Caught the soft strain, and here record his lay.
At the bottom of this piece, in which energy wooes simplicity, was a prose
inscription, nearly obliterated by time, or carelessness, I know not which.

"This elegy was written by the poetess of the mountain, who was mad enough to
think for herself in the year **** Gloria Patri! She commends her body to the
virgin of St. Nicholas, in whose chapel she wishes to be laid."

Poor poetess! said I, laying down the book, thy heart is no longer torn by
contending passions, it ceases to beat; Love and friendship have quitted it for
ever.

Meditating on man, I considered him as making a progress toward perfection,
only in those intervals, when he feels harmony within, arising from the gentler
passions of his nature, and that rude and violent ideas occasionally throw him
back: and concluded, he is at all times a being more entitled to pity than
reproach.

Our family were not yet risen, except Emily, who had left her apartment, and
tripped into her father's park. I observed she took a friendly peep at my poor
Mayo, who was now indolent from age, and for whose repose a little cot was
erected near the park gate.

Unnoticed, I followed the lively maid, saw her stoop, and admire the humid
flowerets, and heard her congratulate the lark as the Heaven-loving songstress
ascended from her downy chamber.

The sun had scarcely drawn up the gray ether from the valleys; and the
shepherd, who was slowly winding the distant hill, appeared through a mist. His
hands were folded athwart his bosom, his long hair fell on his shoulders, and
his faithful dog crept humbly behind him. Happy clown! Who would not give
their grandeur for thy vacant ease? He kept his path, approached Emily with
rustic diffidence, and bowed as he passed, but the amiable girl would not
suffer him to go unwelcomed by her morning offering; she opened her purse,
requested him to partake of its contents, and curtified as she left him. For
"his eyes lacked luster, and his locks were gray."

Giving her time to advance before me, I questioned the venerable peasant; the
man that could claim Emily's attention was worthy mine.

He told me his son was a soldier at ******, that he now lay ill in an hospital
there, and if he could but get him cleared, Anna, he was certain, would recover
with gladness at her brother's return. -- "What ails your Anna? will money or
advice relieve her?"

"No, no, sir, she does not much mind money. And, as for advice, she does not
care to take it. I I have said to her, that reading the Bible can hurt no one,
but she reads about things I don't understand." --

Why, in a lituation where labor is so necessary, does your daughter waste her
hours?"

This ill-natured question disagreed with my understanding and taste. I was not
illiberal enough to confine spirit to situation; nature often exalts one above
the other, but I was willing to hear how he would defend his Anna -- He replied:

"O, sir, she labors as much as I do, through the day, in spinning, and what
not, and reads when she should take her natural rest -- What is night for, sir,
but to sleep?"

"Hem! -- to meditate -- and mourn!" -- said I.

"But there!" -- softening his voice, "Anna cannot sleep! -- there must be
something wrong in it. Poor Anna, I hope, will find a better world!"

He drew his hand over his eyes; the suffusion could not be concealed -- I
turned myself round --. When a man wishes to hide his emotions, it is at least
unrefined to stare at his struggling features. Emily had set me an example of
generosity, I followed it, the peasant was grateful in the warm language of
nature, and went on.

The charming girl, with all her enthusiasm for the beauties of nature, was
fearful of ranging too far to contemplate them -- she turned back, was a little
surprised at seeing me so near; but, soon recovering that irresistible ease,
which graced her every movement, she addressed me with a smile --

"I lament the violence you have done yourself, sir, in rising before nine
o'clock. Your late ramble should have insured you repose, especially, as we
were up last night.

To the still hour when fairies make their ring,
And dance to music of a beetle's wing.
"And why did Emily leave her tranquil pillow, while the silken bands of
slumber are allowed to hold the sense of the happy? To rove unnoticed, to drink
alone the fragrance of the spring, is the privilege of a mind careless of the
world. But Emily has brighter scenes before her; Emily should taste every
guiltless pleasure, while protected and prized by a generous father." --

"I do: my youthful hours glide smoothly; sheltered by his paternal love, I
know no richer blessing." --

"A blessing I have never known!"

"My father would think your reflection unkind -- He has taught me candor. To
his noble and manly sentiments, I owe my ideas of sterling virtue, and my
contempt of hypocrisy; whose bancful web not only ensnares the innocent, but
too often entangles her own practitioners. -- What great business is doing in
the world, sir! or what mighty good will mankind attain by insincerity with
each other?"

"Our passions, Emily, are often dangerous; we are obliged to conceal them,
fearing their effects may prove fatal to the cause of virtue; and, even in this
laudable concealment, we may appear insincere."

"Right -- there I will allow a virtuous mind to prescribe for itself!"

"And while the wounded heart is thus struggling and prescribing for itself,
does it not deserve the consolation, rather than the contempt of society? No
great good can be attained worthy the sacrifice of truth, but truth is so fine,
so exquisite and rare, she will not sometimes obtrude on the coarser part of
mankind; the wise, through modesty, often conceal her."

"According to your theory, truth may not always appear -- But, according to my
resolutions, my actions shall arise from no other spring."

"You need no other -- Where passion is not acting nor conspiring against
internal peace or general order, truth may and will appear. Innocence gives now
a luster to your sentiments, which truth calls her own."

"Well, sir, you say the passions are dangerous, I believe they are useful, and
only rebellious when we would give them false meanings, or render them
subservient to poor convenience. The passions are the wings of spirit. Cold
tranquillity the grave of thought. Turn your eyes to my convent! Even there the
passions reign; but they rove through the mind like murmuring winds through
barren and gloomy regions."

"I only mean, Emily, that the chain of reason should be thrown on the desires
of the heart."

"Reason! What is reason? By what criterion is it established? Reason is cheap,
vague; offering itself to you on all occasions. If a man does right according
to received custom, he is said to act with reason; but should his conduct,
though faultless, oppose custom, he is still moving in contact with his own
reason; and he will be astonished when he finds it is the reason of some other
man and not his own that he is expected to obey. For you, sir, there is no
necessity of torturing or concealing truth, your heart is not capable of a
sentiment that can disgrace you!"

We now perceived my guardian and Roderique strolling round the park; they soon
joined us, on an eminence from which the eye wandered over the ocean till it
was stayed by the horizon.

The father of Emily, taking her hand, informed us, he had prevailed on his
accomplished guest (meaning Roderique) to remain a week with him. -- "Rural
beauties cannot invite an imagination long softened by luxurious scenes, and
made restless by varied delights, in which the poisons of the heart are
concealed. Nor does our new friend come under that description; but I will
promise him attention, and innocent pleasure; and, to your politeness, my dear
Henry, I commend this gentleman." --

I bowed -- Roderique slightly returned my congee.

The perspective my guardian had brought for the purpose of assisting
Roderique's view of the ocean, was in the hand of the latter: I requested the
favor of it, and raising it to my eye, immediately discerned a little skiff or
sloop, but thinly manned, laboring through the billows -- My heart fluttered.
I concluded the wanderer of the main to be the faithful fisherman, so
impatiently expected by the fugitive in the rock.

It is impossible to describe the gentle thrillings of the blood which we so
powerfully feel when collateral incident strikes on the image of our treasured
joys. I felt a transport sacred to friendship; I concealed that transport, even
from the friends I loved -- Did I value truth the less?

I restored my guardian his perspective, and we hastened home to breakfast.
Roderique was particularly attentive to Emily, her father was kind to all;
never did hospitality smile on a more benignant form.

My die was cast! My wishes were silent; but every progressive moment convinced
me that Emily was necessary to my peace.

Roderique had been given to my attention: he expressed a desire of making an
excursion round the country; I felt undelighted with the idea of accompanying
him, and feigned myself indisposed. The splendour of the skies, notwithstanding
my excuse, tempted our family-party to take a turn through the meadows; and to
the care of Emily and her father, did I, for good reasons, resign the envied
Roderique. In passing the gate, he offered his arm to the amiable maid, she
declined it, and accepted that of my guardian. My eyes pursued them, till they
were lost in the shade of elm trees that grew round the adjacent enclosure;
when, hastily ordering my horse, I resolved instantly to depart for the
miserable cavity of my poor recluse. I rode threw a narrow lane, with the sole
purpose of avoiding my friends; and at the end of a field, to the right, my
horse's head turned suddenly upon them. They had crossed the meadow which
directed to the same point. I was a little abashed; Emily smiled, and asked me,
"which I had conquered, my indisposition, or my love of truth?"

"My indisposition must be conquered by stronger forces than mine, dear Emily;
my love of truth remains; I will convince you of it in some happier moment; at
present, do not condemn me unheard." -- Adding to this, the usual compliments
of the day, and congratulations on the pleasure of their walk, I rode off.

The heat of the sun was forgot, while spurred on by impatient friendship; I
soon arrived at the brink of the precipice, where I had first seen the
interesting stranger. Slipping my horse's bridle on an oak branch, I roved
along the jagged surface of the rock, but saw no guiding mark; and recollected
rather late, that I had appointed no hour of return to this solitary scene.
Stung by disappointment, I called aloud; the rock reverberated, but no human
voice answered me; my vexation and my hallooing availed me nothing; I grew
spiritless, and was remourning, when a damsel appeared at a great distance; she
seemed suddenly to have arisen from beneath the shrubbery which clothed the
slanting hills: her hat was in her hand; I observed she shook it at me, as one
of my feet was in the stirrup, the other on the earth; I left my awkward
position, again fastened my bridle to the tree, and received her with that
delicacy due to the female character. She smiled, curtsied, and I wished her
fair weather on her journey.

"I thank you, sir," said she; "but my journey I believe must end here, for
unless you be the gentleman, I am come to seek one I cannot find, and talk of
one I do not know."

Chance may do much for you, my good girl -- from whence or from whom are you
sent?" --

"From the Fisherman's hut below the mountain -- My father has crossed the
ocean, and a gentleman waits his return, who has sent me hither: -- "Not," said
he, "(as I was putting on my yellow mittens), that I can positively direct you,
Lydia; you are better acquainted with those unfrequented wilds than I am. But
should you meet a gentleman wandering near that high rock which seems to touch
the skies, conduct him, I pray you, to this habitation of your father." "So,
sir, I came here yesterday, and am come again to day." --

"I am the man; lead me quickly to my friend" --

Without hesitation, the damsel directed me down the declivity, with which she
was well acquainted. At some moments she kindly obliged me to rest on her arm,
while she first descended the rugged steep; alternately she trusted herself to
my superior strength. Holding her in my arms, I once involuntarily pressed her
to my bosom; silence reigned around, the skies themselves were full of
beneficence, and creative power! But -- virtue, in the form of Emily, suddenly
filled my soul; she checked the dangerous sensation, and it died away.

"If honor consists of self-restraint, then am I honorable," whispered my
spirit to the watchful angels -- Lydia is young, unartful, and wake to the
touch of tenderness. Shame on the man who would steal from her cheek the
crimson of innocence. -- "

Meditations of this kind officiously operated in my bosom as the gentle maid
conducted me to her father's hut -- and meditations of this kind only serve to
prove that man can forego one blessing, while in pursuit of a better.

On entering the fisherman's dwelling, the first object that presented itself,
was my incognito, leaning on his hand. Some letters lay before him, which I
imagined he had been reading, and Lydia twice announced me before he rouzed
from his reflective posture. A gleam of unaffected joy enlivened him as he
welcomed me to his embrace.

The fisherman made his appearance; his garb was mean, his habitation homely;
yet on his brow sat that dignity, which honesty dares to wear in the presence
of princes. He introduced his children -- I sincerely wished them happier days,
and they respectfully left me with their more-wretched guest.

"I am now on the eve of departure," said my solitary friend, "a short delay,
even in this uninhabited scene, might ruin me and my hospitable host. On his
arrival at Paris, he found means to reach the duke of B****, who informed him,
on his producing my letters, tha^ the supposition of our being wrecked, had
prevailed secretly at court; and many private enquiries had been made
concerning me."

"Fly! (says he, in this second letter) nor despairingly yield your valuable
life; the time may come when I shall be able to assist you. The minister is
enraged against me, on account of his political maneuvers, to which I would
not assent, and my safety lies in leaving France for a time. -- I go to the
Austrian Netherlands, and will wait for you at the abbe Dorvontes. -- Come to
me, if possible, in the course of a month. B****."

"And how will you depart?" replied I. --

"Here are jewels to a large amount," (said he,) "in this casket, which I had
concealed in my belt a few hours before we were surprised by the storm: I have
also some cash: with this poor fisherman and his family, have I sworn to divide
my fortune; and I have promised to send for them, when once I am in a place of
safety -- His children shall be mine."

I began to suspect the charming Lydia had made an impression on the heart of
this gentleman; for superlative gratitude generally springs from secret love --
I was forming false ideas.

"Yes, sir, continued he, "I will study to cheer his creeping hours of age; and
my friendship shall bless him, when his strength is no more."

I stooped, under the pretense of fastening my buckle, but in reality to hide
my emotion -- "Why," (my melting heart would have said,) "must I never find a
father to relieve, when his health and strength are no more?"

In stooping forward, the miniature I had worn for years round my neck, broke
its chain, and fell to the ground. The stranger first perceived it, caught it
up, and was politely offering it me, when I jocularly questioned him, "If so
much beauty excited not his attention?"

He gazed -- In a moment his soul was lost in silent contemplation! -- Pressing
the lovely image to his lips, he burst into tears, and could only articulate --

"It is she! -- my long, long lost angel!"

Confused as I was, prudence at the moment restrained me from calling
assistance. He raised his eyes, and exclaimed, with a mournful look, "Where is
she? Why have you torn her from me! Speak! -- Tell me she will again be mine!"

I could promise nothing -- I knew not the original.

Suddenly starting from his seat, where I had supported his reclining head, he
walked hastily the extent of the room for some minutes. It was a short
traverse, but he was more agitated than the traveller, who is setting out on a
long journey, poorly provided.

Assuming composure, he at length addressed me:

"How dare you wear this picture?"

"I value it highly, sir; it was given me by the man I most love."

"Perhaps the lady loved him too -- but this is not a moment for expostulation."

His increasing rage blinded his reason; in a strong paroxysm he pointed his
sword at me --

"Beware, sir! or you will prove how fallacious are your ideas of honor."

Stung by the salutary hint, he rested the point of his sword on the ground,
and stood lost in silent despair.

"O heaven! is this thy care of man? -- Was I not yesterday sufficiently
wretched? I did not think it in the power of fate further to heap the measure
of my woes! -- This day, what am I! -- It is impossible -- She never could love
another! -- No matter -- Pardon me, sir, I am wrong -- I am distracted -- Where
will you arm? -- I must keep this picture."

"If our host can provide me a sword, I will do myself the justice of defending
a heart as worthy as your own; but not unless you first restore the prize we
fight for."

"It is mine," -- said he fiercely --

"Not without you own it as a theft; and such an avowal will for ever throw you
beneath my notice. I will contend with you as a gentleman, not as a robber."

"You are right," (replied he with a melancholy air,) "it must be yours till I
have won it. -- Go! (after pressing it to his lips) "inestimable jewel! Dear
resemblance of all I adore! Why, ah! why art thou in possession of any but the
man who dies for thee? -- Take this beauty, sir -- yet be warned by one much
older, and more experienced in affliction than you are -- If her unequalled
perfections have enslaved you, forget them. I charge you this hour to tear her
from your heart!"

Pronouncing these words in a resolute tone, he bowed, and restored me the
picture; I placed it in my bosom, and firmly waited that tremendous trial which
is formed on savage principles, and deservedly despised when the passions have
subsided.

I was well aware that the fatal victory we had mutually resolved to gain,
must, in future, give birth to remose in the mind of the survivor: but
pusillanimity would have rendered me unworthy the friendship of this exalted
unknown; and so strangely was my heart attached to him, that death from his
hand would be in my opinion less painful than life with the loss of his esteem.

My antagonist had, at my request, left the apartment we were in, to enquire
for some kind of arms. He returned without effecting his purpose: the
unwealthful habitation of our host needed no military prowess to defend it; for
over his little all, did quiet Poverty spread her sable wing.

Disappointed, yet highly raging, the stranger offered me his sword, on
condition I should restore him the picture.

"You have too much generosity to refuse my prayer. You are unarmed, I cannot
fight you; but give me that gem! Let me, in dying, call it mine! Pierce this
heart so tenacious of its right! When it has ceased to beat, her irresistible
beauties may be yours -- But tell her! -- Oh! tell her, in her fondest
moments, that my soul flew out bearing her image to eternal bliss!

Never had my heart sustained such a moment of softened anguish. Tearing open
his bosom, this too-powerful opponent kneeled, and offered me his sword. Pity
mixed with my stronger feelings. I lamented the laws of honor which obliged me
never to resign the gift he sued for; and, while I made him understand me on
this cruel point, I raised his compassion, for he seemed well acquainted with
mental conflict.

"Come with me, my unfortunate friend," (said I, offering him my hand) come
with me to my home; we may there find an explanation of this mystery; you
shall, you must be convinced, that I have never wronged you."

"I will go!" -- (replied he with wild impatience) "Conjecture is the child of
uncertainty; the man who yields to it is sometimes heedlessly undone. I will go
with you; I fear you not; it is not in the power of the world now to deprive me
of any thing worthy my esteem. What gives you happiness has ended mine."

In vain I strove to remove those opinions kindled by jealousy in the bosom of
this man; deaf as the storm to the traveller, he beat down my defensive plea,
and imperiously commanded me to guide him to my friends, if I had any -- I
obeyed this brave but desperate stranger; who, in the moment of passion trusted
himself to me, he deemed his rival, and, who might, from the confidence so
lately reposed in him, prove a foe. The fisherman heard our loud altercation,
but intruded not; we threw open the door in haste to depart, and met him
weeping with his trembling Lydia.

"Suffer me to direct you to the top of the mountain," (said he to his
impassioned guest,) "though I fear you are returning to perfidy and death; why
will you not pursue your first purpose of going to the duke? -- May heaven
protect you!"

"Peace, old man! Am I not pursuing an object dearer than the life thou have
preserved?"

I secretly slipped a purse into the hand of Lydia, whose eyes were full of
that softened sentiment, so amiable in the sex, and so powerful with mankind.

We departed, in company with her honest father. My horse (whom I had forgot)
was feeding heartily on the brow of the hill. My long absence made him
impatient and hungry; he had broke his bridle, and hunger, not gratitude,
detained him near the spot where he was left by a thoughtless master. Here the
fisherman took leave of us, and returned to his cabin and his children.

That gloomy silence which hangs on two objects deeply interested, when neither
can collect language equal to his feelings, prevailed with me and my companion,
from the moment we left the fisherman till we arrived at the gate of my
guardian. Emily received us with restrained astonishment, the habit of the
stranger made an apology necessary. He did apologize, and with such a grace as
convinced us he thought ornament wanting more for our sakes than his own. "To
you, the utmost respect should be ever paid: for me, wretched appearances,
Madam, suit well."

He did not know how far the soul of Emily soared above the gaudy seemings of
the world. Compliments, the frivolity of which, the good sense of Emily soon
annihilated, were at an end, when my guardian and Roderique entered. I
introduced my unknown gentleman as well as I could, and a very incoherent
introduction I made of it. My guardian looked at the stranger with surprise.
Roderique rudely surveyed him with contempt, and the new guest sternly returned
his ill-timed gaze. Turning away with manly indifference from the supercilious
Roderique, he frankly addressed himself to the former; "You seem agitated, sir,
I beg you will compose yourself; I will not long obtrude; my business shall be
brief. I feel myself injured; this young gentleman defies me* I came here to
claim your justice, but, in the presence of this lady, dare not seize the
moment of reparation."

"Emily," said her father, "may I request you to retire?"

"I know no reason, I must confess," replied Roderique, "why the company should
separate -- but, on second thought, I believe it may be as well, for this
gentleman (walking round, as if he meant to inspire him with diffidence) can
have little business with the ladies."

The other only returned --

"Your conceptions, sir, are of little importance to a man who despises
trifles:"

Roderique tried to hum a lively air; Emily retired, in a manner, that
convinced me she gladly left the spot where pointed ill-manners stung the
unfortunate.

"You talk of injuries, sir," said my guardian, "if I have ever wronged you,
boldly claim revenge."

"It is not you who are my object. I am led here to submit to your arbitration.
Justice in you will dissipate my ideas of revenge; but, by heaven, I will not
depart, till that gentleman restores the gem I have too long lost!"

"That gentleman, sir, is no robber! I will answer for his honor, and you
wound mine when you doubt him; his heart must not be struck at till mine has
ceased to beat."

"Command him, sir, to restore the picture now concealed in his bosom!"

"In vain; (replied my guardian furiously) the picture can never find a more
noble bosom; it is his right, his highest privilege. I gave it him sixteen
years ago, as a pledge -- "

"A pledge! -- Is it possible! -- A pledge of what, sir, did she condescend? --
But -- I am not myself! -- She never gave it you! it is falsehood deserving
damnation, and you wrong her, sir. -- This moment command him, if you have any
influence, to resign that picture, or the richest stream that revels near my
heart shall be wasted on your pavement -- A pledge! -- A pledge! -- Where am I?
-- "

Here the voice of the stranger faultered. I remained in silent and awful
observation -- Even Roderique seemed struck with reverence.

"Yes," said my guardian -- "I avow, and will for ever repeat, that no man can
have a dearer claim to the resemblance of that unfortunate beauty; it is her
pledge of love, of pure unsullied love!

"Silence! -- I will hear no more! -- Leave unended your tale of infamy --
Poltroons of your cast were meant to curse the fame of helpless woman --
Slander her if you dare, sir; come, we will parley when we meet again -- Draw,
sir; and bid your boy assist you -- I would willingly try both."

"No, sir," (replied my Guardian with a serenity that gave an heavenly luster
to his features) "we are not assassins. I alone will encounter you. Henry,"
(turning to me as he was following the enraged stranger toward the door) "I
have but one request to make, though this may be my last hour, protect my
child; I am confident you will never be dastard enough to resign the picture of
your MOTHER."

"His MOTHER!" (turning hastily back) -- "My Henry -- My son! -- My dear
Henry," exclaimed the unknown.

In a moment my guardian was obliged to give way. I felt myself in the arms of
my Father, and we together sank speechless on the floor.

The transports of filial love were new; new images opened on my mind as I held
the object I had so long sought, in my strong embrace.

"Why, sir," (said I to my guardian hastily) "did you give me this picture, and
charge me to preserve it, without informing me it was the resemblance of my
mother?"

"Ah! my dear Henry," replied he, with a sigh, "the clue that has led you to
the knowledge of your father is yet in the hand of wayward fortune, and may
break before you are completely blessed."

Impossible, sir! Heaven designed me as an instrument to promote his felicity.
Oh, sir! had you seen him lost to comfort; had you found him so very wretched,
you would have acted as I have done, and trusted the event to Heaven."

"I need not inform you, sir," said my Father to my guardian, "who I am; you
never till this hour personally knew me; but you have protected my child; may
God, from his store of blessing, pour your rewards! I am powerless, and can
only offer you the language of a heart melted by your benevolence, and waiting
from you its future peace. Where is my wife! Answer me that one question, and
do with me as you please. Life, without her, is of no value."

"Could I give you that satisfaction, sir," replied my guardian, "believe me, I
would not linger in the tale; your wife, I have heard, must tread the paths of
society no more. Where she is immured, I cannot inform you. On the second of
April, which, I believe, according to the letter I received from the duke, was
about a week before you and your tutor were committed to close confinement,
this youth, then an infant, was placed beneath my care. Not having
accommodations suited to so tender a babe, my wife being dead, and my children
receiving different educations, a distance from me, I resigned him to the care
of one of my tenants. The man was nobly honest, the woman simple and
uncorrupted. With them he grew; the miniature, which has caused so much
altercation, was sent me by the duke of B**** -- I hung it round the neck of
Henry; and not daring to reveal the secret of his birth, only charged him to
preserve it even at the expense of life. How well he has obeyed my injunction
you can determine."

"I will not arraign the mercy of Heaven," said my father; "my son is restored.
Who shall set bounds to everlasting beneficence? -- May I not yet behold her!
May not some dark unfathomable event throw the long-loved beauty into my
faithful arms! How the imaginary phantom dances to my tender wishes! -- but --
I must be resigned."

During this scene of unaffected joy, we had forgot Roderique -- Nature had
left no vacuum in our souls, and affection had closed every avenue, through
which a mere object of polite civility could enter on our recollection. Whilst
our glowing sentiments were thus undergoing a mutual interchange, Roderique had
sat himself down to write, like one who was intent on taking minutes of some
extraordinary occurrence. -- And such the reader will ere long, perceive was
the employment of that gentleman at this interesting eclaircissement.

I had ever prized myself on being an adept in scrutinizing the human heart,
and never did my vanity so falsely support itself as now. I affected to be
wonderfully penetrating, when I told Roderique, as he smiled at my father, with
a kind of triumph, that the generosity of his mind shone strongly in his
features. Roderique hastily squeezing the paper, on which he had wrote, thrust
it into his pocket, and advanced toward us. I never, till now, had given him
credit for goodness of heart; and was pleased in presenting him to my father as
an accomplished nobleman, whom we ranked in the number of our friends.

We had acted inadvertently, but there was no recalling the past moment, and we
suffered in the sequel for our imbecility.

Surely there are seasons of sweet delirium, when the soul feels herself
unusually enlarged and bountiful. Then, if ever, we resemble our Creator; we
would eagerly dispense delight, as we unexpectedly receive it; while fancy
increases the rapture by throwing agreeable tints on every object around us. My
overflowing heart was immerged in newborn transport; and my reader will not
wonder that Roderique appeared through a pleasing medium -- Had I not lately
found a father? shame on the man, (said I to myself) who suspects a friend, and
has not candor to reveal his sentiments. What harmony would animate the world,
were mortals sincere! Thus I arraigned my rectitude, for having beheld
Roderique with past dislike. I was at this moment so very generous as to
ascribe that dislike to my love for Emily, and resolved in future to be more
just in restraining my desires and expanding my friendship; nor did Roderique,
in my opinion, retain his wonted manner; his hauteur was changed to
obsequiousness; I became subdued by his attention, and was fastened to his
will; in a word, we were friends.

My father, though evidently pining after good unpossessed, was grateful to the
kind civilities of my guardian, whose every effort was meant to please. In
hunting, angling, and rural diversion we strove to lessen the weight of care;
but fate had laden my father too heavily! my friend Roderique too seemed lately
to have taken up his share of business; I never could tempt him from his
employ, which was continually writing and receiving letters. I was, therefore,
allowed sufficient leisure to arrange my plans of future happiness. I had but
one; and resolved, the first opportunity, to ask my father's consent, that I
might marry Emily. Yet, I had not endeavored to engross the affections of that
lovely object; I even sometimes avoided her, lest she should observe the
anguish of my soul, pity, and secretly love me under inauspicious influences.
Heavens! what would I not have resigned for the knowledge of this one truth!

Thou will find, my gentle reader, I am very inconsistent; but we are all so;
love and virtue clashing in thy mind, will make thee feel with me.

Yes, I wished Emily's affection to keep pace with mine. I wished her to taste
that pure, though visionary bliss of loving, without the dull certainty of
possessing; of voluntarily yielding, with the choice of being free; of keeping
the reins of her conduct in her own hands, without being assaulted by the wild
passions of a man, who, at times, could not answer for himself.

Such was the great passion with which I longed to fill the heart of Emily; for
this reason I resolved privately to gain the sanction of her father and mine,
and to watch the dawning of her gentle wishes.

To aid this little plan, and throw wider my view of happiness, Roderique one
day informed me, he should soon depart. -- I know not why, but my heart
fluttered strangely at this information.

"Are you not unwilling," said I, "to leave so fine a country. Is here no
object, whose charms are powerful enough to detain you?"

What an awkwardness there was in this question; every word of it simply
declares.

"None more powerful than your own," replied Roderique: "in your conversation,
I have learned the lessons of honor, of truth, and of filial affection: accept
my heart, and call me for ever yours."

Still I panted for an avowal of Roderique's sentiments respecting Emily. I had
no right to accuse or complain; I had beheld a treasure without attempting to
secure it, and his privilege was fair as mine. I continued musing, as I spoke,
on the insensible vivacity of Roderique, who was so soon to leave us; like a
shadow we must behold no more.

"My guardian will regret your absence -- even Emily -- the charming Emily -- "
(an ill-timed sigh lengthened her name upon my lips) -- "perhaps may mourn."

"Emily is lovely," replied Roderique, with wonderful carelessness, "but I
leave her to you -- pursue, possess, be happy, and grow old in all she is
capable of communicating. For me, my dear friend, other pleasures wait. I will
return to my former scene of gaiety, I will remember you and Emily, and I will
flatter myself with the idea of not being always a stranger to your memory."

Selfish as I was, Roderique relieved me from the excrutiating pangs of
jealousy. In return, I made him warm protestations of lasting regard. Feeble
was my judgment, and officious in self-deception, when I fancied this man
capable of disinterested friendship. Yet, had Emily never existed, Roderique
might have been less abandoned.

Our conversation was prolonged from the park gate, where it began, to the door
of my guardian's mansion; in the window of which we espied the charming maid
leaning on her hand. She had studiously avoided company for some days; had
seldom left her own apartment; and her father informed us she complained of an
oppression near her heart. "I will invite her to ride with me," said this
indulgent man, "in hopes of dissipating a melancholy I cannot account for."

He accordingly accompanied her over the adjacent plains; I implored the angel
of health to restore her native cheerfulness, and retired to my study.

I had taken up the orations, said to have been delivered by the divine Plato,
to his disciples on the promontory of Sunium, and had read a few pages, when I
was disturbed by a gentle rap at my door -- it was my father who entered; he
saluted me affectionately, and began a conversation with a serious air.

"The obscurity of this peaceful spot, my dear son, suits my miserable
fortunes; but how long may I, with honor, continue under the kind protection
of your guardian, whose life and property may be endangered by his hospitality
to me? While I am a wanderer, and free from chains, Louis trembles for his
crown. I am his twin-brother, was born with him in the same hour, consequently,
have been a state prisoner through life, and am now an exile. I seek not the
diadem of France; my heart is not so heated by ambition, as by civil commotion,
to shed the blood of thousands; nor would I wish you to be known through the
realm, as the nephew of the king."

My blood seemed to make a full pause at this declaration; but it paused only
to revisit my heart with treble force.

"What! -- my noble father! are you content to creep round the world a victim
to persecution, and an alien to society?"

"Content is with your mother; if I find her, the dominions of nature will be
mine."

"May the Almighty power in restoring her to you, give me the blessing I have
never known! -- But do not expect to hear me whistle after the plough, or die
undistinguished amidst the peaceful pleasures of these woodlands. -- Bid me go
and seek my mother! Bid me rush into the path of glory; I may learn her destiny
-- I may soften yours, I may snatch some laurels from the hand of war; at
least, my life will not glide away without leaving a proof of my existence on
the annals of fame."

He answered. -- "Fame has affliction for her favorite: she sets him up; he
veers with her blast, and riots in her transient charms. Soon, much too soon,
her minion falls from her finest height. Envy receives him in her snaky bosom;
he looks up, and owns with regret, that no summit was ever gained on which man
can permanently rest."

"But my honor, sir, will oblige me at least to leave this scene; at once
inactive, inglorious, and dangerous to you, to my guardian, to me, and to -- "

Here my conscious heart arrested my tongue, before it wildly pronounced the
name of her I loved; for, however cold I might appear to be, I too, certainly,
at some moments, feared for Emily and myself. Besides, did not a suffering
father stand before me, whose wrongs I was impatient to redress? -- He did, and
my whole soul became expanded with the grandeur of her own ideas.

My father calmly replied -- "Your observations are just, my son; for your
secret consolation preserve your honor and your virtue, and barter not either
for public fame. Fame can never repay you. I am serious -- If quitting this
retreat will secure your rectitude, you shall with me immediately depart."

During this speech, I felt the power of my father darting to the inmost
recesses of my troubled mind.

He continued -- "Emily has informed me -- "

I started. -- "Why are you agitated? why do you turn pale? Be seated, my
worthy Henry," politely drawing a chair, this generous fugitive proceeded:

"Yesterday you lamented the dejection of Emily; you were surprised at her
avoiding the presence of yourself and Roderique; you know not the cause, nor do
I; the motives of those who are all innocence and delicacy may not be
impertinently scrutinized; but she is not happy."

"God forbid, sir! -- who makes her otherwise? I will not tamely -- pray inform
me." --

My Father smiled; and, interrupting me, said, "I find you are no culprit,
Henry, you hourly give me new proofs of exalted purity. Emily has informed me,
that she wishes to cut short this visit to her Father, and requests me to use
my influence with him, that she may, in three days, depart. In my convent, said
the charming girl, I shall find the peace I have lost. Here I have met with
insolence; but should I reveal the name of him who has offended me, his life
would be the expiation; or my dear, my valuable father might fall in the
contest! I therefore entreat you to forward my departure from a spot where my
bosom suffers from more causes than one."

My Father, toward the conclusion of this speech, eyed me with fixed regard,
while the mantling blood arose from my heart and spread an honest anger over my
visage; particles of fire seemed to fly before me.

I only articulated, "what shall I do, sir! -- What would you do? Chastise the
disturber of my Emily!"

With a mournful look, he turned from me, and walked silently to the window,
while my agitation became extreme. Willingly would I have fallen at his feet,
and poured out the sentiments of my soul; I had not the power -- by
irresistible reverence I was chained to my seat.

My father, still gazing through the window, in a musing attitude, and without
turning to look at me, said, in a low voice, "Would you destroy the peace of
Emily?"

"Me, Sir! -- I destroy the peace of Emily! O, thou Almighty Power! who have
formed me to thy will, be thou her strong defender!"

Endeavoring to calm my perturbed spirit, I stood silent; my father, at
length, approaching me with quickness, said, affectionately, "Henry! -- My dear
Henry! Why will you in vain distress me? I ask not your confidence, because you
appear resolved that I never shall share it; but, is it impossible for us to
meet on equal terms? I promise to advise, not restrain you; and will lose the
name of father in that of friend -- Only try to forget Emily!"

Pressing his hand to my lips, I exclaimed, "Yes, my father, I see too plainly
you dare not trust your son; you will not permit me to be the guardian of that
gentle maid; and yet, Sir, her father once told me, that, to my honor, he
could confide his child."

"I could trust her with your honor, but not with your AFFECTION."

This was a stroke I was not aware of. I fell before him, breathed my guiltless
passion in fervent language; and assured him I had never influenced the mind of
Emily by an avowal of my love.

My father was pleased; he strove to bring me back to tranquillity; yet, whilst
he talked of reason, of prudence, and of proud philosophy, his eyes were full
of tears. I hoped to profit by the tenderness of the moment; I drew back his
memory to the image of my mother. He was disturbed; his bosom heaved; and I
exulted in the idea of having conquered his objections. To whom could I plead
with more hope of success? -- Had not my father known the joys and the sorrows
of unconquerable love?

He was silent for some moments. I felt relieved in having unburthened myself
to him, and saw no reason he could oppose to my union, yet he appealed to my
principles.

"You love Emily?"

"I do, Sir; nor can I blame myself for adoring an object that inspires me with
virtues. Yes, my father! she hangs upon my memory, and vice can offer no
temptation where her image is seen. I am ennobled by love, and will not sink
unworthy of my Emily's perfection."

"You see before you, my dear Henry, in your unfortunate father, an example of
selfish and ungenerous passion."

"Ungenerous, Sir!" --

"You must not interrupt me: ungenerous and unjust: I studied my own happiness,
without considering the miseries I was preparing for another. I timely felt my
arm too feeble to ward off the shafts my fate was preparing for an innocent
object; yet, like you, I loved; pursued that love; won a valuable heart to my
sentiments, and wedded it only to anguish: need I say that your destiny is
equally uncertain? What can you do for Emily! How will you shield her from the
storm now impending over your head and mine? Will you not rather render her
wretched, by alluring her from a fond father, who deems her his richest
blessing; and who, without her, may sink comfortless into the vale of time? --
But, far be it from me to aggravate our mutual woes -- If Emily loves you,
brave all future accidents, and lead her to the altar."

My father waited my reply -- I had none to make; the essential part was
wanting. I was a stranger to the sentiments of Emily. -- He wished me
self-composure; and left to my judgment the picture of his experience,
faithfully delineated. How warmly had I painted the hours in perspective! My
coloring was too high.

END OF VOLUME FIRST.
THE ROYAL CAPTIVES: A FRAGMENT OF SECRET HISTORY.

COPIED FROM AN OLD MANUSCRIPT.

BY ANN YEARSLEY.

VOLUME II.

Dear spirit of refinement!
From where thou have chosen thy pure celestial dwelling, descend!
From thee, bright form of innocence,
Fly the brutal shadows that darken the bosom of man.
Thine are the grand, the energetic, the invisible;
Thou art the soul of the world!
Vide Page 89, Vol. I. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR ROBERT CAMPBELL.

M.DCC.XCV.

THE ROYAL CAPTIVES.
MY Guardian returned with his lovely daughter. I saw them pass through the
court, but sought them not. Hope was extinguished; I paused in silence on the
future; misery alone was seen. Where could I find an asylum for afflicted
beauty? How defend a wife! -- Filial piety here forbad my indulgence of soft
ideas. My exiled Father, my lost Mother, claimed my exertion, and I resolved to
rise superior to the dear delirium. "Can I see him depart alone," said I,
looking wildly at the horizon; "can I lie dreaming of unutterable worlds in the
eyes of Emily, whilst he is roving joyless round the earth? No, I will imitate
his virtue, and share his fate."

Full of my purpose, I rang for my dinner to be brought into my study, and sent
back a line by the servant, in which I requested my father to hasten our
departure on the morrow.

"All is now concluded," I exclaimed, with a sigh. "Woman, fascinating woman,
shall enslave me no more! I will hurry from the indolence with which she
impregnates the very air around her, and the sounds of war shall awaken me to
energy. Yes! I will go to the Duke of B****, and, unknown to my father, will
implore his assistance in asserting our privileges of sharing, at least, the
common freedom of mankind. Must we for ever behold the sword of Death held over
us, merely because we are the relatives of a King! May we not breathe with
liberty? Execrable state! My father shall be happy! Unerring Mover of eternal
life! do thou so direct my youthful ardour as to make it propitious to his
clouded fortune: give me war and death, but suffer the gentle rays of peace to
fall on his hours!"

Thus, indulging alternately the luxury of reading, and of thought, I remained
in my study till the approach of evening, when I saw Emily straying negligently
down the terrace-walk, toward the opening of the pleasure garden. She
sometimes stooped to smell the hyacinth as it grew, and stood meditating on the
rose without plucking it; as she loosed the beauteous bud from her hold, it
seemed to fly back to its parent-branches, as if conscious of the death it had
escaped, and pleased in remaining a little longer in the fragrant family. Again
I saw her hesitate, with her hands folded, and her head reclined on one
shoulder, to gaze on the jonquils which had been gathered at noon, and now lay
dying, neglected, on the turf. Her white scarf waved on the officious wind as
she turned the corner of the grove which secluded her from my sight. My eyes
remained for a moment fixed to the point from whence she had disappeared. What
had I now to do in my study; My resolves were formed: I had offered up the
dearest wishes of my soul at the altar of my duty; it could be no crime to bid
Emily a long farewell -- No! No! My heart was too honest, and honestly did it
ever obey the feelings of Nature, when those feelings were in unison with the
pleasant duties it owed to my fellow creatures.

I tripped lightly down the stairs, hastened through the hall, whispered an
adieu to every well known tree, and threw a parting look on each variegated
blossom.

"Tomorrow," said I, with a sigh, (as I touched a carnation Emily had planted,)
"To morrow I leave thee, tender flower. May thou long be cherished by the
hand that placed thee here, whilst I am becoming roughly inured to savage
valor, and a foe to peace! -- Ah! what a contrast! Thou art not capable of
destroying, thou art not MAN!"

As I cast a lingering eye athwart the embroidered parterre, memory ran back to
the moment when Emily brought the bouquette, with this innocent apology: 'They
must once die, and why not die with you?'

Dear Emily, "(replied my busy thought) "Henry must die! and why not die with
you?"

Rapt with my own ideas, I fancied the Carnation began to shut her
richly-tinted beauties. -- "Thou art no niggard, sweet flower! Thou have a
right to mourn, while thy beloved sun is stealing to his western loves! -- He
will return -- When will Henry return?

Here, the age-loving ivy crept round the venerable oak, as if enamoured of her
hoary protector -- There, the honey-suckle willingly entangled herself in the
snares laid by the wily gardener round the bower to receive her encroachments;
and above me, the blackbird hailed the dewfall with his love-lengthened song.

Bounteous Creator! Are not all thy tribes in harmony? can Nature vary from
herself? Is she not glowing with universal love? Are not the minutiae of things
eternally moving in her behalf? Why then must man throw the freezing drops of
self-denial on the warm transports of the heart.

Under this kind of reasoning, and full of questions, for which I required
answers from some power stronger than myself, could my emotions be enough
regulated to play with safety round my judgment, while in the presence of
Emily? Ought I to have followed her? A gentleman would say -- "Yes."; a lady
would say -- "Nothing."

Reclined on a bank, and perusing a paper, I saw Emily in an arbor of
woodbines. She saw me not, as I stole like a thief round coveted treasure; and
I sat myself down behind her. Flowers, and leaves of various kinds formed her
only external shields from so ardent a lover; but had she not invincible
innocence?

Often did I murmur at the shrubbery, whose green trappings waved themselves so
busily as to conceal her speaking eyes; but as the moments were delicious ones,
I waited happily the denouement.

After reading the paper she turned herself a little -- I could observe her
features -- Judge my soul by thy own, when she sang with a tender air, Angels!
who our paths prepare,
And on your azure pinions rest,
To watch the human heart,
Sleep not! -- make me all your care!
While secret passion wounds my breast,
Some heavenly balm impart!
Guard me to my lone retreat!
Where the nun unnotic'd pines;
Her tender flame unknown! --
There, till my heart forgets to beat,
And memory his fair shade resigns,
Henry will be my own.


Love, which would have forced me to advise, inspired me at the same moment
with the fear of offending. -- Emily arose to be gone; for the evening star
appeared, and the blackbird was sunk to repose. --

"My dear girl!" said I, rushing from my concealment -- I could say no more --
Emily shrieked, and I caught her in my arms. Pointed as lightning is the
transport of an oppressed heart, when bounding toward the object of its care.
-- I held her to my bosom, unable to tell her why. Was not such a moment worth
an age of trammeled love? Heaven should, at that moment, have called me from
life.

Soon did the charming maid disengage herself and recover her native dignity. I
could make no apology. True, I had not exceeded the bounds of virtue, but I had
broken rudely on her reserve; and waited in silence that sentence which, I
knew, must throw me on my fate.

'Was it well done, Sir,' (said she, with a faultering voice) 'to intrude on my
retirement? Do you feel an increase of pleasure by having acquired the
knowledge of my self-delusion? You have acted ungenerously, and your conduct
may prove destructive to more than me. -- '

Throwing myself at her feet, I loudly exclaimed -- "Hold, incomparable Maid!
Pronounce not my doom: here will I kneel till you are convinced how dearly your
felicity is prized by my fond heart. I am not ungenerous, I will sacrifice my
peace, my life, to the tranquillity of your unblemished mind! -- I will for ever
remain at your disposal, but I never can cease to love you! O, Emily! I have
long suffered, have long strove to banish you from my imagination; my strength
of soul is not sufficient -- Without you I am sick; without you I hate
existence; and all the varied tints of creative Nature fade on my joyless
sight. What must I do! Can you teach me not to adore you? Have you the power of
tearing your image from my remembrance? No! I will hold you till every object
is shut out by Death, and too surely I shall fall a victim to despair and love."

Still holding her hand, I found she shook with perturbation: the pauses of her
breath grew short: She sighed, and with difficulty requested me to rise.

"Say you pardon me, generous Emily! suffer me at least to indulge the
melancholy comfort of believing myself honored with your friendship; think
with what anguish I go -- "

'Go! -- whither would you go? -- Can you leave my father?' --

"I have a father! -- "

'True -- I had forgot you have any father but mine.'

The artless maid put her hand to her forehead, as if endeavoring to reconcile
her judgment to the circumstance of the moment: but she grew more embarrassed,
and her hesitation increased the transport of my impassioned soul; all was
forgot but Emily! I grew wild with love; rose from the earth, sealed a wournful
adieu on her chaste lips; and, in that moment, could have fled with her to some
unknown world!

How finely wrought is the mind of man! -- Yet how seldom are his harmonic
powers tuned by a skilful hand. Vulgar objects draw out vulgar tones; but, when
touched by refinement, his thrillings are exquisite, and he melts the heart of
another by that mysterious flame in which himself is dissolving!

That Emily had caught a portion of my fervor, I had reason to hope, but
virtue was the master-key of her feelings.

We cast a melancholy look on the star that hung on the end of evening; it
glided over our heads; we were soon to see it no more.

"So pass our joys! -- "

'True; and so pass our sorrows,' replied the self-collected maid --

"Are they not wise who monopolize the few pleasures of life, and hoard them in
remembrance from the thief of nature? -- Time, my Emily, steals the moments of
felicity: whilst we seize his treasures, the old traveller stands still!"

'Time cannot steal the pleasures I have been taught to prize -- I feel them as
emanations of some great power, to whom time itself is a slave; of course I
shall never too eagerly seize felicity, but take my my little lot and be
content.'

I was now sensible that I was out in my part, for I really did myself the
credit to think I had assumed a designing character in my last speech, not at
all natural to me.

Emily continued -- 'I had hoped you would have remained to comfort my father
till the return of my brothers. That idea is banished -- I am acquainted with
your rank; and to prove your superiority am at the same moment surprised with
an avowal of your love, and of your departure. This is the presumption of a man
whose affections are subservient to his ambition.' --

"Torture me not! You are above the snares employed by the artful of your sex
to humble the slaves who adore them. Too good to rack my heart, merely because
it is your own, and keep me in the horrors of suspense to feed an ill-timed
vanity. -- Adieu, Emily! -- we may never meet more; but I could have wished,
that though I should obey my father, you would not hate me!"

The thoughtful maid stood silent -- her eyes were bent to the earth -- My
thoughts were breaking into wild disorder; and the only prospect which gave me
temporary ease, was that of rushing into danger, when once I had left her, that
I might shorten an existence no longer desirable.

"Cruel and unjust are you to yourself and me! Was it possible you could so
lately breathe the name of Henry! could you so tenderly sing of love, while
your heart was a stranger to the sacred flame? -- You accuse me of ambition to
throw me from you."

Roused from her meditative attitude she gave me her hand -- I pressed it to my
lips, and she generously replied, 'What have I to do with foolish reserve! I
have no guilt to conceal -- My heart stands confessed to the Father of All! Yes,
exalted Henry! I dare to love you while you love virtue; and, among your many
perfections, filial regard is in my estimation not the least. -- Go! preserve
your worthy father; yet leave me not I conjure you till -- '

"Till when?" -- said I, hastily interrupting her. "I cannot marry you, dear
Emily; my fate is undecided. -- I must go! -- never! -- perhaps never to hold
you thus; to hear you speak, to listen to your instructive converse: nor may I
take you with me. I have no home. It is a father leads me on; can you forgive
me? It is I that am unjust; I have instantaneously deceived you. You are
wronged by the man who adores you."

'Be more calm' (replied Emily) 'think me not wedded to your person: lament not
the necessity of the moment, but preserve your father.'

"Do I possess your soul, as you possess mine? I wish you to languish for me in
whatever scene you may in future be engaged: I shall in absence sigh for you! I
will adore the sun that cheers you! I will gaze on the moon, and fancy my Emily
is at that moment whispering my name through the midnight breeze -- yet I
cannot call you for ever mine."

'How little do you know me, Henry -- Is marriage the only tie that can relieve
your fears? Will you owe nothing to me? All institutions were invented by man;
that in particular is necessary to his feeble judgment. Marriage is the only
chain for two suspecting souls, mutually in fear of each other; invested with
prerogative they are watchful and suspicious; apparently polite, they are in
private cooly envenomed, and hourly becoming practiced in deliberate deceit:
Life wears away in unavailing murmurs -- But can Henry know no other security?
-- Is he a stranger to that lambent, that eternal flame which ever encircles
kindred minds? Go -- absence will not make you less dear -- love me if you can
-- continue free, and save a father!'

"How can I depart unblest! Ah, Emily! should no future world exist, where is
the reward for our self-denying principles?"

'Presumptuous Henry! We are not capable but of transient happiness! The
indulgence of our wishes could not render us permanently blessed; all must fade
away. Why we are ushered into existence, or why, after wasting life, we die,
never can be answered. But should the privation of faculty only precede some
mighty change, it were well methinks to rise with conscious purity from those
mortal particles of which we were recently composed; and granting existence
ends on the bed of death, surely my beloved friend will own that the
remembrance of those pleasures, which passion may afford, will not at that hour
bring consolation.'

I was all she chose to make me: passively virtuous, and obedient to her will;
she threw the rein on my imagination, and though I felt the influence of the
scene around, my feeble judgment was the friend of my dear instructress.

The moon now silvered the foliage of the bower; Emily directed her steps
toward the house, and I reluctantly followed.

'Will you see me within the walls of my convent?' (said she, as we walked
slowly on) 'I shall there be safe -- perhaps for ever.' --

"For ever! Emily! -- am I pursuing a shadow! Is it possible you can think of
taking the veil? -- Send me not from you with so dreadful an apprehension!"

'I think not of the veil: I see no Heaven through the dreary passage of
incessant mortification; unmeaning in itself because unworthy the Power for
whom the fanatic supposes she suffers. My reason for hastening thither is more
intimately connected with mortal objects; and, for the same reason I wish you
to remain with my father till after the departure of Roderique.'

My father's conversation in the study came to my recollection; but as I knew
Emily had the choice of speaking truth, or remaining silent, I had not much
hope of gaining an explanation of these hints concerning Roderique; nor was I
much agitated on the account, as our party were so soon to be broken up, and
each severally to take his different path. I, however, asked her if she was in
fear of Roderique; she told me he only met her contempt, and commended me to
silence on so jarring a subject. We reached the house, with a tender
pensiveness hanging on us like a hoar frost on the blossom; and found my
Guardian, my Father, and Roderique discoursing on the sports of the field. The
latter, after we were seated, returned to the conversation, and wished, as his
stay was to be short, a hunting party could be formed before he left Rochelle.
My Guardian willingly promoted his wish; and I have seen him rejoice at the
escape of the hare, and mourn at her death; but as he began to make his little
arrangement of friends and sportsmen, Emily respectfully interrupted him, by
mentioning her desire, 'first to depart.'

Her Father, attentive to her happiness in every point, I believe sometimes
sacrificed his own; and did not hesitate to enquire when she would resolve;
adding, with a parental, smile, 'you must live individually for yourself, my
dear child; I can only be a secondary cause of pleasure to you; your mind is
all your own, your conduct your own; and, when I am no more, you must continue
on the theater of life till your part is played. When the scene is closing,
call not loudly on the world: society stands listening over dying worth, and
voluntarily shields it; and Emily will deserve the plaudits of the wise. Name
the day of your departure; your will is mine.' --

'To morrow, my honored Father,' said Emily.' --

'To-morrow let it be,' said Roderique hastily, and immediately rang for his
servant.

'Then to morrow,' (rejoined my father) 'we will all conclude to separate;
since, if I may speak for myself, either will think this noble mansion but a
prison when bereft of those friends whose sentiments endeared it. My son, since
I have so happily found him, claims my unabating care. To the protection of his
uncle, in the Netherlands, I will leave him, and return. France yet holds my
wife; and my search after her shall end but with my existence.'

A smile, expressive I thought of triumph, shone on the face of Roderique, and
sank into a settled stare at my father. Imagining him lost in some melancholy
reflection, I touched his shoulder, and asked him, -- "if my Father, myself, my
Guardian, or Emily had most the interest of his heart at this moment of
purposed separation?"

'Your Father, Sir' -- (said he with an unusual bluntness) and immediately rose
from his seat.

The attendant he had rang for entering, Roderique ordered him to prepare for
departure immediately, and ushering him to the farthest part of the room, gave
him a letter, whispering some instructions, and pronouncing others of little
importance distinctly.

'I shall not,' added he, 'wait here for your return, my horses will be got
ready by your fellow servants; let nothing retard you.'

To my Guardian he returned acknowledgements in the most refined language
politeness could suggest; lamented the necessity that forced him away that very
hour, and took leave of us all in a manner that endeared us to him. One look he
gave to Emily, as he passed toward the door, that sufficiently indicated a
heart torn by various passions.

As his equipage and attendants rattled through the courtyard, I felt a kind
of regret, and could not help mourning the nature of man. How much like shadows
we (...)! said I, today blessed in the bosom of friendship, tomorrow gone! --
The last dawn I expected to see at the Count de Marsans after a sleepless night
appeared: The sun ascended with effulgence, and the raptures of creation were
heightened -- Raising my eyes to that glorious orb, I breathed the strain of
heavenly gratitude. -- Magnificent source of unending comfort! Thou have poured
thy floods of light through ages! Thou shall continue to invite the infant
hours from the bosom of eternity! Thou shall gild them as they pass for the
felicity of Man! Yet Man! feeble Man! must mourn! Too rich in imagination, and
too poor in judgment, his joys are incomplete; and he steals sorrowing through
the world a victim to idea. Fancy brings her gaudy visions to dance round him
in his morn of life; The cold hand of disappointment prepares for him the bed
of age; but thou shall unwearied roll! In thy vivifying beams shall eternally
sport the busy atoms of creative power which keep the universe for ever young.

Exquisitely blessed in the confidence of her I loved I knew the dear moment of
generous truth she had indulged me would be ever mine. To love and be beloved
gives such hidden strength to the soul of man that he becomes dignified by the
mutual influence, and feels as if invulnerable through every other circumstance.

An officious attention prevailed through the house; doors were left open to
show unusual dispatch; and servants stumbled down stairs with unnecessary noise
to show how highly interested they were in the departure of their young
mistress, who stood in a reflective attitude in the great parlour.

I saw her, and made an involuntary pause; but not daring to trust myself alone
with her, at this mournful crisis, sighed, and passed on to find my Father. --
He had been writing a letter to the faithful Fisherman who had preserved him,
and employed a servant of my Guardian's to search out the hut, beneath the
covering of the rock, and to direct its honest master to follow us to *****,
with Lydia and her little brothers. -- Or, if the Fisherman retained a
predilection to the peaceful lot in which he was placed, the domestic had
orders to leave him a sum of money for the purpose of buying a vessel of larger
size than that in which he used to scud through the ocean.

The carriage ^ow waited to convey the disturber of my peace to the gloomy
recess of pious ^anaticism; while a sufficient number of attendants waited to
escort us on our different roads. I will not pretend to describe our mutual
sorrow; or our many protestations of never-dying friendship; let it here
suffice (my sympathising reader) that, as with a burdened heart I led Emily to
the carriage, she took a valuable ring from her finger, and, slipping it on
mine, emphatically said, 'While you 'love truth, remember Emily. --

Words were too weak; in silent ecstasy I tore the diamond cross from my bosom,
closed her hand upon it and held her in my arms as a treasure never to be
resigned. Ardent as this tender embrace was, it was not so significant as to
discompose my innocent girl, or attract the discernment of surrounding
attendants. Her beauty invited me to love; her virtues commanded me to be
respectful. -- My Guardian stood by -- and long inured to self-restraint
through every trial, he checked his feelings. Even now he endeavored to smile,
but his heart forbad his features to play falsely.

'A short-time since, my dear Henry,' (said the worthy man) you wished to enter
into a military life -- I dissuaded you from it. I dared not give my consent
even to your uncle the Duke of B****, who was the nobleman that visited me
incog. and with whom you were so much delighted. You are now going to him -- I
have done but my duty in strictly adhering to the rights of friendship; and in
preserving, inviolable, the secret of your birth. When I gave the picture of
your amiable Mother to your bosom, I was proof against your eager enquiries;
and you were polite enough ever after to decline them. I now leave you to the
tender solicitude of a Father -- farewell, deserving youth! Continue to be what
you now are, and your friends will exult when Henry is named.

"May I in absence be dear to you. Sir! Preserve Emily -- barter her not for
wealth: Suffer her heart alone to direct her to the altar when I return. -- But
when, when shall I return -- No; I never shall see you more!"

My words died incoherently away; my eyes were insensibly fixed on the earth as
I uttered this last painful sentence on myself. The Father of Emily -- took
advantage of the pause, handed her hastily into the carriage, and they drove
off.

"She is gone!" (said I, to poor Mayo, whom Emily had often fed, and who had
tamely followed us from his wooden cabin neglected and unobserved:) "She is
gone! but whither can thou go? Thou art old!" (The harmless creature looked
up at me, and followed me back to the spot where our horses were waiting) "May
the hand that shall stretch out to relieve thee, Mayo, never be blasted by the
damps of poverty! Merciful must it be and amply should it be filled!"

After recommending the dumb companion of my infant hours to the care of my
Guardian's honest steward, accompanied by my Father and attendants, I left the
scene where I had indulged imagination, and thirsted after wisdom. Many a
beautiful shrub, whose first blossom I had remarked with delight, seemed to nod
mournfully as I passed them. With me they had grown, with me they had reached
maturity. I left them with reluctance, and beheld them no more.

We rode for some hours over the waste; frequent intervals of silence,
hesitations, and broken discourses, employed us gradually, while trees flocks,
valleys, and hills flew behind like emblems of passing life.

The soul possesses a gloomy and despotic power: when her feelings may be
moderate enough for language, language she calls in; but when she is laboring
after triumph, glory, and immortal Fame, she forbids the tongue to move,
stifles the rising passions, and looks forward with awful majesty to the event
she thinks worthy her sole exertion; then is human sound but as a shepherd's
bell heard from afar and forgot.

Why did not my Father talk of the scene we had left? and why did I forbear to
mention Emily? We admired the rivulets, were charmed with the music of the
groves, conversed scientifically on the different strata, of different rocks,
and admired earth as the bed of elements; but all this had nothing to do with
our real feelings. It was only our artful manner of contriving to be silent on
subjects that asked more than language could afford. The evening soberly came
on, when we entered a thick wood, through which were many paths in many
directions. The sun was gone, the horizon became black, hollow winds blew
suddenly through the thickets, and the bleating lambs intimated a coming storm.
Man cannot be cheerful amidst discouragements; but he does well when he
endeavors to surmount them -- We went on;

'Alberti,' (said my Father to o^e of our attendants, who was appointed the
guide) 'where is your map?'

'It is in my portmanteau; I will show it your Honour', replied Alberti.

'No matter, if you are certain we go right.'

'Right, my Lord, as a arrow from the string.

'And why not as an arrow to its mark, Alberti?'

'When an arrow sets out, please ye, it always means to be right, but a wrong
mark may pop in its way.'

'What was that noise?

'Thunder, My Lord; but I Will alight and look at the map.'

'You should have kept it in your pocket. I see some distant spires yonder, and
we will halt for the night at the first village.'

Lightning, hail, and wind raged suddenly through the forest: earth caught a
momentary radiance from the electric matter that darted athwart her bosom,
while the unbending oak appeared as an emblem of unshaken fortitude. Stubbornly
it braved the storm; yet kindly did it afford shelter to us lonely travelers.
What could the virtuous man do more?

In our journey through the forest, we had discerned but one little cabin; it
was formed of branches of trees, which, being hewn into an equal thickness,
were laid on each other, and plaistered with clay. The roof was flat, and of
the same composition, a hole being left in the middle to carry off the smoke.
Curiosity led us to take a peep within, where we saw only one man, who told us
he was a miner; that in this hovel he lived all the week, because his mine lay
near, in the depth of the forest; but that on Sundays he went eight miles to
his home, where his wife and children made him happy. How few were the hours of
comfort allotted this poor miner! Here we could not shelter; but he informed us
that a house stood, within a mile, in the track toward the old church. Not
knowing that track, we requested him to be our guide. He cheerfully complied,
awakened his dog that lay sleeping with his nose on his master's hat, and both
accompanied us till we came in sight of the house, when we rewarded him, and he
returned to his lodging, or rather to his tomb. -- The house he had directed us
to was built of slabs rough as they were drawn from their native quarries, and
a quick-set hedge was planted round the garden. Near the wicker gate stood
three cows feeding on dry leaves and hay, mixed with furze, while eleven sheep
stood, with their lambs at the door of the fold, waiting to be taken in from
the beating of the pitiless storm. Sensible that the soft movements of Nature
are no where so powerful as in solitude, we, at first, hesitated whether we
should disturb the inhabitants of this dwelling; but the tempest redoubling its
impetuosity, it was resolved the embassy should be mine to ask a protection
till it was spent. I alighted, tapped gently at the door, and it was
immediately opened by a female, whose advanced age, and cleanliness of person,
struck me at once with reverence and delight. I told her my errand, and pleaded
the inclemency of the weather.

'I will come again in a moment, Sir,' said she, throwing a book from her hand
on a deal dresser, the shelves of which were laden with wooden trenchers, and
bright pewter plates alternately. She hastened up the stairs, and left me to
take care of the lower part of the house: no grate was to be seen, but a most
comfortable fire blazed on the spacious hearth, while a large flitch of bacon
hung on each side.

Lessons of cookery, I suppose, said I to myself, taking the book the good
woman had left; I however, was mistaking the subject, which was a treatise on
resignation.

Resignation is idleness; I will read no more! Give me the noble exertion of
the soul that enables us to turn from the evil of the hour, and renew the chase
after distant good! Thus I reflected. My Father and attendants observing I was
received with civility, ventured to lean over the gate; but as I had entered
alone, and was waiting the second appearance of the mistress of the house, I
gave them yet no invitation, and they observed a becoming distance. Through a
series of untried incidents we were to pass; but, in my mighty wisdom, I could
not see an inch before me; our best method, I thought, was, that as fast as we
could get rid of one disagreeable circumstance we should stand prepared for
another. The venerable matron at last descended, leading a lovely creature by
the hand, who appeared to be the victim of sorrow. Rich in artless ringlets,
her hair fell heavily on her snowy neck, and her large blue eyes swam in the
liquid brightness of sensibility; she accosted me with an easy air, but her
voice was faint and tremulous.

'Whoever you are Sir,' said she, 'we are in some respects at your disposal;
yet, as mutual necessity is often the cause of reciprocal friendship, I offer
you my protection, and ask yours.'

"Command me, Madam! From whom would you wish me to protect you?"

'From yourself, should you be the professed votary of licentiousness; I know
my request may found inconsistently, but are we not so mysteriously wrought,
that strong and forcible virtues burst from the mind, and bear down the petty
vices of unguarded youth?'

The native sweetness of her accents tuned my soul to simple nature; her fears
were awake, and she was no borrower of sentiment. She continued; 'In a word,
Sir, you see before you two helpless women, whom you may insult, though you can
never render vicious. I have a father, but he is gone to *****, where, we hear,
my brother lies ill. When my father will return I know not; his daughter will
never shut his door on the weary traveller.'

I bowed, and blessed her; for when woman is frank without indelicacy, and free
without boldness, she makes a proselyte to her will.

Observing this young creature to be far advanced in that state which endears
the sex to the generous mind, I entertained fears for her health, dissipated
her alarming conjectures, and informing her, that my friends and myself would
depart when the storm was subsided, requested her permission for them to enter.
She bowed with a smile of approbation, whispered Nanelle, who instantly laid
fresh fuel on the fire, and placed the frugal viands on the brown table. My
thoughts were pure in the presence of this rural beauty: I fancied there was
something too sacred about her to stand the gaze of our servants, and ventured
to make one more request, which was, that she would return to her chamber. She
retired, and my friends were invited by the hospitable Nannelle to recover
their vital heat at her welcome fire. We gladly accepted her invitation, and
seated ourselves on some long oak benches, which appeared to have been made
some fifty years, and shone with solemn brilliancy beneath the hard brush of
house-wifery.

'Will your Honors taste some of our cider?' said Nanelle, 'surely it will do
you good, since you must ride through the rain again -- Be not bashful good
gentlemen, you are wondrous welcome, I would not ask you if you were not.'

Reader had thou been with us in this faithful scene of nature, thou would
have owned with me, that the real necessities of man are but few. Pride has
been accumulating imaginary wants through ages, and hourly forming destructive
creations.

The spirit of the storm yet shook the woods, and passed, murmuring, over the
unaspiring roof of the gentle Anna. (For that was the name Nannelle gave her
mistress) We drank cider out of the best cup, taken from the high shelf; and,
perceiving the good woman looked at the cup as if she wished me to admire it, I
praised the taste of the artist.

'It was bought by our squire; he gave it to mistress, and she put it up,
saying, she would never drink out of it till he returned; but, I believe, he
does not mean to come back; fine folks always have their figaries -- '

'And what figary had your squire when he presented this cup to so charming a
woman as your mistress? -- "

'I don't know.'

The night grew fine; my Father rewarded Nannelle, desired she would continue
to love her mistress, and send us away with her prayers. --

'God bless ye, Gentlemen,' wiping her eyes with her blue apron -- 'but my dear
mistress! -- Ah! there, see what it is to sorrow for one's love! -- I Will call
^uzin, our cowherd; that steeps over the wheat floor, and he shall bring the
lantern. -- '

'No, no,' said my Father, 'only afford us your candle 'till we have
distinguished our several bridles.'

We had now but two miles to ride before we were to reach the village of ***,
that lay on the skirt of the forest, and we set forward with alacrity. The
winds faintly whispered, and the moon looked pale on the brambles, which were
silvered with the rain. --

'Hark! (said our guide) 'I hear a voice to the left. -- '

We checked our horses, but could hear no human found. My father possessed that
firm composure, so familiar with the noble mind, and so little understood by
the million: he listened, in consequence of Alberti's exclamation, but hearing
no alarm, imputed it to his watchful fancy, and we rode on.

'The Abbe Dorovontes,' said my Father, as I was musing, 'was a most singular
character. He observed mankind in silence, pronounced human effort futile; took
a comprehensive view of the known globe, and fairly confessed he knew nothing.

'Set men in groupes,' said he, 'and watch them -- A certain number till the
earth, others beat the the sea; all love gold; a few catch diadems. What can
all this mean? They weep, they dance, they sing and love, and toward what
great end can those labors, and those gambols of mankind advance?' -- 'Murder
-- Help!' -- we now heard distinctly through the forest, the last word was sent
forth in a shriek; we all made a full stop. Pity and horror opened the way to
every heart; but not one could conclude which path to pursue. In a few minutes
were seen through the trees, at a distance, flaming torches or lights, which
were accompanied by the noise of a carriage and of horses; we now could hear
many voices, one in a peremptory tone was raised above the others: 'Stop the
old fellow's mouth; suffer him to plead no more; he will make the most daring
of you cowards!' said this person who seemed to be of chief authority. Fired by
this barbarous command, we instantaneously spurred our horses, without speaking
a syllable to each other, so unanimous were we in avenging the rights of
violated order. Neither winds nor lightnings could impede us, and we soon
gained upon the wandering lights, which served to invite us after those who
fled.

'Spare! ah spare my Father!' was in a supplicating tone breathed from the
window of the carriage. My Father called to the postillion, and ordered him to
stop; the latter did not obey. I rode round to the heads of the horses, and
presented a pistol to the fellow's breast, whose ready submission saved his
life. We were quickly surrounded by a troop of horsemen, who were wild,
audacious, and only attentive to the orders of two well made men. These men I
thought only worthy my wrestling with, their inferior crew I looked upon as a
fry, not an atom of which was of consequence enough to be singled out. I held
the bridles of the horses, burning to resign them to some of our retinue.
Alberti at length came up; -- "stand here," said I, "keep the carriage from
moving till you see me lie dead upon the earth."

'Secure that hardy blockhead,' said one of the superiors. His manner of
articulation, I thought, had some time been familiar to me.

'Which of you dare secure him?' said my Father sternly, as he rode up behind
with our attendants -- 'who are ye, base assassins! who may, with impunity,
disgrace manhood, by causing the shriek of female woe to sound through the
desert? Monsters must you be who can oppress unoffending woman!'

'Shoot the priest' (replied one of the two who commanded the group (his d -- n
-- d clamours may in future make many a jovial buck unhappy.'

"Defend yourself, Sir," (said I to him who had given the order) advancing. I
perceived his face was concealed by a black scarf. Without honorable ceremony
he made a pass at me; fortunately my horse started as the moon emerged from a
cloud, and threw her light on the sword of my antagonist; the lounge he made at
me consequently was void, unless he stabbed the air. But as the force of his
thrust caused him to bend forward from his saddle, his horse took a sympathetic
fright with mine, and forcibly threw him to the earth. I alighted, full of the
savage purpose of taking his life who had, unprovoked, sought mine. Stumbling
on the sword that had fallen from his hand, mercy made that moment her own. Was
he not disarmed? was not his passive situation a shield? -- Yes. He who made
us, stayed me from piercing his heart!

"Rise," said I, "and defend the cause you have espoused." -- He gave me no
answer; uproar drew my eyes and ears toward the safety of my Father. I turned
like lightning, and saw him valiantly fighting against an odds of three to one;
without once reflecting that to no purpose was my antagonist dismounted, if I
neglected to take his life. I threw myself before my father; for the danger to
which I saw him exposed bereaved me of every other reflection but that of
preserving him. Our opponents doubled us in number; the fray became terrible;
to the clashing of swords succeeded dismal groans; darkness hindered us from
disti^guishing objects, and fury forbad us to pity them. Whom we were fighting
for we knew not, what was to be the conclusion we knew not; we were only
certain that a general appeal had been made to humanity, and we were the first
who heard it. Struggling as we stood against unequal assassins, we felt no
dismay: the door of the carriage was at length forced open, and a gentleman
burst forth from its seat. His assistance soon gave the turn in our favor; but
the torches being extinguished, and the moon having retired within her
thickened sky, I could not discern who the stranger was that so valiantly
fought by my side. -- Rallying round the carriage, we perceived extraordinary
efforts were made to seize my Father; dearly did they pay for the attempt --
two of them fell. The second commander, who was taller than his associate, and
whose face was also concealed by a black veil of some kind, rode furiously
within reach of my sword, saying, with a hoarse voice, 'the day of revenge will
come: for you, young champion, here is a pledge of my love!' -- The contents of
a pistol was immediately discharged at my head, which carried off part of my
hat, and the skin of my right temple: rouzed to vengeance, I darted forward
like an hungry lion, who admits no interval till his appetite is sated by the
cause that excited it, and fired in return. The ball missed my antagonist, but
entered his horse's jaw; the poor beast, unable to bear the agony, reared his
head in the air; again came down on his fore-feet; and, heedless of the reign,
bore his master in a moment from our sight. His party hastily followed, and a
dreadful pause ensued with us who remained on the field. The gentleman who had
left the carriage, and bravely fought to defend it, eagerly flew to the door:
the lady he left in it retained no signs of life. Uttering the bitterest
lamentations, he seemed to be at once bereft of fortitude and judgment. He put
the hilt of his sword to the earth, with the rash resolve of falling on its
point. I prevented his despair by catching him in my arms.

"Live, Sir, I charge you live! and remember there are others wretched as
yourself: to fly affliction thus is cowardice."

'Oh my child!' --

It was my GUARDIAN! Sorrow softened his voice to its natural key, and made him
known. My God! What horrors were mine! -- "Dead! is she dead! Can it be
possible?" said I with wild amazement -- You shall not entangle me with heavy
existence. Was she not the universe to me? Did she not sooth me with an angel's
care? When was I sad, that Emily did not comfort me? it was but this morning we
were highly prized, dearly loved! Blessed with prosperity and friends; but she is
gone!"

'I am poor, Sir! who will now value a forlorn old man! -- Why do you weep? --
You have no cause! -- you have not lost an Emily.

I could not answer him -- feeling myself growing stupid, his voice, and his
mourning ceased to affect me. Father, friend and country were forgot: I wished
for rest, and laid myself silently down, like one oppressed by slumber, without
endeavoring to comfort him.

'Yes,' throwing himself down near me, 'we will sleep here. -- Emily is not at
home; we will never go home -- Emily was very good! -- I loved her -- but we
will wait till the morning. -- '

I was raised from the earth by a number of our attendants, who supported me in
their arms, and after some time my respiration became more free. My Father took
me by the hand. --

'Henry! my dear Henry I fear is wounded' -- (said he with tender solicitude)
'try to live! -- Emily! your beloved Emily needs your assistance and mine; she
is fainting in the carriage; we have all been trying to restore her, but I fear
her father must be somewhere lost in the fray. -- Dreadful catastrophe! --

"My Guardian lies dead by my side, Sir! I believe I have slept long, my dreams
were horrible! Emily is dead! -- Did you know it, Sir?"

'I know she breathes; we have been chaffing her temples. Where is your
Guardian!'

"There, Sir, down there! by that shrub." Leaving my Father and some of the
servants to raise my Guardian, I flew to the carriage; and found my Emily
recovering from her swoon by swift degree. Oh, how my fond heart swelled with
hope; I trembled with love, and held her once more to my bosom: her senses were
not quite returned, but where could she be safe if not in the arms of her Henry?

"Let us not lose a moment, my angel; we have very lately found welcome in a
simple dwelling, where pity is upon the watch to receive the stranger; thither
will we guide you; warmth and comfort will entirely rostore you; in tranquillity
the powers of life, now fluttering with terror, will regain their native
energy, -- "

'Where! Oh where is my father?' said Emily, without appearing to know me --
'tell me not of comfort but with him; you can offer no asylum.'

"I am Henry."

'No -- you cannot be my Henry.'

There was an awful sternness in her words; I was a little chagrined, but my
Father, who had by his earnest attention recovered the Father of Emily, and
convinced him she was living, now joined us, leading his worthy friend; tears
of joy mingled themselves with congratulations on every side. We were once more
happy, though totally at a loss to account for the cause of our strange meeting.

We summoned our attendants by name, found none were missing, and it was
resolved unanimously that we should return to friendly Nannelle; beneath whose
roof we should find repose till morning. Alberti rode before the carriage to
direct the postillion; my Father by the side -- and my Guardian, with his
inestimable daughter, within it.

I had not felt, during the heat of passion, the least pain or inconvenience
from the grazing of the ball on my temple; but, in attempting to mount my
horse, I thought the beast began to swim round me, and under that idea I stood
still, that my horse might stand: consequently the carriage set off before; my
own three servants, who were the stoutest fellows in the group, however waited;
and, after a little hesitation, occasioned by the smarting of my head, I was on
horse back. Darkness had so effectually thrown itself over the moon, that we
could barely distinguish objects; yet the pathetic nightengale sang,
unambitious of applause, in the midst of drouzy solitude.

Sweet emblem of genius! thou art awake whilst many sleep: thy raptures are
self possessed; they were meant by heaven to cheer the midnight hour, whilst
despair and love make hard the pillow of man!

We had only a few minutes left the scene of action when a deep groan was
heard. My attention was arrested, I turned my horse to the left, from whence I
thought the sound proceeded, and soon discerned a body lying on the turf; it
was a youth; his face was covered, and turned to the earth; but life was
struggling within him. I alighted, stooped and uncovered his face, and
recollected him to be the person who had, at the commencement of the assault,
ordered my father to be shot. Mercy forbad me to leave him exposed; the agonies
of departing man, call, nay command the tender sympathy of nature; and we
placed the stranger bleeding and senseless across the backs of two horses,
having first fastened the two saddles as even as we could, and made a kind of
bed on them with our great-coats. We slowly moved on foot, holding the bridles,
toward the dwelling of gentle Anna, where we hoped to find our friends. We at
length arrived; found our horses littered by Luzin the hind, in the out-house;
and our party comfortably conversing with Nannelle in her clean kitchen. This
good creature, I was pleased to hear, had prevailed on Emily to repose herself
in one of the inner chambers till day should break; and Anna had followed the
well-timed example.

My Father and Guardian had been uneasy; in few words we explained the cause of
our delay, and both hastened to assist in conveying the wounded stranger into
the house as we bore him in our arms, his head fell heavily on my bosom; I
forgot his ferocious conduct, and beheld him only as the victim of thoughtless
valor.

Poor nature is frail in her best productions; ever ceaseless in her labors,
and eager in her formations, her most perfect works are left unfinished.
Precept may do much, but charity will do more in cooling the hottest revenge.
-- O charity! when were thou sportive with the miseries of mankind? Thy tongue,
fair angel, continually proclaims through the universe -- waste not life!
extinguish not existence, lest thou affront the majesty of God!

Uncovering the face of the youth, for the purpose of bathing his temples with
odoriferous spirits, I perceived a large and deep contusion on one side his
head, and concluded he had fallen on some sharp stone in the forest, when he
failed in the lounge made precipitately at me. His features were wonderfully
fair, his fine brows appeared like thrones on which reflection and science
might fit some future day unmolested by riotous habit.

We laid him on a mattress, dried the bloody stream that had mingled itself
with his long hair, and waited with the silent hope of his soon becoming
reanimated. My dear girl had been led to some inner apartment before we
arrived, her Father and Nannelle having prevailed on her to seize a short
repose. The charming mistress of this rural asylum had not been disturbed; the
hind, Luzin, had been called up, but he only officiated in taking care of our
horses, leading some into the out house, and leaving others tied to the gate to
brave the pitiless elements how they could. Nannelle, I perceived, looked with
surprise and horror at the wounded stranger; sighed -- caught the Treatise on
Resignation off the dresser, opened it, endeavored to read; but happening to
cast her eyes once more on the fainting youth, stamped with her foot, tore the
yellow ribband from her head, and immediately threw it with the Treatise on
Resignation behind the fire.

"What do you ail Nannelle?" said I, "Shall I call your mistress?"

'No, no, Sir! my dear mistress will come too soon.'

The gentleman was now so far revived as to call faintly for water. We ran and
supported him while Nannelle held the cup to his lips; he did not taste; his
head drooped, and he turned distastefully away.

'Lay me down! Make haste! I cannot live! My head! -- my head sounds horribly!'

Stooping to lay him easily on his pillow, I heard him whisper with a sigh:
'Anna! -- My dear Anna you are now avenged!'

At that moment, the young creature who had welcomed us from the storm, and
who, I suppose, had been at last disturbed by the noise we made, appeared. Her
manner interested my Father, who approached her with respect; but, without
heeding the company, she gazed for some moments wildly on the stranger, and
throwing herself down near him, shrieked,

'Antonio!'

'Raise me, Nannelle,' said the feeble stranger; the good woman obeyed. He
threw his weak arms round her mistress, and proceeded; 'Live! Oh! live, my
dearest Anna! Do not send me to the grave laden with additional guilt. When the
powers of justice hold the records of my misspent years, let not thy death be
found in the number of my crimes. I have wronged thee my unsuspecting Anna!
deeply wronged thee! But my career of life is finished, and I have much to do
while the prospect is closing. Heaven! who will in a few hours strike me from
its ample work, can only, at this awful moment, witness my remorse. I die, my
inestimable wife; and I die loving you! whom I have made ever, ever wretched!'
--

He paused as his head lay on the bosom of his Anna, while her tears fell on
his cheek; we stood round full of pity and attention; he sighed deeply, and
continued;

'You are so indulgent, so alive to tender sentiment, that you will forget my
faults while you mourn my fate. Beware of that sweet delusion* let my villainy
prove an antidote to your sorrow, and think the tear corrupted that falls for
extinguished vice.' -- For this gentleman, (pointing to me) 'there remains some
little reparation. I am the second son of De Forbes * * *. What is more
infamous, I am the brother of him you call Roderique; ^e has imposed on you,
the tale of his being the son of a Spanish nobleman was feigned. His commission
came from the King himself, who gave the order that your Father should be
sought through the realm until his existence or death could be ascertained. My
brother set forward, escorted with splendour and expense. Two months had elapsed
since his departure from court, when my father received a letter, dated * * * *
*, from the Count de Marsan's estate, to the effect, that chance had brought
the royal fugitive under the same roof with himself; that he was endeavoring
to gain the confidence of the family with whom it was supposed the younger
Henry had been educated; that he required some little time to learn the
different plans of action which were forming round him; that the younger Henry
was with his Father, and it would be easy to throw the net over them at any
hour.

'This, I remember, was the purport of his letter, but he mentioned nothing of
Emily, or his passion for her, which was never meant to prove honorable.
Though it has been the means of preserving thus far the lives of you, Sir, and
your noble Father, for the sake of Emily he required delay, and waited for the
crisis of her return to the convent, to strike his operations forcibly. In this
part of the work, so far as related to his love, I rashly became his confident:
he had perverted my principles respecting woman, and, being the elder, always
kept before me in the path of licentiousness. It is too late to make
reflections, you see the end of my profligacy, but more danger remains, nor
dare I suppose you can escape. Good God! must I lie here incapable of remedying
the evils I have consented to bring on you! Raise me! I shall be well if I can
save you -- In vain -- My head is heavy, I feel it swelling to a size that will
make me horrid.'

After a short delirium, he became more composed and rapidly weak; his voice
shook frequently, but he continued --

'Pursue not your route -- Halt at no village -- The skirts of this forest are
surrounded by armed troops -- No opening is left, except that which leads to a
convent. My brother, for selfish reasons, ordered the soldiers (except those
who accompanied him and me in our purposed villainy) to keep clear of that pass
to avoid a discovery which might do him no credit. From the moment my brother
saw Emily, he formed the design of carrying her off -- You may remember his
abrupt departure from your Guardian, his sending the servant away first to me.
That servant, whose name is Cregney, is full of guile, the tool of my brother,
but an arrant coward. We had, in consequence of former dispatches, arrived at
the Elephant hotel, near the White Horse, behind the hill; there a select party
waited: the larger body were stationed among the woods, but (through mistake, I
suppose) came not to our assistance. Let me entreat you, on the faith of a
dying man, not to go forward. The dreadful scheme of my brother is, at present,
broken. I know not where he is. Emily, and her Father he will conclude to be
flying toward their home. If living he will not give her up; but the disgrace
awaiting him, on account of his suffering the royal fugitive to escape, will
drive him on to acts of desperation -- Elude him, if you can, the chance is not
in your favor.'

"What crime," said I, "has my Father been guilty of, that he is thus pursued
through the world?"

'Accident, not guilt, is the cause of your Father's misfortunes: he is eldest
twin-brother of Louis, and heir to the crown. Being born blind, his eldership
was set aside, and his younger brother proclaimed Dauphin of France. Time gave
him sight; the film, that had long shut out the rays of reflection, gradually
broke away, and his eyes shone with uncommon luster.'

Here Antonio paused. --

'I would struggle with death a little longer! A few, only a few minutes more!'

We were attentive -- he observed it, and, with difficulty, proceeded:

'State policy could not alter the register; and it was, after much anxious
deliberation, concluded by the King his father, the Queen, and some of the
Privy Council, with whom my father was, at that time, thought a Nestor, to
educate the Prince liberally, but privately; never to make him acquainted with
his birth, but to take every case of his health and understanding, so that he
might be capable of reigning, should his brother die childless. My father is
now very old, but being in the secret, my brother was commissioned, and there
was a necessity for my being entrusted with a share of this business, which,
having not justice for its principle, can throw no obligation of secresy on my
departing spirit. Truth is for ever flying through the universe, many shut
their eyes on her blaze of light, none can arrest her progress! I once adored
that divinity of soul -- Why did I forsake virtue! What a retrospect! -- Give
me my yesterdays! -- No! -- All is fixed for me -- A dreadful silence is
within; my lawless passions have destroyed hope -- I am abandoned!' --

Breathless, and overpowered by his agitation, he closed his eyes; his pulse
grew irregular; he made strong efforts, and seemed in a hurry, like one who is
setting out on a journey of vast importance.

Good God, said I to myself, are these the pangs of repenting vice? how much
stronger are they than those conflicts we feel between virtue and desire during
our passage through the world: I find it difficult to love with purity; but
experience, like this, is horrible.

'For my Anna,' continued Antonio, 'I have a dreadful explanation; it will make
her still more wretched; yet, as it may serve to weaken the pangs she would
otherwise feel for my loss, I will try to proceed -- Had I been that perfect
being this lovely creature once thought me, I should have deserved her lasting
lamentations -- As I am depraved, I would willingly check her anguish, and
point her to the future, when, forgetting Antonio, she may be happy in the arms
of some worthy man, who will justly value her spotless mind. Oh, my Anna!
(raising his eyes toward her) 'while penitence and despair darkened their
beams, I go! go out of life in expressless woe! The dear, the unborn pledge of
your innocent love (I dare not mention mine) cannot be the heir of your
perfidious Antonio; yet, what I can, I will.

'The castle of * * * *, and its surrounding domains, are at my disposal. Three
years since it was bequeathed me by an aunt, and my child, when born, shall,
with its deserving mother, solely possess it -- Give me a pen -- I must be
brief -- These gentlemen will witness how willingly I offer you so inadequate a
recompense.'

Nannelle brought pen, ink, and paper, for Anna still sat with Antonio's head
on her bosom, lost in a kind of stupefaction. He wrote a few lines expressive
of his final resolution; he signed it with a trembling hand.

'Yet, my unfortunate dear girl! let me conjure you not to teach my innocent
offspring to hate the memory of its Father -- A Father! -- Gracious Heaven!
suffer me to remain a little longer; let me try to discharge the duties sacred
to so dear a name! -- No; it will not be, this is the hour of vengeance! To my
brother do I owe these pangs of remorse. I informed him of my love, when, two
years ago, we were hunting in this forest, and I had the happiness of
conversing with you, my Anna, on the side of the hill. My brother laughed at
the purity of my passion, ridiculed my constancy, represented the disparity of
our fortunes, your unequal education, the lasting displeasure of my father, and
the shame which would, in his idea, ensue, if I married so imprudently. But my
soul was devoted to your attractions; I could not live without you, every
splended scene palled on my imagination, and I resolved to return and call you
for ever mine. -- '

He hesitated here, as if doubtful whether he should say more, or observe an
everlasting silence; his eyes seemed to gather a wild animation. We flattered
ourselves that life was rekindling, and the gentle Anna gave a faint smile,
like that of hope thrown on the features of despair; or perhaps, memory drew
her back to their dawn of happiness when Antonio met her on the side of the
hill. He looked round him with impatience, and, raising his voice, said, 'Yes
-- Heaven itself shall never recall the past! You are undone! My Brother, whom
social duties never bind, disguised as a priest, performed our
marriage-ceremony, and deceived you, whilst I endeavored to deceive myself.
With what inward horror did I behold you an inoffensive victim to artifice! and
indulged the mental reservation of loving you too well to continue unjust, and
hoped in some future moment, when distant from the violent passions of my
Brother, and the power of my Father, to make you lawfully my wife: -- That hour
is gone by? on this bed of death, I feel that he who listens not to the voice
of virtue when she invites him, may wander neglected till he hears her no more.'

'My dear Antonio,' (exclaimed the agitated Anna) 'I cannot be deceived whilst
you love me! Try to live! Heed not the contempt your infant, or your Anna may
undergo, by being deprived of the sanction of the church. You are all to me!
True, I insisted on marriage as a duty due to the world; but my dearer claims
in you are those of disinterested love, too sublime to be enlarged, or lessened
by human ties; consequently superior to the clamours of slander -- live my
dearest Antonio! we may yet be happy.'

'I will not die!' (starting), 'I must not die now! till this moment never was
life so valuable! Hold me Anna! hold me closer to your heart! -- See how I am
sinking down! can you stay without me? -- Surely I would save you from every
danger; but you are feeble and I am heavy, very heavily laden! Oh, what agonies
are these! I want air, look down! -- look down! -- She loves me still, tear me
not from her! How cold. -- '

Pressing his lips to hers in the agony of separation he tasted this last proof
of tenderness -- and expired.

Anna did not weep -- She continued to hold the lifeless Antonio to her bosom,
insensible he had breathed his last, insensible that his lips would return her
salutations no more! For some moments she appeared to listen; we could not
disturb her silence nor did she notice; but perceiving his conversation was at
a full period, she laid him gently down; gazed on his face and played with his
hair.

Dreading the effect of so fine an imagination when left to its woes, I
approached her with diffidence and respect, conjured her to leave the room, and
attempted to raise her. She submissively offered me her hand without speaking a
word, but her looks were wild. I led her to the door of her chamber, desired
Nannelle to follow, and left her in all that solemn majesty of wounded spirit,
which is, at its first seizure of the human powers, so deaf to the condolence
of an uninteresting world.

But Anna's sorrows were soon to cease! -- Distraction swiftly succeeded: Her
frame became convulsed. To the pangs occasioned by the death of her husband
were added those of a mother, and the moment she gave her infant to the world,
her spirit flew after that of Antonio.

Let no man say he could have met the tragic incidents of this night with
firmness: horror and dismay took from us the power of expression. My Father,
after poor Nannelle spent the first tumult of her soul in tears, enquired
whether she had any friend near, whom we might summon on this mournful
occasion? She told him, Naurette, and her daughters lived only a stone's-throw
in the Dell, beyond the tuft of Firfis; and she would go call them. We would
not suffer her to leave the house, but by her direction sent two of our
servants who soon returned with the good woman bathed in tears. Her daughters
followed; their sorrowful deportment convinced us that the departed Anna was
less envied than beloved. To their tenderest care we commended her orphan
daughter, who was welcomed to the light with tears, and now heedless of
surrounding calamity slumbered unconscious in her nurse's arms. To the humanity
of those sympathising friends we also left the sacred remains of the
unfortunate Antonio, and his injured Anna, requesting they might be deposited
in one grave, and a monument erected to their memory in the church whose
venerable spires we had discerned in coming through the forest. To discharge
these pious duties my father left bills (into which he had converted a part of
his jewels) and promising to send Nannelle future remittances for the support
of Anna's helpless babe, expressed a wish of departing before daybreak, from
this melancholy dwelling, where misery in one night had poisoned every budding
joy.

Innocent Anna! may thy calm spirit watch over thy child, and invisibly turn
aside the arrow of affliction!

I had not beheld Emily since my second arrival at this house; she had been
prevailed on to retire before we could possibly reach it with the fainting
Antonio. He had resigned existence in the lower room, and Emily had flown to
the suffering Anna. When the latter was no more, the affrighted maid ran wildly
from the chamber; I met her as she descended the stairs, and received her
breathless in my arms. -- "Let me, O let me once more hold you to my heart!"
said I precipitately, pressing my lips to hers, my soul was in unison, and
mingled tumultuously with the touch; but Emily felt cold to my endearments.
Surely she could not at that moment have been so self-restrained had she felt
like me.

I now almost think her heart was never mine! if it had, could she have forgot
me? Could she have made an assignation with this Cordelier?

My Guardian, who had stood near the door totally lost in reverie, turned
round, and saw me supporting his beloved daughter. -- 'Ah, my dear Henry,' said
the afflicted parent, 'how do we meet!' Covering his eyes with his
handkerchief, he was silent; and Emily's frequent sighs indicated returning
life. For me, I solemnly protest, no selfish wish hung on my mind. I did not
even feel the desire of possessing this incomparable maid, so sublime and pure
was the transport, so highly did her danger exalt my wishes. Command her not to
dissolve, thou Father of eternal change! -- Can spirit center in a lovelier
form? -- Suffer that particle of intellectual fire which has fallen from thee
still to animate my Emily!

I prayed, and viewless forms, who catch the breathings of the heart, bore my
supplication to Heaven.

As she sat trembling in the chair, her eyes wandered from me to her father.
Full of astonishment, she gave nothing to love; she could not reconcile herself
to this scene of affliction, nor did the pale Antonio contribute to lessen her
amazement.

'Speak to me, Henry! -- or has guilt made you silent? Is it you who have
attempted to tear me from my Father? -- why am I here? why are you here? What
could make you in one night so finished in vice?'

Indignant in her manner, she looked with eager curiosity in my face, as if
challenging my reply -- I had none to make!

Oh! how painful is the first jar of suspicion, when it strikes that heavenly
confidence which binds two mutual hearts! -- Mine sent its thrillings through
every vein: I shook with the force of Emily's injurious imagination, and I
believe should have fallen had I not suddenly reclined on the low railing of
the staircase: there I in my turn, gazed silently at my dear tormentor; I know
not what my eyes expressed. Perhaps they were bent a little accusingly, but
hers soon lost their angry beams, and stole gently from me toward the earth;
while the fine blush, that suffused her features, proclaimed my secret triumph.
She certainly looked conscious of having wronged me. What would I have given
only to breathe this truth upon her lips!

Baseness cannot dwell with love. -- I dared not: the sentiments of delicate
desire are never to be breathed but to the midnight wind, and the object that
inspires them. Here I was surrounded by my friends and officious attendants. --
Emily grew comforted by her Father, who explained to her all he knew of the
night's adventure, and I felt deliciously avenged in her fascinating confusion,
when she thanked me for her deliverance. How many refinements the heart of a
lover forms for itself.

The intelligence given by the lamented Antonio, instead of pointing us to
safety, served to convince us that safety was not to be easily found. We formed
plans and departed from them; not one of us could give a final determination.
My Guardian proposed our returning to his estate, for the present, and citing
the son of De Forbes to the tribunal of civil law; but the precess would have
been tedious, and at last the judgment corrupt. Added to this cons^deration, my
self^sh heart opposed him from an im^^^^^, (...) away, the soul of Emily, in a
convent, would be sacred to me. I know we deceive ourselves when we suffer
imagination to paint a beloved object as we would wish it to be, but what
consolation could I in absence hope for, except the imaginary one of believing
Emily mine?

After much deliberation, it was resolved, at Emily's request, she should
return to her convent: my Father and myself, in spite of every remonstrance,
determined to see her safe within the sacred walls, and to turn across the
country by a different track from that we had at first chosen. To me the world
could wear but one appearance, I had poured out my soul to Emily in the garden,
our separation had there been concluded on, and my mind prepared to meet folly,
mirth and misery, with a stubborn tone of thought. We at last bad poor Nannelle
farewell; we had brought sorrow to her humble dwelling, but could not take it
away: deploring our want of power to repair her ills, we departed and left her
to weep.

Oppression hangs on woman. Custom and law respecting her, are through the
world unjust: Man forms a superiority on the grossness of vice; the laws he
makes support him; and he insults, with impunity, the more delicate sex. Where
can woman find a friend? Endued with tenderness, she often needs support, but
should her afflicted spirit turn to man, she is undone; he is by nature false,
and custom makes him cruel; there is but one avenging effect in thus enslaving
the female mind, which is, that along the path of time we shall not meet one
suitable companion. We are short-sighted, sullen and restless; women, helpless
and tender.

Reflections of this kind naturally prevailed in my mind, till we had lost
sight of that late peaceful habitation, where almighty Love might now mourn his
victims. As I rode behind the carriage, which held the treasure of my soul, I
endeavored to calm my busy memory, and to forget the irretrievable miseries of
the night, in the more pleasing images of my youthful progress, and the
delicate gradations of my infant passion.

The first sight of Emily, her attention to my aged Mayo, the bouquette, her
well-adapted song, every little incident came back to form a picture: and at
this moment, it instantly occurred that the Husbandman I had met in my
Guardian's park was the Father of Anna. -- Hapless Father! Thou shall no more
behold the blessing of thy age! but -- thou shall follow her.

Not caring to indulge this seeming coincidence of circumstance, I tried to
whistle a lively air, as we rode on through the forest -- It would not do; I
became insensibly mute, for my very soul was unstrung. We at length arrived at
the gates of the convent; it was morning -- Nature was awake. The pure had
thanked their Creator: the children of guilt had blushingly stole from her
snares, when one of our attendants alighted, rang the great bell of the
convent, and Emily was announced. The self-denying Abbess appeared, and with
her many of the lay sisters who were the friends of Emily, and whose eyes, I
observed, spite of my unalterable love, shone with surprise and pleasure on our
goodly company. Why should they not? my Father was a handsome man, little more
than forty, his form, modelled by the line of beauty; his complexion glowing
with her full tints; his large eyes were of melting blue, their fringed
curtains a dark-brown, and the animation himself possessed, imperceptibly and
suddenly struck those who beheld him. My Guardian was full of manly grace, a
little older than my Father; his countenance shining with the smile of
philanthropy, his whole manner expressive of the mildness of virtue. Our
attendants were gay, men of vivacity and unmeaning as vivacity generally is;
for your humble servant Henry -- but I care not what Henry is -- this sly
Cordelier -- so blessed -- so beloved -- so appointed -- Whither am I going,
these ravings serve me not! -- On a group so inviting could an harmless maid
gaze with aught but delight? -- No -- Cynics may rail, corrupted prudes
condemn, and the old murmuring visionary lay down his icy rule. Their labors
amount to nothing. Generous Nature dips the sponge, and Sympathy wipes out the
precepts of cowardly Reserve. True; the blaze of soul was on those innocent
girls unusually momentary, for here was Nature expiring in the grasp of
Superstition.

The Abbess, from whose cheek insulted Nature had long withdrawn her rosy hue,
deigned, unsmilingly, to direct us to a house on the south side of the convent,
and detached from it, I supposed, for the charitable purpose of receiving the
worldly visitor (but as my guessing never was of the frigid kind, my reader
must not always trust it.) Around the window-casements, wandered the solitary
jasmine hiding as much lead as glass; up the dark colored wall crept the ivy,
and over the arched door stood the stone figure of a saint; not cut with
awe-inspiring workmanship to deceive us into veneration, like that in which our
cold and ancient patriarchs are immortalized* but in health, strength, beauty
and comeliness; like the young friar, who left the house on our entering it,
and who, I was told by the porter, often confessed the good Lady Abbess.
Resolving not to guess at any thing, but to take things as they came, I sat
down. My Father and my Guardian walked round the apartment, which was spacious,
admired the paintings of the canonized, and read the inscriptions of the Popes
and the Nuns. I could have sworn the Popes and the Nuns had never been fellow
creatures: Pope Urban, born * * * *, died 1644. Pope Innocent, born * * * *,
died 1655. Pope Alexander, born * * * *, died 1667.


Many Popes in succession were born, and died.

The blue-eyed Nun of St. Catharines, born * * * *, and died * * * *.

St. Anne, born 1642, died * * * *. St. Lucillia, born 1653, died * * * *. St.
Civillia, born * * * *, died * * * *.
What did these births and deaths amount to? said my Guardian. --

The painted ceiling attracted may attention; it was meant to be decorated by a
winter scene, in which no beauteous bud was seen to blow. From the east, the
effulgent god, peeping above the horizon, strove to throw a ray of genial
warmth on the snow-drop that early gilded the vale, and seemed to await his
coming; while Winter from the north, sent forth a torpid breathing; and the
snowdrop, at his blast, shut up her beauteous bosom. From those devices, so
natural to the latitude into which we had entered, my attention was arrested by
the slow-paced Lady Abbess, who came accompanied by a lady to whom Emily ran
and expressed her sincere satisfaction at their meeting. My Father too, without
the least apology, or even a lovesick exclamation, started from his place,
over-turned the little carved table that stood before him, ran against me,
threw me upon the floor; and there I quietly sat gazing, and endeavoring to
account for my Father's vigorous exertion.

If he should salute the immaculate Lady Abbess, said I to myself, we are all
undone! But my fear was changed into astonishment, when I saw him clasp the
Lady in his arms, who had entered with her, and imprint on her lips the
salutation of love. My eyes, instinctively I believe, raised themselves toward
Emily, who was that moment gazing on me.

Nothing,' said my Father, turning to a Venus de Medicis.

It was too much! -- the heart cannot long bear the forcible beam of an
enraptured eye; and Emily instantly affected to admire the antique roof, where
Winter was represented as blasting the opening year.

"May thy youth know a happier spring! dear maid!" said I, rising from the
floor with apparent composure. By this time I fancied my Father might have
whispered his business in the Lady's ear, who, without waiting my advances,
threw her arms round me, and sunk on my bosom --

'MY SON!' -- was all she could articulate, in a voice that made me shiver.
Rapture such as angels might feel, absorbed my whole soul. No language could
embody my ideas. I supported my Mother, looked at my Father -- He was silent,
but the big tear of affection rolled down his face.

'My Husband! my Son! my Henry! Oh what an age is gone, what hours have I known
-- but I have found you! -- found you both! we will never more be separated.'

'Take me with you,' said my Mother, with all the incoherence of full delight;
while the good Lady Abbess stood trowning.

'I will! I will, my love!, exclaimed my Father, 'one destiny surely awaits us,
or indulgent heaven would not have given you so unexpectedly to me.'

'I thought you had formed resolves, madam, of a more pious nature,' said the
Abbess.

'What resolves?' replied my Mother, casting her eyes pensively on the earth.

'Have we not labored to extinguish your sense of worldly enjoyments?' --

'And what good did you promise yourself, had your labor succeeded?' replied
my Father laconically.

'The greatest good, Sir: that of teaching her soul to win its way to heaven.
In short, that of breaking all social ties?'

'Yes -- and of mistaking the grand beauties of order for the burning phantoms
of imagination.'

The pious old lady, I supposed, made a stop only to summon her reasoning
powers, which, every one knows, lie so deep in the mind's inexhaustible abyss,
that we often cannot find them till the end of the argument, and my mother
resumed; 'When I formed those resolves my spirit was made obedient to your
wishes by despair. But I have found a Husband; I have found my beloved, my
handsome Henry! and may not these obliterate my solitary resolve?'

'Ask your conscience?'

The tone with which this sentence was pronounced, proved that the Abbess
fancied she had gained a point. 'Yes, Madam,' she repeated with a triumphant
smile, 'ask your conscience!' --

'Which is unsullied, if I know my Eleanora, nor shall your superstitious rites
rob me of my claim, unless she willingly flies the husband who adores her. --
Mistake me not, good Lady; so confused, so very inadequate is the code of all
religious ceremonies, that like Aaron's rod, one swallows the other, and the
last lies without efficacy. You practice wars with the feelings of Nature; you
lose your tenderness* you are less than woman, because religious pride would
whisper you are more. You can be of no service to God, you will not bless
mankind; victims drop between your walls; society hears not their hopeless
sighs, nor do you pity expiring beauty. Your souls are rendered obdurate by the
working of that misguided frenzy, which your Priests awaken in your ductile
minds -- If you will teach woman, I pray you encourage her to dare beyond the
invention of man: bid her not trust his opinions further than the verge of the
grave. He cannot even paint to you a Deity. Why then immure yourself here? Why
hourly die for the poor satisfaction of being deemed unusefully virtuous? It Is
a state, Lady Abbess, like that in which the moth spends her last moment.'

My mother waited the result of this harangue, made by my Father in a
peremptory manner. The Abbess was offended -- he perceived it and led her into
an adjoining apartment. None of us, I believe, were quite easy under this short
suspense. We knew superstition here wore every pontifical terror, and that we
had nothing in the world about us but poor reason. After some delay, we were,
however released. For the lately-jarring couple returned to us much better
pleased with each other. I tried to guess the cause of so necessary a
reconcilement; but, what with the filial respect I owed my Father, and the
frozen sanctity with which I beheld the venerable virgin, I could not for my
soul divine aright. Reader, do not thou guess -- I will tell thee -- My
Father's purse was heavy, and he lightened it in that of the Lady's.

'We are ready to attend you my Eleanora,' said my Father. This Lady will
obviate every objection with the holy brotherhood, and we may depart.'

This was not a time for any of us to be inquisitive; it was enough for my
affectionate parents that once more they were reciprocally blessed; and the
history of their long separation was mutually reserved for happier hours. My
Mother, however, took an opportunity to inform us that she was not known in the
convent; that such precaution had been taken to save the appearance of force in
her seclusion, none supposed but that she came in voluntarily, and all expected
she was to take the veil.

'The ministers of the King have lost me: I escaped from the convent in which I
was first confined: I secreted myself by day, as much as possible, for a
considerable time; but fearing I should by chance be recognized, came here, and
was welcomed as one weary of the world. Long struggling with hopeless love,
importuned and soothed alternately into cold and gloomy habits, I had lately
given the Abbess reason to suppose that I would leave society for ever. You, my
beloved husband, are a better guide; be you and my Henry my Guarding Angels.'

As my Mother was about to pour the sentiments of fond delight into our bosoms
whilst we stood listening with silent affection, her friends came to bid her
adieu. The good Lady Abbess had gone to inform them of her destined departure.
Those who were probationers ran to us, full of unaffected concern, but those
who were imprisoned by their vows, only waved their hands, and mourned my
Mother's return to the temptations of the world.

Strange infatuation of solitary existence! Were they created for this single
blessedness? Who can tell? We have invented virtue -- We have carried
sanctification to an extreme, and when extremes meet, 'chaos is come again.'
Human ideas mingle in a vortex, and the man who is audacious enough to snatch
an old thought from the mass, and dress it fashionably, hits the taste of the
million lately born, and shall be pronounced 'Inspired' -- Poor human Nature!

Notwithstanding we had bade farewell to these death-devoted maids, we were
prevailed on to accept of the invitation of the Lady Abbess, which was to sleep
and refresh ourselves in this convenient and comfortable house till the
morning. The articles belonging to my Mother were not all collected, and we
began to think the day too far spent to advance. I am certain my reader (drowsy
as he must be in reading my story) will swear there is no blessing in nature
like sleep, I therefore will not apologize, but own we concluded to stay with
the Lady Abbess till the morrow.

My Father knew (as I have related) I loved Emily. He knew also that I had
never, in a noble and candid mander, unbosomed myself to my Guardian. But he
was too refined to suffer my monopolizing the child, without the sanction of
the father. Alas! he did not know how naturally and unerringly our souls had
formed an invisible union. We had not waited for the secondary right of
arbitrary duty; we had seized the first claim of Nature, which was that of
innocently mingling our sentiments. Our persons were yet to be disposed of as
Heaven would permit. My Father now drew me aside, told me he was sensible how
much I must feel, and asked me if I really wished to marry Emily: I told him my
existence depended on that hope.

Be it so: blessed with my Eleanora, my dreary prospects are changed, and my
cares vanished. I have wealth enough to make us all happy in some peaceful
retreat. Your Mother and myself will imperceptibly grow old in the society of
you and your family. Only promise you will never indulge destructive ambition.'
--

"Never, my Lord, on my own account will I raise a tumult in France; but must
you be for ever an exile? Should I not be justified in drawing my sword in the
cause of filial duty?"

'Filial duty, my son, is considered by me as mere articulated sound, sinking
as you breathe it indivisibly into air: -- True, we have contrived emblems by
which it may be said we convey sound to the eye, these we call record.
Characters, or what you will, and by those mute auxiliaries have law and duty
been handed down, through ages, for the support of order formed on human plans.
But shall the empty phrase of filial duty cause you to be a murderer! believe
me Henry, that man has a false idea of relative duty, when he spreads a wide
evil for the sake of giving his friend or father a partial good.'

What could I say? Did not this man deserve a crown? I really thought him
worthy of reigning, but dared not own I wished it. -- He continued --

'The thunders of duty too often break on the head of a trembling child, who
stands a meek victim to the will of another, and gives all away! Oh, how many
pangs would the guiltless heart be spared, did haughty parents forego their
fruitless claims! Sons would become domestic, happy husbands; daughters elude a
broken spirit, and an early grave. -- No, my generous boy; you must look on me
as receding from the world, and as to your personal happiness, may it ever
depend on yourself.'

"But how will my uncle approve of your obscurity? He is brave, and if I my
judge from his appearance, when he visited my Guardian, possesses fire enough
himself to put in motion the grand machine of war. -- And who shall guide it?"

I was neither devout nor profane enough to promise my Father the assistance of
a Deity, as a meek and pious priest would have done. The plough-share of war is
generally followed by a crowd of pigmies, who are in such a fury to guide it,
that they ^^ample one over the other; whilst the ill-directed iron is harrowing
up their peace. --

'My brother is not happier than I am unless he is more beloved, which I
greatly doubt; for preeminence chills the heart that would, on an equal scale,
adore. Reason well with life, my son. Nature has contrived it shall be short;
man contrives it shall be wretched. He who rushes unfeelingly over his fellow
creatures, to catch the bubble of public fame, feels the sting of a perturbed
spirit; and shall not rest but in death. For you, and me, let love and the
social blessings suffice to preserve us from inactivity; you shall be happy
with your Emily, I with my Eleanora.'

No one man can be said to make a people blessed; but surely a king, possessing a
mind like that of my Father, could never add to the miseries of mankind. I
kissed his hand, in a transport of gratitude and admiration, and consented to
renounce ambition. In a few words, he made my Guardian acquainted with my
wishes, who unaffectedly gave his sanction only with this proviso, 'That the
affections of his daughter should govern, never be made subservient to his
approbation.'

'The last admonition of Antonio still hangs on my memory, said he -- 'I think
it would be prudent not to pursue your journey to l'Abbee Dorovantes, but to
seek a retreat in * * * * *, from thence you may inform the Duke of B * * * *,
that your resolutions are changed, he may there meet us, and the union of our
children be rendered lasting.'

We agreed. -- I now beheld happiness rapidly approaching to love. To be blessed
with the object of my wishes, and crowned with the kind opinion of those I
revered, were advantages that certainly promised uninterrupted tranquillity;
and to these my glowing imagination added her strongest tints to beautify the
scene.

Emily had been pleasingly occupied in receiving the congratulation of her
friends in the convent; she returned to give us her good night. Her Father
whispered to her the conclusions we had formed, and I had the pleasure of once
more seeing the traits of cheerfulness on her lovely features as the modestly
withdrew.

The holy Abbess took my Father by the hand and my Mother by the hand, looked
up with heavenly fervor, and wished them the peaceful slumber of happy minds.

Her prayer, for aught I can tell to the contrary, was well turned: we all
stood in need of rest, though I much question if either slept the better for it.

'How happy I am,' continued the good Lady, 'in proving myself your
disinterested friend! Gold is ever inadequate to the soul's best actions; they
are beyond all earthly purchase! I am hourly convinced by what I think and what
I feel, that the soul and the body are two things; but the body is, as it were
differently formed, subject to the natural necessity which displays itself
every where. It must be dependent on something; the appetites must be fed or
the body dies; but the soul stands in a manner aloof! the soul silently scorns
to partake of sordid gold! though gold is necessary, yes, the soul! the exalted
soul is -- as I may say -- is like -- Like nothing -- except it be like my
Eleanora, 'said my Father, as he led my Mother to repose.

Simple I, without saying a syllable, except good night, saw my friends retire
one after the other, noticing, when unnoticed, till I found myself
inadvertently alone with the seraphic Lady Abbess -- What was to be done? --
Nothing; yet I resolved, with the utmost gentleness, to steal an holy kiss from
her cold cheek -- I did; and while I was shutting the door after me, saw her
eyes filled with more despair than displeasure.

Do not think the worse of me, reader, for saluting the lily-coloured Lady --
indeed I was only playful.

The moon, as I was reclining on my pillow, left the horizon. My candle had
given her last friendly spark, and sleep and happy dreams nursed for awhile the
wearied powers of my frame. I was once awakened by the sound of a bell from the
convent; but concluding it to be that unwelcome sound which breaks the balmy
slumber of the Nuns, and summons them to midnight vespers, I again lay down
full of the image of Emily -- O, how far at that moment was destiny preparing
to hurry me from the idol of my soul!

All was still -- How long that stillness had lasted I know not; I awoke in a
state of horror! My limbs were confined; on my throat lay a heavy pressure; my
breath grew short, and suffocation began to arrest the current of life! Agony,
I believe, is stronger for being sudden: even the pains of death become
comparatively weak by a long and slow gradation: I was young, healthful and had
known no waste of strength. My powers of mind or body had received no shock;
and Nature now was ardent in her exertions to avoid dissolution. Forcible in my
struggling, I by some means relieved my throat, and could indistinctly hear
human wispers; I attempted to speak, and my mouth was immediately gagged,
whilst a hoarse voice commanded me to 'be passive, for my doom was fixed.' A
bandage was tied over my eyes, a covering belonging to the bed closely girted
round me, and I was by force conveyed, with horrid silence, to a ^arriage.
Convinced I was in the power of many ruffians, I steadily resigned myself to
the will of my Creator, and lay still. Why I was not that night murdered, I am
yet to learn, since had the contrivance been Roderique's, he was too far gone
in vice to indulge humanity, and might have dispatched his rival If it had been
the will of the King, he from policy more than cruelty might have destroyed a
man whose pretensions to the crown would probably one day shake the peace of
France. -- That I am now breathing is to me a mystery.

The carriage, to the bottom of which I was bound for some hours, went
furiously on. From its uneasy motion, and the jingle of chains, I supposed it
to be a kind of cart or wagon; the trampling of many horses accompanied it,
and the voices of many men kept a continual jargon, the sense of which I did
not understand, because my hearing was not sufficiently clear. I heard them, at
last, mention morning -- I could not see it, my eyes were still darkened. How
tediously did the hours seem to creep, whilst I lay burning with indignation,
and endeavoring to despise death! Sometimes I heard the wheels rush against
the hedges, in passing, as I supposed, through narrow lanes; again they would
plunge into deep ruts, made apt for impression by the late rains; and the
recovering jolt always made me sensible of the vehicle's coming out; at other
moments the horses seemed slowly to labor through lengthened marshes, the
heavy mire of which so enfeebled and retarded those noble animals, that the
lashes of their cruel masters lost their effect. -- During this dismal day, the
longest I thought I had ever known, no refreshment was offered me -- I really
began to think myself forgotten, even by my enemies. The horses at length
stopped, and the order was given for lighted torches: I supposed now the time
to be night, and that we were on some beaten road; I was not mistaken -- some
travelers saluted us as they passed by, civilly, bidding God to bless us;
others enquired to what town we were going, and what commodities we had to
sell? My guards gave different answers to successive questions, not one of
which were true, whilst I lay panting beneath a pile of straw. The carriage
soon left the high roads; the hoofs of the horses were not to be heard, and I
concluded they were for many miles running over turf. The mind of man, when
disturbed, is a chaos, 'without form and void.' His ideas take no shape, or the
formation he tries at swiftly dies. Millions of chimeras floated on my
imagination; all were rejected in speedy succession ere they became old enough
to take the color of reason; yet fancy will be busy till we are no more.

'How near the shore is the vessel,' said some person, as the carriage hawled
up, and made a full stand; 'not above forty feet; the wind is favorable; we
shall go seven knots.'

This dialogue ended; -- as their voices died away, I could distinctly hear the
roaring of the sea. Death throws horror on the imagination of man, from those
lifeless forms he hourly beholds; the flitting breath departed, our lately
smiling friends answer not to our lamentations, heed not our sighs, nor wipe
away our tears. It is this eternal insensibility which pervades the dead --
that shocks our mortal affections, and we tremble at the idea of sinking into
the same state. What manner of death is least painful, I believe, has long been
a question: for me, drowning appeared most awful.

In the season of childhood, I had accompanied a lad, whose father was tenant
to my Guardian, in a walk on the bank of a river. It was in the month of July
-- Creation glowed with sultry exhalations, I panted at noon, reclined under
the shadow of a willow, and my young friend sat by me till I fell into heavy
sleep; the flocks were going to sold, and I found the clothes of my companion
placed under my head, when I awoke. -- "Jacques," said I, rubbing my eyes, "we
have staid here till I am cold" -- Jacques was gone! I started from the earth,
roved wildly along the shore, enquired of the shepherds, and called through the
woods. My terrors increased, imagination doubled them. I quickened my step, and
ran toward home; being almost spent with crying, I walked throngh a lane which
I never thought gloomy till now, and, turning the corner of the hedge, met a
boatman carrying Jacques wrapped up in his blue jacket. -- "Tell him to
awaken," said I, in a transport of joy, "tell him Henry is here."

'He is dead.' --

"Dead!" --

'Drowned.' --

"No! no! -- Let me press my lips to his, and he will breathe again."

The man laid down my pale little friend. I lay down near him, but he was cold.
I raised his head -- he was no longer the kind, attentive boy, who had, a few
hours since, placed the wild-rose in my bosom. --

"Where do you think his spirit is?"

Boatman. 'Gone to Heaven, it is to be hoped.'

"And is this all I must ever see of little Jacques -- He was good! I will be
good! Perhaps I may meet his spirit when I die."

'May be so,' replied the man with a sigh, 'it is always right to hope.'

My unfortunate companion was learning to swim, I was informed, and the current
carried him away. -- He was borne to the village churchyard, attended by his
mourning father. His image remained indelible with me, and now revived with
more than usual strength. To drown! good Heaven! to sink into the vast deep, so
full of the powers of life! bandaged! chained! not the least indulgence left
for struggling nature! How long shall I be dying? (said I to myself.) What will
be my feelings? -- The work of dissolution will, I hope, be short! After the
shudder of a moment I became more collected. Man wills not himself into being;
he lives not by his own energy, or he would live for ever. I must die! Time,
when past, is not mine; the future is not mine; what then are my claims? I have
none. Reflection thus prepared me for my fate, and I scorned to plead with
those I imagined to be my executioners. Through this dismal scene my mouth was
gagged, and the first moment of ease I experienced was, when one of the men,
who assisted in receiving me from the carriage, roughly drew the iron from my
lips. My eyes were not yet uncovered, nor my limbs unbound.

'We leave him to your care; be you answerable for the completion of the work,'
said some one at a trifling distance.

I immediately exclaimed, "Monsters, if you know me, dispatch me."

'Ah! malheureux, vous etes condamne -- N'importe -- bon soir.

From the beach I was conveyed in a boat to a vessel, and dawn up its side with
difficulty. In so helpless a state I could not aid the efforts of the seamen,
nor ward off personal anguish. Being laid on the deck stunned with nautical
expressions of surprise and laughter, I was unswathed, the covering was taken
from my eyes, and I enjoyed the unspeakable pleasure of sitting upright. After
suflering so long in a passive state, my mouth was sore, my thirst intolerable;
I feebly begged for water. A young tar, hastily brought me some, but my jaws
had been strained so severely, that I felt much torture in drinking, yet the
eager craving of Nature was too powerful to be denied, and my muscles soon
recovered their usual elasticity. I have often reflected since on the strange
tranquillity which hung on my mind and body, whilst sitting on the deck of the
ship. I remembered but little. I cared for nothing around me. I felt no
agonizing impatience on the account of those I had been torn from, but fell
into a vacancy which could be neither pleasure nor pain. Being awakened from
this listlessness, I grew peevish, but was soon laughed into quietude by a
young tar, who came sauntering along the deck with a chain in his hand,
singing, My rum is out! my spirits die!
My mother gave me all her store.
The tears that left her aged eye,
Fell on the beach I hail no more.
'Jemmy,' (she cried) 'grey is my hair,
'Expect no more my form to see!
'Thy little sisters claim thy care;
'Give them the love thou ow'st to me.'
And though three thousand miles apart,
And though my aged mother sleep,
My sisters still shall have my heart,
The world shall never make them weep.
Jemmy will come, my sisters dear!
Think, when the winds blow loud at night,
My latitude may still be fair,
-- I wish my cag of rum was tight Full.
!


There was a peculiar manner in this fellow that drew my attention. I perceived
he had sudden starts of love and pity, but that the habitual hurry of a
seafaring life had drowned the softest emotions of his heart as they arose;
his mother and sisters had an interest in his bosom. They were far asunder, and
rum was but the means of supporting him now, that he might provide for those
dear relatives in future. He stood listening to the gurgling waves, while he
sang the foregoing song on the side of the ship, not in a hurry to fasten his
chain round my ancle. When I enquired who wrote his song -- 'myself,' (said he,
in a merry tone) 'Come, hoist! Damn me if I Would give a quid of tobacco for such a
land tortoise -- why, what trunk of a tree did you leave last? -- Do you go the
voyage with us?'

"I have my doubts: this chain seems to assure me I shall not."

'O! curse the chain; many a good lad has worn a brace of them, who, for all
that, pulled up his buntlings afterward and danced with the lasses.'

Whilst this hearty fellow was comforting me in his way, he, with all the ease
of an Englishman, drew his tobacco-pouch from his pocket, and pushing a large
roll of the vivifying herb on one side his mouth, desired me to do the same. I
refused and thanked him. He felt no concern; but, as he put his little pouch
into his trowsers pocket, he murmured --

'I hate to see a man in chains though he never touched a topsail.'

"Were you never in this predicament, my friend?"

'Never but once, and the Devil may carry me if I would not run the gauntlet at
any time for the same trick.'

"What was your offense?" --

'Why, I only stole a boiled chicken off my Captain's table, (not this Captain)
and gave it to a young Negro-woman, who was near dying with her pour baby at
her bosom, between decks. She ate it up, while I stood looking at her; and in
an hour after I took the full compliment of a dozen. -- Damn the dozen! and
damn the Captain, who could see her starve, for starve she did after all,
because she could not, or would not eat the slave's common provender; she often
prayed for Jemmy, (that is me) and said, a little before she died, that 'her
great father, sitting at the end of the sea, would take care of Jemmy.' But
there! she is gone! her baby was launched after her while I was in irons.'

A stout man, who I supposed was the commander, came forward, and saluting
Jemmy with his rope-end, the latter skipped up the shrouds like a squirrel. For
my part, I believe despair made me audacious, and I, with little ceremony,
demanded of this officer whither we were bound.

'To heaven or hell.'

Fancying he meant only that we must sink or swim, I resolved to suppress my
curiosity; the more, as this fellow's ill-mannered abruptness tended to silence
my question, by the fullest answer in the human language.

'Bear a hand with this lubber down between decks,' said he, and whistled
carlessly as he passed forward: I was helped down, chained to a ring-bolt, an
old hammock thrown near me, and some biscuit left for my support. All this did
not appear as a preparation for my immediate death, and I naturally began to
awaken from the stupor in which I had for some hours indulged myself. My
parents! so lately found; so deservedly beloved, wandered across my memory.
Their images were followed by that of Emily, but I checked the dear illusions,
and laid my weary head, resigned on the hammock. Three days passed over me
whilst in this inactive state. Jemmy would often steal down and try to cheer
me. One morning he came early, hugging his black-jack full of grog, and bade me
drink deep and be merry.

'The world is but an ocean, mesmate, and though we all seem to be making
different ports, we do but touch-and go. One port is made for all -- I have
reason to think you will get in before me; if so, look about you, see if you
can see Tom Williams; if you can, tell him Jemmy Lee is beating into the
channel. Come drink -- one must follow another, we cannot make mankind drive a
breast if it was to save our souls.'

This short oration of Jemmy boasted little elegance and much idea, (somewhat
like a British harangue) but as life had lost greatly of its estimate with me,
this honest youth continued uninterrupted. --

'Your sail will soon be taken in I am afraid. What do you think I heard last
night? -- Come, take a bit of a quid; it will serve to moisten your mouth bye
and bye, for I must go up again; my watch will be called in an hour.'

"Excuse me, Jemmy, I am not in the habit of chewihg the leaf."

'Well then, I wont ask you any more -- Here Is health and happiness to him who
steers out of his course to save a wreck! -- Ah, my hearty! I don't know your
name, but I wish you were safe on dry land! Why I heard a fine dialogue about
you last night -- The Captain mentioned you to our gentleman passenger at
supper; and, when I came out of the cabin, I listened at the door, for I wanted
to know somewhat about you. The passenger said, Captain, I have an order to
take him out to sea, and carry your certificate back to France of his being
sunk!'

'Who is he, replied the Captain, or what has he done to deserve death?'

'He is an enemy to the King, and my master lives in dread of assassination
from him.'

'When your master (whom I never thought like myself) ordered me to bring my
vessel along-shore, he told me the prisoner was condemned by the law, and that
I might make some money of him at one of the islands where I shall touch; that
part of the bargain I shall keep to myself. After taking in my cargo at
Carthagena, where we are to set you on shore, I shall pursue my voyage up the
Streights -- But as to the prisoner -- why, I have already received money
enough for his passage, if it were possible I could carry him into another
planet -- Come, take your glass, I Will give you a song Andrew the mate taught me
-- Like to an apple on the sea,
The world is ever floating;
The brave ride merrily, like me,
The old on wealth are doting.
But he who loves his gentle maid,
Shall meet a kind returning;
And he who never a friend betrayed,
May -- hiccup! -- sing till rosy morning.


'Aye, but Captain,' said the passenger, (for he would not let him sing the
song out) 'here is my master's written order, which you must read.'

'Read -- I can read nothing to night -- hiccup -- By Jove I am more than half
seas over!'

'Here are five hundred louis-d'ors, Captain.'

'Five hundred louis d'ors! --

'Five hundred louis-d'ors! -- '

'Damme, if that would not -- hiccup -- purchase my whole cargo!

'But you must perform my master's order.'

'Your master! why he is for all I know a knave on shore -- I the sovereign of
the sea. --

'Will you for this gold consent it shall be done to night?'

'The Devil himself will be offended if you make a murderer of a drunken man.
It is a large sum -- five hundred louis-d'ors. Hiccup, Sir, to hell I pitch
your louis-d'ors, here have I been beating old Davy for these ten years -- I am
a Scotchman, my dear ship's name is the Highland-Queen; no man shall stretch
out his hand at the day of judgment, and say to me, Captain Murray, you turned
me, out of life; no, no, my -- I say, Sir! -- My vessel -- my little
Highland-Queen, shall not be followed up the Streights by a ghost.'

'A ghost! Captain Murray! -- for God's sake is your vessel haunted? Lord have
mercy upon me!'

'The Devil help you, hiccup! -- you are a pretty fellow to drown a man, I tell
you, you coward! the prisoner's spirit would sit all night shrieking in the
rigging; nay, I should not wonder if he flew over the side with you in a flash
of fire.'

'I was never at sea before!,

'Then you never saw our great water-serpents, who come up in the night and
spit blue flame in our shrouds when we got a villain in the ship. -- Blue,
yellow, red, green, all the colors of the rainbow, burn round us till the crew
kneel down, say the Lord's Prayer, and tumble the wretch plump into the deep --
hiccup -- give me the other glass and I shall be up to any rigg.'

'Sir! Sir!' (and the poor gentleman panted for breath) 'I'll give you the sum
of money, if you will do the business without my knowledge of it. -- To be sure
I was sent on board to see it done, and was afterward to be put on shore at
Carthagena, from whence I was to return to Marseilles -- but you can do it
without me.'

'But not without the five hundred louis-d'ors.'

'No, Captain -- here they are.'

'Agreed,' said the Captain, and took up the money 'so that I am afraid you
will lie-by sooner than you expected. I had a mind not to tell you all this,
but, if any preparation can be made for a long voyage we seamen like to make
it.'

Jemmy left me to reflection; I had no worldly riches to bequeath; my ideal
form, I believed would long be preserved by Emily, and I lamented in sympathy
with my unhappy parents -- All partial formation must dissolve, though the
great-system of Nature shall eternally renovate. Am I not, in the grave, the
undoubted property of God?

Arrived at this height of resignation, I supported a suspense of three
weeks-rolling on the sea. The sight of land at last was proclaimed by one of
the crew; and that night, when all was still, except the watch upon deck, the
Captain came to me, accompanied only by Jemmy, and sternly ordered me to be
stripped. Poor Jemmy reluctantly obeyed, without speaking, but the silent tear
that fell on my cheek as he stooped to unbind me was full of pity.

'Wrap something round him, and stow him away,' said the Captain, let none of
the crew know where he is while Monsieur Cregney is on board.' --

'God bless you, Sir?' replied Jemmy, in a transport of pleasure -- 'I was
afraid, Sir, you were going to order me to throw him overboard.'

'And what difference to you if I had? -- '

The Captain crept to his cabin: I was directed to lie closely behind a large
coil of cable, and Jemmy covered me with some of the sails. My only fear now
was of suffocation from foulness of air; however, my chance of life was much
greater than it had been on the yesterday.

There is a pith, in some men, hard to be got at. It seems to peep upon us like
a sudden light, and shut up again: The manner in which this Captain conducted
himself was singular, and there is wondrous energy in natural eccentricity. I
wished to be acquainted with the mind of this man; but circumstances would not
agree to it. -- We were three days making land, during which Jemmy never
brought me any refreshment but at midnight, when our anchor was cast. I was not
relieved for the space of a week: the happy moment came! Monsieur Cregney, I
was informed, had been shown the bed-clothes in which I had been bound on the
night when forcibly torn from the convent; had received a written certificate
of my death, and was gone on shore in order to return to France. With a smiling
countenance, Jemmy led me to the Captain's cabin; I bowed as I entered, he took
me by the hand, his heart swelled: but he stubbornly broke the sigh in its
utterance -- 'Cheerily lad! I had some work to save you, take this purse that
was to have made a villain of Captain Murray, and never feel becalmed whilst
the winds fill one honest man's sail.'

"Keep your purse, Captain, as the regard of humanity."

'No; you are but a smuggled commodity at best, I could not buy you into
breathing, I would not purchase you as a nonentity, and the five hundred
louis-d'ors may make you a valuable purchase to some bouny lassie.'

"Do you know who I am? -- "

'No; nor do I care!'

"Will you, or can you, without violating your honor, inform me by whose
contrivance I was sent: on board your vessel?" --

'By the contrivance of a young Lord, who has paid me fifty livres per diem for
two weeks past, on condition of my laying off-shore to receive you. He told me
that the King had given his sanction to your death, but that I might make money
of you after passing the Streights. Monsieur Cregney, however, has enlarged on
my first compliance, and showed me an order for your death. -- Monsieur Cregney
believes you are dead, and is upon returning to Marseilles full of that belief.
Go; -- be careful of yourself -- I must pursue my voyage -- and think sometimes
of Captain Murray.'

To Jemmy I present one hundred of the louis-d'ors, his civility had attached
me to him; he swore they should all be bundled home to his mother and sisters;
and if rough virtue has a charm, I surely might be allowed to part reluctantly
from this young man.

Captain Murray as we stood on the shore embraced me, and with honest warmth
breathed a farewell. 'The billows of life,' (said he) 'you see, must be
stubbornly braved: we are soon wrecked in a crazy bottom: A good heart is the
best pilot in a storm; and if Monsieur Cregney has a heart like mine, he may
call on Heaven for its care. If he has not, may he never find sounding even in
harbor! -- I may never meet you more! -- but, were you to see me sinking, I
know you would venture far to hold up Captain Murray. -- '

His heart heaved -- he shook me by the hand, pressed it between his own; and
after looking in my face silently for a moment, broke away, saying -- 'God
bless you! --

Captain Murray was older than me; he knew more of the world; and of the
moments of separation. -- I staggered speechless as he left me, followed him
with my eyes. He looked back and waved his handkerchief toward an adjacent
inn, wiped his cheek, and went on board. -- I never saw him since.

And now was I left to look around me; no friend to whom I could unbosom my
cares, though my heart was heavy. I however soon collected my scattered ideas;
and, by the strength of my judgment, forced them to obey collateral
circumstance. To the inn I withdrew, sat myself down in a private room, and
strove to meditate on future plans. The most pleasing resolve I could form, was
to return to France and seek those objects from whom I had been torn. I might
go back -- I could not look forward to happiness. Captain Murray had, on my
being released from confinement, ordered me to be clothed in one of his suits,
consisting of a fine cotton shirt, red jacket, and white callico trowsers; so
disinterested was this benevolent tar! I could offer him nothing -- he had
given me all. The only return I made was a note, which I unobserved slipped
into his pocket, informing him of my name, quality and connections. I did not
this from motives of despicable vanity, but I thought if ever we met again I
might claim his friendship from that rich source of obligation he opened on my
grateful soul. At the inn, I enquired for a vessel bound for France, and was
informed that an American brig was then waiting for freight and passengers, and
that her Captain lived in the street of Saint Dennis, which was but a third
street from the inn. I made no delay; hastened to the house, met with the
Captain, and agreed to lodge with him till his vessel should sail. Thus did
Heaven seem once more propitious to my fortunes. In reading, writing and
diverting myself with the Captain's family (which consisted of a sensible
mother and three lovely girls) I passed my hours. Domestic peace was here --
placid manner, cheerfulness flowing from a self-corrected mind, and a continued
equanimity of temper in this charming wife, taught her husband to adore her and
made her children ashamed of imperfection. Such happiness, said I with a sigh,
would Emily have diffused around her! -- Sometimes I would stroll down to the
vessel, throw my eyes over the sea, and chide the contrary winds: it was to no
purpose; I could not command circumstances to obey my will. The Wednesday
following was at last fixed on for the day of our departure, and the tedious
hours had rolled on to the evening preceding that day, when I supped with the
Captain in his cabin, toasted my dear girl, and drank a little too much. I felt
not the effect of my conviviality till I came on shore, and had advanced a
considerable way toward home; the houses were shut up; not an object to be
seen, and the silence of the night caused me to quicken my step which was soon
arrested by a young female, who very freely took hold of my arm -- 'Venez avec
moi,' said she -- and in a moment forgot the delicacy so amiable in her sex.
Wine had exhilirated my soul, my fancy was luxuriant -- this daughter of
passion kindled warmth in my bosom, but her coarseness converted me. I looked
in her face -- she was beautiful. -- "Take this, and return to virtue," said I
-- giving her a considerable share of my louis-d'ors, which I took loosely from
my pocket, and throwing her from my arms. -- She stood as if lost in gratitude,
and I went on, somewhat proud of my superior excellence.

"What are the grand blessings of life?" said I to myself -- "Love and social
virtue, to be sure. -- " answering my own question with much confidence.

This female outcast was not an object of the one, but she called forth the
other -- My moral vanity was not gratified even by this forcible conclusion --
"In correcting the senses," continued I, "we surely enlarge the mind" -- this
reflection gave birth to more. I endeavored to trace and retrace the origin of
evil; went back, in idea, through the wilds of time -- could find no beginning
-- came home to my starting post, and solemnly declared, "That a larger portion
of pity than severity was due to erring woman."

All these sentiments, you will say, were very fine for a gentleman half-tipsey
-- They served me for the moment and that was enough. The clock of Saint Dennis
had struck two, when I turned the corner of the street, and was near my lodging.

The young woman I had in part neglected, made her appearance again, through an
alley -- My reader will perceive, that I had spun out my thread of morality,
and was melting into pity -- pity fills the heart of man with all that is soft
and languishing toward woman; and I was pausing to enquire sensibly into the
miseries of this young creature, when she eagerly exclaimed, 'there he is --
the gold is 'in his waistcoat' -- A banditti immediately rushed forward with
one intent of surrounding me. Happily I had what the sailors term an
oaken-towel in my hand, which the boatswain had forcibly pleaded the use of,
and swore it might, in going home, serve more occasions than one. Under his
kind command I, on board, accepted it -- and this was the hour when my oak was
to prove its fashion and quality. Never had it boasted an owner of more wild
resolution; (true courage being out of the question) -- I hotly defended
myself, standing with my back against a wall for the space of three minutes,
with as much agility as Agamemnon himself could have done: Swift in my revenge
as my assassins were in their plunder, I struck the stiletto from the hand of
one; and, meeting the temple of another, reeled him to the earth -- What could
this alertness have arisen to had not a gentleman came to my assistance? -- The
odds were now five to one -- He saw the odds; and, as one of the bravoes
attempted to stab me, plunged the sword in his heart.

'Dead!' (said one) -- 'Dead,' -- replied his companions. -- 'Let us be off!

'What shall we do with Larrette? --

'Od -- mn her, let her scout as we must.'

Death certainly puts many a good man, and many a good woman beside their best
purposes; and Larrette, without trusting to my pity, which had so lately been
operating in her favor; ran as courageously as the most vigorous of her
friends -- I looked after her, it is true, but I did not much regret losing the
opportunity of doing a good action: for as pity left my heart to fly after
Larrette, gratitude filled the vacuum in behalf of my deliverer. In fervent
language I invited him to my home. He politely promised me a visit in the
morning -- This was the morning fixed on for sailing, but the wind still
continuing its contrary direction, afforded me the opportunity of receiving my
new friend. I found he knew the affairs of France better than myself; that he
possessed acute penetration, much reserve, and more benevolence; yet he was a
little older than myself. --

'Accident, more than design,' said he, 'has brought me to Carthagena, I am
making a tour with a nobleman who has, upon oath, obliged me to conceal his
name and my own. I never lamented the restraint till this moment; I cannot
repose a confidence in you; in return I can expect none: but be assured, I am a
branch of one of the first families in France; I travel in the character of a
Marquis D****, with my illustrious friend; who retreats for a while from court
cabal -- and now, only say by what name I am simply to address you.'

"Henry" -- replied I, "and a more luckless fellow you never drew a sword for."

After spending two days more in waiting for a gale, and soothed by the
attentions of this gentleman, whose mind was worthy my regard, we took an
affectionate farewell. I left him on the shore, and sailed for France.

Thou will repine with me, my good reader, that we were not better known to
each other, when I tell thee, this was the identical Marquis so lately found
within these walls, a victim to despotic power. In a few days I knew his worth,
though I knew not his rank, nor am I yet acquainted with his real name and
quality. He is gone! for ever gone! And the letter found amongst his papers
convinces me, he was making a tour with my uncle the Duke of B****.

Our vessel flew before the wind, the land fainted from the eye; noisy
cheerfulness invigorated the crew, and my bosom was light. What a chasm it
makes in the life of a man to be rolling through tedious months on the ocean!
cooped within a few boards, and limited to a few strides fore and aft. I had
seldom patience to remain below with the passengers, but would try to amuse
myself by hanging my head over the vessel's bow, and pursuing, with my eyes,
the nitrous particles that shone beneath, like jewels of varied luster -- To
what depth may the imagination descend when it labors to fathom the sea! I had
not, however, the felicity of making many grand reflections on the fallacious
element; for we had scarcely passed the Streigh^s of Gibraltar, when we were
borne down upon by an Algerine corsair -- All hands were ordered up; the deck
was cleared, and every preparation made, not to conquer, but to die,
stubbornly! For when we beheld the number of barbarians which swarmed on the
deck of the Algerine, we could not hope, but resolved, they should buy us
dearly. The conflict was dreadful! -- In three quarters of an hour we had lost
all our companions, except the boatswain, two gentlemen passengers, the captain
and myself. Advancing to the quarter deck, we these made a full stand; embraced
each other in silence. Neither mentioned peace or submission, because all were
wound up to the strongest exertion we were capable of. The lantern in the
steerage was still burning -- The Captain, grasping us severally by the hands,
recommended our souls to God with the utmost fervor, and hastening to the
steerage, seized the candle -- we saw him no more! By this time the Algerines
had thrown an iron hook in our rigging and boarded our bow. Their superior
number overwhelmed us. No sooner were we made prisoners, and secured in the
corsair, than they loosed the hook from the rigging, probably watching the
event -- The sea was in smooth condition; the vessels merely drifted, the
American brig was soon wasted at some distance from the corsair. I still gazed
at her with anxiety, wishing to discern the captain; and the Algerines were as
watchful as myself, but from different motives; as she drove gently, and no
danger attending, a boat manned to bring her to -- She blew up! --

"Thy little girls, and thy amiable wife will expect thy return, "(said I, as I
took a remnant of the captain's shirt from the main stay of the corsair^
scorched as it was) "gallant, but unfortunate man!"

As the smoke cleared away, we found a lock of his hair, and one of his
fingers, which had been blown through the air.

"Good God! Is it thus thy image is broken by accident?" (exclaim I, with more
presumption than knowledge) ignorant as we are, we are passive to thee!"

A blow on the left shoulder instantly caused me to think less of the mangled
captain, than of myself, I lay down at command, and called my obedience
resignation: such an effect will a great evil, when properly compared, cause
upon a lesser one. What was the fate of two gentlemen passengers I know not;
they accompanied me to Algiers, and were sold to one chief, whose horde lay far
in the country. I was sold to a wandering Arab, and drudged on, in complicated
misery as a slave, for the space of five years. Those five years, I will at
present pass over, that my reader may not be obliged to follow me, weeping,
through Barbary, with a plaintive and mournful spirit.

Rest satisfied? thou, who art hanging over this narrative, when I inform thee,
that slavery having no charms, I escaped from its horrors, and arrived in
France on the ninth of August, 1684. Toward Rochelle I bent my eager steps,
resolving to enquire at my Guardian's mansion, for my parents and Emily. --
Heaven? how did my heart palpitate with troubled joy, when I saw the eastern
chimney peeping through the long row of aged elms. Without hesitation, I ran
through the first gate and knocked loudly at the door; my garb was not
killingly genteel, but I had forgot it; I had also forgot, at this delicious
moment, the afflictions I had known -- Could the images of misery and murder
find a place in my remembrance now! -- No; all was transport, all exquisite
delight and ardent expectation. I knocked a second time, louder than before;
the door was opened, I stepped in without ceremony, and could only articulate
-- tell your master, Henry is here." --

The servant left me in the hall, with just as much ceremony as I had used in
entering it; I watched every step he took, and cursed the slowness of his
motion, as he stalked insensibly along. Another came of more polished manners,
who civilly invited me up stairs, and showed me into the little room which was
once my study. -- It was no study now? -- my books were gone! The elegy of
Laura was gone, all was changed; no kind memento of the refined pleasure I had
here tasted remained 'to administer to my mind's disease,' and my raptures were
subsiding swiftly, when my dear, my beloved Guardian appeared -- He pressed me
to a heart broken by sorrow. --

'You return not to Emily -- she -- 'tears and grief checked his words; I
trembled, a sudden chillness thrilled through my veins, and I stood as one
immovable. Silent anguish absorbed us for some moments: my soul was tortured
with suspense, but I revered this good man's struggle, and waited till his
resignation should conquer his woe. He at length informed me, that his books
and papers had been seized by royal authority, that his fortunes were entirely
changed since that fatal night when I was borne from the convent, and that he
knew nothing of his Emily or my parents.

'I was conveyed back to this dwelling, (continued the venerable mourner.)
'escorted by a party of soldiers, a seal was put on my papers, and myself given
to understand that liberty was more a favor allowed than a privilege I had a
right to demand. To whom can I camplain? Repeated solicitation, tears, and
threats with the Abbess of the convent availed no more than to gain repeated
avowals of her ignorance respecting my Emily's fate. Here I wait for death!
Here I prepare for that state to which my child -- and even you, Henry, must
follow! I have wealth still, but whom have I to share it. My sons are abroad,
and my daughter is for ever lost to me; I therefore shun parade; you are young,
and may still look forward for brighter prospects than those already faded into
disappointment; yet, while I exist, command my purse, and accept me as a
father.'

This was no resting place for my impatient soul; I could not long together sit
down and weep; daring better suited me: to seek my friends and avenge their
wrongs, was a consolation, in my judgment, more eligible than tears. For this
purpose I resolved to wander through France, not without money, but without
attendants, that I might listen silently and unnoticed to the opinions of the
nation. Whilst I remained with my Guardian, which was only a short time, I
observed a deep and deadly melancholy growing on his mind. Such melancholy, I
am convinced, often settles into black despair, which the poor sufferer,
self-deceived, would willingly pronounce resignation. I tried to comfort him,
and he strove to appear sensible of my attention.

Alas! we knew but too well the situation of each other's heart; and in
endeavoring to disguise, we revealed our reciprocal anguish. Unable to support
this mental conflict, I promised to write, and tore myself away.

Neatly dressed, but unattended, I repaired to every public place; strolled
into every house of fashionable resort, mixed with people of every description,
and found national discontent gnawing at the root of national splendour.

Cardinal Mazarine was dead since the year 1661; Turenne died in 1678, and the
Calvinists, left by the cruel excesses of the King's soldiery to secret cabals
and feeble murmurs, quitted the kingdom in vast numbers. With these I was
sometimes seen, hoping to hear of my persecuted Father, but finding that hope
vain, sought the friendship of the Marquis Louvois, who stood in high favor
with the King. Louvois I found intrepid; every species of boldness sunk beneath
his daring spirit; and his will, supported by his cunning, seemed absolutely to
command success. From this man I might have learned much; the springs of
political intrigue were coerced in his hand, like the fasces in the hand of the
Roman; but my whole soul revolted secretly from his instructions. As a stranger
he at first politely conversed with me on common topics -- On further intimacy
he revealed a part of his plans. I had no right to betray his confidence, but
finding him the acting-instrument of court-design, I had fully resolved to quit
his society for ever, and travel on in search of objects more dear to my sick
and languishing mind. He, however, had the fascinating address to persuade me
to accompany him to this island. Innocent pleasures, he said, were his only
pursuit; having obtained leave of his sovereign to absent himself on account of
the weak state of his health. Horrible delusion! Here was I arrested by his
command; and here I expect soon to die. The fate of my friend, the Marquis, who
rescued me at Carthagena, the groans and complainings I hear every hour within
this dreadful prison; the picture of my unfortunate Mother, and the depraved
heart of Dormoud, leave me little hope of prolonged existence; while I live,
from time to time I will continue my story. Should my execution be sudden, I
can only at this moment claim the confidence of a pitying-world * * * * * * * *
* * * * * *

10th September, 1685.
THE Cordelier still visits the castle; officiates with those who request his
pious aid, but shuns me. What can be the cause? -- It is not of consequence. He
cannot comfort me -- his brother's papers I delivered to him unperused by me.
That note! -- That destructive proof of Emily's inconstancy, I could not
resign; my executioner will find it in my bosom * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
* * * *

18th September, 1685.
NIGHT came on, when gazing through the grate of an adjoining apartment, I saw
a genteel woman at her devotions; absorbed by strong curiosity, I listened to
her sublime supplications, and fancied her voice had, in some former period,
struck on my ear. I could not behold her features; she wore a deep veil; but my
soul was borne with hers to the Father of Mercy. The voices of those guards who
were appointed to go their last round for the night, broke our heavenly
enchantment. The Lady, I could discern, appeared for a moment extremely
discomposed; started from her kneeling posture, and turned toward the door, as
if expecting the entrance of the soldiers. But they turned along through
another passage; when she sat down, and, leaning on her hand, sighed for
resignation, I prayed she might attain it, and stole from the grate. As I laid
myself on the pillow, my sorrowful spirit whispered, Is she not my Mother? O
how time seems to creep when we load him with suspense! How swiftly does he
hunt down our little joys! When once the idea of my mother had again rushed on
my mind, agitations of wild nature shook me -- What can I do for her? Dare I
own her? May not our dear relationship cause her destruction? Can I clasp her
to my heart, and in the language of filial love bid her be comforted? Can I for
my mother, throw wide the door of liberty, -- O! no! we meet but to die! We
meet but to say how wretched we have lived, and how joyless we leave a Husband
and a Father. Good God! is it possible thou can forget u^!

Wearied at last by the violence of my emotions, I yielded insensibly to
repose; and dawn, like an eye in the east, had scarcely got above its horizon,
when Dormoud appeared at the side of my bed. I had no time to guess at the
purpose of his visit. He sat down, told me, with his usual carelessness, that
he was grown too impatient, on account of a pretty woman, to sleep late in a
morning, and that my assistance might serve him much.

'Come rise, and breakfast with me; our Cordelier, who is become a pleasant
fellow, since he has gotten the better of the death of the Marquis, will join
us. He is to confess the idol of my soul this morning. I have commanded him to
put in a word for me, but I shall hope more from your negotiation as a young
clever fellow, than from him as a dull, moralizing hypocrite -- allons.' --
This man was as old as my Father.

Am I then become an instrument of vice! Is it possible for Henry, for that
Henry once so beloved by the purest spirit in nature, to seduce woman! -- Yes
-- Emily is fallen -- why may not I give a loose to wild desire -- to baseness
-- to the last profligacy man can know -- which is that of abetting the
happiness of a villain. Woman! woman! what art thou? Enchanting, lovely,
faithless creature! -- Why did thou beguile me? why cheat me of my youthful
hours? -- Ah Emily! --

Perdition, at this moment, could afford no horrors for me. -- I was tired of
being virtuous -- I was tired of love.

After much delay and many struggles, I left my chamber, filled with shame.
This was to be the day, the fatal day on which I was to be initiated in the
mysteries of vice -- for Heaven is my witness, there had not been a deed in the
record of my youth which could stamp me a villain, or sting me with repentance.
I paused on the staircase; reflected on the female captive -- and, falling
against the wall, with my arms folded across my bosom, began seriously to think
of death; and to weigh the last pang of nature against the degrading drudgery
of life. -- " Should it be my Mother!"

I started, and ran down stairs -- The image of my Mother still touched my
brain -- I could not divest myself of the idea, and hastened precipitately to
the grate, where I had first beheld the Lady at her devotions -- " should it be
my Mother!" I again exclaimed, half breathless, with terror. -- I will kill
Dormoud, by Heaven!

This last resolve gave a sudden composure to my late-troubled spirit. I
slackened my pace, and went gently on tip-toe as I approached the grate. A
little black curtain had been let down from the top of the window; but time,
and its usefulness, had much worn the texture of it. One division, in
particular, offered me a sight of the charming captive, whose resignation had
endeared her to me -- I put my face down, looked through the curtain and saw
her -- not at prayer, but fainting on the bosom of the Cordelier. -- No! -- It
is not my Mother!

Joy, at least a kind of ridiculous and exulting mirth, succeeded my
complainings. I not only was convinced that the Lady was no relation of mine,
but I was convinced had a better protector than myself, and that she could
trust much with this holy comforter.

"The Devil may run with this Cordelier," (said I to myself) "surely he does
what pleases him with the heart of woman! I am glad however, the lady is not my
Mother; she would recline on no bosom but that of her husband, or her son!"

Thus I reflected -- but of what service could be my conjectures? I knew not
whether this was the lady meant by Dormoud. She was still veiled, and if I
could have seen her face I was not in a humor to be in love with it;
therefore, leaving the Cordelier to fulfill his heavenly office, I went very
sedately to breakfast with Dormoud.

The gaiety this man diffused around him, lulled every care -- his manner so
fascinated the human mind.

"Could I discern virtue through thy native embellishments, what a rare piece
of workmanship would thou be!" -- This soliloquy was only whispered from my
heart, as I sat conversing with him.

'When I informed you, that my happiness could be promoted by your assistance,'
said he, 'I meant you should prove my negociator with a perverse beauty, who is
here imprisoned only because I love -- her soul never entertained a crime! By
my contrivance she is here, and here she shall make me happy -- and yet -- when
I approach her, Sir, my desires are chastened by her unsullied innocence -- I
am awed -- she awakens me to a sense of the purity I have lost; and I leave
her, enraged at my own weakness.'

For my own part, I had no grand idea of the lady's unsullied innocence; for I
strongly suspected her to be identically the same lady who was then confessing
to the Cordelier. True, I had seen nothing incompatible with delicacy, unless
the most sorrowful tenderness could be deemed so; but I had seen enough to
convince me the lady was not invulnerable. Dormoud resumed --

'Till now, as woman varied, varied were my pleasures. -- The vain coquette
invited my advances, and trifled with my heart; but, when she thought herself
secure, I burst the web of her feigned-indifference, added warmth to her
stronger passions, till she dissolved in the flame she affected to kindle alone
for me. My vengeance was just; her memory obtruded, and Dormoud was gone. --
The ambitious beauty, who unportioned, stood up for high marriage settlements,
held her willing neck to receive my golden fetters. She appealed not to my
heart, I despised hers; visions of splendour dazzled; I continually waved them
before her senses. Insensible to love, she sacrificed all to pride, and broke
her own enchantment. I left her to weep, but hers were not the tears of wounded
affection -- And now what avails my past victories? -- I am ensnared by one to
whose impenetrable soul I can find no avenue! -- she shall! -- she must be
mine!'

'If the mind of Dormoud may be reclaimed, this object of his love can only
boast the power! Who knows but she has excellence! If so, her attractions,
instead of descending, may draw this man to the zenith of her perfection."

Reasoning thus within myself, I secretly resolved to use my best efforts with
the lady, and gain upon Dormoud to marry rather than destroy her peace.

"I will plead for you, Sir," said I, "and may the regard you entertain for the
lady, recall you to the path of refinement; a path from which you have been
hurried by the impetuosity of youth. You are accomplished -- the chain of
ignorance hangs not on your mental powers; nor can you eternally avoid the
whispers of virtue. -- "

'Cease! -- Cease your admonitions! Far! very far beyond your judgment lie the
doings of Dormoud. I have your faith, you have promised me secrecy; on your
fidelity depends your existence.'

There was a time when such a threat, from such a man, would have shook me; the
roughest passions of my soul would have taken the alarm, and awoke to
vengeance; but -- No! -- all was past! -- Self appeared to have no influence
over my despairing spirit. What had I here to live for, after being pronounced
a captive for ever! -- I was calm, truly undisturbed by the menaces of Dormoud;
yet to do one kind action for him was to tune his shattered thoughts to peace.

Here is but one obstacle to my wishes,' continued he, 'which is her hatred, at
least it is that torpid insensibility to which she gives the softer term of
virtue. In hourly danger of death, she braves me with a smile of resignation;
but that resignation is meant to Heaven alone, her haughty soul despises me.'
--

"Marry her -- offer no violation to her will, but lead her to the chamber of
pure delight. There will delicacy and tender confidence mingle her soul with
yours -- Friendship, love, every high sensation that swells the human heart;
every fine dependence that loses itself in unison, will await you with the
woman you adore; and who may love, if once she believes she can love in you the
image of excellence."

'Marry her!' replied Dormoud, with a gesture of abhorrence. --

"Why do you start, Sir? -- your youth is spent, you cannot be happy without
her, and where will you find domestic bliss if not with a woman of beauty and
virtue?"

'But matrimony is such a net, and its texture so strong and heavy, that I
shall never be able to stretch myself with any ease or pleasure. Besides, I
very much doubt, if I have the power to lay continually contracted like an
hedgehog, merely to please my wife and the parson.'

"Believe me, Sir, your wishes will not wander, if you truly love. -- "

'But I Will never marry, Sir, if I can do without it -- Heavens! How blessed
should I be if she could love as I do -- Go! win her to my arms, and command my
fortune!'

"May I talk of marriage? -- "

'D -- n it, Sir, how you teize me! -- Try other allurements -- She must be
mine. -- '

The entrance of the Cordelier checked, in some degree, the warmth of Dormoud.
In a moment he collected himself, and enquired after the health of his fair
prisoner.

'She does not complain,' said the Cordelier, 'her soul seems to have mounted
above every worldly care, and every mortal infirmity.'

'That is not the state of mind I wish you to encourage, my good Father! I
think she may as well soar to heaven from the pillow of delight, as from a
river of tears. It is amazing that you gloomy disciplinarians will, through
every age, make the Deity an inquisitor, and dislocate your victims by torture
before you think them worthy his acceptance.'

'The Cordelier blushed -- I was in pain for him -- He mildly replied --

'We only wish to exalt and purify the mind of man, that he may not despise
himself. Man is possessed of powers which himself cannot define; all he can do
is, to endeavor, through the conveyance of sound, to communicate their
workings to his fellow beings; this conveyance he feels inadequate, and,
consequently, turns in upon his mind, if vice alone is seen; if the senses are
predominant; and, in uproar, tearing him within; you will perceive his form
early relax, his finer faculties grow dim, and all pleasure that is not gross
will, to him, appear unlovely. On the contrary; if early taught that an
universe can only be seen by looking backward over the realms of spirit, man
grows proud of every new discovery in his intellectual world; he will exult
with the hope of possessing a state suited to his fine, though invisible
powers, and will no longer despis himself, -- '

'Very well, good Father, you are exceedingly eloquent on topics which, I am
certain, will give you range enough; and so far am I from endeavoring to
oppose your pious harangue, that I will do all I can to support it, and you
shall draw the conclusion -- Your pretty mourner is the universe to me; and, in
possessing her, I will ask nothing more to suit my fine, invisible powers; and
until she is displeased with me, I will not despise myself.'

The muscles of an anchoret would have unbended at this scene. -- The eyes of
Dormoud sparkled with gaiety, as they were turned up to the Cordelier, who
stood gazing on him like one struck with terror and astonishment -- the
momentary pause ended in a loud laugh of Dormoud; who, taking the Cordelier's
hand, sympathised with him in a merry manner -- 'And how, my holy Fried,' said
he, could you so easily let go the best end of the argument!'

'I am confused, not conquered -- a prize of unequalled value is neither won
nor guarded with ease. -- I am more interested on your account than you can
conceive.'

To this last speech of the Cordelier I could have given my secret avowal; but
I was resolved to observe all I could, and be silent -- My situation required
caution, and silence is seldom inconvenient to those who would advance safely
through the troubles of life.

'I thank you,' replied Dormoud to the Cordelier, 'I believe, my good Sir, you
would kindly make me dissatisfied with the retrospect of myself -- I never mean
to take a backward view, whilst time drags me forward; but do indulge me for a
month or two, and I will try to be virtuous through the remaining part of my
life.'

'Listen to the voice of virtue, and you may smile when dying.

'Yes! -- but you sombre sons of melancholy vision are known to promise more
than yourselves dare trust to. You sooth, with the hope of mercy, poor
delinquents, whom you nevertheless, from the severity of your rules, think lost
for ever. Far be it from the innocent Dormoud to argue like a modern sophist,
for and against you, without knowing why; but surely I may avail myself of your
spiritual lenity, and beg you will comfort me, by persuading my fair prisoner,
that I am the most honorable of men.'

'Have you resolved to support that character?'

'Humph! -- I -- I wish to -- I had forgot myself -- I only was thinking what
would please the lady.

'Can you expect me to violate truth? Does it pertain to my office to delude
the judgment of my fellow creatures? -- '

'A little, I believe -- Well, well, my dear Father, you will find me a
proselyte the moment I am convinced of the efficacy of your doctrine; in the
interval, you know, if I lose the pleasure of sinning, you and your sable
brethren will lose the glory of my repentance.'

Perceiving the heart of this lively libertine invulnerable, I wished to
support the gentle Cordelier, and interrupted the conversation, by saying to
Dormoud, "If I may advise, Sir, you should rest your cause with the lady, and
trust to her decision."

'I must -- I must -- but her inflexibility enrages me.'

On other topics we gave our opinions alternately, till the Cordelier took
leave, which he did hastily, and with looks full of trouble. My eyes followed
him; I melted with commiseration, and wished Dormoud had treated him with more
reverence, though he had lately avoided me.

When alone with Dormoud, he returned to the subject his imagination swelled
with. He wished me immediately to visit the lady, to plead with her in his
behalf -- 'but,' said he, 'if you can succeed with her in no other way, tell
her I will -- ' Here he made a full pause.

"Marry her," replied I. --

'Go, Sir -- you are sensible we are friends conditionally.'

This speech was delivered with haughty fullenness, its effect was lost on me,
my whole soul was collected, a few momentary pangs came not within her
estimation. And as I feared not death, I could not fear Dormoud. Charged with
his dishonorable embassy, I hoped to acquit myself, not as a creature apt for
villainy; but, if the lady should prove as tender to him as she was to the
Cordelier, I did not think myself privileged in opposing her sentiments.
Therefore I hastened to her apartment, knocked gently at her door; it was
opened, and she received me with dignity of manner, but veiled. In attempting a
formal apology, my tongue faultered. The lady observed, spared my confusion,
and, with an heavenly sweetness, desired me to be seated.

'You seem a stranger, Sir, may you never become familiar to the horrors of
this prison.'

Endeavoring to appear respectful, I took my seat with aukwardness enough, I
believe, and incoherently claimed the lady's indulgence -- She sighed -- deeply
sighed!

I could hear her breath flutter in tremulous pauses; her face I was not
permitted to behold.

Surely, said I to myself, agitation is sympathetic, or we should not thus
mutually feel distressed: politeness bids me leave her, that she may conquer
this surprise. Hardly knowing what was best, I suddenly arose to be gone, and,
bowing low, found courage at last to say, "Pardon me, Madam, I meant not to
intrude -- my presence oppresses you -- I will, if permitted, wait on you at
some more tranquil moment."

'Pray, Sir, excuse my manner! if it is forbidding, I mean it not; no future
moment will find me more tranquil -- believe me much at leisur^ -- let me
prevail on you, Sir, to say why I am honored with your visit?'

I sat down again -- The lady, in spite of her efforts to conceal it, was still
agitated.

"Politeness, Madam, may, in some degree, be forgot or neglected, when the mind
is stubbornly adhering to the first good, first perfect, and first fair. My
visit, however unexpected, or however painful, may be productive of your
liberty and happiness. Calm your apprehensions -- I am a stranger to you -- I
am no stranger to that tender delicacy due to your sex. Summon therefore, those
stronger virtues, of which I hope you are possessed, and yield not thus to
unfavourable impressions."

'What means this solemn prelude, Sir? my situation from you needs no support:
What have you to do with my virtues? Can you judge me, who am accountable only
to heaven? When I complain, do you prove a comforter! If you come to fortify my
mind against the fear of death, know I am prepared, and have not leisure to
hear you: none can guide me through the unknown gulf, I must depart alone;
whilst here my sorrows are sacred, not one of your sex must profane them.'

So, so! here is another farce rising (thought I.) This lady positively will
not be saved by any man but the Cordelier. O, woman! thy artful reserve never
ends.

I was not in a humor to be over credulous; and as I firmly believed the lady
was giving me a taste of the buskin, I resolved to bring her up to a climax,
and proceeded in a solemn tone:

"I ask not your confidence, Madam, time only can convince you that my
assiduity is not merely officious, but honorable; whilst I guide you to peace,
I will not ask your friendship, this gloomy situation forbids that hope, for
the attendants here are Doubt, Suspicion, Dismay, and Murder."

'I know it -- proceed, Sir.'

"Dormoud loves you."

'Speak not of Dormoud."

"Reflect on your dreadful state; I shudder at the evils which may befall you,
if your soul is not magnanimous enough to sacrifice your love to your honor."

'Fear me not, Sir -- You must indeed be a stranger to me; you will, I fancy,
soon know me better -- perhaps too soon.'

Her last three words were breathed in a low tone, like that of one laboring
with inward anguish. What could I propose to this commanding creature,
commanding only from apparent, or real resignation! for I now confess, with
shame, my doubts were not removed.

I may be wrong, with respect to the lady, said I, pausing within myself, but
her conduct ought not to influence mine -- I am not a villain yet! -- Emily
alone, I believe, could make me so; she is wandering in the flowery path of
vicious pleasure; she leads the pursuit, this holy Cordelier follows -- There
may come a time -- No -- I shall never interrupt them --

"Madam, when I tell you there are dangers near, you cannot foresee nor
prevent, you will pardon my officiousness, though you may not follow my advice.
Reflect for one moment, think in whose power you are, and if the world holds
but one object to whom you may be dear, or who may be dear to you, preserve
your life! look forward to a happier future; and soothed by heavenly hope,
purchase liberty with honorable misery."

'What mean you by honorable misery, Sir?'

"Your marriage with Dormoud!"

I started at my own proposition -- Dormoud had given me no authority to make
it, but my love of virtue, I believe, was impulsive. I felt no desire myself of
seducing this defenseless lady, and forgot, at the moment, they were not my own
sentiments I was sent to deliver.

'Feeble custom of mankind!" replied the lady, 'marriage can bind, but where
honor is not known, could I marry to delude the man I contemned? Would he
brutally dare to seize my hand whilst conscious he was the object of my
disgust? There may be such a man, Sir, but with such a man I should deserve and
taste dishonorable misery. The tie of marriage too often secures the dull and
unimpassioned frame, but how many tender, noble and nameless blessings
invisibly hang over two kindred souls unconfined by human institutions? That
refined and generous affection is not born of law. Heaven alone directs its
inherent and increasing force, till death, for death alone dissolves it. --
Speak to me of honor; let it stand unsupported by, and superior to, your laws.'

This was the first time I had heard such doctrine from a lady; the beloved
Cordelier, I supposed, was whispering through her enraptured soul. She however,
set my thinking powers at a stand, and ^efied my judgment. Woman generally
regards the Hymeneal state with a kind of awe. At least we teach them it is
their duty and their interest to hold it sacred, though we often destroy, by
our example, the effect of our theory. Till we better obey the laws we make,
woman will laugh at us, inasmuch as we endeavor to insult her understanding.
Finding I was wrapped in my own contemplation, the lady resumed:

'Well, Sir, if you ever were beloved, I think you must hold my opinion.'

"I once believed I was, Madam -- My mistress talked much of honor; amused me
with ideas of fancied virtue; bad me love her and truth, yet, by heaven, she is
false! -- Pardon my impatience! I am mad with the imagination of her guilt! She
pursues another -- She holds me in her chains, faithless woman! for her sake
shall the whole sex -- "

'Hold, Sir, in the name of the whole sex.'

"Bear with me -- I am injured -- deeply wounded; the fascinating beauty I
adored has proved your doctrine false. No tender ties invisibly held her heart
to mine; no truth, no honor -- but she is -- she shall be my contempt."

'Are you certain, Sir, that your wrongs are not imaginary? Are you not fearful
of expressing yourself too passionately? Do you not feel a dread while stabbing
the character of the woman you once loved?'

Her voice altered from its firmness, as she put those questions, into a
tremulous solemnity, as if she feared my avowal of the charges I advanced, and
hoped for my recantation. I was struck with more reverence than I had felt on
the commencement of my visit, but boldly continued my protestations of eternal
contempt for the principles of my fallen mistress.

'Is she not still dear to you, Sir?'

"I -- I -- No, Madam -- She was dear only to me -- perhaps she did not love
me: she is cheap to those she loves -- I have forgot her -- at least she never
more shall enslave my spirit."

My heart struggled to utter contrary language; it still was beating with
wounded tenderness, but pride, insulted pride, came to my relief, embittered my
ideas, and filled me with such stubbornness, that had Emily appeared at that
moment before me, I think I could have thrown her from me for ever. My
negotiation with the lady had all this time gained but little advant^ge, and I
returned to it as well as I could. After recapitulating the subject of my
visit, making generous comments on her opinions, and setting my unsuccessful
proposition of matrimony aside. I hinted, that the true support of her argument
would be always in her own power; and if marriage ^ppeared to shackle the
freeborn flame, Dormoud, who loved her, would study other methods to make her
happy.

'Base!'

My eloquence was at a full stop. I was dumb -- A spider at that moment
happened to be crawling up the wall, and afforded me the opportunity, by
striking it down with my handkerchief, of turning aside my blushing countenance.

'I hope, Sir, this is your first time of acting in an official capacity for --
'

"For what, Madam?" interrupting her with quickness --

'For your mistress, Sir -- you certainly plead much in her behalf, when you
say, she is false to you. Could she have been equally a friend to you and
virtue? Say, would you have dared, either for the sake of Dormoud or for your
own, to have seduced her into snares inconsistent with the delicacy of her
soul?' --

"I loved her, Madam, whilst I knew she was innocent, with ecstacy, that filled
me with visionary refinement; could I now meet her, my ardour would be very
different. Who ever sported with a crocodile as they would with a lamb?"

'Ha! is it possible! -- Enough, Sir: -- I confess your reasoning is just; you
are no self-deluding sophist. By conversing frequently with you, or gazing
through your medium, I should maintain, obstinately, that all men were blind
who did not see as I did. Be not discouraged; your success may more than answer
your expectations -- I have but one wish ungratified, which is, that of being
informed how you were brought to this dreadful place. -- It does not matter! --
all is over, all will soon pass away!'

"Madam, it is impossible you can judge me, unless you know the woman." --

'Behold that woman!' throwing up her veil. --

The conflict was too powerful! she fainted -- Trembling with astonishment and
terror I caught her in my arms: once more! -- Once more to hold my Emily! To
gaze on her I had loved so long! for whom I had suffered so much! Good Heaven!
How enraptured I stood with momentary joy. -- The vision ended as her sense
returned. She looked at me, but not with tenderness; not with that innocent
confidence which once filled her eyes; but, panting with pride, indifference
and despair. -- O what would I have given to retrieve so fine a mind! What
would I have borne to have recalled so valuable a heart to love and Henry! --

'It is wonderful!' said she, withdrawing her eyes from me and fixing them on
the earth -- 'it is dreadful! But it must be so -- Henry! -- poor Henry! where
have you been?'

She paused --

"Speak on! -- Ask me again where I have been! Tell me I have been long
forgotten." --

A flood of tears silently flowed down her cheeks, I suffered them to flow
without interruption, hoping they were the soft effects of pity or of love. --
The Cordelier was not thought of at this moment. --

'I never supposed we could meet thus, unfortunate Henry! Why did you suffer
the world to corrupt you? what has the world gained by making you base --?'

"Am I base in your eyes, Emily?"

'For ever!'

"Who has dared to tell you I am base?"

'Yourself, Sir -- Leave me -- I am cheap only to those I love -- and have no
leisure but to employ with my confessor.'

"Damn him!"

'How, Sir!' --

"Pardon me, Emily!" --

'You cannot now offend, Sir.' -- said the haughty maid, breaking in upon my
apology with the utmost sang froid. --

"Have you forgot your Father, Emily?"

'I remember him well -- He can never come to me! -- I must never go to him!
here I am to breathe my last! -- Henry! -- I did not wish to meet you here. Why
did you come to see me die! -- Depart! -- try to be happy -- you are changed,
greatly changed; but there are pleasures in the world suited to depravity, and
you may yet be happy!"

"I am a prisoner."

'God forbid! -- O where are now my blissful visions of eternity! the joys of
heaven are growing languid to my spirit's eye. -- Go, Sir! I pray you leave me
-- Do you not discern distraction growing round you? I am feeble, very feeble
-- Nay, I shall taste of guilt in conversing with you -- Leave me with my
confessor.' --

Observing her speech grew incoherent and broken in its meaning, I began to
dread the consequence of this melancholy and strange meeting; I therefore
retired, with a heart bursting with shame, jealousy and sorrow; and, in passing
through the arched-aisle, met the Cordelier. --

"You have undone me, Father," said I to him, that Lady loves you."

'She has a right,' replied he with firmness.

"By Heaven you must be cautious!" --

'I will -- Go to your apartment, and try to follow my example' --

Without deigning further explanation, he entered the apartment of Emily, from
whence that deluding beauty had banished me.

Stupid with astonishment I forgot Dormoud, and wandered from Emily's door,
through the furthest passages, endeavoring to account for this mysterious
event.

Who could bring unfortunate Emily here? Why she is a prisoner, I need not
question. Individuals in France stand in hourly jeopardy, are ever devoted to
secret intrigue and too frequently torn from their friends they know not why. I
left her in the convent on that fatal night, when I was borne into slavery.
Could Dormoud convey her thence? Roderique, I supposed then, my only rival, and
my inveterate foe. Where is now that finished villain? Perhaps an associate
with this infernal Governor! -- What can I do! why did I not expire in chains
within these walls -- anguish accumulates. Poor Emily! will no kind spirit
plead for thee? Thy youth, thy innocence, thy inexperience; or it might happen
that some designing act of friendship performed by this happy Cordelier
strengthened his purposes and dissolved thine.

Thus I reflected, but my revolvings threw no light on this state of horror.
All was enveloped in the shade of destiny. No gleam of comfort came, nor did I
know whither to go; could I immediately return to Dormoud? Did I dare, truly to
relate the unexpected result of my mediation for him! No, such imprudence would
have hurried on the stroke of fate. Emily, myself, or both must instantly have
fallen; and though the sight of the Cordelier had recalled my sense of honor,
and I had resolved never to marry Emily, she still seemed to wisper her claim
to my pity and my friendship; 'To your honor I could confide my child, said
her Father in an happier hour. Lost in perplexity, I insensibly reached the
least frequented part of the castle, I heard sighs and lamentations: I saw not
the victims who breathed them, he low door of the subterraneous den, shown me
by Dormoud, last presented itself -- I stood looking at it with attention, and
as Dormoud had predicted, felt less terror than at first, for calamity was
become familiar to me. As I loitering gazed around me, at the many heavy doors
barred with iron, and ranged in those quiet and solemn walls, my curiosity was
awakened by hearing a noise within; the groan I had heard when with Dormoud,
came again to my recollection: and I wished impatiently to descend those steps
once more, where I had found the picture of my mother; my anxiety was
unavailing! -- the ponderous key was in the possession of Dormoud -- I
remembered my hapless parents and walked slowly on. This wing of the castle,
shooting itself into the sea, was doubly terrible: a stillness controuled the
troubled spirit! -- I felt as if moving through a void sacred only to invisible
woe! Beings, who were irrevocably lost and meant to be cut off from the world
were confined here! No guards passing: vigilance might here have slept, since
massy bars filled every little avenue, and all appeared tremendously secure.
Turning my eye toward the right hand wall, I observed a low window about a
foot square; I put my face close to the grate; cold and confined air seemed to
come moaning from some back part; I supposed it came from the ocean, and the
darkness of this gloomy chamber could only be discovered by a glimmering flame,
languishing and going out by fits, from a shattered and filthy lamp placed on a
large coffin. I listened -- the winds breathed horror on my imagination, which
swiftly formed creations of such frightful shadowing, that I even started from
the grate. At that moment I thought the name of Henry stole softly on my ear!
-- nothing more! Dead silence followed -- I was persuaded it was fancy; the
flame in the lamp expired: -- and borne down with dismay, I again bent my
irregular steps toward Emily's door.

If I must be a villian, said I, as I passed it, I will not prove a villain for
Dormoud; I will learn circumvention till I outdo him, I will oppose art to his
arrogance, servility to his pride, and flattery to his crimes; he is too full
of vice to be worthy my care. Indulgent Father of unnumbered worlds! let me
still beg existence from thee! Preserve me amidst the snares of man, and though
entangled in this web of human misery, make me act for the cause of virtue!

When a man begins the work of villainy with compunction, it is a proof that he
will become an idler. Vicious minds must encounter many difficulties in their
lame-halting after flying pleasure; I could not presume to keep pace yet with
Dormoud, but I resolved whilst my life was prolonged within these walls, to
become his competitor in the manner I thought best suited to my train of
thought. -- I also resolved that if Emily was not mine, she never should be his
against her inclination; the Cordelier I knew held a good chance against us
both.

But what or Emily? -- She has forgotten me; would she have forgotten her vows
had I not insulted her truth, and wounded her fame even in her presence? Yes,
-- she has favored this Cordelier, he loves her, is beloved, and I am
estranged; yet, it can be no crime to save her from Dormoud -- I will try to
protect her, that she may (should a future chance offer) be blessed with the
object of her affections: this is the last struggle of dying hopes!

Dormoud was waiting for me* I hastened to him, and flattered him with
expectation. Embracing me with liveliness, 'and when,' said he, shall I visit
her.'

"Let me prevail on you to calm your impatience, Sir; love when immature,
feebly operates on the human mind. Banish fear and uneasiness from her you
admire, and your felicity may be of long continuance."

'But you give me hopes: you think she will not persevere in cruelty; why may I
not this moment throw myself at her feet, and tell her I am expiring with the
flame she has kindled in my bosom?'

"Her confessor is with her!"

'That quiet fellow crosses me like my evil genius: and yet, I almost wish my
life had been like his; his harmless, unimpassioned manner gains on my respect,
but I shall never get hold of this charming lady whilst he supports her holy
delusion.'

"Do you know him further than from his offices here?" --

'I know he has the address of managing some of the first men in France.'

"Where did he come from?"

'From the Netherlands, strongly recommended by the Abbe Dorovontes: let us
talk no more of him: -- Say when I may see the lady.' --

This was the first step I had taken from the way of truth, and it now appeared
a certain one toward destruction -- I had made an unwarrantable proposal to
Emily; I had given false hope to Dormoud, merely to gain time, and stood
between both a deceiver: no other path offered, I was obliged to go on. --

"It is vain to think of obtaining her but through the sanction of the church."
--

'The Devil it is! you melt and freeze me with the same breath.'

"Because you allow not yourself, or the lady, leisure to arrive by fine and
fond gradation at consummate happiness -- when was woman won surrounded by
terrors? Delicacy, attention, composure; all that can soften and allure, should
play gently near her. Sensibility and tenderness once awakened in the bosom of
woman, imagination and memory will befriend the lover, she will in idea become
more his than her own, and yield to pity, more than she can hold with pride."

I was not certain in this specious harangue of describing a lady's heart, but
I was certain mine would warmly comply with all those endearing duties.

'By Heaven I will obey you,' (said Dormoud, passionately) 'only give me hope
and you shall manage me, till -- aye, till I am no longer patient enough to
bear your rein. You, I believe, have been conversant with that haughty part of
the sex styled women of virtue; I only with the weak and willing, and my cheap
victories are no longer valued. But this glorious conquest was reserved for my
riper judgment, and over this fair opposer I will not seem to triumph, but to
yield.' --

"The lady thinks favorably of you -- I will see her again, and draw forth, if
possible, her secret resolves; I am in your power, Sir, -- you may command my
services."

'My dear friend, you make me happy; I will not command but obey you: share my
confidence, taste every pleasure confinement can afford, but you are so
conducive to my tranquillity that you will pardon me when I say, liberty to you
would be affliction to me. You really master my passions, at least from your
bent they will acquire aggregated force.'

This was new reasoning, and not very congenial to my wish for freedom. In
truth, I grew hourly more involved, and my embarrassments thickened as I
labored to disengage myself.

'I have,' (resumed the Governor) 'been invited by the Marquis Louvois to spend
a day or two with him; the Deputy Rozinelle, will in my absence grant your
reasonable requisitions: before I depart gain me an amicable interview with my
charming mistress, I promise not to make full use of it -- Shall it be
tomorrow? -- I die to see her!'

To this hotheaded lover, I said more than I meant to fulfill, and withdrew.

To hear that the Cordelier came from the Netherlands, and recommended by the
Abbe Dorovontes, of whom my Father had spoken to me, afforded hope of
intelligence; I accordingly resolved to regain his attention and friendship,
especially as I meant to resign Emily for ever; my parents were still dear to
me. -- The remembrance of them sacred; but when I reflected on Emily, pride,
revenge, jealousy and despair, tore my bosom with their working * * * * * * * *
* * * * * * * * * * * *

2d August, 1685.
WHAT mean these shivering sits -- I am ill -- writing is become too great a
labor -- here I must end my * * * * * * * * * *.

FINIS.

