TEN SERMONS PREACHED ON VARIOUS IMPORTANT SUBJECTS.

BY GEORGE WHITEFIELD, A. B.

CAREFULLY CORRECTED AND REVISED ACCORDING TO THE BEST LONDON EDITION.

PRINTED AT NEWBURYPORT, BY BLUNT and MARCH.

MDCCXCV.

Sold by Messrs. THOMAS and ANDREWS, MR. E. LA^^IN, MR. D. WEST, B^st^n -- By
MR. MATTHEW CAREY, MR. (...) CAMPBELL, and MR. WILLIAM YOUNG P^ila^^l^^^^ --
Mr. THOMAS ALLEN and MR. WILLIAM, (...).

CONTENTS.
SERMON I. The Lord our Righteousness. Jer. xxiii. 6. The Lord our
Righteousness. 11 SERMON II. The Seed of the Woman, and Seed of the Serpent.
Genesis iii. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. 37
SERMON III. Persecution every Christian's Lot. 2 Timothy iii. 12. Yea, and all
that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. 61 SERMON IV.
Abraham's offering up his Son Isaac. Genesis xxii. 12. And he said, Lay not thine
hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him; for now I know that
thou* fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from
me. 81 SERMON V. Readiness Conversion. Acts ix. 22. But Saul increased the more in
strength, and confounded the Jews which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is
very Christ. 100 SERMON VI. Christ, the Believer's Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Cor. i. 30. But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption. 124 SERMON VII. The Pharisee and Publican. Luke xviii. 14. I tell
you, this man went down to his house justified* rather than the other: for
every one that exalts himself, shall be abased; and he that humbles himself
shall be exalted. 145 SERMON VIII. The Holy Spirit convincing the World of Sin,
of Righteousness, and of Judgment. John xvi. 8. And when he is come, he will
reprove the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. 163 SERMON IX.
The Conversion of Zaccheus. Luke xix. 9. 10. And Jesus said unto him, this day
is salvation come to this house; forasmuch as he also is the son of Abraham.
For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. 184 SERMON
X. The Power of Christ's Resurrection. Philip. iii. 10. That I may know him and
the power of his resurrection. 204
THE PREFACE.
THE following Sermons, I think I may say, were given me by the Lord Jesus
Christ; and according to my present light, are agreeable to the form of sound
words delivered to us in the lively oracles of God. They contain the sum and
substance, I will not say, word for word, of what was delivered from the
pulpit; for, as I had no occasion in America, Scotland, and England, to preach
upon the same subjects, I was obliged, according to the freedom and assistance
given me from above, to enlarge, or make excursions, agreeable to the people's
circumstances among whom I was preaching the kingdom of God. I had no leisure
or freedom to commit any of them to writing, but during my last voyage from
America to England; (...) do I expect to find leisure to write down any fresh
discourses, till it shall please God that I embark again. May the Spirit of
God, who delights out of the mouths of babes and sucklings to perfect praise,
bless them to every reader, and put it into their hearts to pray for their poor
unworthy servant in Jesus Christ,

GEORGE WHITEFIELD.

SERMON I.
THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS.
JEREMIAH xxiii. 6. The Lord our Righteousness.
WHOEVER is acquainted with the nature of mankind in general, or the propensity
of his own heart in particular, must acknowledge that self-righteousness is the
last idol that is rooted out of the heart. -- Being once born under a covenant
of works, it is natural for us all to have recourse to a covenant of works for
our everlasting salvation. And we have contracted such a devilish pride by our
fall from God, that we would, if not wholly, yet in part at least, glory in
being the cause of our own salvation. We cry out against Popery, and that very
justly; but we are all Papists, at least I am sure we are all Arminians by
nature; and therefore, no wonder so many natural men embrace that scheme. It is
true, we disclaim the doctrine of merit, are ashamed directly to say we deserve
any good at the hands of God; therefore as the apostle excellently well
observes, we go about, we fetch a circuit, to establish a righteousness of our
own, and, like the pharisees of old, will not wholly submit to that
righteousness, which is of God through Jesus Christ our Lord.

This is the sorest, though alas! the most common evil that was ever yet seen
under the sun. An evil, that in any age, especially in these dregs of time
wherein we live, cannot sufficiently be inveighed against -- For as it is with
the people, so it is with the priests; and it is to be feared, even in those
places where once the truth, as it is in Jesus, was eminently preached, many
ministers are so sadly degenerated from their pious ancestors, that the
doctrines of grace, especially the personal all-sufficient righteousness of
Jesus, is but too seldom, too slightly mentioned. Hence the love of many waxes
cold; and* I have too often thought was it possible, that this single
consideration would be sufficient to raise our venerable forefathers again from
their graves; who would thunder in their ^ars their fatal error.

The righteousness of Jesus Christ is one of those great mysteries which the
angels desire to look into, and seems to be one of the first lessons that God
taught men after the fall. For what were the coats that God made to put on our
first parents, but types of the application of the merits or righteousness of
Jesus Christ to believers hearts? We are told, that those coats were made of
skins of beasts, and as beasts were not then food for men, we may fairly infer,
that those beasts were slain in sacrifice, in commemoration of the great
sacrifice Jesus Christ thereafter to be offered. And the skins of those beasts
thus slain, being put on Adam and Eve, they were thereby taught ^ow their
nakedness was to be covered with the righteousness of the Lamb of God.

This is it which is meant, when we are told Abraham believed on the Lord, and
it was counted to him for righteousness. In short, this is it of which the law
and all the prophets have spoken, especially Jeremiah in the words of the text
-- The Lord our righteousness. --

I propose through divine grace, I. To consider who we are to understand by the
word Lord. II. How the Lord is man's righteousness. III. I Will consider some
chief objections that are generally urged against this doctrine. IV. I shall
show some very ill consequences that flow naturally from denying this doctrine.
V. Shall conclude with an exhortation to all to come to Christ by ^aith, that
they may be enabled to say with the prophet in the text. -- The Lord our
righteousness.


I. I am to consider who we are to understand by the word Lord -- The Lord our
righteousness.

And if any Arians or Socinians are drawn by curiosity to hear what the babbler
has to say, let them be ashamed of denying the divinity of that Lord that has
bought poor sinners by his precious blood. For the Person mentioned in the text
under the character of Lord, is Jesus Christ. -- Behold, ver. 5. the days come,
says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, a King shall
reign and prosper, shall (...) judgment and justice in the earth. -- In his
days, ver. 6. Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is
his name whereby ^e shall be called, The Lord our righteousness. -- By the
righteous* Branch, all agree that we are to understand Jesus Christ. -- He it
is that is called the Lord in our text. If so, if there were no other text in
the Bible to prove the divinity of Christ, that is sufficient. For if the word
Lord may properly belong to Jesus Christ. He must be God. For as you have it in
the margins of your Bibles, the word Lord is in the original Jehovah, which is
the essential title of God himself. Come then, ye Arians, kiss the Son of God,
bow down before him, and honor him, even as you honor the Father, Learn of
the angels those morning stars, and worship him as truly God. -- For otherwise
you are as much idolaters, as those that worship the Virgin Mary. And as for
you Socinians, who say Christ was a mere man, and yet profess that he was your
Savior, according to your own principles you are accursed. For, if Christ be a
mere man, then he is only an arm of flesh. -- And it is written, Cursed is he
that trusts on an arm of flesh. -- But I would hope there are no such
monsters here. At least, that after these considerations, they would be ashamed
of broaching such monstrous absurdities any more. -- For it is plain, that by
the word (...) we are to understand the Lord Jesus Christ, who here takes to
himself the title of Jehovah, and therefore must be very God of very God, or,
as the apostle devoutly expresses it, God blessed for ever.

How the Lord is to be man's righteousness comes next to be considered.

And that is, in one word, by imputation. -- For it pleased God, after he had
made all things by the word of his power, to create man after his own image.
And so infinite was the condescension of the high and lofty One, who inhabiteth
eternity, that although he might have insisted on the everlasting obedience of
him and his posterity, yet he was pleased to oblige himself, by a covenant or
agreement made with his own creatures, upon condition of an unsinning
obedience, to give them immortality and eternal life. -- For when it is said,
the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, we may fairly infer, so
long as he continued obedient, and did not eat thereof, he should surely live.
-- The 3d of Genesis gives us a full, but mournful account* how our first
parents broke this covenant, and thereby stood in need of a better
righteousness than their own, in order to procure their future acceptance with
God. For what must they do? They were as much under a covenant of works, as
ever. And, though after their disobedience they were without strength, yet they
were obliged not only to do, but continue to do all things, and that too in the
most perfect manner which the Lord had required of them. -- And not only so,
but to make satisfaction to God's infinitely offended justice, for the breach
they had already been guilty of. -- Here then opens the amazing scene of divine
philanthropy -- I mean God's love to man -- For behold, what man could not do,
Jesus Christ, the Son of his Father's love, undertakes to do for him. And that
God might be just in justifying the ungodly, though he was in the form of God,
and therefore thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet he took upon him
the form of a servant, even human nature. -- In that nature he obeyed, and
thereby fulfilled the whole moral law in our stead -- And also died a painful
death upon the cross, and thereby became a curse for, or instead of, those whom
the Father had given him. As God, he satisfied at the same time that he obeyed,
and suffered as man; and being God and man, in one person* wrought out a full,
perfect and sufficient righteousness for all to whom it was to be imputed.

Here then we see the meaning of the word righteousness. It implies the active,
as well as passive obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ. We generally, when
talking of the merits of Christ, only mention the latter, viz* -- his death;
whereas the former, viz. his life and active obedience is equally necessary.
Christ is not such a Savior as becomes us, unless we join both together. --
Christ not only died, but lived; not only suffered, but obeyed, for or instead
of poor sinners. And both these jointly make up that complete righteousness
which is to be imputed to us, as the disobedience of our first parents was made
ours by imputation. In this sense, and no other, are we to understand that
parallel which St. Paul draws in the 5th of the Romans, between the first and
second Adam. This is what he elsewhere terms our being made the righteousness
of God in him. This is the sense wherein the prophet would have us to
understand the words of the text; therefore chap. xxx. ver. 16. She, i. e. the
church itself shall be called (having this righteousness imputed to her) the
Lord our righteousness. -- A passage, I think, worthy the profoundest
meditation of all the sons and daughters of Abraham.

Many are the objections which the proud hearts of fallen men are continually
urging against this wholesome, this divine, this soul-saving doctrine. I come
now in the third place, to answer some few of those which I think the most
considerable.

And first, they say, because they would appear friends to morality, That the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness is destructive of good works, and leads to
licentiousness.

And who pray are the persons that generally urge this objection? Are they men
full of faith, and men really concerned for good works? No, whatever few
exceptions there may be, if there be any at all, its notorious, they are
generally men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. The best title
I can give them is, that of profane moralists, or moralists falsely so called.
For I appeal to the experience of the present, as well as past ages, if
iniquity did and does not most abound where the doctrine of Christ's whole
personal righteousness is most cried down, and most seldom mentioned. --
Arminian being Antichristian principles, always did, and always will lead to
Antichristian practices. And never was there a reformation brought about in the
church, but by the preaching the doctrine of an imputed righteousness. -- This,
as that man of God, Luther calls it, is Articulus Stantis aut Cadentis
Ecclesiae, the article by which the church stands or falls. -- And though the
preachers of this doctrine are generally branded by those on the other side
with the approbrious names of Antinomians, deceivers, and what not! yet, I
believe* if the truth of the doctrine on both sides was to be judged of by the
lives of the preachers and professors of it, their's on our side the question,
would have the advantage every way.

Its true, this, as well as every other doctrine of grace, may be abused. And
perhaps the unchristian walk of some, who have talked of Christ's imputed
righteousness, justification by faith, and the like, and yet never felt it
imputed to their own souls, has given the enemies of the Lord thus cause to
blaspheme. But this is a very unsafe, as well as very unfair way of arguing. --
The only question should be, Whether or no this doctrine of an imputed
righteousness does itself cut off the occasion of good works, or ^ead to
licentiousness? No, in no wise. It excludes works indeed from being any cause
of our justification in the sight of God. -- But it requires good works as a
proof of ^ur having this righteousness imputed to us, and as a declarative
evidence of our justification in the sight of men. And then how can the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness, be a doctrine leading to licentiousness?

Its all calumny. -- St. Paul introduces an infidel making this objection in
his epistle to the Romans. -- And none but infidels, that never felt the power
of Christ's resurrection upon their souls, will urge it over again. -- And
therefore, notwithstanding this objection, with the prophet in the text we may
boldly say, The Lord is our righteousness.

But Satan (and no wonder that his servants imitate him) often transforms
himself into an angel of light. And therefore (such perverse things will
infidelity and Arminianism make men speak) in order to dress their objections
in the best colors. -- Some urge, that our Savior preached on such doctrine
-- that in his sermon upon the Mount, He mentions only morality; and
consequently the doctrine of an imputed righteousness falls wholly to the
ground. --

But surely the men, who urge this objection, either have not read, or never
understood our Lord's blessed discourse, wherein the doctrine of an imputed
righteousness is so plainly taught, that he that runs, if he has eyes that see,
may read.

Indeed our Lord does recommend morality and good works (as all faithful
ministers will do) and clears the moral law from the many corrupt glosses put
upon it by the letter-learned Pharisees. -- But then, before he comes to this,
its remarkable, he talks of inward piety, such as poverty of spirit, meekness,
holy mourning, purity of heart, -- especially hungering and thirsting after
righteousness, and then recommend good works, as an evidence of our having his
righteousness imputed to us, and these graces and divine tempers wrought in our
hearts. -- Let your light (that is, the divine light I before have been
mentioning) shine before men, in a holy life, that they seeing our good works,
may glorify your Father which is in heaven. -- And then immediately adds, Think
not that I am come to destroy the moral law -- I came not to destroy, to take
away the force of it as a rule of life, but to fulfill, to obey it in its whole
latitude, and give the complete sense of it. -- And then he goes on to show,
how exceeding broad the moral law is. So that our Lord, instead of disanulling
of an imputed righteousness in his sermon upon the Mount, not only confirms it,
but also answers the foregoing objection urged against it, by making good works
a proof and evidence of its being imputed to our souls. -- He therefore that
has ears to hear, let him hear what the prophet says in the words of the text
-- The Lord our righteousness.

But as Satan not only quoted scripture, but also backed one temptation with it
after another, when he attacked Christ's person in the wilderness; so his
children generally take the same method in treating his doctrine. And therefore
they urge another objection against the doctrine of an imputed righteousness,
from the example of the young man in the gospel.

We may state it thus: -- The evangelist St* Mark, say they, chap. x. mentions
a young man that came to Christ, running and asking him what he should do to in
(...) eternal life? Christ, say they, referred him to the commandments, to know
what he must do to inherit eternal life. It is plain therefore, works were to
be partly at least, the cause of his justification; and consequently the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness is unscriptural. -- This is the objection
in its full strength; and little strength in all its fullness. For, was I to
prove the necessity of an imputed righteousness, I scarce know how I could
bring a better instance to make it good.

Let us take a more intimate view of this young man, and our Lord's behavior
toward him, Mark x. 17. the evangelist tells us, That when Christ was gone
forth into the way, there came one running (it should seem it was some
nobleman, a rarity indeed, to see such a one running to Christ!) and not only
so, but he kneeled to him (though perhaps many of his rank scarce knew the time
when they kneeled to Christ^ and asked him, saving, Good Master, what shall I
do, that I may inherit eternal life? -- Then Jesus, to see whether or not he
believed him to be what he really was, truly, properly God, said unto him, Why
call thou me Good? There is none good, but one, that is God. -- And that he
might directly answer his question; says he, Thou know the commandments: Do
not commit adultery, Do not bear false witness, Defraud (...), Honor thy
father and mother. -- This, I say, was a direct answer to his question; namely,
that eternal life was not to be attained by his doings. -- For our Lord, by
referring him to the commandments, did not (as the objecters insinuate) in the
least hint, that his morality would recommend him to the favor and mercy of
God. -- But he intended thereby to make the (...) his schoolmaster to bring him
to himself; that the young man, seeing (...) broken every one of these
commandments, might thereby ^e convinced o^ the insufficiency of his own, and
consequently the absolute necessity of looking out for a better righteousness,
whereon he might depend for eternal life.

This was what our Lord designed. -- The young man being self-righteous, and
willing to justify himself, said, All these have I observed from my youth. But
had he known himself, he would have confessed, All these have I broke from my
youth. -- For supposing he had not actually committed adultery, had he never
lusted after a woman in his heart? What if he had not really killed another;
had he never been angry without a cause, or spoken unadvisedly with his lips?
If so, by breaking one of the least commandments in the least degree, he became
liable to the curse of God: For cursed is ^e (says the law) that continues
not to do all things that are written in this book." -- And therefore, as I
observed before, our Lord was so far from speaking against, that he treated the
young man in that manner, on purpose to convince him of the necessity of an
imputed righteousness.

But perhaps they will reply, it is said, Jesus beholding him loved him. And
what then? This he might do with a human love, and at the same time this young
man have no interest in his blood. -- Thus Christ is said to wonder -- to weep
over Jerusalem, and say -- Oh that thou had KNOWN, etc. But such like
passages are to be referred only to his human nature. And there is a great deal
of difference between the love wherewith Christ loved this young man, and that
wherewith he loved Mary, Lazarus, and their sister Martha. -- To illustrate
this by a comparison. -- A minister of the Lord Jesus Christ, seeing many
amiable dispositions, such as readiness to hear the word, and decent behavior
at public worship, a life outwardly spotless in many, cannot but so far love
them. But then there is much difference betwixt that love which a minister
feels for such, and that divine love, that union and sympathy of soul, which he
feels for those that he is satisfied are really born again of God. -- Apply
this to our Lord's case, as a faint illustration of it -- Consider what has
been said upon the young man's case in general, and then, if before you were
fond of this objection, instead of triumphing with him, you will go sorrowful
away. -- Our Savior's reply to him, more and more convinces us of the truth of
the prophet's assertion in the text, viz. that the Lord is our righteousness.

But there is a fourth and grand objection yet behind, and that is taken from
the 25th chapter of St. Matthew, where our Lord is described, as rewarding
people with eternal life, because they fed the hungry, clothed the naked, and
such like. -- Their works therefore were a cause of their justification;
consequently, the doctrine of imputed righteousness is not agreeable to
scripture.

This I confess is the most plausible objection that is brought against the
doctrine insisted on from the text. And in order that we may answer it in as
clear and brief a manner as may be, we confess with the article of the church
of England, that albeit good works do not justify us, yet they will follow
after justification, as fruits of it; and though they can claim no reward in
themselves, yet forasmuch as they spring from faith in Christ, and a renewed
soul, they shall receive a reward of grace, though not of debt; and
consequently, the more we abound in such good works, the greater will be our
reward when Jesus Christ shall come to judgment.

Take these considerations along with us, and they will help us much to answer
the objection now before us. -- For thus St. Matthew -- Then shall the King say
to them on the right hand, Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. -- For I was an
hungry, and ye gave me meat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink. I was a
stranger, and ye took me in. Naked, and ye clothed me. I was sick, and ye
visited me I was in prison, and ye came unto me. I will therefore reward you,
because you have done these things out of love to me, and hereby have evidenced
yourselves to be my true disciples. -- And that the people did not depend on
these good actions for their justification in the fight of God, is evident. For
when saw we thee an hungry, say they, and fed thee? or thirsty, and gave thee
drink? When saw we thee a stranger, and took thee in? Or naked, and clothed
thee? Or when saw we thee sick, or in prison, and came unto thee? -- Language
and questions quite improper for persons relying on their own righteousness for
acceptance and acquitance in the sight of God.

But when they reply again this. -- In the latter part of the chapter, say
they, It is plain that Jesus Christ rejects and damns the others for not doing
these things. And therefore if he damns those for not doing, he saves those for
doing; and consequently the doctrine of an imputed righteousness is good for
nothing.

But that is no consequence at all -- For God may justly damn any man for
omitting the least duty of the moral law, and yet in himself is not obliged to
give any one any reward, supposing he has done all that he can. We are
unprofitable servants, we have done not near so much as it was our duty to do,
must be the language of the most holy souls living; and therefore from, or in
ourselves, cannot be justified in the sight of God. -- This was the frame of
the devout souls just now referred to -- Sensible of this, they were so far
from depending on their works for justification in the sight of God, that they
were filled, as it were, with a holy blushing, to think our Lord should
condescend to mention, much more to reward them for their poor works of faith
and labors of love. I am persuaded their hearts would rise with a holy
indignation against those, who urge this passage as an objection against the
assertion of the prophet in the words of the text, that the Lord is our
Righteousness.

Thus I think we have fairly answered these grand objections, which are
generally urged against the doctrine of an imputed righteousness. -- Was I to
stop here, I think I might say, we are made more than conquerors, through him
that loved us. -- But there is a way of arguing which I have always admired,
because I have thought always very convincing, viz. by showing the absurdities
that will follow from denying any particular proposition in dispute.

This is the next thing that was proposed, -- And never did greater or more
absurdities flow from the denying any doctrine, than will flow from denying the
doctrine of Christ's imputed righteousness.

And first, if we deny this doctrine, we turn the truth, I mean the word of
God, as much as we can into a lie, and utterly subvert all those places of
scripture, which say, That we are saved by grace; that it is not of works, le^t
any man should boast. -- That salvation is God's free gift -- and that, He that
glories, must glory in the Lord. -- For, if the whole personal righteousness
of Jesus Christ be not the sole cause of my acceptance with God, if any work
done by or foreseen in me, was in the least to be joined with it, or looked
upon by God as an inducing, impulsive cause of acquitting my soul from guilt,
then I have somewhat whereof I may glory in myself. Now boasting is excluded in
the great work of our redemption. But that cannot be, if we are enemies to the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness. -- It would be endless to enumerate how
many texts of scripture must be false, if this doctrine be not true. Let it
suffice to affirm in the general, that if we deny an imputed righteousness, we
may as well deny a divine revelation all at once. For it is the alpha and
omega, the beginning and the end of the book of God. -- We must either
disbelieve that, or believe what the prophet has spoken in the text, That the
Lord is our righteousness.

But farther. -- I observed at the beginning of this discourse, that we are all
Arminians and Papists by nature; -- for, as one observes, Arminianism is the
back way to Popery. And here I venture further to affirm, That if we deny the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness, whatever we may style our^elves, we are
really Papists in our hearts, and deserve no other title from men.

Sirs, What think you? -- Suppose I was to come and tell you, that you must
intercede with saints, for them to intercede with God for you -- would you not
then say, I was justly reputed a Popish missionary by some, and deservedly
thrust out of the ^ynag^^^es by others? -- I suppose you would. -- And why?
Because you would say, the intercession of Jesus Christ was sufficient of
itself, without the intercession of saints, and that it was blasphemous to join
theirs with his, as though it was not sufficient.

Suppose I went a little more round about, and told you, that the death of
Christ was not sufficient, without our death being added to it; that you must
die as well as Christ, join your death with his, and then it would be
sufficient. -- Might you not then, with a holy indignation, throw dust in the
air, and justly call me a ^etter forth of strange doctrines? And now then, if
it be not only absurd, but blasphemous, to join the intercession of saints,
with the intercession of Christ, as though his intercession was not sufficient,
or our death with the death of Christ, as though his death was not sufficient;
judge ye, if it be not equally absurd, equally blasphemous, to join our
obedience, either wholly or in part, with the obedience of Christ, as if that
was not sufficient. And if so, what absurdities will follow the denying that
the Lord, both as to his active and passive obedience, is our righteousness?

One more absurdity I shall mention, that will follow from the denying this
doctrine, and I have done.

I remember a story of a certain prelate, who, after many arguments in vain
urged to convince the earl of Rochester of the invisible realities of another
world, took his leave of his lordship with some such words as these: -- Well,
my lord, says he, if there be no hell, I am safe; -- but, if there should be
such a thing, my lord, as hell, what will become of you? I apply this to those
that oppose the doctrine now insisted on. If there be no such thing as the
doctrine of an imputed righteousness, those that hold it, and bring forth fruit
unto holiness, are safe. But if there be such a thing (as there certainly is)
what will become of you that deny it, is no difficult matter to determine. --
You^ portion must be in a lake of fire and brimstone for ever and ever, since
you will rely upon your works, by your works you shall ^e judged. -- They shall
be weighed in the balance of the sanctuary. -- They will be found wanting -- By
your works therefore shall you be condemned; and you, being out of Christ,
shall find God to your poor, wretched souls, a consuming fire.

The great Stoddard, of Northampton, in New England, has therefore well entitled
a book which he wrote (and which I would take this opportunity to recommend)
The safety of appearing in the righteousness of Christ. -- For why should I
lean upon a broken reed, when I can have the rock of ages to stand upon, that
never can be moved?

And now before I come to a more particular application, give me leave, in the
apostle's language, triumphantly to cry out, Where is the scribe? where the
disputer? where is the reasoning infidel of this generation? Can any thing
appear more reasonable, even according to your own way of arguing, than the
doctrine here laid down? Have you not felt a convincing power to go along with
the word? Why then will you not believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, that so he
may become the Lord your righteousness.

But its time (...) me to come a little closer to your consciences.

Brethren, though some may be offended at this doctrine, and may account it
foolishness; yet to (...) of you, I doubt not but it is precious, it being
(...) to the form of ^ound words, which from your infancy has been delivered to
you: and coming from a quarter, you would least have expected it, may be
received with more pleasure and satisfaction. But give me leave to ask you one
question, Can you say, the Lord our righteousness? I say, the Lord our
righteousness. For entertaining this doctrine in your heads, without receiving
the Lord Jesus Christ savingly by a ^^vely faith into your hearts, will but
increase your damnation. As I have often told you, so I tell you again, an
unapplied Christ, is no Christ at all. -- Can you then, with believing Thomas,
cry out, My Lord and my God^ Is Christ your sanctification, as well as your
outward righteousness? For the word righteousness in the text, not only implies
Christ's personal righteousness imputed to us, but also holiness of heart
wrought in us -- These two God has joined together. -- He never did, He never
does, He never will put them asunder. -- If you are justified by the BLOOD, you
are also sanctified by the Spirit of the Lord. Can you then in this sense say,
the Lord our righteousness? Were you ever made to abhor yourselves for your
actual and original sins* and to loath your own righteousness (or, as the
prophet beautifully expresses it, your righteousnesses) as filthy rags? Were
you ever made to see and admire the all sufficiency of Christ's righteousness,
and excited* by the Spirit of God to hunger and thirst after it? Could you ever
say, my soul is athirst for Christ, yea, even for the righteousness of Christ?
Oh, when shall I come to appear before the presence of my God in the
righteousness of Christ! Oh, nothing but Christ! nothing but Christ! Give me
Christ, O God, and* I am (...)! My soul shall praise thee for ever. (...) I
say, ever the language of your hearts? And after these inward conflicts, were
you ever enabled to reach out the arm of faith, and embrace the blessed Jesus
in your souls, so that you could say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his? If so,
fear not, whoever you are -- hail, all hail! you happy souls! The Lord, the
Lord Christ, the everlasting God is your righteousness. -- Christ has justified
you, who is he that condemns you? Christ has died for you, nay rather is
risen again, and ever lives to make intercession for you. -- Being now
justified by his grace, you have peace with God, and shall e're long be with
Jesus in glory, reaping everlasting and unspeakable redemption both in body and
soul. -- For there is no condemnation to those that are really in Christ Jesus.
Whether Paul or Apollos, or life or death, all is yours, if you are Christ's,
for Christ is God's! -- Oh, my brethren, my heart is enlarged toward you! --
Oh, think of the love of Christ in dying for you! -- If the Lord be your
righteousness, let the righteousness of your Lord be continually in your mouth.
Talk of, oh talk of and recommend the righteousness of Christ, when you lie
down, and when you rise up, at your going out and at your coming in! -- Think
of the greatness of the gift, as well as of the giver! -- Show to all the world
in whom you have believed! Let all by your fruits know, that the Lord is your
righteousness, and that you are waiting for your Lord from heaven! -- Oh, study
to be holy, even as he who has called you, and washed you in his own blood, is
holy! -- Let not the righteousness of the Lord be evil spoken of through you.
-- Let not Jesus be wounded in the house of his friends; but grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ day by day. -- Oh, think
of his dying love! Let that love constrain you to obedience! Having much
forgiven, love much. Be always asking, what shall I do, to express my gratitude
to the Lord, for giving me his righteousness? Let that self abasing, God
exalting question be always in your mouths. O be always lisping out* Why me,
Lord! Why me? Why am I taken, and others left? Why is the Lord my
righteousness? Why is he become my salvation, who have so often deserved
damnation at his hands?

Oh, my friends, I trust I feel somewhat of a sense of God's distinguishing
love upon my heart! therefore I must divert a little from congratulating you to
invite poor christless sinners to come to him, and accept of his righteousness,
that they may have life.

Alas, my heart almost bleeds! What a multitude of precious souls are now
before me! How shortly must all be ushered into eternity -- And yet, O cutting
thought! was God now to require all your souls, how few, comparatively
speaking, could really say, the Lord our righteousness.

And think you, O sinners, that you will be able to stand in the day of
judgment, if Christ be not your righteousness! No, that alone is the
wedding garment in which you must appear. -- Oh, christless sinners, I am
distressed for you! -- The desires of my soul are enlarged. -- Oh, that this
may be an accepted time! Oh, that the Lord may be your righteousness! For
whither would you flee, if death should find you naked? -- Indeed there is no
hiding yourselves from his presence. -- The pitiful fig leaves of your own
righteousness will not cover your nakedness, when God shall call you to stand
before him. -- Adam found them ineffectual, and so will you. -- Oh, think of
death! -- Oh, think of judgment! Yet a little while, and time shall be no more;
and then what will become of you, if the Lord be not your righteousness? Think
you, that Christ will spare you? No, he that formed you, will have no mercy on
you. If you are out of Christ, if Christ be not your righteousness, Christ
himself shall pronounce you damned. -- And can you bear to think of being
damned by Christ? Can you bear to hear the Lord Jesus say unto you, Depart from
me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels? Can
you live, think you, in everlasting burnings? Is your flesh brass, and your
bones iron? What if they are, hellfire, that fire prepared for the devil and
his angels, will heat them through and through! And can you bear to depart from
Christ? Oh, that heart-piercing thought! -- Ask those holy souls, who are at
any time bewailing an absent God, who walk in darkness, and see no light,
though but a few days or hours; ask them, what it is to lose a sight and
presence of Christ? -- See how they seek him sorrowing, and go mourning after
him all the day long! And if it is so dreadful to lose the sensible presence of
Christ only for a day, what must it be to be banished from him to all eternity!
-- But thus it must be, if Christ be not your righteousness. -- For God's
justice must be satisfied; and unless Christ's righteousness is imputed and
applied to you here, you must be satisfying the divine justice in hell torments
eternally hereafter. -- Nay, as I said before, Christ himself, the God of love,
shall condemn you to that place of torment. -- And oh, how cutting is that
thought! Methinks I see poor, trembling, christless wretches, standing before
the bar of God, crying out, Lord, if we must be damned, let some angel, or some
archangel pronounce the damn^tory sentence. But all in vain. -- Christ himself
shall pronounce the irrevocable sentence. Knowing therefore the terrors of the
Lord, let me persuade you to close with Christ, and never re^t till you can
say* the Lord our righteousness. -- Who knows but the Lord may have mercy on,
nay, abundantly pardon you? Beg of God to give you faith; and if the Lord give
you that, you will by it receive Christ, with his righteousness, and his all.
You need not fear the greatness or number of your sins -- For are you sinners?
so am I. Are you the chief of sinners? so am I. Are you backsliding sinners? so
am I. And yet the Lord (for ever adored be his rich, free, and sovereign grace)
the Lord is my righteousness. -- Come then, O young men, who (as I acted once
myself) are playing the prodigal, and wandering away afar off from your heavenly
father's house, come home, come home, and leave your swines trough -- Feed no
longer on the husks of sensual delights. -- For Christ's sake, arise and come
home! Your heavenly Father now calls you. -- See yonder the best robe, even the
righteousness of his dear Son, awaits you. -- See it, view it again and again.
-- Consider at how dear a rate it was purchased, even by the blood of God* --
Consider what great need you have of it. -- You are lost, undone, damned for
ever without it! -- Come then, poor, guilty prodigals, come, come. -- Indeed I
will not, like the elder brother, be angry. -- No, I will rejoice with the
angels in heaven: And oh, that God would now bow the heavens, and come down!
Descend, O Son of God, descend; and as thou have ^hewn in me such mercy, O let
the blessed Spirit apply thy righteousness to some prodigals now before thee,
and clothe their naked souls with thy best robe.

But I must speak a word to you, Young Maidens, as well as young men. -- I see
many of you adorned as to your bodies; but are not your souls naked! Which of
you can say, the Lord is my righteousness? Which of you was solicitous to be
dressed in this robe of invaluable price, and without which, you are no better
than whited sepulchers in the sight of God? -- Let not then so many of you,
young maidens, any longer forget your only ornament: -- Oh, seek for the Lord
to be your righteousness, or otherwise burning will soon be upon you instead of
beauty!

And what shall I say to you of a middle age, you busy merchants, you cumbred
Martha's, who, with all your gettings, have not yet gotten the Lord to be your
righteousness? Alas! what profit will there be of all your labor under the
sun, if you do not secure this pearl of invaluable price? This one thing, so
absolutely needful, that it only can stand you in stead, when all other things
shall be taken from you. Labor therefore no longer so anxiously for the meat
which perishes, but henceforward seek for the Lord to be your righteousness.
-- A righteousness that will entitle you to life everlasting. -- I see also
many hoary heads here, and perhaps the most of them cannot say, the Lord is my
righteousness. -- O grey-headed sinners, I could weep over you! -- Your gray
hairs* which ought to be your crown, and in which perhaps you glory, is now
your shame -- You know not the Lord is your righteousness. -- Oh, haste then,
haste ye, aged sinners, and seek an interest in redeeming love! -- Alas, you
have one foot already in the grave* -- Your glass is just run out. -- Your sun
is just going down, and it will set and leave you in an eternal darkness,
unless the Lord be your righteousness! -- Flee then, oh flee for your lives! Be
not afraid. -- All things are possible with God. If you come, though it be at
the eleventh hour, Christ Jesus will in no wise cast you out. Oh, seek then for
the Lord to be your righteousness, and beseech him to let you know how it is
that a man may be born again when he is old! -- But I must not forget the lambs
of the flock. -- To feed them was one of my Lord's last commands. -- I know he
will be angry with me, if I do not tell them, that the Lord may be their
righteousness; and that of such is the kingdom of heaven. -- Come then, ye
little children, come to Christ; the Lord Christ shall be your righteousness.
-- Do not think, that you are too young to be converted. -- Perhaps many of you
may be nine or ten years old, and yet cannot say, the Lord is our
righteousness; which many have said, though younger than you. -- Come then,
while you are young. -- Perhaps you may not live to be old. -- Do not stay for
other people. If your fathers and mothers will not come to Christ, do you come
without them. -- Let children lead them, and show them how the Lord may he
their righteousness. -- Our Lord Jesus loved little children. You are his lambs
-- He bids me feed you. -- I pray God make you willing betimes to take the Lord
for your righteousness.

Here then I could conclude -- but I must not forget the poor negroes -- No, I
must not. Jesus Christ has died for them* as well as others. Nor do I mention
you last, because I despise your souls, but because I would have what I have to
say, make the deeper impression upon your hearts. -- Oh that you would seek the
Lord to be your righteousness! -- Who knows but he may be found of you. -- For
in Jesus Christ there is neither male or female, bond or free, even you may be
the children of God, if you believe in Jesus. -- Did you never read of the
Eunuch belonging to the queen of Candace? -- A negro like yourselves. -- He
believed -- The Lord was his righteousness, He was baptized. Do you also
believe, and you shall be saved. -- Christ Jesus is the same now, as he was
yesterday, and will wash you in his own blood. -- Go home then, turn the words
of the text into a prayer, and entreat the Lord to be your righteousness. Even
so, come Lord Jesus, come quickly, into all our souls! Amen, Lord Jesus, Amen
and Amen.

SERMON II.
THE SEED OF THE WOMAN, AND THE SEED OF THE SERPENT.
GENESIS iii. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between
thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel.
WHEN I read to you these words, I may address you in the language of the holy
angels to the shepherds, that were watching their flocks by night. Behold I
bring you glad tidings of great joy. -- For this is the first promise that was
made of a Savior* to the apostate race of Adam. We generally look for Christ
only in the New Testament; but Christianity, in one sense, is very near as old
as the creation. -- It is wonderful to observe, how gradually God revealed his
Son to mankind. He began with the promise in the text, and this the elect lived
upon till the time of Abraham -- To him God made further discoveries of his
eternal counsel concerning man's redemption. -- Afterward, at sundry times,
and in diverse manners, God spoke to the fathers by the prophets, till at length
the Lord Jesus himself was manifested in the flesh, and came and tabernacled
among us.

This first promise must certainly be but dark to our first parents, in
comparison of that sight we enjoy. -- And yet, dark as it was, we may assure
ourselves they built upon it their hopes of everlasting salvation, and by that
faith were saved.

How they came to stand in need of this promise, and what is the extent and
meaning of it, I intend God willing, to make the subject matter of your present
meditation.

The fall of man is written in too legible characters not to be understood --
Those that deny it, by their denying prove it. The very heathens confessed and
bewailed it. -- They could see the streams of corruption running through the
whole race of mankind, but could not trace them to the fountain head. Before
God gave a revelation of his Son, man was a riddl^ to himself -- And Moses
unfolds more in this one chapter (out of which the text is taken) than all
mankind could have been capable of finding out of themselves, though they had
studied to all eternity.

In the foregoing chapter, he had given us a full account, how God spoke the
world into being; and especially how he formed man of the dust of the earth,
and breathed into him the breath of life, so that he became a living soul. A
counsel of the Trinity was called concerning the formation of this lovely
creature. The result of that council was, Let us make man in our image after
our likeness. -- So God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him. -- Moses remarkably repeats the words, that we might take
particular notice of our divine original. -- Never was so much expressed in so
few words. -- None but a man inspired could have done so. But it is remarkable,
that though Moses mentions our being made in the image of God, yet he mentions
it but twice, and that, as it were, in a transient manner, as though he would
have said, "Man was made in honor, God made him upright, in the image of God
male and female created he them. But man so soon fell, and became like the
beasts that perish, nay; like the devil himself, that it is scarce worth
mentioning."

How soon man fell after he was created, is not told us, and* therefore, to fix
any time, is to be wise above what is written. -- And, I think, they
who-suppose that man fell the same day in which he was made, have no sufficient
ground for their opinion. -- The many things which are crowded together in the
former chapter, such as the formation of Adam's wife, his giving names to the
beasts, and his being put into the garden which God had planted, I think
require a longer space of time than a day to be transacted in -- However, all
agree in this, "Man stood not long." How long, or how short a while, I will not
take upon me to determine. -- It more concerns us to enquire, how he came to
fall from his stedfastness, and what was the rise and progress of the
temptation which prevailed over him. -- The account given us in this chapter
concerning it, is very full, and it may do us much service under God, to make
some remarks upon it.

Now the serpent, says the sacred historian, was more subtle than any beast of
the field which the Lord God had made, and he said unto the woman, yea, has
God said, ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden.

Though this was a real serpent, yet he that spoke was no other than the devil;
from hence, perhaps, called the old serpent, because he took possession of the
serpent when he came to beguile our first parents. -- The devil envied the
happiness of man, who was made, as some think, to supply the place of fallen
angels. -- God made man upright, and with full power to stand if he would -- He
was just, therefore, in suffering him to be tempted -- If he fell he had no one
to blame except himself. -- But how must Satan effect his fall? -- He cannot do
it by his power, he attempts it therefore by policy -- He takes possession of a
serpent, which was more subtle than all the beasts of the field, which the Lord
God had made; so that men that are full of subtility, but have no piety, are
only machines for the devil to work upon, just as he pleases.

And he said unto the Woman. -- Here is an instance of his subtility -- He says
unto the woman, the weaker vessel, and when she was alone from her husband, and
therefore was more liable to be overcome -- Yea, has God said, ye shall not
eat of every tree of the garden? These words are certainly spoken in answer to
something which the devil either saw or heard -- In all probability, the woman
was now near the tree of knowledge of good and evil. (For we shall find her, by
and by, plucking an apple from it) perhaps she might be looking at, and
wondering what there was in that tree more than the others, that she and her
husband should be forbidden to taste of it -- Satan seeing this, and covering
to draw her into a parley with him (for if the devil can persuade us not to
resist, but to commune with him, he has gained a great point) he says, Yea,
has God said, ye shall not eat of every tree in the garden? -- The first thing
he does, is to persuade her if possible, to entertain hard thoughts of God --
This is his general way of dealing with God's children -- "Yea, says he, has
God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? What! has God planted
a garden and placed you in the midst of it only to teaze and perplex you? has
he planted a garden, and yet forbid you making use of any of the fruits of it
all?" It was impossible for him to ask a more ensnaring question, in order to
gain his end: For Eve, was here seemingly obliged to answer, and vindicate
God's goodness. And therefore, --

Ver. 2. The woman said unto the Serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees
of the garden: But, Ver. 3. Of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of
the garden, God has said, ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it,
lest ye die.

The former part of the answer was good, "We may eat of the fruit of the trees
of the garden, God has not forbid us eating of every tree of the garden. No, we
may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden (and it should seem even of the
tree of life, which was as a sacrament to man in a state of innocence) there is
only one tree in the midst of the garden, of which God has said, Ye shall not
eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die." Here she begins to warp,
and sin begins to conceive in her heart. -- Already she has contracted some of
the serpent's poison, by talking with him, which she ought not to have done at
all. For we might easily suppose, that it could be no good being, that could
put such a question unto her, and infinuate such dishonorable thoughts of God.
-- She should therefore have fled from him, and not stood to have parleyed with
him at all. -- Immediately the ill effects of it appear -- she begins to soften
the divine threatening. -- God has said, the Day thou eatest thereof thou
shall surely die; or, dying thou shall die. -- But Eve says, ye shall not eat
of it, neither shall ye touch it lest ye die. -- We may be assured we are
fallen into, and begin to fill by temptation, when we begin to think God will
not be so good as his word, in respect to the execution of his threatenings
denounced against sin. -- Satan knew this, and therefore artfully said unto the
woman, ver. 4. Ye shall not surely die, in an insinuating manner, "Ye shall not
surely die -- surely, God will not be so cruel as to damn you only for eating
an apple, it cannot be." -- Alas! how many does Satan lead captive at his will,
by flattering them that they shall not surely die, that hell torments will not
be eternal -- that God is all mercy; that he therefore will not punish a few
years sin with an eternity of misery. -- But Eve found God as good as his word,
and so will all they that go on in sin, under a false hope that they shall not
surely die.

We may also understand the words spoken positively, and this is agreeable to
what follows -- You shall not surely die -- "It is all a delusion, a mere mere
bugbear, to keep you in a servile subjection."

For, ver. 4. God does know, that in the day ye eat thereof, then shall your
eyes be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.

What child of God can expect to escape slander, when God himself was thus
slandered even in paradise? Surely the understanding of Eve must have been, in
some measure, blinded, or she would not have suffered the tempter to speak such
perverse things. -- In what odious colors is God here represented! God does
know, that in the day ye eat thereof, ye shall be as gods (equal with God.) So
that the grand temptation was, that they should be hereafter under no control,
equal, if not superior to God, that made them, knowing good and evil. -- Eve
could not t^ll what Satan meant by this; but, to be sure, she understood it of
some great privilege which they were to enjoy. -- And thus Satan now points out
a way, which seems right to sinners, but does not tell them the end of that way
is death.

To give strength and force to this temptation, in all probability, Satan, or
the serpent, at this time, plucked an apple from the tree, and ate it before
Eve, by which Eve might be induced to think, that the sagacity and power of
speech, which the serpent had above the other beasts, must be owing, in a great
measure, to his eating that fruit; and, therefore, if he received so much
improvement, she might also expect a like benefit from it. All this, I think,
is clear; for, otherwise, I do not see with what propriety it could be said,
when the woman saw that it was good for food. How could she know it was good
for food, unless she had seen the serpent feed upon it?

Satan now begins to get ground apace -- Lust had conceived in her heart;
shortly it will bring forth sin -- Sin being conceived brings forth death. Ver.
6. And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also unto her husband, and he did eat.

Our senses are the landing ports of our spiritual enemies. -- How needful is
that resolution of holy Job, I have made a covenant with mine eyes. When Eve
began to gaze on the forbidden fruit with her eyes, she soon began to long
after it with her heart. -- When she saw that it was good for food, and
pleasant to the eyes (here was the lust of the flesh, and lust of the eye) but,
above all, a tree to be desired to make one wise, wiser than God would have her
be, nay as wi^e as God himself; she took of the fruit thereof, and gave also
unto her husband with her, and he did eat -- As soon as ever she sinned
herself, she turned tempter to her husband -- its dreadful, when those, who
should be help-mates for each other in the great work of their salvation, are
only promoters of each others damnation -- But thus it is. If we ourselves are
good, we shall excite others to goodness; if we do evil, we shall entice others
to do evil also. -- There is a close connection between doing and teaching. How
needful then is it for us all to take heed that we do not sin any way
ourselves, left we should become factors for the devil, and ensnare perhaps our
nearest and dearest relations? She gave also unto her husband with her, and he
did eat.

Alas! what a complication of crimes was there in this one single act of sin!
-- Here is an utter disbelief of God's threatening -- The utmost ingratitude to
their Maker, who had so lately planted this garden and placed them in is* with
such a glorious and comprehensive character. -- Here is the utmost neglect of
their posterity, who they knew were to stand or fall with them -- Here was the
utmost pride of heart -- They wanted to be equal with God -- Here is the utmost
contempt put upon his threatening and his law -- The devil is credited and
obeyed before him, and all this only to satisfy their ^en^^al appetite. Never
was a crime of such a complicated nature, committed by any here below --
Nothing but the devil's apostasy and rebellion could equal it.

And what are the consequences of their disobedience? -- Are their eyes opened?
-- Yes, their eyes are opened -- But, alas! it is only to see their own
nakedness. For, we are told, ver. 7. that the eyes of them both were opened,
and they knew that they were naked. -- Naked of God, naked of every thing that
was holy and good -- and destitute of the divine image, which they before
enjoyed. -- They might rightly now be termed ^chabod; for the glory of the Lord
departed from them -- Oh! how low did these sons of the morning then fall! out
of God into themselves; from being partakers of the divine nature, into the
nature of the devil and the beast -- Well, therefore, might they know that they
were naked, not only in body but in soul. --

And how do they behave now they are naked? Do they fly to God for pardon? --
Do they seek to him for a robe to cover their nakedness? -- No. They are now
dead to God, earthly, sensual, devilish -- And, therefore, instead of applying
to God for mercy, they sewed, or platted fig leaves together, and made
themselves apron, or things to gird about them. This is a lively representation
of all natural men -- We see that we are naked -- We in some measure, confess
it, but, instead of looking up to God for succor, we patch up a righteousness
of our own (as our first parents platted fig leaves together) hoping to cover
our nakedness by that. But our righteousness will not stand the severity of
God's judgment: It will do us no more service than the fig leaves did Adam and
Eve -- that is, none at all.

For, ver. 8. They heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the trees of the
garden, in the cool of the day; and Adam and his wife (notwithstanding their
fig leaves) hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God, among the trees
of the garden.

They heard the voice of the Lord God, or the word of the Lord God, even the
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Word that was with God, and the Word that was
God. They heard him walking in the trees of the garden, in the cool of the day.
-- A season, perhaps, when Adam and Eve used to go, in an especial manner, and
offer up an evening sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving -- The cool of the
day. Perhaps, the sin was committed early in the morning, or an noon -- But God
would not come upon them immediately -- He staid till the cool of the day. For,
if we would effectually reprove others, we should not do it, when they are
warmed with passion, but wait till the cool of the day. --

But what an alteration is here! -- Instead of rejoicing at the voice of their
Beloved -- instead of meeting him with open arms, and enlarged hearts, as
before, they hide themselves in the trees of the garden -- Alas, what a foolish
attempt was this? -- Surely, they must be naked, otherwise how could they think
of hiding themselves from God? -- Whither could they flee from his presence? --
But, by their fall, they had contracted an enmity against God: They now hated,
and were afraid to converse with God, their Maker. -- And is not this our case
by nature? assuredly it is. We labor to cover our nakedness with the fig
leaves of our own righteousness -- We hide ourselves from God as long as we
can, and will not come, and never should come, did not the Father prevent,
draw, and sweetly constrain us by his grace, as he here prevented Adam.

Ver. 9. And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Adam, where art
thou?

"The Lord God called unto Adam" -- (for otherwise Adam would never have called
unto the Lord God) and said, " Adam, where art thou? -- How is it, that thou
come not to pay thy devotions as usual?" -- Christians, remember the Lord
keeps an account when you fail coming to worship -- Whenever, therefore, you
are tempted to withhold your attendance, let each of you fancy you heard the
Lord God calling unto you, and saying, "O man, O woman, where art thou?" -- It
may be understood in another and better sense -- Adam, where art thou? What a
condition is thy poor soul in? This is the first thing that the Lord asks, and
convinces a sinner of, when he prevents, and calls him effectually by his grace
-- He also calls him by name: For unless God speaks to us in particular, and we
know where we are, how poor, how miserable, how blind, how naked, we shall
never value the redemption wrought out for us by the death and obedience of the
dear Lord Jesus -- Adam, where art thou?

Ver. 10. And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid. See
what cowards sin makes us -- If we knew no sin, we should know no fear. Because
I was naked, and I hid myself: Ver. 11. And he said, Who told thee that thou
wast naked? Have thou eaten of the tree, whereof I (thy Maker and lawgiver)
commanded thee, that thou should not eat?

God knew very well that Adam was naked, and that he had eaten of the forbidden
fruit -- But God would know it from Adam's own mouth. -- Thus God knows all our
necessities before we ask, but yet insists upon our asking for his grace, and
confessing our sins. For, by such acts, we acknowledge our dependence upon God,
take shame to ourselves, and thereby give glory to his great name. Ver. 12. And
the man said, the woman which thou gave to (...) with me, she gave me of the
tree, and I did eat.

Never was nature more lively delineated. See what pride Adam contracted by the
fall! How unwilling he is to lay the blame upon, or take shame to himself. This
answer is full of insolence toward God, enmity against his wise, and
disingenuity in respect to himself. For herein he tacitly reflects upon God --
The woman that THOU gave to be with me. -- As much as to say, If THOU ^adst
not given me THAT WOMAN, I had not eaten the forbidden fruit. Thus when men
sin, they lay the fault upon their passions; then blame and reflect upon God
for giving them those passions -- Their language is, "The appetites that THOU
gave us, they deceived us, and therefore we sinned against thee." But, as
God, notwithstanding, punished Adam for hearkening to the voice of his wife, so
he will punish those who hearken to the dictates of their corrupt inclinations
-- For God compels no man to sin. Adam might have withstood the solicitations
of his wife, if he would. -- And so, if we look up to God we should find grace
to help in the time of need -- The devil and our own hearts tempt, but they
cannot force us to consent, without the concurrence of our own wills. So that
our damnation is of ourselves, as it will evidently appear at the great day,
*notwithstanding all mens' present impudent replies against God -- As Adam
speaks insolently in respect to God, so he speaks with enmity against his wife
-- The woman, or this woman, she gave me -- He lays all the fault upon her, and
speaks of her with much contempt -- He does not say, my wife, my dear wife, but
this woman. For sin disunites the most united hearts. It is the bane of holy
fellowship -- Those who have been companions in sin here, if they die without
repentance, will both hate and condemn one another hereafter -- Al^ damned
souls are accusers of their brethren -- Thus it is, in some degree, on this
side the grave -- The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
tree, and I did eat. What a disingenuous speech was here! He makes use of no
less than fifteen words to excuse himself, and but one or two (in the original)
to confess his fault, if it may be called a confession at all -- The woman
which thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree -- Here are fifteen
words -- and I did eat. With what reluctance do these last words come out? How
soon are they uttered? And I did eat* But thus it is with an unhumbled,
unregenerate heart. It will be laying the fault upon the dearest friend in the
world* nay* upon God himself, rather than take shame to itself -- This pride we
are all subject to by the fall* and* till our hearts are broken* and made
contrite by the Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be always charging
God foolishly. Against THEE, and THEE only, have I sinned; that thou might
be justified in thy saying, and clear when thou judge, is the language of
none but those, who, like David, are willing to confess their faults, and are
truly sorry for their sins. This was not the case of Adam -- His heart was not
broken; and therefore he lays the fault of his disobedience upon his wife and
God, and not upon himself -- The woman which THOU gave to be with me, she
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

Ver. 13. And the Lord God said, what is this that thou have done? What a
wonderful concern does God express in this expostulation! "What a deluge of
misery have thou brought upon thyself, thy husband, and thy posterity? What is
this that thou have done? Disobeyed thy God, obeyed the devil, and ruined thy
husband, for whom I made thee to be an help-meet! What is this that thou have
done?" God would here awaken her to a sense of her crime and danger, and
therefore, as it were, thunders in her ears. For the law must be preached to
self-righteous sinners. We must take care of healing, before we see sinners
wounded, lest we should say, Peace, peace, where there is no peace. Secure
sinners must hear the thundering of mount Sinai, before we bring them to mount
Sion. They who never preach up the law, it is to be feared, are unskilful in
delivering the glad tidings of the gospel. Every minister should be a
Boanerges, a son of thunder, as well as Barnabas, a son of consolation. There
was an earthquake and a whirlwind, before the small still voice came to Elijah
-- We must first show people they are condemned, and then show them how they
must be saved. But how and when to preach the law, and when to apply the
promises of the gospel, wisdom is profitable to direct -- And the Lord God said
unto the woman, what is this that thou ^ast done?

And the Woman said, the serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. She does not make
^se of so many words to excuse herself, as her husband; but her heart is as
unhumbled as his -- What is this, says God, that thou have done? God here
charges her with doing it -- She dares not deny the fact* or say, I have not
done it; but she takes all the blame off herself, and lays it upon the serpent
-- The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. She does not say, "Lord, I was to
blame for talking with the serpent -- Lord, I did wrong, in not hasting to my
husband, when he put the question to me -- Lord, I plead guilty, I only am to
blame -- Oh, let not my poor husband suffer for my wickedness!" -- This would
have been the language of her heart had she now been a true penitent. But both
were now alike proud -- Therefore neither will lay the blame upon themselves --
The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat -- The woman which thou gave to be
with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.

I have been the more particular in remarking this part of their behavior,
because it tends so much to the magnifying of free grace, and plainly shows us
salvation comes only from the Lord -- Let us take a short view of the
miserable circumstances our first parents were now in -- They were legally and
spiritually dead -- Children of wrath, and heirs of hell -- They had eaten the
fruit, of which God had commanded them, that they should not eat -- And when
arraigned before God, notwithstanding their crime was so complicated, they
could not be brought to confess it -- What reason can be given, why sentence of
death should not be pronounced against the prisoners at the bar? -- All must
own they are worthy to die. -- Nay, how can God, consistently with his justice,
possibly forgive them? -- He had threatened, that the day wherein they eat of
the forbidden fruit, they should surely die -- And if he did not execute this
threatening, the devil might then slander the Almighty indeed. And yet mercy
cries, Spare these sinners, spare the work of thine own hands. Behold then
wisdom contrives a scheme how God may be just, and yet be merciful; be faithful
^o his threatening, punish the offense, and at the same time spare the
offender. -- An amazing scene of divine love here opens to our view, which had
been from all eternity hid in the heart of God! -- Notwithstanding Adam and Eve
were thus unhumbled, and did not so much as put up one single petition for
pardon, God immediately passes sentence upon the serpent, and reveals to them a
Savior. --

Ver. 14. And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou have done this,
thou art ^ccursed above all cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon
thy ^elly shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life, i.
e. he should be in subjection, and his power should always be limited and
restrained. His enemies shall lick the dust, says the Psalmist, ver. 15. And I
will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed;
it shall bruise thy head, and thou sh^l^ bruise his heel. --

Before I proceed to the explanation of this verse, I cannot but take notice of
one great mistake, which the author of the Whole Duty of Man is guilty of, in
making this verse contain a covenant between God and Adam, as though God
personally treated with Adam, as before the fall. For, talking of the second
covenant, in his preface concerning caring for the soul, says he, "This second
covenant was made with Adam, and us in him, presently after the fall, and is
contained in these words -- Genesis iii. 15. where God declares the seed of the
woman shall break the serpent's head; and this was made up, as the first was,
of some mercies to be afforded by God, and some duties to be performed by us."
-- This is exceeding false divinity -- For these words are not spoken to Adam
-- they are directed only to the serpent -- Adam and Eve stood by as criminals,
and God could not treat with them, because they had broken his covenant. And it
is so far from being a covenant, wherein "some mercies are to be afforded by
God, and some duties to be performed by us," that here is not a word looking
that way -- It is only a declaration of a free gift of salvation through Jesus
Christ our Lord -- God the Father, and God the Son, had entered into a covenant
concerning the salvation of the elect from all eternity; wherein God the Father
promised, that if the Son would offer his soul a sacrifice for sin, he should
see his seed. Now this is an open revelation of this secret covenant, and
therefore God speaks in the most positive terms, It shall bruise thy head, and
thou shall bruise his heel -- The first Adam God had treated with before -- He
proved false -- God therefore to secure the second covenant from being broken,
puts it into the hands of the second Adam, the Lord from heaven -- Adam, after
the fall, stood no longer as our representative -- He and Eve were only private
persons, as we are, and were only to hold on the declaration of mercy contained
in this promise by faith (as they really did) and by that they were saved -- I
do not say, but we are to believe and obey, if we are everlastingly saved --
Faith and obedience are conditions, if we only mean that they in order go
before our salvation; but I deny that these are proposed by God to Adam, or
that God treats with him in this promise, as he did before the fall under the
covenant of works. For, how could that be, when Adam and Eve were now prisoners
at the bar, without strength to perform any conditions at all* -- The truth is
this -- God as a reward of Christ's sufferings, promised to give the elect
^aith and repentance, in order to bring them to eternal life -- And both these,
and every thing else necessary for their everlasting happiness, are infallibly
secured to them in this promise, as Mr. Boston, an excellent Scots divine*
sweetly and clearly shows, in a book entitled (...) View of the Covenant of
Grace. --

This is, by no means, an unnecessary distinction. It is a matter of great
importance -- For want of knowing this, people have been so long misled -- They
have been taught that they must do so and so, as though they were under a
covenant of works, and then for DOING this, they should be saved. -- This is
plainly the whole drift of the book wrongly entitled, The Whole Du^^ of Man --
Whereas, on the contrary, people should be taught, that the Lord Jesus was the
second Adam, with whom the Father entered into covenant for fallen man -- That
they can now do nothing of or for themselves, and should therefore come to God,
beseeching him to give them faith, by which they shall be enabled to lay hold
on the righteousness of Christ, and that faith they will show forth by their
works, out of love and gratitude to the ever blessed Jesus, their most glorious
Redeemer, for what he has done for their souls: this is a consistent scriptural
scheme; without holding this, we must run into one of these two bad extremes, I
mean Antinomianism on the one hand, or Arminianism on the other -- From both
which may the good Lord deliver us! --

But to proceed: By the seed of the woman, we are here to understand the Lord
Jesus Christ, who, though very God of very God, was for us men and our
salvation, to have a body prepared for him by the Holy Ghost, and to be born of
a woman, who never knew man, and by his obedience and death, make an atonement
for man's transgression, and bring in an everlasting righteousness, work in
them a new nature, and thereby bruise the serpent's head, i. e. destroy his
power and dominion over them -- By the *serpent' (...) seed, we are to
understand the devil and all his children, who should be permitted by God to
tempt and sift his children. -- But, blessed be God, he can reach no further
than the heel. --

It is not to be doubted but Adam and Eve understood this promise in this
sense; for its plain, in the latter part of the chapter, sacrifices were
instituted -- For, from whence should those skins come, but from beasts slain
for sacrifice, of which God made them coats? -- We find also Abel, as well as
Cain, offering sacrifice in the next chapter: and the apostle tells us, he did
it by faith, no doubt in this promise -- And Eve, when Cain was born, said, I
have gotten a man from the LORD, or (as Mr. Henry observes) it may be rendered,
I have gotten a^ man -- THE LORD -- the promised M^ssiah. -- Some further
suppose, that Eve was the first believer, and therefore they translate it thus;
the seed, not of THEE, but of THIS woman, which magnifies the grace of God so
much the more, that she, who was first in the transgression, should be the
first partaker of redemption -- Adam believed also, and was saved -- For, unto
Adam and his wife, did the Lord God make coats of skins, and clothed THEM,
which was a remarkable type of their being clothed with the righteousness of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

This promise was literally fulfilled in the person of our Lord Jesus Christ --
Satan bruised his heel, when he tempted him for forty days together in the
wilderness -- He bruised his heel, when he raised up strong persecution against
him, during the time of his public ministry -- He, in an especial manner,
bruised his heel, when our Lord complained that his soul was exce^^ing
sorrowful, even unto death, and he sweat great drops of blood falling upon the
ground, when praying in the garden. He bruised his heel, when he put it into
the heart of Judas to betray him: -- And he bruised him yet most of all, when
his emissaries nailed him to an accursed tree, and our Lord cried out, My God,
my God! Why* have thou forsaken me? -- Yet, in all this, the blessed Jesus, the
seed of the woman, bruised his accursed head -- For, in that he was tempted, he
was able to succor those that are tempted. By his stripes we are healed. The
chastisement of our peace was upon him. By dying, he destroyed him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil. -- He thereby spoiled principalities and
powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them upon the cross. --

This promise has been, is, and will be fulfilled in the elect of God
considered collectively, as well before as after the coming of our Lord in the
flesh -- For they may be called the seed of the woman. Marvel not, that all
that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. -- In this
promise there is an eternal enmity put between the seed of the woman, and the
seed of the serpent. So that those that are born after the flesh, cannot but
persecute those that are born after the Spirit. This enmity showed itself soon
after this promise was revealed, in Cain's bruising the heel of Abel* It
continued in the church through all the ages before Christ came in the flesh,
as the history of the Bible, and the 11th chapter of the Hebrews plainly show
-- It raged exceedingly after our Lord's ascension, witness the acts of the
apostles, and the history of the primitive Christians. -- It now rages, and
will continue to rage, and show itself, in a greater or less degree, to the end
of time. But let not this dismay us! For, in all this, the seed of the woman is
more than conqueror, and bruises the serpent's head -- Thus the Israelites, the
more they were oppressed, the more they increased. -- Thus it was with the
apostles -- Thus it was with their immediate followers. So that Tertullian
compares the church in his time to a mowed field, the more frequently it is
cut, the more it grows. The blood of the martyrs was always the seed of the
church. And I have often sat down with wonder and delight, and admire how God
has made the very schemes, which his enemies contrived in order to hinder, the
most effectual means to propagate his gospel -- The devil has had so little
success in persecution, that if I did not know, that he and his children,
according to this verse* could not but persecute, I should think he would count
it his strength to sit still. What did he get by persecuting the martyrs in
queen Mary's time? Was not the grace of God exceedingly glorified in their
support? What did he get by persecuting the good old Puritans? Did it not prove
the peopling, of New England? -- Or to come nearer to our own times, What has
he got by putting us out of the synagogues? Has not the word of God, since
that, mightily prevailed? My dear hearers, you must excuse me for enlarging on
this head. God fills my soul generally, when I come to this topic. I can say
with Luther, "If it were not for persecution, I should not understand the
scripture." If Satan should be yet suffered to bruise my heel further, and his
servants should thrust me into prison, I doubt not, but even that would only
tend to the more effectual bruising of his head. I remember a saying of the
then lord Chancellor to the pious Bradford: "Thou have done more hurt, said he,
by thy exhortations in private in prison, than thou did in preaching before
thou wast put in," or words to this effect. The promise of the text is my dally
support. -- I will put enmity between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. --

Further: This promise is also fulfilled, not only in the church in general,
but in every individual believer in particular -- In every believer there are
two seeds, the seed of the woman, and the seed of the serpent -- The flesh
lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh -- It is with the
believer, when quickened with grace in his heart, as it was with Rebeccah, when
she had conceived Esau and Jacob in her womb! She felt a struggling, and began
to be uneasy -- If it be so, says she, why am I thus? -- Thus grace and nature
^^^ugg^^ (if I may so speak) in the womb of a believer's heart -- But, as it
was there said, the elder shall serve the younger; so it is here -- grace in
the end shall get the better of nature -- The seed of the woman shall bruise
the serpent's head. Many of you, perhaps, that have believed in Christ, may
find some particular corruption yet strong, so strong, that you are sometimes
ready to cry out with David, I shall ^all one day by the hand of S^^l. But,
fear not, the promise in the text insures the perseverance and victory of
believers over sin, satan, death and hell. What if indwelling corruption does
yet remain, and the seed of the serpent bruise your heel, in vexing and
disturbing your righteous souls? Fear not, though saint, yet pursue -- You
shall yet bruise the serpent's head. Christ has died for you, and yet a little
while, and he will send death to destroy the very being of sin in (...) Which
brings me (...).

To show the most extensive manner in which the promise of the text shall be
fulfilled, viz. at the final judgment, when the Lord Jesus shall present the
elect to his Father without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, glorified both
in body and soul. --

Then shall the seed of the woman give the last and fatal blow, in bruising the
serpent's head -- Satan, the accuser of the brethren, and all his accursed
seed, shall then ^e cast out, and never suffered to disturb the seed of the
woman any more. Then shall the righteous shine in the kingdom of their Father,
and sit with Christ on thrones, in majesty on high.

Let us therefore not be weary of well-doing, for we shall reap an everlasting
harvest of comfort; if we faint not. Dare, dar^, my brethren in Christ, to
follow the Captain of your salvation, who was made perfect through sufferings
-- The seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpent's head -- Fear not men -- Be
not too much cast down at the deceitfulness of your hearts -- Fear not devils
-- You shall get the victory even over them -- The Lord Jesus has engaged to
make you more than conqueror over all -- Plead with your Savior, plead --
Plead the promise in the text -- Wrestle, with God in prayer -- If it has been
given you to believe; fear not* if it should also be given you to suffer. Be
not any wise terrified by your adversaries -- The King of the church has them
all in a chain -- Be kind to them; pray for them; but fear them not. The Lord
will yet bring back his ark, though at present driven into the wilderness, and
Satan like lightning shall fall from heaven.

Are there any enemies of God here? The promise of the text encourages me to
bid you defiance -- The seed of the woman, the ever-blessed Jesus shall bruise
the serpent's head -- What signifies all your malice -- You are only raging
waves of the sea, foaming out your own shame -- For you, without repentance, is
reserved the blackness of darkness for ever -- The Lord Jesus sits in heaven
ruling over all, and causing all things to work for his childrens' good -- He
laughs you to scorn -- He has you in the utmost decision, and therefore so
will I -- Who are you that persecute the children of the ever-blessed God?
Though a poor stripling, the Lord Jesus, the seed of the woman, will enable, me
to bruise your heads.

My brethren in Christ, I think I do not speak thus in my own strength, but in
the strength of my Redeemer. I know in whom I have believed. I am persuaded he
will keep that safe which I have committed unto him -- He is faithful who has
promised, that the ^eed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head -- May we
all experience a daily completion of this promise, both in the church and in
our hearts, till we come to the church of the firstborn, the spirits of just
men made perfect in the presence and actual fruition of the great God, our
heavenly Father.

To whom with the Son and the Holy Ghost* be ascribed all honor, power, might,
majesty, and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen.

SERMON III.
PERSECUTION EVERY CHRISTIAN'S LOT.
2 TIMOTHY iii. 12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall
suffer persecution.
WHEN our Lord Jesus was pleased to take upon himself the form of a servant,
and go about preaching the kingdom of God, he took all opportunities in public,
and more especially in private, to caution his disciples against seeking great
things for themselves; and also to forwarn them of the many distresses,
afflictions, and persecutions which they must expect to endure and go through
for his name's sake. The great St. Paul, therefore, the author of this epistle,
in this, as in all other things, following the steps of his blessed Master,
takes particular care, among other apostolical admonitions, to warn young
Timothy of the difficulties he must expect to meet with in the course of his
ministry* "This know also," (says he, verse first of this chapter) "that in the
last days perilous times shall come. For men shall be lovers of their
ownselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady,
high-minded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God; having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. For of this sort
are they which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with sins,
led away with diverse lusts; ^ver learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth." -- Now, as Jannes and Jambres (two of the Egyptian
magicians) withstood Moses (by working sham miracles) so do these also resist
the truth; and (notwithstanding they keep up the form of religion are men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But, in order to keep him from
sinning under their opposition, he tells him, that though God, for wise ends,
permitted these false teachers, as he did the magicians, to oppose for some
time, yet they should now proceed no farther. For their folly, says he, shall
be made manifest unto all men, as theirs (the magicians) also was, when they
could not stand before Moses, because of the boil; for the boil was upon the
magicians as well as upon all the Egyptians. And then, to encourage Timothy yet
the more, he propounds to him his own example: "But thou have fully known my
doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering, charity, patience,
persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at
Lystra; what persecutions I endured; But out of them all the Lord delivered
me." And then* lest Timothy might think that this was only the particular case
of Paul: Yea, says he, in the words of the text, and all that will live godly
in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

The words, without considering them as they stand in relation to the context,
contain a necessary and important truth, viz. that persecution is the common
lot of every godly man. This is a hard saying. How few can bear it? I trust
God, (...) the following discourse, will enable me to make it good, by showing,
I. What it is to live godly in Christ Jesus. II. The different kinds of
persecution to which they, who live godly, are exposed. III. Why it is, that
godly men must expect to suffer persecution?


Lastly, We shall apply the whole.

And first, Let us consider what it is to live godly in Christ Jesus: this
supposes, that we are made the righteousness of God in Christ, that we are born
again, and are made one with Christ by a living faith, and a vital union even
as Jesus Christ and the Father are one. Unless we are thus converted, and
transformed by the renewing of our minds, we cannot properly be said to be in
Christ, much less to live godly in him. To be in Christ merely by baptism, and
an outward profession; is not to be in him in the strict sense of the word: No;
they that are in Christ Jesus, are new creatures; old things are passed away,
and all things are become new in their hearts. Their life is hid with Christ in
God; their souls daily feed on the invisible realities of another world. To
live godly in Christ, is to make the divine will, and not our own, the sole
principle of all our thoughts, words and actions; so that, whether we eat or
drink, or whatsoever we do, we do all to the glory of God. Those who live godly
in Christ, may not so much be said to live, as Christ to live in them: he is
their alpha and omega, their first and last, their beginning and end. They are
led by his Spirit, as a child is led by the hand of its Father; and are willing
to follow the Lamb whithersoever he leads them. They hear, know, and obey his
voice. -- Their affections are set on things above. Their hopes are full of
immortality; their citizenship is in heaven. Being born again of God, they
habitually live to, and daily walk with God. They are pure in heart; and, from
a principle of faith in Christ, are holy in all manner of conversation and
godliness.

This is to live godly in Christ Jesus: and hence we may easily learn, why so
few suffer persecution? because so few live godly in Christ Jesus. You may
attend on outward duties; you may live morally in Christ, i. e. you may do (as
they term it) no one any harm, and avoid persecution: but they that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution.

Secondly, What is the meaning of the word persecution, and how many kinds
there are of it, I come now to consider.

The word persecution is derived from a Greek word signifying to pursue, and
generally implies, "pursuing a person for the sake of his goodness, or God's
good will to him." The first kind of it, is that of the heart. We have an early
example of this in that wicked one Cain, who, because the Lord had respect to
Abel and his offering, and not to him and his offering, was very wroth, his
countenance fell, and at length he cruelly slew his envied brother. Thus the
Pharisees hated and persecuted our Lord long before they laid hold on him: and
our Lord mentions being inwardly hated of men, as one kind of persecution his
disciples were to undergo. This heart-enmity (if I may so term it) is the root
of all other kinds of persecution, and is in some degree or other, to be found
in the soul of every* unregenerated man; and numbers are guilty of this
persecution, who never have it in their power to persecute any other way. Nay,
numbers would be carried out actually to put in practice all other degrees of
persecution, was not the name of persecution become odious among mankind, and
did they not hereby run the hazard of losing their reputation. Alas! how many
at the great day, whom we know not now, will be convicted and condemned, that
all their life harbored a secret evil will against Zion! They may now screen
it before men; but God sees the enmity of their hearts, and will judge them as
persecutors at the great and terrible day of judgment!

A second degree of persecution is that of the tongue; out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaks. Many I suppose think it no harm to shoot out
arrows, even bitter words, against the disciples of the Lord: they scatter the
firebrarnds, arrows, and death, saying, "Are we not in sport?" But, however
they may esteem it, in God's account evil-speaking is a high degree of
persecution. Thus Ishmael's mocking Isaac in the Old, is termed persecuting him
in the New Testament. Blessed are ye, says our Lord, when men shall revile you,
and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
name's sake. From whence we may gather, that reviling and speaking all manner
of evil falsely for Christ's sake, is a high degree of persecution. For a good
name, says the wise man, is better than precious ointment, and to many is
dearer than life itself. It is a great breach of the sixth commandment to
slander any one; but to speak evil of and slander the disciples of Christ,
merely because they are his disciples, must be highly provoking in the sight of
God; and such who are guilty of it (without repentance) will find that Jesus
Christ will call them to an account, and punish them for all their ungodly and
hard speeches in a lake of fire and brimstone. This shall be their portion to
drink.

The third and last kind of persecution, is that which expresses itself in
actions; as when wicked men separate the children of God from their company;
blessed are ye, says our Lord, when they shall separate you from their company:
or expose them to church censures. They shall put you out of their synagogues;
threatening and prohibiting them from making an open profession of his religion
or worship; or interdicting ministers for preaching his word, as the high
priests threatened the apostles, and forbad them any more to speak in the name
of Jesus; and Paul breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord: Or when they call them into courts; you shall be called
before governors, says our Lord: Or when they fine, imprison, or punish them,
by confiscation of goods, cruel scourging, and, lastly, death itself.

It would be impossible to enumerate in what various shapes persecution as
appeared. It is a many-headed monster, insatiable as hell, cruel as the grave;
and, what is worse, it generally appears under the cloak of religion. But
cruel, insatiable, and horrid as it is, they that live godly in Christ Jesus,
must expect to suffer and encounter with it in all its forms.

This is what we are to make good under our next general head.

Thirdly, Why is it that godly men must expect to suffer persecution? And,

First, This appears from the whole ten^ur of our Lord's doctrine. We will
begin with his divine sermon on the Mount. Blessed, says he, are they who are
persecuted for righteousness' sake; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. So
that, if our Lord spoke truth, we are not so blessed as to have an interest in
the kingdom of heaven, unless we are or have been persecuted for righteousness'
sake. Nay, our Lord (it is remarkable) employs three verses in this beatitude,
and only one in each of the others; not only to show that it was a thing which
men (as men) are unwilling to believe, but also the necessary consequence of it
upon our being Christians. This is likewise evident from all those passages,
wherein our Lord informs us, that he came upon the earth, not to send peace but
a sword; and that the father-in-law shall be against the mother-in-law, and
that a man's foes shall be those of his household. Passages, which, though
confined by false prophets to the first, I am persuaded will be verified by the
experience of all true Christians in this, and every age of the church. It
would be endless to recount all the places wherein our Lord forewarns his
disciples that they should be called before rulers, and thrust out of
synagogues, nay, that the time would come, wherein men should think they did
God service to kill them. For this reason he so frequently declared, that
unless a man forsake all that he had, and even hated life itself, he could not
be his disciple. And therefore it is worthy our observation, that in that
remarkable passage, wherein our Lord makes such an extensive promise to those
who left all for him, he cautiously inserts persecution. And Jesus answered and
said, Verily I say unto you, there i^ n^ man that has left house, or brethren,
or (...), or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my sake and
the gospel's, but he shall receive (...) hundred fold now in this time; houses
and brethren, and sisters and mothers, and children and lands, with
persecutions; (the word is in the plural number, including all kinds of
persecution) and in the world to come eternal life. He that has ears to hear,
let him hear what Christ says in all these passages, and then confess, that all
who live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

As this is proved from our Lord's doctrine, so it is no less evident from his
life. Follow him from the manger to the cross, and see whether any persecution
was like that which the Son of God the Lord of glory, underwent whilst here on
earth. How was he hated by wicked men? How often would that hatred have excited
them to take hold of him, had it not been for fear of the people? How was he
reviled, counted and called a blasphemer, a wine bibber, a Samaritan, nay, a
devil, and, in one word, had all manner of evil spoken against him falsely?
What contradiction of sinners did he endure against himself? How did men
separate from his company, and were ashamed to walk with him openly? Insomuch
that he once said to his own disciples, Will you also go away? Again, how was
he stoned, thrust out of the synagogues, arraigned as a deceiver of the people,
a seditious and pestilent fellow, an enemy to Ce^ar, and as such scourged,
blindfolded, spit upon, and at length condemned, and nailed to an accursed
tree? Thus was the Master persecuted; thus did the Lord suffer; and the servant
is not above his master, nor the disciple above his Lord: If they have
persecuted me, they will also persecute you, ^aith the blessed Jesus. And
again, every man that ^s perfect, that is, a true Christian, must be as his
m^ster, i. e. suffer as he did. For all these things our Lord has set us an
example, that we should follow his steps: and therefore, God forbid that any
who would live godly in Christ Jesus, should henceforward expect to escape
suffering persecution.

But farther: Not only our Lord's example, but the example of all the saints
that ever lived, evidently demonstrates the truth of the apostle's assertion in
the text. How soon was Abel made a martyr for his religion? How was Isaac
mocked by the son of the bondwoman! And what a large catalogue of suffering
Old Testament saints, have we recorded in the eleventh chapter of the Hebrews!
Read the Acts of the apostles, and see how the Christians were threatened,
stoned, imprisoned, scourged, and persecuted even unto death. Examine
church history in after-ages, and you will find the murder of the innocents by
Herod, was but an earnest of the innocent blood which should be shed for the
name of Jesus. Examine the experience of saints now living on earth; and if it
were possible to consult the spirits of just men made perfect, I am persuaded
each would concur with the apostle in asserting, that all who will live
godly-in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

How can it be otherwise in the very nature of things? Ever since the fall,
there has been an irreconcilable enmity between the feed of the woman and the
seed of the serpent. Wicked men hate God, and therefore, cannot but hate those
who are like him: they hate to be reformed, and therefore must hate and
persecute those who, by a contrary behavior, testify of them, that their deeds
are evil. Besides, pride of heart leads men to persecute the servants of Jesus
Christ. If they commend them, they are afraid of being asked, "Why do you not
follow them?" And therefore because they dare not imitate, though they may
sometimes be even forced to approve their way, yet pride and envy make them
turn persecutors. Hence it is, that as it was formerly, so it is now, and so
will it be to the end of time; he that is born after the flesh, the natural
man, does and will persecute him that is born after the Spirit, the regenerate
man. Because Christians are not of the world, but Christ has chosen them out
of the world, therefore the world will hate them. If it be objected against
this doctrine, "that we now live in a Christian world, and therefore must not
expect such persecution as formerly;" I answer, "All are not Christians that
are called so; and, till the heart is changed, the enmity against God (which is
the root of all persecution) remains," and consequently Christians, falsely so
called, will persecute as well as others. I observed therefore, in the
beginning of this discourse, that Paul mentions those that had a form of
religion, as persons of whom Timothy had need be chiefly aware: for, as our
Lord and his apostles were mostly persecuted by their countrymen the Jews, so
we must expect the like usage from the formalists of our own nation, the
Pharisees, who seem to be religious. For the most horrid and barbarous
persecutions have been carried on by those who have called themselves
Christians; witness the days of queen Mary; and the fines, banishments, and
imprisonments of the children of God in the last century, and the bitter
irreconcilable hatred that appears in thousands who call themselves
Christians, even in the present days wherein we live.

Persons who argue against persecution now, are not sufficiently sensible of
the bitter enmity of the heart of every unregenerate man against God. For my
own part, I am so far from wondering that Christians are persecuted, that I
wonder our streets do not run with the blood of the saints: was men's power
equal to their wills, such a horrid spectacle would soon appear. But,

Persecution is necessary in respect to the godly themselves. If we have not
all manner of evil spoken of us, how can we know whether we love contempt, and
seek only that honor which comes from above? If we have not persecutors, how
can our passive graces be kept in exercise? How can many Christian precepts be
put into practice? How can we love, pray for, and do good to those who
despitefully use us? How can we overcome evil with good? In short, how can we
know we love God better than life itself? St. Paul was sensible of all this,
and therefore so positively and peremptorily asserts, that all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution.

Not that I affirm, "All are persecuted in a like "degree." No: This would be
contrary both to scripture and experience. But though all Christians are not
really called to suffer every kind of persecution, yet all Christi^^s are
liable thereto: and notwithstanding some may live in more peaceful times of the
church than others, yet all Christians, in all ages, will find by their own
experience that, whether they act in a private or public capacity, they must in
some degree or other, suffer persecution.

Here then I would pause, and, lastly, by way of application, exhort all
persons,

First* To stand a while and examine themselves. For, by what has been said,
you may gather one mark, whereby you may judge whether you are Christians or
not. Were you ever persecuted for righteousness' sake? If not, you never yet
lived godly in Christ our Lord. Whatever you may say to the contrary, the
inspired apostle, in the words of the text (the truth of which, I think, I have
sufficiently proved) positively asserts, that "all that will live godly in him,
shall suffer persecution." Not that all who are persecuted are real Christians;
for many sometimes suffer, and are persecuted on other accounts than for
righteousness sake. The great question therefore is, "Whether you are ever
persecuted for living godly?" You may boast (as perhaps you may think) of your
great prudence and sagacity, (and indeed these are excellent things) and glory
because you have not run such lengths and made yourselves so singular, and
liable to such contempt, as some others have. But, alas! this is not a mark of
your being a Christian, but of a Laodicean spirit, neither hot nor cold, and
sit only to be spewed out of the mouth of God. That which you call prudence, is
often only cowardice, dreadful hypocrisy, pride of heart, which makes you dread
contempt, and afraid to give up your reputation for God. You are ashamed of
Christ and his gospel, and in all probability, was he to appear a second time
upon earth, in words as well as works, you would deny him. Awake therefore, all
ye that live only formally in Christ Jesus, and no longer seek that honor
which comes of man. -- I do not desire to court you, but I entreat you to live
godly, and fear not contempt for the sake of Jesus Christ. Beg of God to give
you his Holy Spirit, that you may see through, and discover the latent
hypocrisy of your hearts, and no longer deceive your own souls. Remember you
cannot reconcile two irreconcilable differences, God and Mammon, the
friendship of this world, with the favor of God. Know you not who has told
you, that the "friendship of this world is enmity with God?" If therefore you
are in friendship with the world, notwithstanding all your specious pretenses
to piety, you are at enmity with God: you are only heart-hypocrites, and, "What
is the hope of the hypocrite, when God shall take away his soul?" Let the words
of the text sound an alarm in your ears -- Oh let them sink deep into your
hearts; "yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution."

Secondly, From the words of the text, I would take occasion to speak to those
"who are about to list themselves under the banner of Christ's cross." What say
you? Are you resolved to live godly in Christ Jesus, notwithstanding the
consequence will be, that you must suffer persecution? You are beginning to
build, but have you taken our Lord's advice, to sit down first and count the
cost? Have you well weighed with yourselves that weighty declaration, "he that
loves father or mother more than ME, is not worthy of ME;" and again, "Unless
a man forsake all that he has, he cannot be my disciple?" Perhaps some of you
have great possessions; will not you go away sorrowful, if Christ should
require you to sell all that you have! Others of you again, may be kinsmen, or
some way related, or under obligations to the high priests, or other great
personages, who may be persecuting the church of Christ: what say you? Will
you, with Moses, rather choose to "suffer affliction with the people of God,
than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season?" Perhaps you may say, "My friends
will not oppose me." That is more than you know: in all probability your chief
enemies will be those of your own household. If therefore they should oppose
you, are you willing naked to follow a naked Christ? and to wander about in
sheepskins, and goat skins, in dens and caves of the earth, being afflicted,
destitute, tormented, rather than not be Christ's disciples? You are now all
following with zeal, as Ruth and Orpah did Naomi, and may weep under the word;
but are not your tears crocodile's tears? And when difficulties come, will you
not go back from following your Lord, as Orpah departed from following Naomi;
Have you really the root of grace in your hearts? Or, are you only stony-ground
hearers? You receive the word with joy; but, when persecution arises because of
of the word, will you not be immediately offended? Be not angry with me for
putting these questions to you. I am jealous over you, but it is with a godly
jealousy; For, alas! how many have put their hands to the plough, and
afterward have shamefully looked back? I only deal with you, as our Lord did
with the person that said, "Lord I will follow thee whithersoever thou will.
The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man,
says he, has not where to lay his head." What say you? Are you willing to
endure hardness, and thereby approve yourselves good soldiers of Jesus Christ!
You now come on foot out of the towns and villages to hear the word, and
receive me as a messenger of God: But will you not by and by (...) out, "Away
with him, away with him; it is not fit such a fellow should live upon the
earth?" Perhaps some of you, like I I^zael, may say, "Are we dogs that we
should do this?" But, alas! I have met with many unhappy souls, who have drawn
back unto perdition, and have afterward accounted me their enemy, for dealing
faithfully with them; though once, if it were possible, they would have plucked
out their own eyes, and have given them unto me. Sit down therefore, I beseech
you, and seriously count the cost, and ask yourselves again and again, whether
you count all things but dung and dross, and are willing to suffer the loss of
all things, so that you may win Christ, and be found in him: for you may assure
yourselves, the apostle has not spoken in vain, "All that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution."

Thirdly. The text speaks to you that are patiently suffering for the truth's
sake: "Rejoice and be exceeding glad; great shall be your reward in heaven."
For to you it is given not only to believe, but also to suffer, and perhaps
remarkably too, for the sake of Jesus! This is a mark of your discipleship, an
evidence that you do live godly in Christ Jesus. Fear not therefore, neither be
dismayed. Oh, be not weary and saint in your minds! Jesus, your Lord, your
life, comes and his reward is with him. Though all men forsake you, yet will
not he: No; the Spirit of Christ and of glory shall rest upon you. In patience
therefore, possess your souls. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. Be in
nothing terrified by your adversaries: on their part Christ is evil spoken of;
on your part he is glorified. Be not ashamed of your glory, since others can
glory in their shame. Think it not strange concerning the fiery tria^,
wherewith you are or may be tried. The devil rages, knowing that he has but a
short time to reign. He or his emissaries have no more power than what is given
them from above; God sets them their bounds, which they cannot pass; and the
very hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not; no one shall set upon you
to hurt you, without your heavenly Father's knowledge. Do your earthly friends
and parents forsake you? Are you cast out of the synagogues? The Lord shall
reveal himself to you, as to the man that was born blind. Jesus Christ shall
take you up. If they carry you to prison, and load you with chains, so that the
iron enter into your souls, even there shall Christ send an angel from heaven
to strengthen you, and enable you with Paul and Silas, to sing praises at
midnight. Are you threatened to be thrown into a den of lions, or cast into a
burning fiery furnace, because you will not bow down and worship the beast?
Fear not; the God whom you serve, is able to deliver you: Or, if he should
suffer the flames to devour your bodies, they would only serve as so many fiery
chariots, to carry your souls to God. Thus it was with the martyrs of old; so
that one, when he was burning, cried out, "Come, you Papists, if you want a
miracle, here, behold one! This bed of flames is to me a bed of down." Thus it
was with almost all that suffered in former times; For Jesus, notwithstanding
he withdrew his own divinity from himself, yet has always lifted up the light
of his countenance upon the souls of suffering saints. "Fear not therefore
those that can kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do: but
fear him only, who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell." (...) Dare,
dare, to live godly in Christ Jesus, though you suffer all manner of
persecution. But,

Fourthly, Are there any true ministers of Jesus Christ here? You will not be
offended if I tell you, that the words of the text are in an especial manner,
applicable to you -- St. Paul wrote (...) to Timothy, and we, of all men, that
live godly in Christ Jesus, must expect the severest persecution. -- Satan will
endeavor to bruise our heels, let who will escape -- And it has been the
general way of God's providence, in times of persecution, to permit the
shepherds first to be smitten, before the sheep are scattered -- Let us not
therefore show, that we are only hirelings, who care not for the sheep, but,
like the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls, let us readily lay down our lives
for the sheep -- Whilst others are boasting of their great preferments, let us
rather glory in our great afflictions and persecutions for the sake of Christ.
-- St. Paul now rejoices that he suffered afflictions and persecutions at
Iconium and Lystra. Out of all the Lord delivered him -- Out of all the Lord
will deliver us, and cause us hereafter to sit down with him on thrones, when
he comes to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

I could proceed, but I am conscious in this part of my discourse, I ought more
particularly to speak to myself, knowing that Satan has desired to have me,
that he may sift me as wheat. I know I must (How can it be avoided?) suffer
great things for Christ's Name sake -- Without a spirit of prophecy, we may
easily discern the signs of the times. Persecution is even at the doors -- The
tabernacle of the Lord is already driven into the wilderness -- The ark of the
Lord is fallen into the unhallowed hands of uncircumcised P^^istines. They have
long since put us out of their synagogues, and high p^^^ts have been calling on
civil magistrates to exe^t their authority against the disciples of the Lord.
-- Men in power have been breathing ou^ threatenings -- We may easily guess what
will follow, imprisonment and slaughter -- The storm has been gathering some
time -- It must break shortly. Perhaps it will fall on me first.

Brethren therefore, whether in the ministry or not, I beseech you, pray for
me, that I may never suffer justly, as an evil doer, but only for righteousness
sake -- Oh! Pray that I may not deny my Lord in any wise, but that I may
joyfully follow him, both to prison and to death, if he is pleased to call me
to feal his truths with my blood -- Be not ashamed of Christ, or of his gospel,
though I should become a prisoner of the Lord -- Though I am bound, the word of
God will not be bound -- No, an open, an effectual door is opened for preaching
the everlasting gospel, and men or devils shall never be able to prevail
against it -- Only pray, that whether it be in life or death, Christ may be
glorified in me. -- Then I shall rejoice, yea, and will rejoice.

And now, to whom shall I address myself next?

Fifthly, To those, "who persecute their neighbors for living godly in Christ
Jesus." But what shall I say to you? Howl and weep for the miseries that shall
come upon you -- For a little while the Lord permits you to ride over the heads
of his people, but by and by, death will arrest you, judgment will find you,
and Jesus Christ shall put a question to you, which will strike you dumb. "Why
persecuted you ME?" -- You may p^ead your laws and your canons, and pretend
what you do is out of zeal for God, but God shall discover the cursed hypocrisy
and serpentine enmity of your hearts, and give you over to the tormentors -- It
is well, if in this life, God does not set some mark upon you -- He pleaded the
cause of Naboth, when innocently condemned for blaspheming against God and the
King -- And our Lord sent forth his armies, and destroyed the city of those who
killed the prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto them.

If you have a mind therefore to fill up the measure of your iniquities, go on,
persecute and despise the disciples of the Lord: but know, that, for all these
things, God shall bring you into judgment. Nay, those you now persecute, shall
be in part your judges, and sit on the right hand of the Majesty on High,
whilst you are dragged by infernal spirits into a lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, and the smoke of your torment shall be ascending up for ever and
ever. Lay down therefore, ye rebels, your arms against the Most High God, and
no longer persecute those who live godly in Christ Jesus. The Lord will plead,
the Lord will avenge their cause. You may be permitted to bruise their heels,
yet in the end they shall bruise your accursed heads. I speak not this, as
though I were afraid of you; for I know in whom I have believed: Only out of
pure love I warn you, and because I know not but Jesus Christ may make some of
you vessels of mercy, and snatch you, even you persecutors, as firebrarnds out
of the fire. Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even
persecutors, the worst of sinners: his righteousness is sufficient for them;
his spirit is able to purify and change their hearts. He once converted Saul:
may the same God magnify his power, in converting all those who are causing the
god^y in Christ Jesus, as much as in them ^ies, to to suffer persecution! The
Lord be with you all. Amen.

SERMON IV.
ABRAHAM'S OFFERING UP HIS SON ISAAC.
GENESIS xxii. 12. And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do
thou any thing unto him; for now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have
not withheld thy son, thine only son from me.
THE great Apostle Paul, in one of his epistles, informs us, that whatsover was
written aforetime was written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the holy scripture might have hope. And as without faith it is
impossible to please God, or to be accepted in Jesus, the Son of his love; we
may be assured, that whatever instances of a more than common faith are
recorded in the book of God* they were more immediately designed by the Holy
Spirit for our learning and imitation, upon whom the ends of the world are
come. For this ^eason, the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, in the
eleventh chapter, mentions a noble catalogue of Old Testament saints and
martyrs, "who subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, stopped the mouths of
lions, etc. and are gone before us to inherit the promises." A sufficient
confutation, I think, of their error, who lightly esteem the Old Testament
saints, and would not have them mentioned to Christians, as persons whose faith
and patience we are called upon more immediately to follow. If this was true,
the apostle would never have produced such a cloud of witnesses out of the Old
Testament, to excite the Christians of the first, and consequently purest age
of the church, to continue steadfast and unmovable in the profession of their
faith. Amidst this catalogue of saints, methinks, the patriarch Abraham shines
the brightest, and differs from the others, as one star differs from another
star in glory; for he shone with such distinguished luster, that he was called
the friend of God, the father of the faithful; and those who believe on Christ,
are said to be sons and daughters of, and to be blessed with, faithful Abraham.
Many trials of his faith did God send this great and good man, after he had
commanded him to get out from his country, and from his kindred, unto a land
which he should show him; but the last was the most severe of all, I mean, that
of offering up his only son. This, by the divine assistance, I propose to make
the subject of your present meditation, and, by way of conclusion, to draw some
practical inferences, as God shall enable me, from this instructive story.

The sacred penman begins the narrative thus, verse 1. And it came to pass
after these things, God did tempt Abraham -- After these things, that is, after
he had underwent many ^evere trials before, after he was old, full of days, and
might flatter himself perhaps that the troubles and toils of life were now
finished -- After these things God did tempt Abraham -- Christian, you know not
what trials you may meet with before you die -- Nothwithstanding you may have
suffered, and been tried much already, yet, it may be, a greater measure is
still behind, which you are to fill up -- Be not high-minded, but fear -- Our
last trials, in all probability, will be the greatest -- And we can never say
our warfare is accomplished, or our trials finished, till we (...) down our
heads, and give up the ghost -- And it came to pass, after these things, that
God did tempt Abraham.

God did tempt Abraham -- But can the scripture contradict itself? Does not St.
James tell us, That God tempts no man? And God does tempt no man to evil, or on
purpose to draw him into sin. For when a man is thus tempted, he is drawn away
of his own heart's lust, and enticed -- But in another sense God may be said to
tempt -- I mean to try his servants, and in this sense we are to understand
that passage of St. Matthew, where we are told, that Jesus was led by the
Spirit (the good spirit) into the wilderness, to be tempted of the devil -- And
our Lord, in that excellent form of prayer which he has been pleased to
prescribe us, does not require us to pray, that we may not absolutely be led
into temptation, but delivered from the evil of it -- Whereby we may plainly
infer, that God sees it fit sometimes to lead us into temptation, that is, to
bring us into such circumstances as will try our says, and other Christ^an
graces -- In this sense we are to understand the expression before us -- God
did tempt or try Abraham.

How God was pleased to reveal his will at this time to his faithful servant,
whether by the Shechinah, or Divine appearance, or by a small still voice, as
he spoke to Elijah, or by a whisper, like that of the Spirit to Philip, when he
commanded him to join himself to the Eunuch's chariot, we are not told, nor is
it material to inquire. It is enough that we are informed, God said unto him,
Abraham; and that Abraham knew it was the voice of God: for^ he said, behold,
here I am." O what a holy familiarity (If I may so speak) is there between God
and those holy souls that are united to him by faith in Christ Jesus! God says,
Abraham; and Abraham said (it should seem without the least surprise) "Behold,
here I am." Being reconciled to God by the death and obedience of Christ, which
he rejoiced in, and saw by faith afar off; he did not, like guilty Adam, seek
the trees of the garden to hide himself from, but takes pleasure in conversing
with God, and talks with him, as a man talks with his friend. O that
CHRIST-less sinners knew what it is to have fellowship with the Father and the
Son! They would envy the happiness of saints, and count it all joy to be termed
enthusiasts and fools for Christ's sake.

But what does God say unto Abraham; Ver. 2. "Take now thy son, thine only son
Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and offer him
there for a burnt-offering upon one of the mountains which I shall tell thee
of."

Every word deserves our particular observation. Whatever he was to do, he must
do it now, immediately, without conferring with flesh and blood. But what must
he do? Take now thy son. Had God said, take now a firstling, or choicest lamb
or beast of thy flock, and offer it up for a burnt-offering, it would not have
appeared so ghastly; but for God to say, "Take now thy son, and offer him up
for a burnt-offering," one would have imagined, was enough to stagger the
strongest faith. But this is not all: It must not only be a son, but thine only
son Isaac, whom thou love. If it must be a son, and not a b^ast, that must be
offered, why will not Ishmael do, the son of the bondwoman? No, it must be his
only son, the heir of all, his Isaac, by interpretation laughter, the son of
his old age, in whom his soul delighed; whom thou love, says God, in whose
life his own was wrapped up: And this son, this only son, this Isaac, the son
of his love, must be taken now, even now without delay, and be offered up by
his own father, for a burnt offering, upon one of the mountains of the which
God would tell him.

Well might the apostle, speaking of this man of God, say, that against hope he
believed in hope, and, being strong in faith, gave glory to God: For, had he
not been blessed with faith which man never before had, he must have refused to
comply with this severe command. For how many arguments might nature suggest,
to prove that such a command could never come from God, or to excuse himself
from obeying it? "What! (might the good man have said) butcher my child! it is
contrary to the very law of nature: Much more to butcher my dear son Isaac, in
whose seed God himself has assured me, that all the families of the earth shall
be blessed. But supposing I could give up my own affections, and be willing to
part with him, though I love him so dearly, yet, if I murder him, what will
become of God's promise? Besides I am now like a city built upon a hill; I
shine as a light in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
generation: How then shall I cause God's name to be blasphemed, how shall I
become a byword among the heathen, if they hear that I have committed a crime
which they abhor! But, above all, what will Sarah my wife say? How can I ever
return to her again, after I have imbrued my hands in my dear child's blood? O
that God would pardon me in this thing, or take my life in the place of my
son's!" Thus, I say, Abraham might have argued, and that too seemingly with
great reason, against complying with the divine command. But, as before by
faith he considered not the deadness of Sarah's womb, when she was past age,
but believed on him, who said, "Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed;"
so now being convinced that the same God spoke to, and commanded him to offer
up that son, and knowing that God was able to raise him from the dead, without
delay he obeys the heavenly call.

O that unbelievers would learn of faithful Abraham, and believe whatever is
revealed from God, though they cannot fully comprehend it! Abraham knew God
commanded him to offer up his son, and therefore believed, notwithstanding
carnal reasoning might suggest many objections. We have sufficient testimony,
that God has spoken to us by his Son; why should we not also believe, though
many things in the New Testament are above our reason? For, where reason ends,
faith begins. And, however infidels may style themselves reasoners, of all men
they are the most unreasonable: For is it not contrary to all reason, to
measure an infinite by a finite understanding, or think to find out the
mysteries of godliness to perfection?

But to return to the patriarch Abraham: We observed before what plausible
objections he might have made; but he answered not a single word: No, without
replying against his Maker, we are told, ver. 3. that "Abraham rose up early in
the morning, and saddled his ass, and took two of his young men with him, and
Isaac his son, and clave the wood for the burnt-offering, and rose up and went
unto the place of which God had told him."

From this verse we may gather, that God spoke to Abraham in a dream, or vision
of the night: For it is said, he rose up early. Perhaps it was near the fourth
watch of the night, just before break of day, when God said, Take now thy son;
and Abraham rises up early to do so; as I doubt not but he used to rise early
to offer up his morning sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. It is often
remarked of people in the Old Testament, that they rose early in the morning;
and particularly of our Lord in the New, that he rose a great while before day
to pray. The morning befriends devotion; and if people cannot use so much
self-denial as to rise early to pray, I know not how they will be able to die
at a stake (if called to it) for Jesus Christ.

The humility, as well as piety of the patriarch, is observable: He saddled his
own ass (great men should be humble;) and to show his sincerity, though he took
two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, yet he keeps his design as a
secret from them all: Nay, he does not so much as tell Sarah his wife: For he
knew not but she might be a snare unto him in this affair; and, as R^^ekah
afterward, on another occasion, advised Jacob to flee, so Sarah also might
persuade Isaac to hide himself; or the young men, had they known of it, might
have forced him away, as in after-ages the soldiers rescued Jonathan out of the
hands of Soul. But Abraham sought no such evasion, and therefore, like an
Israelite indeed, in whom there was no guile, he himself resolutely "clave the
wood for the burnt-offering, rose up and went unto the place of which God had
told him." In the second verse, God commanded him to offer up his son upon one
of the mountains which he would tell him of. He commanded him to offer his son
up, but would not then directly tell him the place where: This was to keep him
dependent and watching unto prayer: For there is nothing like being kept waiting
upon God; and, if we do, assuredly God will reveal himself unto us yet further
in his own time. Let us practice what we know, follow providence so far as we
can see already; and what we know not, what we see not as yet, let us only be
found in the way of duty, and the Lord will reveal even that unto us. Abraham
knew not directly where he was to offer up his son; but he rises up and sets
forward, and behold now God shows him; and he went to the place of which God
had told him. Let us go and do likewise.

Ver. 4. Then on the third day, Abraham lif^ up his eyes, and saw the place
afar off.

So that the place, of which God had told him, was no less than three days
journey distant from the place where God first appeared to him, and commanded
him to take his son. Was not this to try his faith, and to let him see that
what he did, was not merely from a sudden pang of devotion, but a matter of
choice and deliberation? But who can tell what the aged patriarch felt during
these three days? Strong as he was in faith, I am persuaded his bowels often
yearned over his dear son Isaac. Methinks I see the good old man walking with
his dear child in his hand, and now and then looking upon him, loving him, and
then turning aside to weep. And perhaps, sometimes he stays a little behind to
pour out his heart before God; for he had no mortal to tell his case to. Then,
methinks, I see him join his son and servants again, and talking to them of the
things pertaining to the kingdom of God, as they walked by the way. At length,
on the third day, he lift up his eyes and saw the place afar off. And, to show
that he was yet sincerely resolved to do whatsover the Lord required of him, he
even now will not discover his design to his servants, but said, ver. 5. to his
young men (as we should say to our worldly thoughts when about to tread the
courts of the Lord's house) "abide you here with the ass; and I and the lad
will go up yonder and worship, and come again to you." This was a sufficient
reason for their staying behind; (...) it being their master's custom to go
frequently to worship, they could have no suspicion of what he was going about.
And by Abraham's saying, that he and the lad would come again, I am apt to
think he believed God would raise him from the dead, if so be he permitted him
to offer his child up for a burnt-offering. However that be, he is yet resolved
to obey God to the uttermost; and therefore.

Ver. 6. "Abraham took the wood of the burnt-offering, and laid it upon Isaac
his son; and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife, and they went both of
them together." Little did Isaac think that he was to be offered on that very
wood which he was carrying upon his shoulders; and therefore, ver. 7. Isaac
innocently, and with a holy freedom (for good men should not keep their
children at too great a distance) spoke unto Abraham his father, and said, My
father; and he (with equal affection and holy condescension) said, Here am I,
my son^ And to show how careful Abraham had been (as all Christian parents
ought to be) to instruct his Isaac how to sacrifice to God, like a youth
trained up in the way wherein he should go; Isaac said, Behold the fire and the
wood; but where is the lamb for a burnt-offering? How beautiful is early piety!
How amiable, to hear young people ask questions about sacrificing to God in an
acceptable way! Isaac knew very well that a lamb was wanting, and that a lamb
was necessary for a proper sacrifice: Behold the fire and the wood; but where
is the lamb for a (...)-offering? Young men and maidens, learn of him.

Hitherto, it is plain, Isaac knew nothing of his father's design: But I
believe, by what his father said in answer to his question, that now was the
time Abraham revealed it unto him.

Verse 8. "And Abraham said, my son, God will provide himself a lamb for a
burnt-offering." Some think that Abraham by faith saw the Lord Jesus afar off,
and here spoke prophetically of that Lamb of God already slain in decree, and
hereafter to be actually offered up for sinners. This was a lamb of God's
providing indeed (we dared not have thought of it) to satisfy his own justice,
and to render him just in justifying the ungodly. What is all our fire and
wood, the best preparation and performances we can make or present unless God
had provided himself this Lamb for a burnt offering? He could not away with
them. The words will well bear this interpretation. But, whatever Abraham might
intend. I cannot but think he here made an application, and acquainted his son
of God's dealing with his soul; and at length, with tears in his eyes, and the
utmost affection in his heart, cried out, "Thou art to be the lamb, my son; God
has commanded me to provide thee for a burnt offering, and to offer thee upon a
mountain which we are now ascending." And, as it appears from a subsequent
verse, Isaac, convinced that it was the divine will, made no resistance at all;
for it is said, "they went both of them together;" and again, verse 9, when we
are told that Abraham bound Isaac, we do not hear of his complaining or
endeavoring to escape, which he might have done, being (as some think) near
thirty years of age, and it is plain, capable enough for carrying wood enough
for a burnt-offering. But he was partaker of the like precious faith with his
aged father, and therefore is as willing to be offered, as Abraham is to offer
him: and so they went both of them together.

Verse 6. At length "they came to the place of which God had told Abraham. He
built an altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and
laid him on the altar upon the wood."

And here let us pause awhile, and by faith take a view of the place where the
father has laid him. I doubt not but the blessed angels hovered round the altar
and ^ang, Glory be to God in the highest, for giving such faith to man. Come,
all ye tenderhearted parents, who know what it is to look over a dying child:
Fancy* that you saw the altar erected before you, and the wood laid in order,
and the beloved Isaac bound upon it: Fancy that you saw the aged parent
standing by weeping (for why may we not suppose that Abraham wept, since Jesus
himself wept at the grave of Lazarus?) O what pious, endearing expressions
passed now alternately between the father and the son! Josephus records a
pathetic speech made by each, whether genuine I know not but methinks I see the
tears trickle down the patriarch Abraham's cheeks; and out of the abundance of
the heart, he cries, Adieu, adieu, my son; the Lord gave thee to me, and the
Lord calls thee away; blessed be the name of the Lord: adieu, my Isaac, my only
son, whom I love as my own soul; adieu, adieu. I see Isaac at the same time
meekly resigning himself into his heavenly Father's hands, and praying to the
Most High to strengthen his earthly parent to strike the stroke. But why do I
attempt to describe what either son or father felt? It is impossible: we may
indeed form some faint idea of, but shall never fully comprehend it, till we
come and ^it down with them in the kingdom of heaven, and hear them tell the
pleasing story over again -- Hasten, O Lord, that blessed time! O let thy
kingdom come!

And now, ver. 10. The fatal blow is going to be given. "And Abraham stretched
forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son." But* do you not think he
intended to turn away his head, when he gave the blow? Nay, why may we not
suppose he sometimes drew his hand in, after it was stretched out, willing to
take another last farewell of his beloved Isaac, and desirous to defer it a
little, though resolved at last to strike home? Be that as it will, his arm is
now stretched out, the knife is in his hand, and he is about to put it to his
dear son's throat.

But sing, O heavens! and rejoice, O earth! Man's extremity is God's
opportunity: for behold, just as the knife, in all probability, was near his
throat, ver. 11. "the angel of the Lord, (or rather, the Lord of angels, Jesus
Christ, the angel of the everlasting covenant) called unto him (probably in a
very audible manner) from heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham.* (The word is
doubled, to engage his attention; and perhaps the suddenness of the call made
him draw back his hand, just as he was going to strike his son) And Abraham
said, Here am I."

And he said, verse 12. "Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do thou any
thing unto him: for now know I that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
withheld thy son, thine only son from me."

Here then it was that Abraham received his son Isaac from the dead in a
figure. He was in effect offered upon the altar, and God looked upon him as
offered and given unto him. Now it was that Abraham's faith, being tried, was
found more precious than gold purified seven times in the fire. Now as a reward
of grace, though not of debt, for this signal act of obedience, by an oath, God
gives and confirms the promise, "that in his seed all the nations of the earth
should be blessed," verse 17, 18. With what comfort may we suppose the good old
man and his son went down from the mount, and returned unto the young men! With
what joy we imagine he went home, and related all that had passed to Sarah! And
above all, with what triumph is he exulting now in the paradise of God, and
adoring rich, free, distinguishing, electing, everlasting love, which alone
made him to differ from the rest of mankind, and rendered him worthy of that
title which he will have so long as the sun and the moon endure: "The father of
the faithful!"

But let us now draw our eyes from the creature, and do what Abraham, if he was
present, would direct to; I mean, fix them on the Creator, God blessed for
evermore.

I see your hearts affected, I see your eyes weep, (and indeed, who can refrain
weeping at the relation of such a story?) But, behold, I show you a mystery hid
under the sacrifice of Abraham's only son, which, unless your hearts are
hardened, must cause you to weep tears of love, and that plentifully too. I
would willingly hope you even prevent me here, and are ready to say, "it is the
love of God, in giving Jesus Christ to die for our sins. Yes, that is it." And
yet perhaps you find your hearts at the mentioning of this, not so much
affected. Let this convince you, that we are fallen creatures, and that we do
not love God or Christ as we ought to do: for, if you admire Abraham offering
up his Isaac, how much more ought you to extol, magnify, and adore the love of
God, who so loved the world, as to give his only begotten Son, Christ Jesus our
Lord, "that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting
life?" May we not well cry out* Now know we, O Lord; that thou have loved (...)
since thou have not withheld thy Son, thine only son from us? Abraham was God's
creature, (and God was Abraham's friend, and therefore under the highest
obligation to surrender up his Isaac. But O stupendous love (...) Whilst we
were his enemies, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law,
that he might become a curse for us. O the freeness, as well as the infinity,
of the love of God our Father! It is unsearchable; I am lost in contemplating
it; it is past finding out* Think, O believers, think of the love of God, in
giving Jesus Christ to be a propitiation for our sins. And when you hear how
Abraham built an altar, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son,
and laid him on the altar upon the wood; think how your heavenly Father bound
Jesus Christ his only Son, and offered him upon the altar of his justice, and
laid (...) on him the iniquities of us all. When you (...) of Abraham's
stretching forth his hand to slay his son, think, O think, how God actually
suffered his Son to be slain, that we might live for evermore. Do you read of
Isaac c^rrying the wood upon his shoulders, upon which he was to be offered?
Let this lead you to Mount Calvary, (this very mount of Moriah where Isaac was
offered, as some think) and take a view of the antitype Jesus Christ, that Son
of God, bearing and ready to sink under the weight of that cross on which he
was to hang for us. Do you admire Isaac so freely consenting to die, though a
creature, and therefore obliged to go when God called? O do not forget to
admire infinitely more the dear Lord Jesus, that promised seed, who willingly
said, "(...) I come," though under no obligation so to do, "good why will," to
obey and die for men, O (...) of you weep just now, when I bid you fancy (...)
you saw the altar, and the wood laid in order, and Isaac laid bound on the
altar? Look up by faith, behold the blessed Jesus, our all glorious Immanuel,
not bound, but nailed on an accursed tree: see how he hangs, crowned with
thorns, and had in derision of all that are round about him: see how the thorns
pierce him, and how the blood in purple streams trickles down his sacred
temples! Hark how the God of nature groans! See how he bows his head, and at
length humanity gives up the ghost! Isaac is saved, but Jesus, the God of
Isaac, dies; a ram is offered up in Isaac's room, but Jesus has no substitute;
Jesus must bleed, Jesus must die: God the Father provided this Lamb for himself
from all eternity. He must be offered in time, or man must be damned for
evermore. And now where are all your tears? Shall I say, refrain your voice
from weeping? No, rather let me exhort you to look to him* whom you have
pierced, and mourn, as a woman mourns for her firstborn: for we have been
the betrayers, we have been the murderers of this Lord of glory; and shall we
not bewail those sins, which brought the blessed Jesus to the accursed tree?
Having so much done, so much suffered for us, so much forgiven, shall we not
love much? O! let us love him with all our hearts, and minds, and strength, and
glorify him in our souls and bodies; for they are his. Which leads me to a
second inference I shall draw from the foregoing discourse.

From hence we may learn the nature of true justifying faith. Whoever
understands and preaches the truth as it is in Jesus, must acknowledge, that
salvation is God's free gift, and (...) saved, not by any or all the works of
(...) which we have done or can do; no; we can neither wholly nor in part
justify ourselves in the sight of God. The Lord Jesus Christ is our
righteousness; and if we are accepted with God, it must be only in and through
the personal righteousness, the active and passive obedience of Jesus Christ
his beloved Son. This righteousness must be imputed, or counted over to us, and
applied by faith to our hearts, or else we can in no wise be justified in God's
sight: and that very moment a sinner is enabled to lay hold on Christ's
righteousness by faith, he is freely justified from all his sins, and shall
never enter into condemnation, notwithstanding he was a fire brand of hell
before. Thus it was that Abraham was justified before he did any good work: he
was enabled to believe on the Lord Christ; it was accounted to him (...)
righteousness; that is, Christ's righteousness was made over to him, and so
accounted his. This, this is gospel; this is the only way of finding acceptance
with God: good works have nothing to do with our justification in his sight. We
are justified by faith alone, as faith the article of our church; agreeable to
which the apostle Paul says, "By grace ye are saved, through faith; and that
not of yourselves; it is the gift of God." Notwithstanding good works have
their proper place: they justify our faith, though not our persons; they follow
it, and evidence our justification in the sight of men. Hence it is that the
apostle James asks, was not Abraham justified by works (alluding no doubt to
the story on which we have been discoursing) that is, did he not prove he was
in a justified state, because his faith was productive of good works? This
declarative justification in the sight of men, is what is directly to be
understood in the words of the text: "Now know I," says God, "that thou fear
me, since thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son from me." Not but that
God knew it before; but this is spoken in condescension to our weak capacities,
and plainly shows, that his offering up (...) son was accepted with God, as an
evidence of the sincerity of his faith, and for this, was left on record to
future ages. Hence then you may learn, whether you are blessed with, and are
sons and daughters of faithful Abraham. You say you believe; you talk of free
grace, and free justification: you do well; the devils also believe and
tremble. But has the faith which you pretend to, influenced your hearts,
renewed your souls, and, like Abraham's, worked by love? Are your affections,
like his, set on things above? Are you heavenly-minded, and, like him, do you
confess yourselves strangers and pilgrims on the earth? In short, has your
faith enabled you to overcome the world, and strengthened you to give up your
Isaacs, your laughter, your most beloved lusts, friends, pleasures, and profits
for God? If so, take the comfort of it; for justly may you say, "We know
assuredly, that we do fear and love God, or rather are loved of him." But if
you are only talking believers, have only a faith of the head, and never felt
the power of it in your hearts, however you may bolster yourselves up, and say,
"we have Abraham for our father, or Christ is our Savior;" unless you get a
faith of the heart, a faith working by love, you shall never sit with Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, or Jesus Christ in the kingdom of heaven.

But I must draw one more inference, and with that I shall conclude.

Learn, O saints! from what has been said, to sit loose to all your worldly
comforts; and stand ready prepared to part with every thing, when God shall
require it at your hand. Some of you perhaps may have friends, who are to you
as your own souls, and others may have children, in whose lives your own lives
are bound up: all I believe have their Isaacs, their particular delights of
some kind or other. Labor, for Christ's sake, labor, ye sons and daughters of
Abraham, to resign them, daily in affection to God, that, when he shall require
you really to sacrifice them, you may not confer with flesh and blood, any more
th^^ the blessed patriarch now before us. And as for you that have been in any
measure tried like unto him, let his example encourage and comfort you.
Remember, Abraham your father was tried so before you: think, O think, of the
happiness he (...) on joys, and how he is incessantly thanking God so tempting
and trying him when here below. (...) up often by the eye of faith, and see him
sitting with his dearly beloved Isaac in the world of spirits. Remember, it
will be but a little while, and you shall sit with them also, and tell one
another what God has done for your souls. There I hope to sit with you, and
hear this story of his offering up his son from his own mouth, and to praise,
the Lamb that sits upon the throne, for what he has done for all our souls,
for ever and ever.

SERMON V.
READINESS CONVERSION.
ACTS ix. 22. But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews
which dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ.
IT is an undoubted truth, however it may seem a paradox to natural men, that
"whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution." And
therefore it is very remarkable, that our blessed Lord, in his glorious sermon
on the Mount, after he had been pronouncing those blessed, who were poor in
spirit, meek, pure in heart, and such like, immediately adds (and spends no
less than three verses in this beatitude) "Blessed are they who are persecuted
for righteousness sake." No one ever was, or ever will be endowed with the
forementioned graces in any degree, but he will be persecuted for it in a
measure. There is an ir^^concileable enmity between the seed of the woman, and
the seed of the serpent. And if we are not of the world, but show by our fruits
that we are of the number of those whom Jesus Christ has chosen out of the
world, for that very reason the world will hate us. As this is true of every
particular Christian, so it is true of every Christian church in general. For
some years past we have heard but little of a public persecution: why! Because
but little of the power of godliness has prevailed amongst all denominations.
The strong man armed has had full possession of most professors' hearts, and
therefore he has let them rest in a false peace. But we may assure ourselves,
when Jesus Christ begins to gather in his elect in any remarkable manner, and
opens an effectual door for preaching the everlasting gospel, persecution will
flame out, and Satan and his emissaries will do their utmost (though all in
vain) to stop the work of God. Thus it was in the first ages; thus it is in our
days, and thus it will be till time shall be no more.

Christians, and Christian churches must then expect enemies. Our chief concern
should be, to learn how to behave toward them in a Christian manner: for
unless we take good heed to ourselves, we shall embitter our spirits, and act
unbecoming the followers of the Lord, "who, when he was reviled, reviled not
again* when he suffered, threatened not; and, as a lamb before his shearers is
dumb; so opened he not his mouth." But what motive shall w^ make use of to
bring ourselves to this blessed Lamb-like temper? Next to the immediate
operation of the Holy Spirit upon our hearts, I know of no consideration more
conducive to teach us long-suffering toward our most bitter persecutors; than
this, "That, for all that we know to the contrary, some of those very persons,
who are now persecuting, may be chosen from all eternity by God, and hereafter
called in time, to edify and build up the church of Christ."

The persecutor Sa^l* mentioned in the words of the text (and whose conversion
God willing, I propose to treat on in the following discourse) is a noble
instance of this kind.

I say, a persecutor, and that a bloody one: for see how he is introduced in
the beginning of this chapter; "and Saul yet breathing out threatenings and
slaughter against the disciples of our Lord, went unto the high priest, and
desired of him letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of
THIS WAY, whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound to
Jerusalem."

"And Saul yet breathing out." This implies that he had been a persecutor
before. To prove which, we need only look back to the seventh chapter, where we
shall find him so very remarkably active at Stephen's death, that the
"witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose name was Saul."
He seems, though young to be in some authority. Perhaps, for his zeal against
the Christians, he was preferred in the church, and was allowed to sit in the
great council or sanhedrim; for we are told, chap. viii. ver. I. "That Saul was
consenting unto his death;" and again, at ver. 3. he is brought in as exceeding
all in his opposition; for thus speaks the evangelist, "as for Saul, he made
havoc of the church, entering into every house, and haling men and women,
committed them to prison." One would have imagined, that this should have
satisfied; at least abated the fury of this young zealot. No: being exceedingly
mad against them, as he himself informs Agrippa, and having made havoc of all
in Jerusalem, he now is resolved to persecute the disciples of the Lord, even
to strange cities; and therefore yet breathing out threatening. "Breathing
out." The words are very emphatical, and expressive of his bitter enmity. It
was a natural to him now to threaten the Christians, as it was for him to
breathe: he could scarce speak, but it was some threatenings against them. Nay,
he not only breathed out threatenings, but slaughters also (and those who
threaten, would also slaughter, if it were in their power) against the
disciples of the Lord. Insatiable therefore as hell, finding he could not
refute or stop the Christians by force of argument, he is resolved to do it by
force of arms; and therefore went to the high priest (for there never was a
persecution yet without a high priest at the head of it) and desired of him
letters, issued out of his spiritual court, to the synagogues or ecclesiastical
courts at Damascus, giving him authority, "that if he found any of this way,
whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem" -- I
suppose to be arraigned and condemned in the high priest's court. Observe how
he speaks of the Christians. Luke, who wrote the Acts, calls them disciples of
the Lord, and Saul styles them men and women of this way. I doubt not but he
represented them as a company of upstart enthusiasts, that had lately gotten
into a new method or way of living; that would not be content with the
temple-service, but they must he righteous overmuch, and have their private
meetings or conventicles; and break bread, as they called it, from house to
house, to the great disturbance of the established clergy, and to the utter
subversion of all order and decency. I do not ^ear that the high priest makes
any objection: No, he was as willing to grant letters, as Saul was to ask them;
and wonderfully pleased within himself, to find he had such an active zealot to
employ against the Christians.

Well then, a judicial process is immediately issued out, with the high
priest's seal affixed to it. And now methinks I see the young persecutor finely
equipped, and pleasing himself with thoughts how triumphantly he should ride
back with the men and women of this way, dragging after him to Jerusalem.

What a condition may we imagine the poor disciples at Damascus were in at this
time! No doubt they had heard of S^ul's imprisoning and making havoc of the
saints at Jerusalem, and we may well suppose were apprised of his design
against them. I am persuaded this was a growing, because a trying time with
these dear people. O how did they wrestle with God in prayer, beseeching him
either to deliver them from, or give them grace sufficient to enable them to
bear up under the fury of their persecutors? The high priest doubtless with the
rest of his reverend brethren, flattered themselves, that they should now put
an effectual stop to this growing heresy, and waited with impatience for Readiness
return.

But, "He that sits in heaven laughs them to scorn, the Lord has them in
derision^" And therefore, ver. 3. "As Saul journeyed, and came even near unto
Damascus," perhaps to the very gates (our Lord permitting this, to try the
faith of his disciples, and more conspicuously to baffle the designs of his
enemies) "suddenly at midday, as he acquaints Agrippa) there shined round about
him a light from heaven," a light brighter than the sun; "and he fell to the
earth (why not into hell?) and heard a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?" The word is doubled, Saul, Saul: like that of our Lord to
Martha; Martha, Martha; or the prophet, O earth, earth, earth! Perhaps these
words came like thunder to his soul. That they were spoken audibly, we are
assured from verse 7. His companions heard the voice. Our Lord now arrests the
persecuting zealot, calling him by name; for the word never does us good, till
we find it spoken to us in particular. "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou ME?"
Put the emphasis upon the word why, what evil have I done? Put it upon the word
persecutest, why persecutest! I suppose Saul thought he was not persecuting;
no, he was only putting the laws of the ecclesiastical court into execution;
but Jesus, whose eyes are as a flame of fire, saw through the hypocrisy of his
heart, that, notwithstanding his specious pretenses, all this proceeded from a
persecuting spirit, and secret enmity of heart against God; and therefore says,
"Why persecutest thou ME?" Put the emphasis upon the word ME, "Why persecutest
thou me?" Alas! Saul was not persecuting Christ, was he? He was only taking
care to prevent innovations in the church, and bringing a company of
enthusiasts to justice, who otherwise would overturn the established
constitution. But Jesus says, "Why persecutest thou me?" For what is done to
Christ's disciples, he takes as done to himself, whether it be good or whether
it be evil. He that touches Christ's disciples, touches the apple of his eye;
and they that persecute the followers of our Lord would persecute our Lord
himself, was he again to come and tabernacle among us.

I do not find that Saul gives any reason why he did persecute; no, he was
struck dumb; as every persecutor will be, when Jesus Christ puts this same
question to them at the terrible day of judgment. But being pricked at the
heart, no doubt with a sense not only of this, but of all his other offenses
against the great God, he said, ver. 5. "Who art thou, Lord?" See how soon God
can change the heart and voice of his most bitter enemies. Not many days ago,
Saul was not only blaspheming Christ himself, but, as much as in him lay,
compelling others to blaspheme also: But now, he who before was an impostor, is
called "Lord; who art thou, Lord?" This admirably points out the way in which
God's Spirit works upon the heart: It first powerfully convinces of sin, and of
our damnable state; and then puts us upon inquiring after Jesus Christ. Saul
being struck to the ground, or pricked to the heart, cries out after Jesus,
"Who art thou, Lord?" As many of you that were never so far made sensible of
your damnable state, as to be made feelingly to ^eek after Jesus Christ, were
never yet truly convicted by, much less converted to, God. May the Lord, who
struck Saul, effectually now strike all my Christ-less hearers, and set them
upon inquiring after Jesus as their ALL in ALL! Saul said, "Who art thou, Lord?
And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest." Never did any one
inquire truly after Jesus Christ, but Christ made a saving discovery of himself
to his ^oul. It should seem, our Lord appeared to him in person; for Ananias,
afterward says, "the Lord who appeared to thee in the way which thou came;"
though this may only imply Christ's meeting him in the way; it is not much
matter: It is plain Christ here speaks to him, and says "I am Jesus, whom thou
persecutest." It is remarkable, how our Lord takes to himself the name of
Jesus; for it is a name in which he delights: I am Jesus, a Savior of my
people; both from the guilt and power of their sins; a "Jesus, whom thou
persecutest." This seems to be spoken to convince Saul more and more of his
sin: and I doubt not, but every word was sharper than a two-edged sword, and
came like so many daggers to his heart: O, how did these words affect him! a
Jesus! a Savior! and yet I am persecuting him! This strikes him with horror;
but then the word Jesus, though he was a persecutor, might give him some hope.
However, our dear Lord, to convince Saul that he was to be saved by grace, and
that he was not afraid of his power and enmity, tells him, "It is hard for thee
to kick against the pricks." As much as to say, though he was persecuting, yet
he could not overthrow the church of Christ: For he would ^it as King upon his
holy hill of Zion; the malice of men or devils should never be able to prevail
against him.

Ver. 6. And he "trembling and astonished, said, Lord, what will thou have me
to do?" Those, who think Saul had a discovery of Jesus made to his heart
before, think that this question is the result of his faith, and that he now
desires to know what he shall do, out of gratitude, for what the Lord had done
for his soul; in this sense it may be understood, See my Sermon on, What think
ye of Christ?
and I have made use of it as an instance to prove, that faith will work by
love; but perhaps it may be more agreeable to the context, if we suppose that
Saul had only some distant discovery of Christ made to him, and not a full
assurance of faith: For we are told, "he trembling and astonished," trembling
at the thoughts of his persecuting a Jesus, and astonished at his own vileness,
and the infinite condescension of this Jesus, cries out, "Lord, what will thou
have me to do?" Persons under soul-trouble, and sore conviction, would be glad
to do any thing, or comply on any terms, to get peace with God. "Arise says our
Lord) and go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou shall do."

And here we will leave Saul a while, and see what is become of his companions.
But what shall we say? God is a sovereign agent; his sacred Spirit blows when
and where it lists; "He will have mercy on whom he will have mercy." Saul is
taken, but, as far as we know to the contrary, his fellow-travellers are left
to perish in their sins; For we are told, ver. 7. "That the men who journeyed
with him stood, indeed speechless, and hearing a confused voice," for so the
word signifies, and must be so interpreted, in order to reconcile it with chap.
xxii. ver. 9. where Saul giving an account of these men, tells Agrippa, "They
heard not the voice of him that spoke to me." They heard a voice, a confused
noise, but not the articulate voice of him that spoke to Saul, and therefore
remained unconverted. For what are all ordinances, all, even the most
extraordinary dispensations of providence, without Christ speaks to the soul in
them? Thus it is now under the word preached: many, like Readiness companions, are
sometimes so struck with the outgoings of God appearing in the sanctuary, that
they even stand speechless; they hear the preacher's voice, but not the voice
of the Son of God, who, perhaps at the same time is speaking effectually to
many other hearts; this I have known often; and what shall we say to these
things? O the depth of the sovereignty of God! It is past finding out. Lord* I
desire to adore what I cannot comprehend. "Even (...) "for ^o it seems good
in thy sight!*

But to return to Saul: the Lord bids him arise and go into the city; and we
are told, ver. 8. that "Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were
opened," (he was so overpowered with the greatness of the light that shone upon
them) that "he saw no man; but they led him by the hand, and brought him into
Damascus," that very city which was to be the place of his executing or
imprisoning the disciples of the Lord. "And he was three days without fight,
and neither did eat nor drink." But who can tell what horrors of conscience,
what convulsion of soul, what deep and pungent convictions of sin he underwent
during these three long days? It was this took away his appetite (for who can
eat or drink when under a sense of the wrath of God for sin?) and, being to be
greatly employed hereafter, he must be greatly humbled now; therefore the Lord
leaves him three days groaning under the spirit of bondage, and buffetted, no
doubt, with the fiery darts of the devil, that, being tempted like unto his
brethren, he might be able hereafter, to succor those that were tempted. Had
Saul applied to any of the blind guides of the Jewish church under these
circumstances, they would have said, he was mad, or going beside himself; as
many carnal teachers and blind Pharisees now deal with, and so more and more
distress poor souls laboring under awakening convictions of their damnable
state. But God often at our first awakenings, visits us wi^h sore trials,
especially those who are, like Saul, to shine in the church, and to be used as
instruments in bringing many sons to glory: th^se who are to be highly exalted,
must first be deeply humbled; and this I ^peak for the comfort of such, who may
be now groaning under the spirit of bondage, and perhaps, like Saul, can
neither eat nor drink^ for I have generally observed, that those who have had
the deepest convictions, have afterward been favored with the most precious
communications, and enjoyed most of the divine presence in their souls. This
was afterward remarkably exemplified in Saul, who was three days without
^ight, and neither did eat nor drink.

But will the Lord leave his poor servant in this distress? No: his Jesus
(though Saul persecuted him) promised (and he will perform) that it "should be
told him what he must do. And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named
Ananias, and unto him, said the Lord in a vision, Ananias; and he said, Behold,
I am here, Lord." What a holy familiarity is there between Jesus Christ and
regenerate souls! Ananias had been used to such love-visits, and therefore knew
the voice of his beloved. The Lord says, Ananias; Ananias says, "Behold, I am
here, Lord." Thus it is that Christ now, as well as formerly, often talks with
his children at sundry times, and after diverse manners, as a man talks with
his friend. But what has the Lord to say to Ananias?

Verse 11. "And the Lord said unto him, arise, and go into the street, which is
called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judas, for one called Saul of
Tarsus;" (see here for your comfort, O children of the most high God, what
notice Jesus Christ takes of the street, and the house where his own dear
servants lodge) "for behold, he prays;" but why is this ushered in with the
word behold* What, was it such a wonder to hear that Saul was praying? Why,
Saul was a Pharisee* and therefore, no doubt, fasted and made long prayers and,
since we are told that he profited above many of his equals, I doubt not but he
was taken notice of for his gift in prayer; and yet it seems, that before these
three days, Saul never prayed in his life; and why? Because, before these three
days, he never felt himself a condemned creature: he was alive in his own
opinion, because without a knowledge of the spiritual meaning of the law; he
felt not a want of, and therefore, before now, cried not after a Jesus, and
consequently, though he might have said, or made a prayer, as many Pharisees do
nowadays, he never prayed a prayer; but now, behold! he prayed indeed; and
this was urged as one reason why he was converted. None of God's children, as
one observes, comes into the world still-born; prayer is the very breath of the
new creature: and therefore, if we are prayerless, we are Christ-less; if we
never had the spirit of supplication, it is a sad sign that we never had the
spirit of grace in our souls: and you may be assured you never did pray, unless
you have felt yourselves sinners, and seen the want of Jesus to be your
Savior. May the Lord, whom I serve in the gospel of his dear Son, prick you
all to the heart, and may it be said of you all as it was of Saul, Behold, they
pray!

The Lord goes on to encourage Ananias to go to Saul: says he, verse 12. "For
he has seen in a vision a man named Ananias, coming i^, and putting his hand
on him, that he might receive his sight." So that though Christ converted Saul
immediately by himself, yet he will carry on the work, thus begun, by a
minister. Happy they, who under soul troubles have such experienced guides, and
as well acquainted with Jesus Christ as Ananias was: you that have such, make
much of and be thankful for them; and you who have them not, trust in God; he
will carry on his own work without them.

Doubtless, Ananias was a good man; but shall I commend him for his answer to
our Lord? I commend him not: for says he, verse 13, "Lord, I have heard by many
of this man, how much evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem: and here he
has authority from the chief priests to bind all that call upon thy name." I
fear this answer proceeded from some relics of self-righteousness, as well as
infidelity, that lay undiscovered in the heart of Ananias. "Arise (said our
Lord) and go into the street, which is called Straight, and inquire in the
house of Judas, for one called Saul of Tarsus; for behold he prays!" One
would think this was sufficient to satisfy him: but says Ananias, "Lord I have
heard by many of this man" (he seems to speak of him with much contempt; for
even good men are apt to think too contemptuously of those who are yet in their
sins) "how much evil he has done to thy saints in Jerusalem: and here, he has
authority from the chief priests, to bind all that call upon thy name." And
what then, Ananias? Is any thing too hard for the Lord? Who made thee to
differ? Could not he who converted thee, convert him also! Surely Ananias here
forgets himself, or perhaps fears, left this man, who had authority from the
chief priests to bind all that call upon Christ's name, should bind him also,
if he went unto him; but the Lord silences all objections, with a "Go ^hy way,
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
kings, and the children of Israel. For I will show him how great things he must
suffer for my name's sake." Here God stops his mouth immediately, by asserting
his sovereignty, and preaching to him the doctrine of election. And the
frequent conversion of notorious sinners to God, to me is one great proof,
among a thousand others, of that precious, but too much exploded, and sadly
misrepresented doctrine of God's electing love; for whence is it that such are
taken, while thousands not near so vile, die senseless and stupid? All the
answer that can be given, is, "They are chosen vessels, Go thy way (lays God)
for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and
kings, and the children of Israel: for I will show him how great things he must
suffer for my name's sake." Observe what a close connection there is between
doing and suffering for Christ. If any of my brethren in the ministry are
present, let them hear what preferment we must expect, if we are called out to
work remarkably for God: not great prebendaries or bishoprics, but great
sufferings for our Lord's name sake; these are the fruits of our labor; and he
that will not contentedly suffer great things for preaching Christ, is not
worthy of him. Suffering will be found to be the best preferment, when we are
called to give an account of our ministry at the great day.

I do not hear that Ananias quarrelled with God concerning the doctrine of
election: no; O that all good men would, in this, learn of him! "He went his
way, and entered into the house; and put his hands on him, and said, Brother
Saul;" just now it was this man; now it is Brother Saul: It is no matter what a
man has been, if he be now a Christian; the same should be our brother, our
sister, and mother: God blots out every convert's transgressions as with a
thick cloud, and so should we; the more vile a man has been, the more should we
love him when believing in Christ, because Christ will be more glorified on his
behalf. I doubt not, but Ananias was wonderfully delighted to hear that so
remarkable a persecutor was brought home to God! I am persuaded he felt his
soul immediately united to him by love, and therefore addresses him not with,
"Thou persecutor, Thou murderer, that came to butcher me and my friends; but,
brother Saul." It is remarkable that the primitive Christians much used the
word brother and brethren; I know it is a term now much in reproach; but those
who despise it, I believe would be glad to be of our brotherhood, when they see
us sitting at the right hand of the Majesty on high. "Brother Saul, the Lord
(even Jesus that appeared unto thee in the way as thou came) has sent me,
that thou might receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost." At
this time, we may suppose, he laid his hands upon him. See the consequences.

Ver. 18. "Immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been scales, and he
received sight forthwith;" not only bodily, but spiritual sight; he emerged as
it were into a new world; he saw, and felt too, things unutterable: he felt a
union of soul with God; he received the spirit of adoption; he could now, with
a full assurance of faith, cry, Abba, Father. Now was he filled with the Holy
Ghost; and had the love of God shed abroad in his heart; now were the days of
his mourning ended; now was Christ formed in his soul; now he could give men
and devils the challenge, knowing that Christ had justified him; now he saw the
excellences of Christ, and esteemed him the fairest among ten thousand. -- You
only know how to sympathize with the apostle in his joy, who, after a long
night of bondage, have been set free by the Spirit, and have received joy in
the Holy Ghost. May all that are now mourning, as Saul was, be comforted in
like manner!

The scales then are now removed from the eyes of Readiness mind; Ananias has done
that for him, under God: he must now do another office -- baptize him, and so
receive him into the visible church of Christ; a good proof to me of the
necessity of baptism where it may be had: for I find here, as well as
elsewhere, that baptism is administered even to those who had received the Holy
Ghost; Saul was convinced of this, and therefore arose and was baptized; and
now it is time for him to recruit the outward man, which, by three days
abstinence and spiritual conflicts, had been much impaired: we are therefore
told (verse 19) "when he had received meat, he was strengthened."

But O, with what comfort did the apostle now eat his food! I am sure it was
with singleness, I am persuaded also with gladness of heart; and why? He knew
that he was reconciled to God; and, for my own part, did I not know how blind
and flinty our hearts are by nature, I should wonder how any one could eat even
his common food with any satisfaction, who has not some well-grounded hope of
his being reconciled to God. Our Lord intimates thus much to us: for in his
glorious prayer, after he has taught us to pray for our daily bread,
immediately adds that petition, "forgive us our trespasses;" as though our
daily bread would do us no service, unless we were sensible of having the
forgiveness of our sins.

To proceed: Saul has received meat, and is strengthened; and whither will he
go now? To see the brethren; "then was Saul certain days with the disciples
that were at Damascus." If we know and love Christ, we shall also love, and
desire to be acquainted with the brethren of Christ: We may generally know a
man by his company. And though all are not saints that associate with saints
(for tares will be always springing up among the wheat till the time of
harvest) yet, if we never keep company, but are shy and ashamed of the despised
children of God, it is a certain sign we have not yet experimentally learnt
Jesus, or received him into our hearts. My dear friends, be not deceived; if we
are friends to the Bridegroom, we shall be friends to the children of the
Bridegroom. Saul, as soon as he was filled with the Holy Ghost, "was certain
days with the disciples that were at Damascus."

But who can tell what joy these disciples felt when Saul came among them! I
suppose holy Ananias introduced him. Methinks I see the once persecuting
zealot, when they came to salute him with a holy kiss, throwing himself upon
each of their necks, weeping over them with floods of tears, and saying, "O my
brother, O my sister, Can you forgive me? Can you give such a wretch as I the
right hand of fellowship, who intended to drag you behind me bound unto
Jerusalem!" -- Thus, I say, we may suppose Saul addressed himself to his
fellow-disciples; and I doubt not but they were as ready to forgive and ^orget
as Ananias was, and saluted him with the endearing title of brother Saul.
Lovely was this meeting; so lovely, that it seemed Saul continued certain days
with them, to communicate experiences, and to learn the way of God more
perfectly, to pray for a blessing on his future ministry, and to praise Christ
Jesus for what he had done for their souls. Saul, perhaps, had sat certain
years at the feet of Gamaliel, but undoubtedly learnt more these certain days,
than he had learnt before in all his life. It pleases me to think how this
great scholar is transformed by the renewing of his mind: what a mighty change
was here! That so great a man as Saul was, both as to his station in life, and
internal qualifications, and such a bitter enemy to the Christians; for him, I
say, to go and be certain days with the people of this mad way, and to sit
quietly, and be taught of illiterate men, as many of these disciples we may be
sure were, what a substantial proof was this of the reality of his conversion!

What a hurry and confusion may we suppose the chief priests now were in! I
warrant they were ready to cry out, what! is he also deceived? As for the
common people, who know not the law and are accursed, for them to be carried
away is no such wonder; but for a man bred up at the feet of Gamaliel, for such
a scholar, such an enemy to the cause as Saul; for him to be led away with a
company of silly, deceived men and women, surely it is impossible: We cannot
believe it. But Saul soon convinces them of the reality of his becoming a fool
for Christ's sake: For straightway, instead of going to deliver the letters
from the high priests, as they expected, in order to bring the disciples that
were at Damascus bound to Jerusalem, "he preached Christ in the synagogues,
that he is the Son of God." This was another proof of his being converted. He
not only conversed with Christians in private, but he preached Christ publicly
in the synagogues: Especially, he insisted on the divinity of our Lord,
proving, notwithstanding his state of humiliation, that he was really the Son
of God.

But why did Saul preach Christ thus? Because he had felt the power of Christ
upon his own soul. And here is the reason why Christ is so seldom preached, and
his divinity so slightly insisted on in our synagogues, because the generality
of those that pretend to preach him, never felt a saving work of conversion
upon their own souls. How can they preach, unless they are first taught of, and
then sent by God? Saul did not preach Christ before he knew him; no more should
any one else. An unconverted minister, though he could speak with the tongues
of men and angels, will be but as a sounding brass and tinkling cymbal to those
whose senses are exercised to discern spiritual things. Ministers that are
unconverted, may talk and declaim of Christ, and prove from books that he is
the Son of God; but they cannot preach with the demonstration of the Spirit and
with power, unless they preach from experience, and have had a proof of his
divinity, by a work of grace wrought upon their own souls. God forgive those
who lay hands on an unconverted man, knowing that he is such* I would not do it
for a thousand worlds. Lord Jesus, keep thy own faithful servants pure, and let
them not be then partakers of other men's sins!

Such an instance as was Readiness conversion, we may be assured, must make a
great deal of noise; and, therefore, no wonder we are told, ver. 21. "But all
that heard him were amazed, and said, Is not this he that destroyed them who
called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent, that he
might bring them bound to the chief priests?"

Thus it will be with all that appear publicly for Jesus Christ; and it is as
impossible for a true Christian to be hid, as a city built upon a hill. --
Brethren, if you are faithful to, you must be reproached and have remarks made
on you for Christ; especially if you have been remarkably wicked before your
conversion. Your friends say, is not this he, or she, who a little while age
would run to as great excess of riot and vanity as the worst of us all? What
has turned your brain? Or if you have been close, false, formal hypocrites, as
Saul was, they will wonder that you should be so deceived, as to think you were
not in a safe state before. No doubt, numbers were surprised to hear Saul, who
was touching the law blameless, affirm that he was in a damnable condition (as
in all probability he did) a few days before.

Brethren, you must expect to meet with many such difficulties as these. The
scourge of the tongue is generally the first cross we are called to beat for
the sake of Christ. Let not, therefore, this move you: It did not intimidate,
no, it rather encouraged Saul.

Says the text, "But Saul increased the more in strength, and confounded the
Jews who dwelt at Damascus, proving that this is very Christ." Opposition never
yet did, nor ever will hurt a sincere convert: Nothing like opposition to make
the man of God perfect. None but a hireling, who cares not for the sheep, will
be affrighted at the approach or barking of wolves. Christ's ministers are as
bold as lions: It is not for such men as they to flee.

And therefore (that I may draw toward a conclusion) let the ministers and
disciples of Christ learn from Saul, not to fear men or their revilings; but,
like him, increase in strength, the more wicked men endeavor to weaken their
hands. -- We cannot be Christians without being opposed: No; disciples in
general must suffer; ministers in particular must suffer great things. But let
not this move any of us from our steadfastness in the gospel: He that stood by
and strengthened Saul, will also stand by and strengthen us: He is a God mighty
to save all that put their trust in him. If we look up with an eye of faith,
we, as well as the first martyr St. Stephen may see Jesus standing at the right
hand of God, ready to assist and protect us. Though the Lord's seat is in
heaven, yet he has respect to his saints in an especial manner, when suffering
here on earth: Then the Spirit of Christ and of glory rests upon their souls.
And, if I may speak my own experience, "I never enjoy more rich communication
from God, than when despised and rejected of men for the sake of Jesus Christ."
However, little they may design it, my enemies are my greatest friends. What I
most fear, is a calm; but the enmity which is in the hearts of natural men
against Christ, will not suffer them to be quiet long: No; as I hope the work
of God will increase, so the rage of men and devils will increase also. Let us
put on, therefore, the whole armor of God: Let us not ^ear the face of men:
Let us fear him only who can destroy both body and soul in hell: I say unto
you, let us fear him alone. You see how soon God can stop the fury of his
enemies.

You have just now heard of a proud, powerful zealot stopped in his full
career, struck down to the earth with a light from heaven, converted by the
almighty power of efficacious grace, and thereupon zealously promoting, nay,
resolutely suffering for, the faith which once with threatenings and slaughters
he endeavored to destroy. Let this teach us to pity and pray for our Lord's
most inveterate enemies. Who knows, but in answer thereunto, our Lord may give
them repentance unto life? Most think, that Christ had respect to Stephen's
prayer, when he converted Saul. Perhaps for this reason God suffers his
adversaries to go on, that his goodness and power may shine more bright in
their conversion.

But let not the persecutors of Christ take encouragement from this to continue
in their opposition. Remember, though Saul was converted, yet the high priest
and Readiness companions, were left dead in trespasses and sins: And, if this
should be your case, you will of all men be most miserable: For persecutors
have the lowest place in hell. And, if Saul was struck to the earth by a light
from heaven, how will you be able to stand before Jesus Christ, when he comes
in terrible majesty to take vengeance on all those who have persecuted his
gospel? Then the question, "Why persecuted thou me?" will cut you through and
through. The secret enmity of your hearts shall be then detected before men and
angels, and you shall be doomed to dwell in the blackness of darkness for
evermore. Kiss the Son therefore, lest he be angry: For even you may yet find
mercy, if you believe on the Son of God: Though you persecute him, yet he will
be your Jesus. I cannot despair of any of you, when I find a Saul among the
disciples at Damascus. What though your sins are as scarlet, the blood of
Christ shall wash them as white as snow. Having much to be forgiven, despair
not; only believe, and like Saul, of whom I have now been speaking, love much.
He ^ounted himself the chiefest sinner of all, and therefore labored more
abundantly than all. Who is there among you fearing the Lord? Whose ^^^rts has
the Lord now opened to hearken to the voice of his poor unworthy servant!
Surely the Lord will not let me preach in vain. Who is the happy soul that is
this day to be washed in the blood of the Lamb? Will no poor sinner take
encouragement from Saul to come to Jesus Christ? You are all thronging round,
but which of you will touch the Lord Jesus? What a comfort will it be to Saul;
and to your own souls, when you meet him in heaven, to tell him, that hearing
of his, was a means, under God, of your conversion! Doubtless it was written
for the encouragement of all poor returning sinners; he himself tells us so:
For "in me God showed all long-suffering that I might be an example to them
that should hereafter believe." Was Saul here himself, he would tell you so,
indeed he would; but being dead, by this account of his conversion, he yet
speaks. O that God may speak by it to your hearts! O that the arrows of God
might this day stick fast in your souls, and you made to cry out, "Who art thou
Lord?" Are there any such amongst you? Methinks I feel something of what this
Saul felt, when he said, "I travail in birth again for you till Christ be
formed again in your hearts." (...) come, come away to Jesus on whom Saul
believed; and then I care not if the high priests issue out never so many
writs, or injuriously drag me to a prison. The thoughts of being instrumental
in saving you, will make me sing praises even at midnight: And I know you will
be my joy and crown of rejoicing, when I am delivered from this earthly prison,
and meet you in the kingdom of God hereafter. Now to God, etc.

SERMON VI.
CHRIST, the Believer's Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption.
I COR. i. 30. But of him are re in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.
OF all the verses in the book of God, this whi^^ I have now read to you, is, I
believe, one of the most comprehensive: What glad tidings does it bring to
believers! What precious privileges are they herein invested with: How are they
here led to the fountain of them all, I mean, the love, the everlasting love of
God the Father! "Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us,
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption."

Without referring you to the context, I shall from these words,

First, Point out to you the fountain from which all those blessings flow,
which the elect of God partake of in Jesus Christ, "who of God is made unto
us." And,

Secondly, I shall consider what these blessings are, "wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption."

First, I would point out to you the fountain from which all those blessings
flow, that the (...) of God partake of in Jesus, "who of God is made unto us:"
the Father, he it is who is spoken of here. Not as though Jesus Christ was not
God also; but God the Father is the fountain of the Deity; and, if we consider
Jesus Christ acting as Mediator, God the Father is greater than he; there was
an eternal contract between the Father and the Son: "I have made a covenant
with my chosen, and I have sworn unto David my servant;" now David was a type
of Christ, with whom the Father made a covenant, that if he would obey and
suffer, and make himself a sacrifice for sin, he should "see his ^eed, he
should prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his
hands." This compact our Lord refers to, in that glorious prayer recorded in
the 17th chap. of John; and therefore he prays for, or rather demands with a
full assurance, all that were given to him by the Father: "Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am." For this same reason
the apostle breaks out in praises of God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; for he loved the elect with an everlasting love, or, as our Lord
expresses it, "before the foundation of the world;" and therefore, to show them
to whom they were beholden for their salvation, our Lord, in the 25th of
Matthew, represents himself, saying, "Come, ye blessed children of my Father,
receive the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world." And
thus, in reply to the mother of Zebedee's children, he says, "It is not mine to
give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of the Father." The
apostle therefore, when here speaking of the Christian's privileges, lest they
should sacrifice to their own drag, or think their salvation was owing to their
own faithfulness, or improvement of their own free will, reminds them to look
back on the everlasting love of God the Father; "who of God is made unto us,
etc."

Would to God, this part of doctrine was considered more, and people were more
studious of the covenant of redemption between the Father and the Son! we
should not then have so much disputing against the doctrine of election, or
hear it condemned (even by good men) as a doctrine of devils. For my own part,
I cannot see how true humbleness of mind can be attained without a knowledge of
it; and though I will not say, that every one who denies election is a bad man,
yet I will say, with that sweet singer, Mr. Trail, it is a very bad (...) such
a one, whoever he be, I think cannot truly know himself: for, if we deny
election, we must, partly at least, glory in ourselves; but our redemption is
so ordered, that no flesh should glory in the divine presence; and hence it is,
that the pride of man opposes this doctrine, because according to this
doctrine, and no other, "he that glories must glory only in the Lord." But what
shall I say? Election is a mystery that shines with such resplendent
brightness, that, to make use of the words of one who has drank deeply of
electing love, it dazzles the weak eyes even of some of God's dear children;
however, though they know it not, all the blessings they receive, all the
privileges they do or will enjoy through Jesus Christ, flow from the
everlasting love of God the Father: "But of him are you in Christ Jesus, who of
God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption."

Secondly, I come to show what these blessings are, which are here, through
Christ, made over to the elect. And,

First, Christ is made to them wisdom -- But wherein does true wisdom consist?
Was I to ask some of you, perhaps you would say, in indulging the lust of the
flesh, and saying to your souls, eat, drink, and be merry. But this is only the
wisdom of brutes -- They have as good a gust and relish for sensual pleasures,
as the greatest epicure on the earth -- Others would tell me true wisdom
consisted in adding house to house, and field to field, and calling lands after
their own names; but this cannot be true wisdom; for riches often take to
themselves wings and fly away, like an eagle toward heaven. Even wisdom itself
assures us, "that a man's life does not consist in the abundance of the things
which he possesses;" vanity, vanity, all these things are vanity; for, if
riches leave not the owner, the owners must soon leave them; "for rich men must
also die, and leave their riches for others;" their riches cannot procure them
redemption from the grave, whither we are all hastening apace.

But perhaps you despise riches and pleasure, and therefore place wisdom in the
knowledge of books: but it is possible for you to tell the numbers of the
stars, and call them all by their names, and yet be mere fools; learned men are
not always wise; nay, our common learning so much cried up, makes men only so
many accomplished fools; to keep you therefore no longer in suspense, and
withal to humble you, I will send you to a heathen school, to learn what true
wisdom is: know thyself, was a saying of one of the wise men of Greece; this is
certainly true wisdom, and this is that wisdom spoken of in the text, and which
Jesus Christ has made to all elect sinners; they are made to know themselves,
so as not to think more highly of themselves, so as not to think more highly of
themselves, than they ought to think. Before they were darkness; now they are
light in the Lord; and in that light they see their own darkness; they now
bewail themselves as fallen creatures by nature, dead in trespasses and sins,
sons and heirs of hell, and children of wrath; they now see that all their
righteousnesses are but as filthy rags; that there is no health in their souls;
that they are poor and miserable, blind and naked; and that there is no name
given under heaven, whereby they can be saved, but that of Jesus Christ. They
see the necessity of closing with a Savior, and behold the wisdom of God in
appointing him to be a Savior; they are also made willing to accept of
salvation upon our Lord's own terms, and to receive him as their all in all:
thus Christ is made to them wisdom.

Secondly, Righteousness. "Who of God is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness;"
Christ's whole personal righteousness is made over to, and accounted theirs.
Being enabled to lay hold on Christ by faith, God the Father blots out their
transgressions, as with a thick cloud; their sins, and their iniquities he
remembers no more; they are made the righteousness of God in Jesus, who is the
end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes. In one sense, God
now sees no sin in them; the whole covenant of works is fulfilled in them; they
are actually justified, acquitted, and looked upon as righteous in the sight of
God; they are perfectly accepted in the Beloved; they are complete in him; the
flaming sword of God's wrath, which before moved every way, is now removed, and
free access given to the tree of life; they are enabled now to reach out the
arm of faith, and pluck and live for evermore. -- Hence it is that the apostle,
under a sense of this blessed privilege, breaks out into this triumphant
language, "it is Christ that justifies, who is he that condemns?" Does sin
condemn? Christ's righteousness delivers believers from the guilt of it: Christ
is their Savior, and is become a propitiation for their sins: who therefore
shall lay any thing to the charge of God's elect? Does the law condemn? By
having Christ's righteousness imputed to them, they are dead to the law, as a
covenant of works; Christ has fulfilled it for them, and in their stead. Does
death threaten them? They need not fear: The sting of death is sin, the
strength of sin is the law; but God has given them the victory, by imputing to
them the righteousness of the Lord Jesus.

And what a privilege is here! Well might the angels at the birth of Christ,
say to the humble shepherds, "Behold, I bring you glad tidings of great joy;"
unto you that believe in Christ, "a Savior is born." And well may they rejoice
at the conversion of poor sinners: for the Lord is their righteousness: they
have peace with God, through faith in Christ's blood, and shall never enter
into condemnation. O believers! (for this discourse is intended in a special
manner for you) lift up your heads; "Rejoice in the Lord always; again I say,
rejoice." Christ is made to you of God, righteousness, what then should you
fear? you are made the righteousness of God in him; you may be called, "The
Lord our righteousness." Of what then should you be afraid? What shall separate
you henceforward from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No; I am persuaded,
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate you from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord, who of God is made unto you righteousness.

This is a glorious privilege, but this is only the beginning of the happiness
of believers: for,

Thirdly, Christ is not only made to them righteousness, but sanctification. By
sanctification, I do not mean a bare hypocritical attendance on outward
ordinances (though rightly informed Christians will think it their duty and
privilege constantly to attend on all outward ordinances.) Nor do I mean by
sanctification, a bare outward reformation, and a few transient convictions, or
a little legal sorrow; for all this an unsanctified man may have; but, by
sanctification I mean a total renovation of the whole man; by the righteousness
of Christ, believers become legally, by sanctification they are made
spiritually, alive; by one they are entitled to, by the other they are made
meet for glory. They are sanctified therefore throughout, in spirit, soul and
body.

Their understandings, which were before dark, now become light in the Lord:
and their will, before contrary to, now become one with the will of God: their
affections are now set on things above; their memory is now filled with divine
things; their natural consciences are now enlightened; their members, which
were before instruments of uncleanness, and of iniquity unto iniquity, are now
instruments of righteousness and true holiness; in short, they are new
creatures; "old things are passed away, all things are become new," in their
hearts; sin has now no longer dominion over them; they are freed from the
power, though not the indwelling and being of it; they are holy both in heart
and life, in all manner of conversation; they are made partakers of a divine
nature; and from Jesus Christ they receive grace for grace; and every grace
that is in Christ, is copied and transcribed into their souls; they are
transformed into his likeness; he is formed within them; they dwell in him, and
he in them; they are led by the Spirit, and bring forth the fruits thereof:
they know that Christ is their Immanuel, God with and in them; they are living
temples of the Holy Ghost. And therefore, being a holy habitation unto the
Lord, the whole Trinity dwells and walks in them; even here, they fit together
with Christ in heavenly places, and are vitally united to him, their head, by a
living faith; their Redeemer, their Maker, is their husband; they are flesh of
his flesh, bone of his bone; they talk, they walk with him, as a man talks
and walks with his friend; in short, they are one with Christ, even as Jesus
Christ and the Father are one.

Thus is Christ made to believers sanctification. And O what a privilege is
this! To be changed from beasts into saints, and from a devilish, to be made
partakers of a divine nature; to be translated from the kingdom of Satan, into
the kingdom of God's dear Son! To put off the old man, which is corrupt, and to
put on the new man, which is created after God, in righteousness and true
holiness. O what an unspeakable blessing is this! I almost stand amazed at the
contemplation thereof Well might the apostle exhort believers to (...); indeed
they have reason always to (...), to rejoice on a dying bed; for the kingdom of
God is in them; they are changed from (...), even by the Spirit of the Lord:
(...) may this be a mystery to the natural, for it is a mystery even to the
spiritual man himself, a mystery which he cannot fathom. Does it not often
dazzle your eyes, O ye children of God, to look at your own brightness, when
the candle of the Lord shines out, and your Redeemer lifts up the light of his
blessed countenance upon your souls? Are you not astonished, when you feel the
love of God shed abroad in your hearts by the Holy Ghost, and God holds out the
golden scepter of his mercy, and bids you ask what you will, and it shall be
given you? Does not that peace of God, which keeps and rules your hearts,
surpass the utmost limits of your understandings? And is not the joy you feel
unspeakable? Is it not full of glory? I am persuaded it is; and in your secret
communion, when the Lord's love slows in upon your souls, you are as it were
swallowed up in, or, to use the apostle's phrase, "filled with all the fullness
of God." Are not you ready to cry out with Solomon, "And will the Lord, indeed,
dwell thus with men? How is it that we should be thus thy sons and daughters, O
Lord God Almighty!"

If you are children of God, and know what it is to have fellowship with the
Father and the Son; if you walk by faith, and not by sight; I am assured this
is frequently the language of your hearts.

But look forward, and see an unbounded prospect of eternal happiness lying
before thee, O believer! What thou have already received, are only the first
fruits, like the cluster of grapes brought out of the land of Canaan; only an
earnest and pledge of yet infinitely better things to come: the harvest is to
follow; thy grace is hereafter to be swallowed up in glory. Thy great Joshua,
and merciful High Priest, shall administer an abundant entrance to thee into
the land of promise, that rest which awaits the children of God: for Christ
(...) not only made to believers, wisdom, righteousness, and sanctification,
but also redemption.

But, before we enter upon the explanation and contemplation of this privilege,

First, Learn hence the great mistake of those writers, and clergy, who,
notwithstanding they talk of sanctification and inward holiness (as indeed
sometimes they do, though in a very loose and superficial manner) yet they
generally make it the cause, whereas they should consider it as the effect, of
our justification. Of him "are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, righteousness," and then sanctification. For Christ's righteousness, or
that which Christ has done in our stead without us, is the sole cause of our
acceptance in the sight of God, and of all holiness wrought in us: To this, and
not to the light within, or any thing wrought within, should poor sinners seek
for justification in the sight of God: for the sake of Christ's righteousness
alone, and not any thing wrought in us, does God look favorably upon us; our
sanctification at best, in this life, is not complete: Though we are delivered
from the power, we are not freed from the in-being of sin; but not only the
dominion, but the in-being of sin, is forbidden by the perfect law of God: For
it is not said, "thou shall not give way to lust, but, thou shall not lust." So
that whilst the principle of lust remains in the least degree in our hearts,
though we are otherwise never so holy, yet we cannot, on account of that, hope
for acceptance with God. We must first therefore, look for a righteousness
without us, even the righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ: For this reason
the apostle mentions it, and puts it before sanctification in the words of the
text. And whosoever teaches any other doctrine, does not preach the truth as
it is in Jesus.

Secondly, From hence also, the Antinomians and formal hypocrites may be
confuted, who talk of Christ without, but know nothing, experimentally, of a
work of sanctification wrought within them. Whatever they may pretend to, since
Christ is not in them, the Lord is not their righteousness, and they have no
well-grounded hope of glory: For though sanctification is not the cause, yet it
is the effect of our acceptance with God; "who of God is made unto us
righteousness and sanctification." He therefore, that is really in Christ, is a
new creature; it is not going back to a covenant of works, to look into our
hearts, and, seeing that they are changed and renewed, from thence form a
comfortable and well-grounded assurance of the safety of our states: No, but
this is what we are directed to in scripture; by our bringing forth the fruits,
we are to judge whether or no we ever did truly partake of the Spirit of God,
"We know (says John) that we are passed from death unto life, because we love
the brethren." And however we may talk of Christ's righteousness, and exclaim
against legal preachers: yet, if we are not holy in heart and life, if we are
not sanctified and renewed by the Spirit in our minds, we are self-deceivers,
we are only formal hypocrites: For we must not put asunder what God has joined
together; we must keep the medium between the two extremes; not insist so much
on the one hand upon Christ without, as to exclude Christ within, as an
evidence of our being his, and as a preparation for future happiness; nor on
the other hand, so depend on inherent righteousness or holiness wrought in us,
as to exclude the righteousness of Jesus Christ without us. But,

Fourthly, Let us now go on, and take a view of the other link, or rather the
end, of the believer's golden chain of privileges, redemption. But we must look
very high; for the top of it, like Jacob's ladder, reaches heaven, where all
believers will ascend, and be placed at the right hand of God. "Who of God is
made unto us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption."

This is a golden chain indeed! And, what is best of all, not one link can ever
be broken asunder from another. Was there no other text in the book of God,
this single one sufficiently proves the final perseverance of true believers?
for never did God yet justify a man, whom he did not sanctify; nor sanctify one
whom he did not completely redeem and glorify; no, as for God, his way, his
work, is perfect; he always carried on and finished the work he began; thus it
was in the first, so it is in the new creation; when God says, "let there be
light," there is light, that shines more and more unto the perfect day, when
believers enter into their eternal rest, as God entered into his. Those whom
God has justified, he has in effect glorified: for as a man's worthiness was
not the cause of God's giving him Christ's righteousness, so neither shall his
unworthiness be a cause of his taking it away; God's gifts and callings are
without repentance; and I cannot think, they are clear in the notion of
Christ's righteousness, who deny the final perseverance of the saints; I fear,
they understand justification in that low sense, which I understood it in a few
years ago, as implying no more than remission of sins: but it not only
signifies remission of sins past, but also a f^^deral right to all good things
to come. If God has given us his only ^on, how will he not with him freely give
us all things? Therefore, the apostle, after he says, "who of God is made unto
us righteousness," does not say, perhaps he may be made to us sanctification
and redemption; but he is made: for there is an eternal, indissoluble
connection between these blessed privileges. As the obedience of Christ is
imputed to believers, so his perseverance in that obedience is to be imputed to
them also: and it argues great ignorance of the covenant of grace and
redemption to object against it.

By the word redemption, we are to understand, not only a complete deliverance
from all evil, but also a full enjoyment of all good both in body and soul: I
say both in body and soul: for the Lord is also for the body; the bodies of the
saints in this life are temples of the Holy Ghost; God makes a covenant with
the dust of believers; after death, though worms destroy them, yet, even in
their flesh shall they see God. I fear, indeed, there are some Sadducees in our
days, or at least heretics, who say, either that there is no resurrection of
the body, or that the resurrection is past already, namely, in our
regeneration: Hence it is, that our Lord's coming in the flesh, at the day of
judgment, is denied; and consequently, we must throw aside the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper. For why should we remember the Lord's death until he come to
judgment, when he is already come to judge our hearts, and will not come a
second time? But all this is only the reasoning of unlearned, unstable men, who
certainly know not what they say, nor whereof they affirm. That we must follow
our Lord in the regeneration, be partakers of a new birth, and that Christ must
come into our hearts, we freely confess, and we hope, when speaking of these
things, we speak no more than what we know and feel: but then it is plain, that
Jesus Christ will come, hereafter, to judgment, and that he ascended into
heaven with the body which he had here on earth; for, says he, after his
resurrection, "handle me, and see; a spirit has not flesh and bones, as you
see me have." And it is plain, that Christ's resurrection was an earnest of
ours: for, says the apostle, "Christ is risen from the dead, and become the
first fruits of them that slept;" and as in Adam all die and are subject to
mortality; so all that are in Christ, the second Adam, who represented
believers as their foederal head, shall certainly be made alive, or rise again
with their bodies at the last lay.

Here then, O believers! is one, though the lowest, degree of that redemption
which you are to be partakers of hereafter; I mean, the redemption of your
bodies: For this corruptible must put on immortality. Your bodies, as well as
souls, were given to Jesus Christ by the Father: they have been companions in
watching, and fasting and praying: Your bodies therefore, as well as souls,
shall Jesus Christ raise up at the last day. Fear not, therefore, O believers,
to look into the grave; for to you it is no other than a consecrated dormitory,
where your bodies shall sleep quietly until the morning of the resurrection;
when the voice of the archangel shall sound, and the trump of God give the
general alarm, "Arise ye dead, and come to judgment;" earth, air, fire, water,
shall give up your scattered atoms, and both in body and soul shall you be ever
with the Lord. I doubt not but many of you are groaning under crazy bodies, and
complain often that the mortal body weighs down the immortal soul; at least
this is my case; but let us have a little patience, and we shall be delivered
from our earthly prisons; ^re long, these tabernacles of clay shall be
dissolved, and we shall be clothed with our house which is from heaven:
hereafter, our bodies shall be spiritualized, and shall be so far from
hindering our souls through weakness, that they shall become strong; so strong,
as to bear up under an exceeding and eternal weight of glory; others again may
have deformed bodies, emaciated also with sickness, and worn out with labor
and age; but wait a little, until your blessed change by death comes; then your
bodies shall be renewed and made glorious, like unto Christ's glorious body: of
which we may form some faint idea, from the account given us of our Lord's
transfiguration on the Mount, when it is said, "His raiment became bright and
glittering, and his face brighter than the sun." Well then may a believer break
out into the apostle' triumphant language, 'O death, where is thy sting! O
grave, where is thy victory!"

But what is the redemption of the body, in comparison of the redemption of the
better part, our souls? I must, therefore, say to you believers, as the angel
said to John, "Come up higher," and let us take as clear a view as we can, at
such a distance, of the redemption Christ has purchased for, and will shortly
put you in actual possession of. Already you are justified, already you are
sanctified, and thereby freed from the guilt and dominion of sin: but, as I
have observed, the being and indwelling of sin yet remains in you; God sees it
proper to leave some Amalekites in the land, to keep his Israel in action. The
most perfect Christian, I am persuaded, must agree, according to one of our
articles, "that the corruption of nature remains even in the regenerate; that
the flesh lusts always against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh."
So that believers cannot do things for God with that perfection they desire;
this grieves their righteous souls day by day, and, with the holy apostle,
makes them to cry out, "Who shall deliver us from the body of this death!" I
thank God, our Lord Jesus Christ will, but not completely before the day of our
dissolution; then will the very being of sin be destroyed, and an eternal stop
put to inbred, indwelling corruption. And is not this a great redemption? I am
sure believers esteem it so: for there is nothing grieves the heart of a child
of God so much, as the remains of indwelling sin. Again, believers are often in
heaviness through manifold temptations; God sees that it is needful and good
for them so to be; and though they may be highly favored, and wrapped up (...)
communion with God, even to the third heaven, yet a messenger of Satan is often
sent to buffet them, lest they should be puffed up with the abundance of
revelations. But be not weary, be not faint in your minds: the time of your
complete redemption draws nigh. In heaven the wicked one shall cease from
troubling you, and your weary souls shall enjoy an everlasting rest; his fiery
darts cannot reach those blissful regions: Satan will never come any more to
appear with, disturb, or accuse the sons of God, when once the Lord Jesus
Christ shuts the door. Your righteous souls are now grieved, day by day, at the
ungodly conversation of the wicked; tares now grow up among the wheat; wolves
come in sheep's clothing: but the redemption spoken of in the text will free
our souls from all anxiety on these accounts; hereafter you shall enjoy a
perfect communion of faints; nothing that is unholy or unsanctified shall enter
into the holy of holies, which is prepared for you above: This, and all manner
of evil whatsoever you shall be delivered from, when your redemption is
hereafter made complete in heaven; not only so, but you shall enter into the
full enjoyment of all good. It is true all saints will not have the same degree
of happiness, but all will be as happy as their hearts can desire. Believers,
you shall judge evil, and familiarly converse with good, angels: You shall sit
down with Abraham, Isaac Jacob, and all the spirits of just men made perfect;
and, to sum up all your happiness in one word, you shall see God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost; and, by seeing God, be more and more like unto him, and
pass from glory to glory, even to all eternity.

But I must stop: the glories of the upper world crowd in so last (...) my
(...) I am (...) the redemption spoken of is unutterable; we cannot here find
it out; eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the hearts
of the most holy men living, to conceive how great it is. Was I to entertain
you whole ages with an account of it, when you come to heaven you must say,
with the queen of Sheba, "Not half, no, not one thousandth part was told us."
All we can do here, is to go upon Mount Pisgah, and by the eye of faith, take a
distant view of the promised land: we may see it, as Abraham did Christ, afar
off, and rejoice in it; but here we o^^y know in part. Blessed be God, there is
a time coming, when we shall know God, even as we are known, and God be all in
all. "Lord Jesus, accomplish the number of thine elect! Lord Jesus, hasten thy
kingdom!"

And now, where are the scoffers of these last days, who count the lives of
Christians to be madness, and their end to be without honor? Unhappy men! you
know not what you do. Were your eyes open, and had you senses to discern
spiritual things, you would not speak all manner of evil against the children
of God, but you would esteem them as the excellent ones of the earth, and envy
their happiness: your souls would hunger and thirst after it: you also would
become fools for Christ's sake. You boast of wisdom; so did the philosophers of
Corinth: but your wisdom is the foolishness of folly in the sight of God. --
What will your wisdom avail you, if it does not make you wise unto salvation?
Can you, with all your wisdom, propose a more consistent scheme to build your
hopes of salvation on, than what has been now laid down before you? Can you,
with all the strength of natural reason, find out a better way of acceptance
with God, than by the righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ? Is it right to
think your own works can in any measure deserve or procure it? If not, why will
you not believe in him? Why will you not submit to his righteousness? Can you
deny that you are fallen creatures? Do not you find that you are full of
disorders, and that these disorders make you unhappy? Do not you find that you
cannot change your own hearts? Have you not resolved many and many a time, and
have not your corruptions yet dominion over you? Are you not bondslaves to
your lusts, and led captive by the devil at his will? Why then will you not
come to Christ for sanctification? Do you not desire to die the death of the
righteous, and that your future state may be like theirs? I am persuaded you
cannot bear the thoughts of being annihilated, much less of being miserable for
ever. Whatever you may pretend, if you speak truth, you must confess, tha^
conscience breaks in upon you in your more sober intervals, whether you will or
not, and even constrains you to believe, that hell is no painted fire. And why
then will you not come to Christ? He alone can procure you everlasting
redemption. -- Haste, haste away to him, poor beguiled sinners. You lack
wisdom; ask it of Christ. Who knows but he may give it you? He is able: for he
is the wisdom of the Father; he is that wisdom which was from everlasting. You
have no righteousness; away, therefore, to Christ: He is the end of the law for
righteousness to every one that believes. You are unholy; flee to the Lord
Jesus: he is full of grace and truth! and of his fullness, all may receive that
believe in him. You are as if afraid to die; let this drive you to Christ; he
has the keys of death and hell; in him is plenteous redemption; he alone can
open the door which leads to everlasting life. Let not, therefore, the deceived
reasoner boast any longer of his pretended reason. Whatever you may think, it
is the most unreasonable thing in the world not to believe on Jesus Christ,
whom God has sent. Why, why will you die? Why will you not come unto him, that
you may have life? Ho! every one that thirsts, come unto the waters of life
and drink freely: Come, buy without money and without price. Were these blessed
privileges in the text to be purchased with money, you might say, we are poor,
and cannot buy: or, were they to be conferred only on sinners of such a rank or
degree, then you might say, how can such sinners as we, expect to be so highly
favored? But they are to be freely given of God to the worst of sinners. To
us, says the apostle; to me a persecutor, to you Corinthians, who were unclean,
drunkards, covetous persons, idolaters. Therefore, each poor sinner may say
then, why not unto me? Has Christ but one blessing? What if he has blessed
millions already, by turning them away from their iniquities; yet he still
continues the same: he lives for ever to make intercession, and therefore will
bless you, even you also. Though, Esau like, you have been profane, and
hitherto despised your heavenly Father's birthright; even now, if you believe,
Christ will be made to you of God, "wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption."

But I must turn again to believers, for whose instruction, as I observed
before, this discourse was particularly intended. You see brethren, partakers
of the heavenly calling, what great blessings are treasured up for you in Jesus
Christ your Head, and what you are entitled to by believing on his name, take
heed therefore, that ye walk worthy of the vocation where with ye are called:
Think often how highly you are favored, and remember you have not chosen
Christ, but Christ has chosen you. Put on (as the elect of God) humbleness of
mind, and glory, but O, let it be only in the Lord -- for you have nothing but
what you have received of God; by nature you were as foolish, as legal, as
unholy, and in as damnable a condition as others; be pitiful therefore, be
courteous, and as sanctification is a progressive work, beware of thinking you
have already attained. Let him that is holy, be holy still, knowing that he who
is most pure in heart, shall hereafter enjoy the clearest vision of God -- let
indwelling sin be your daily burden, and not only bewail and lament, but see
that you subdue it daily by the power of divine grace, and look up to Jesus
continually to be the Finisher, as well as Author of your faith -- build not on
your own faithfulness, but on God's unchangeableness -- take heed of thinking
you stand by the power of your own free will -- the everlasting love o^ God the
Father must be your only hope and consolation -- let this support you under all
trials -- remember that God's gifts and callings are without repentance -- that
Christ having once loved you, will love you to the end. Let this constrain you
to obedience, and make you long and look for that blessed time, when he shall
not only be your wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, but also
complete and everlasting redemption. Glory be to God in the highest.

SERMON VII.
THE PHARISEE AND PUBLICAN.
LUKE xviii. 14. I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather
than the other: For every one that exalts himself, shall be a a^^d; and he
that humbles himself, shall be exalted.
THOUGH there be some who dare to deny the Lord Jesus, and disbelieve the
revelation he has been pleased to give us, and thereby bring upon themselves
swift destruction; yet I would charitably hope there are but few, if any such
among you to whom I am now to preach the kingdom of God. Was I to ask you, "how
you expect to be justified in the sight of an offended God?" I suppose you
would answer, only for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ. But, was I to come
more home to your consciences, I fear most would make the Lord Jesus but in
part their Savior, and go about, as it were, to establish a righteousness of
their own. And this is not thinking contrary to the rules of Christian charity:
For we are all self-righteous by nature; it is as natural for us to turn back
to a covenant of works, as for the sparks to fly upwards. We have had so many
legal and so few free grace preachers, for these many years, that most
professors now seem to be settled upon their lees, and rather deserve the title
of Pharisees than Christians.

Thus it was with the generality of the people during the time of our Lord's
public ministrations: And therefore, in almost all his discourses, he preached
the gospel to poor sinners, and denounced terrible woes against proud
self-justiciaries. The parable to which the words of the text belong, looks
both these ways: For the evangelist informs us (ver. 9.) that our Lord "spoke
it unto certain who trusted in themselves, that they were righteous, and
despised others." And a notable parable it is; a parable worthy your most
serious attention. "He that has ears to hear let him hear" what Jesus Christ
speaks to all visible professors in it.

Ver. 10. "Two men went up to the temple to pray," (and never two men of more
opposite characters) "the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican." The
Pharisees were the strictest sect among the Jews; I was of the strictest sect
of the Pharisees, says Paul. They played often; not only so, but they made long
prayers; and, that they might appear extraordinary devout, they would pray at
the corners of the street, where two ways met, that people going or coming,
both ways, might see them. "They made broad (as our Lord informs us) the
borders of their philacte^ies," they had pieces of parchment sown to their long
robes, on which some parts of the scripture were written, that people might
from thence infer, that they were lovers of the law of God. They were so very
punctual and exact in outward purifications, that they washed at their going
out and coming in. They held the washing of pots, brazen vessels and tables,
and many other suchlike things they did. They were very zealous for the
traditions of the fathers, and for the observation of the rites and ceremonies
of the church, notwithstanding they frequently made void the law of God by
their traditions. And they were so exceedingly exact in the outward observation
of the Sabbath, that they condemned our Lord for making a little clay with his
spittle; and called him a sinner, and said, he was not of God, because he had
given sight to a man born blind, on the Sabbath Day. For these reasons they
were had in high veneration among the people, who were sadly misled by these
blind guides: They had the uppermost places in the synagogues, and greetings in
the market places (which they loved dearly) and were called of men, Rabbi; in
short, they had such a reputation for piety, that it became a proverb among the
Jews, that if there were but two men saved, the one of them must be a Pharisee.

As for the Publicans it was not so with them. It seems they were sometimes
Jews, or at least proselytes of the gate; for we find the one here coming up to
the temple; but for the generality, I am apt to think they were Gentiles; --
for they were gatherers of the Roman taxes, and used to amass much wealth (as
appears by the confession of Zaccheus, one of the chief of them) by wronging
men by false accusations. They were so universally infamous, that our Lord
himself tells his disciples, the excommunicated man should be to them as a
Heathen man, or a Publican. And the Pharisees thought it a sufficient
impeachment of our Lord's character, that he was a "friend to Publicans and
sinners, and went to sit down with them at meat."

But, however they disagreed in other things, they agreed in this, that public
worship is a duty incumbent upon all: For they both came up to the temple. The
very Heathens were observers of temple-worship. We have very early notice of
men's sacrificing to, and calling upon the name of the Lord, in the Old
Testament! and I find it no where contradicted in the new. Our Lord, and his
apostles, went up to the temple; and we are commanded by the apostle, "not to
forsake the assembling of ourselves together," as the manner of too many is in
our days; and such too, as would have us think well of them, though they seldom
or never tread the courts of the Lord's house. But, though our devotions begin
in our closets, they must not end there. And, if people never show their
devotions abroad, I must suspect they have little or none at home. "Two men
went up to the temple." And what went they thither for? Not (as multitudes
amongst us do) to make the house of God a house of merchandise, or to turn it
into a den of thieves; much less to ridicule the preacher, or disturb the
congregation. No, they came to the temple, says our Lord, to pray. Thither
should the tribes of God's spiritual Israel go up, to walk with and pour out
their hearts before the mighty God of Jacob.

"Two men went up to the temple to pray." I fear one of them forgot his errand.
I have often been at a loss what to call the Pharisee's address; It certainly
does not deserve the name of prayer: He may rather be said to come to the
temple to boast, than to pray; for I do not find one word of confession of his
original guilt; not one single petition for pardon of his past actual sins, or
for grace to help and assist him for the time to come: he only brings in God,
as it were, a reckoning of his performances, and does that, which no flesh can
justly do, I mean, glory in his presence.

Verse 11. "The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank thee
that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as
this Publican."

Our Lord first takes notice of his posture; the Pharisee stood, he is not to
be condemned for that; for standing, as well as kneeling, is a proper posture
for prayer. When you stand praying, says our Lord; though sometimes our Lord
kneeled, nay, lay slat on his face upon the ground; his apostles also kneeled,
as we read in the Acts, which has made me wonder at some, who are so bigoted
to standing in family as well as public prayer, that they will not kneel,
notwithstanding all kneel that are around them. I fear there is something of
the Pharisee in this conduct. Kneeling and standing are indifferent, if the
knee of the soul be bent, and the heart upright toward God. We should study
not to be particular in indifferent things, lest we offend weak minds. What the
Pharisee is remarked for, is his standing by himself: For the words may be
rendered, he stood by himself, upon some eminent place, at the upper part of
the temple, near the holy of holies, that the congregation might see what a
devout man he was: Or it may be understood as we read it, he prayed by himself
or of himself out of his own heart; he did not pray by form; it was an
extempore prayer: For there are many Pharisees that pray and preach too
extempore. I do not see why these may not be acquired, as well as other arts
and sciences. A man, with a good elocution, ready turn of thought, and good
memory, may repeat his own or other men's sermons, and by the help of a Wilkins
or Henry, may pray seemingly excellently well, and yet not have the least grain
of true grace in his heart; and I speak this, not to cry down extempore prayer,
or to discourage those dear souls who really pray by the Spirit; I only would
hereby give a word of reproof to those who are so bigoted to extempore prayer,
that they condemn, at least judge, all that use forms, as though not so holy
and heavenly, as others who pray without them. Alas! this is wrong. Not every
one that prays extempore is a spiritual, nor every one that prays with a form,
a formal man. Let us not judge one another; let not him that uses a form, judge
him that prays extempore, on that account; and let not him that prays
extempore, despise him who uses a form. -- "The Pharisee stood, and prayed thus
by himself." Which may signify also praying inwardly in his heart; for there is
a way (and that an excellent one too) of praying when we cannot speak: thus
Anna prayed when she spoke not aloud, only her lips moved. Thus God says to
Moses, "Why criest thou?" when it is plain, he did not speak a word. This is
what the apostle means by the "Spirit making intercession (for believers) with
groanings which cannot be uttered." For there are times when the soul is too
big to speak; when God fills as it were, and overshadows it with his presence,
so that it can only fall down, worship, adore, and lie in the dust before the
Lord. Again, there is a time when the soul is benumbed, barren and dry, and the
believer has not a word to say to his heavenly Father; and then the heart only
can speak. And I mention this for the encouragement of weak Christians, who
think they never are accepted but when they have a flow of words, and fancy
they do not please God at the bottom, for no other reason but because they do
not please themselves. Such would do well to consider, that God knows the
language of the heart, and the mind of the spirit; and that we make use of
words, not to inform God, but to affect ourselves. Whenever therefore any of
you find yourselves in such a frame, be not discouraged: offer yourselves up in
silence before God, as clay in the hands of the potter, for him to write and
stamp his own divine image upon your souls. But I believe the Pharisee knew
nothing of this way of prayer: he was self-righteous, a stranger to the divine
life; and therefore either of the former explanations may be best put upon
these words. "He stood, and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank thee that I
am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as this
publican." Here is some appearance of devotion, but it is only in appearance.
To thank God, that we are not extortioners, unjust, adulterers, and as wicked
in our practices, as other men are, is certainly meet, right, and our bounden
duty: for whatever degrees of goodness there may be in us, more than in others,
it is owing to God's restraining, preventing and assisting grace. We are all
equally conceived and born in sin all are fallen short of the glory of God, and
liable to all the curses and maledictions of the law; so that he that glories,
must glory only in the Lord. For none of us have any thing which he did not
receive; and whatever we have received, we did not in the least merit it, nor
could we lay the least claim to it on any account whatever: we are wholly
indebted to free grace for all. Had the Pharisee thought thus, when he said,
"God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are," it would have been an
excellent introduction to his prayer: but he was a free-willer, as well as
self-righteous (for he that is the one must be the other) and thought by his
own power and strength he had kept himself from these vices. And yet I do not
see what reason he had to trust in himself that he was righteous, merely
because he was not an extortioner, unjust, adulterer; for all this while he
might be, as he certainly was (as is also every self-righteous person) as proud
as the devil. But he not only boasts, but lies before God (as all
self-justiciaries will be found liars here or hereafter.) He thanks God that he
was not unjust: but is it not an act of the highest injustice to rob God of his
prerogative? Is it not an act of injustice to judge our neighbor? And yet of
both these crimes this self-righteous vaunter is guilty. "Even as this
Publican!" He seems to speak with the utmost disdain; this Publican Perhaps he
pointed at the poor man, that others might treat him with the like contempt.
Thou proud, confident boaster, what had thou to do with that poor Publican?
Supposing other Publicans were unjust and extortioners, did it therefore follow
that he must be so? Or, if he had been such a sinner, how know thou but he
has repented of those sins? His coming up to the temple to pray, is one good
sign of a reformation at least. Thou art therefore inexcusable, O Pharisee, who
thus judge the Publican; for thou that judge him to be unjust, art, in the
very act of judging, unjust thyself: thy sacrifice is only the sacrifice of a
fool.

We have seen what the Pharisee's negative goodness comes to; I think, nothing
at all. Let us now see how far his positive goodness extends; for, if we are
truly religious, we shall not eschew evil, but also do good: "I fast twice in
the week, I give tithes of all that I possess."

The Pharisee is not here condemned for his fasting, for fasting is a Christian
duty; "when you fast," says our Lord, thereby taking it for granted, that his
disciples would fast. And "when the bridegroom shall be taken away, then shall
they fast in those days." In fasting often, says the apostle. And all that
would not be castaways, will take care, as their privilege, without legal
constraint, to "keep their bodies under, and bring them into subjection." The
Pharisee is only condemned for making a righteousness of his fasting, and
thinking that God would accept him, or that he was any better than his
neighbors, merely on account of his fasting: this is what he was blamed for.
The Pharisee was not to be discommended for fasting twice in a week; I wish
some Christians would imitate him more in this: but to depend on fasting in the
least, for his justification in the fight of God, was really abominable. "I
give tithes of all that I possess:" He might as well have said, I pay tithes.
But self-righteous people (whatever they may say to the contrary) think they
give something to God. I give tithes of all that I possess: I make conscience
of giving tithes, not only of all that the law requires, but of my mint,
annise, and cummin, of all things whatever I possess; this was well; but to
boast of such things, or of fasting, is Pharisaical and devilish. Now then let
us sum up all the righteousness of this boasting Pharisee, and see what little
reason he had to trust in himself, that he was righteous, or to despise others.
He is not unjust (but we have only his word for that, I think I have proved the
contrary;) he is no adulterer, no extortioner; he fasts twice in the week, and
gives tithes of all that he possesses; and all this he might do, and a great
deal more, and yet be a child of the devil: for here is no mention made of his
loving the Lord his God with all his heart, which was the "first and great
commandment of the law;" here is not a single syllable of inward religion; and
he was not a true Jew, who was only one outwardly. It is only an outside piety
at the best; inwardly he is full of pride, self-justification, free will, and
great uncharitableness.

Were not the Pharisees, do you think, highly offended at this character? For
they might easily know that it was spoken against them. And though perhaps some
of you may be offended at me, yet, out of love, I must tell you, I fear this
parable is spoken against many of you: For are there not many of you, who go up
to the temple to pray, with no better spirit than this Pharisee did? And
because you fast, it may be in the Lent, or every Friday, and because you do
nobody any harm, receive the sacrament, pay tithes, give an alms now and then,
you think that you are safe, and trust in yourselves that you are righteous,
and inwardly despise those, who do not come up to you in these outward duties?
This I am persuaded is the case of many of you, although alas! it is a
desperate one, as I shall endeavor to show at the close of this discourse.

Let us now take a view of the Publican, verse 13. "And the Publican standing
afar off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his
breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner."

The "Publican standing afar off:" Perhaps in the outward court of the temple,
conscious to himself that he was not worthy to approach the holy of holies; so
conscious, and so weighed down with a sense of his own unworthiness, that he
would not so much as lift up his eyes unto heaven, which he knew was God's
throne. Poor heart! what did he feel at this time! None but returning
Publicans, like himself can tell. Methinks I see him standing afar off,
pensive, oppressed, and even over whelmed with sorrow; sometimes he attempts to
look up; but then, thinks he, the heavens are unclean in God's sight, and the
very angels are charged with folly; how then shall such a wretch as I, dare to
lift up my guilty head! And to show that his heart was full of holy
self-resentment, and that he sorrowed after a godly sort, he smote upon his
breast; the word in the original implies, that he struck hard upon his breast;
he will lay the blame upon ^^one but his own wicked heart. He will not, like
unhumbled Adam, tacitly lay the fault of his vileness upon God, and say, the
"passions which thou gave me, they deceived me, and I sinned:" he is too
penitent thus to reproach his Maker: he smites upon his breast, his
treacherous, ungrateful, wicked breast; a breast now ready to burst: and at
length, out of the abundance of his heart, I doubt not with many tears, he at
last cries out, "God be merciful to me a sinner." Not, God be merciful to
yonder proud Pharisee: he found enough in himself to vent his resentment
against, without looking abroad upon others. Not, God be merciful to me a
saint; for he knew all his righteousnesses were but filthy rags. Not, God be
merciful to such or such a one; but, God be merciful to me, even to me a
sinner, a sinner by birth, a sinner in thought, word, and deed; a sinner as to
my person, a sinner as to all my performances; a sinner in whom is no health,
in whom dwells no good thing; a sinner, poor, miserable, blind, and naked,
from the crown of the head to the sole of the feet, full of wounds, and
bruises, and putrefying sores; a self-accused, self-condemned sinner. What
think you? would this Publican have been offended if any minister had told him
that he deserved to be damned? would he have been angry, if any one had told
him, that by nature he was half a devil and half a beast? No: he would have
confessed a thousand hells to have been his due, and that he was an earthly,
devilish sinner. He felt now what a dreadful thing it was to depart from the
living God: he felt that he was inexcusable every way; that he could in no
wise, upon account of any thing in himself, be justified in the sight of God;
and therefore lays himself at the feet of sovereign mercy, "God be merciful to
me a sinner." Here is no confidence in the flesh, no plea fetched from fasting,
paying tithes, or the performance of any other duty; here is no boasting that
he was not an extortioner, unjust, or an adulterer. Perhaps he had been guilty
of all these crimes, at least he knew he would have been guilty of all these,
had he been left to follow the devices and desires of his own heart; and
therefore, with a broken and contrite spirit, he cries out, "God be merciful to
me a sinner."

This man came up to the temple to pray, and he prayed indeed. And a broken and
contrite heart God will not despise. I tell you, says our Lord, I who lay in
the bosom of the Father from all eternity; I who am God, and therefore know all
things; I who can neither deceive, nor be deceived, whose judgment is according
to right; I tell you, whatever you may think of it, or of me for telling you
so, this man, this Publican, this despised, sinful, but brokenhearted man,
went down to his house justified (acquitted, and looked upon as righteous in
the sight of God) rather than the other.

Let Pharisees take heed that they do not pervert this text; for when it is
said, "this man went down to his house justified rather than the other," our
Lord does not mean that both were justified, and that the Publican had rather
more justification than the Pharisee: but it implies, either that the Publican
was actually justified, but the Pharisee was not; or, that the Publican was in
a better way to receive justification, than the Pharisee; according to our
Lord's saying, "the Publicans and harlots enter into the kingdom of heaven
before you." That the Pharisee was not justified is certain, for God resists
the proud; and that the Publican was at this time actually justified (and
perhaps went home with a sense of it in his heart) we have great reason to
infer from the latter part of the text, "For every one that exalts himself
shall be abased, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted."

The parable therefore now speaks to all who hear me this day: for that our
Lord intended it for our learning, is evident, from his making such a general
application; "for every one that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted."

The parable of the Publican and Pharisee, is but as it were a glass, wherein
we may see the different disposition of all mankind; for all mankind may be
divided into two general classes. Either they trust wholly in themselves, or in
part, that they are righteous, and then they are Pharisees; or they have no
confidence in the fl^s^, are selfcondemned sinners, and then they come under
the character of the Publican just now described. And we may add also, that the
different reception these men met with, points out to us in lively colors, the
different treatment the self-justiciary and self-condemned criminal will meet
with at the terrible day of judgment; "Every one that exalts himself shall be
abased, but he that humbles himself shall be exalted."

Every one, without exception, young or old, high or low, rich or poor (for God
is no respecter of persons) every one, whosoever he be, that exalts himself,
and not free grace; every one that trusts in himself that he is righteous,
that rests in his duties; or thinks to join them with the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, for justification in the sight of God, though he be no adulterer,
no extortioner, though he be not outwardly unjust, nay, though he last twice in
the week, and gives tithes of all that he possesses; yet shall he be abased in
the sight of all good men who know him here, and before men and angels, and God
himself, when Jesus Christ comes to appear in judgment hereafter. How low, none
but the Almighty God can tell. He shall be abased to live with devils, and make
his abode in the lowest hell for evermore.

Hear this, all ye self-justiciaries, tremble, and behold your doom! a dreadful
doom, more dreadful than words can express, or thought conceive! If you refuse
to humble yourselves, after hearing this parable, I call heaven and earth to
witness against you this day, that God shall visit you with all his storms, and
pour all the vials of his wrath upon your rebellious heads; you exalted
yourselves here, and God shall abase you hereafter; you are as proud as the
devil, and with devils shall you dwell to all eternity. Be not deceived, God is
not mocked; he sees your hearts, he knows all things. And notwithstanding you
may come up to the temple to pray, your prayers are turned into sin, and you go
down to your houses unjustified, it you are self justiciaries; and do you know
what it is to be unjustified? Why, if you are unjustified, the wrath of God
abides upon you; you are in your blood; all the curses of the law belong to
you: Cursed are you when you go out, cursed are you when you come in; cursed
are your thoughts, cursed are your words, cursed are your deeds; every thing
you do, say, or think from morning to night, is only one continued series of
sin. However highly you may be esteemed in the sight of men, however you may be
honored with the uppermost seats in the synagogues in the church militant, you
will have no place in the church triumphant. Humble yourselves therefore under
the mighty hand of God: Pull down every self-righteous thought, and every proud
imagination that now exalts itself against the perfect, personal, imputed
righteousness of the dear Lord Jesus: For he (and he alone) that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

He that humbles himself, whatever he be; if, instead of ^asting twice in the
week, he has been drunk twice in the week; if, instead of giving tithes of all
that he possesses, he has cheated the minister of his tithes, and state of his
taxes; notwithstanding he be unjust, an extortioner, an adulterer, nay,
notwithstanding the sins of all mankind center and unite in him; yet, if
through grace, like the Publican, he is enabled to humble himself, he shall be
exalted; not in a temporal manner; for Christians must rather expect to be
abased, and to have their names cast out as evil and to lay down their lives
for Christ Jesus in this world: But he shall be exalted in a spiritual sense;
he shall be freely justified from all his sins by the blood of Jesus; he shall
have peace with God, a peace which passes all understanding; not only peace,
but joy in believing; he shall be translated from the kingdom of Satan, to the
kingdom of God's dear Son: He shall dwell in Christ, and Christ in him: He
shall be one with Christ, and Christ one with him: He shall drink of divine
pleasures as out of a river: He shall be sanctified throughout in spirit, soul,
and body; in one word, he shall be filled with all the fullness of God. Thus
shall the man who humbles himself be exalted here; but O how high shall he be
exalted hereafter! as high as the highest heavens, even to the righthand of
God: There he shall sit, happy both in soul and body, and judge angels; high,
out of the reach of all sin and trouble, eternally secure from all danger of
falling. O sinners, did you but know how highly God intends to exalt those who
humble themselves, and believe in Jesus, surely you would humble yourselves, at
least beg of God to humble you; for it is he that must strike the rock of your
hearts, and cause floods of contrite tears to flow therefrom. And O, that God
would give this sermon such a commission, as he once gave the rod of Moses! I
would strike you through and through with the rod of his word, till each of you
was brought to cry out with the poor Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner.
What pleasant language would this be in the ears of the Lord of Sabbath! Are
there no sinners among you? What, are you all Pharisees? Surely you cannot bear
the thoughts of returning home unjustified, can you? What if a fit of the
apoplexy should seize you, and your souls be hurried away before the awful
Judge of quick and dead? What will you do without Christ's righteousness? If
you go out of the world unjustified, you must remain so for ever. O, that you
would humble yourselves, then would the Lord exalt you: It may be, that whilst
I am speaking, the Lord might justify you freely by his grace. I observed, that
perhaps the Publican had a sense of his justification before he went from the
temple, and knew that his pardon was sealed in heaven; and who knows but you
may be thus exalted before you go home, if you humble yourselves? O, what
peace, love, and joy, would you then feel in your hearts! You would have a
heaven upon earth. O, that I could bear any of you say (as I once heard a poor
sinner, under my preaching cry out) "He is come, he is come!" How would you
then, like him, extol a precious, a free-hearted Christ! How would you magnify
him for being such a friend to Publicans and sinners? Greater love can no man
show, than to lay down his life for a friend; but Christ laid down his life for
his enemies, even for you, if you are enabled to humble yourselves, as the
Publican did. Sinners, I know not how to leave off talking with you; I would
fill my mouth with arguments, I would plead with you. Come, let us reason
together; though your sins be as scarlet, yet if you humble yourselves, they
shall be as white as snow. One act of true faith in Christ justifies you for
ever and ever; he has not promised you what he cannot perform; he is able to
exalt you: For God has exalted, and given him a name above every name, that at
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow; nay, God has exalted him to be not
only a Prince, but a Savior. May he be a Savior to you! and then I shall have
reason to rejoice in the day of judgment, that I have not preached in vain, nor
labored in vain.

SERMON VIII.
The Holy Spirit convincing the world of sin, righteousness, and judgment.
JOHN xvi. 8. And when he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment.
THESE words contain part of a gracious promise, which the blessed Jesus was
pleased to make to his weeping and sorrowful disciples. The time was now
drawing near, in which the Son of man was first to be lifted upon the cross,
and afterward to heaven. Kind, wondrous kind! had this merciful High Priest
been to his disciples, during the time of his tabernacling amongst them. He had
compassion on their infirmities, answered for them when assaulted by their
enemies, and fet them right when out of the way, either in principle or
practice. He neither called nor used them as servants, but as friends; and he
revealed his secrets to them from time to time. He opened their understandings,
that they (...) understand the scriptures; explained to them the hidden
mysteries of the kingdom of God, when he spoke to others in parables: Nay, he
became the servant of them all, and even condescended to wash their feet. The
thoughts of parting with so dear and loving a master as this, especially for a
long season, must needs affect them much. When on a certain occasion he
intended to be absent from them only for a night; we are told, he was obliged
to constrain them to leave him; no wonder then, that when he now informed them
he must entirely go away, and that the Pharisees in his absence would put them
out of their synagogues, and excommunicate them; yea, that the time should
come, that whosoever killed them, would think they did God service (a prophecy,
one would imagine, in an especial manner designed for the suffering ministers
of this generation;) no wonder, I say, considering all this that we are told,
ver. 6. Sorrow had (...) their hearts: "Because I have said these things unto
you, sorrow has filled your hearts." The expression is very emphatical; their
hearts were so full of concern; that they were ready to burst. In order*
therefore, to reconcile them to this mournful dispensation our dear and
compassionate Redeemer shows them the necessity he lay under to leave them;
"Nevertheless I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away:" As
though he had said, Think not, my dear disciples, that I leave you out of
anger: No, it is for your sakes, for your profit that I go away: For if I go
not away, if I die not upon the cross for your sins, and rise again for your
justification, and ascend into heaven to make intercession, and plead my merits
before my Father's throne, the Comforter, the Holy Ghost, will not, cannot come
unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you. And, that they might know
what he was to do, "When he is come, he will reprove the world of sin, and of
righteousness, and of judgment."

The person referred to in the words of the text, is plainly the Comforter, the
Holy Ghost; and the promise was first made to our Lord's apostles. But though
it was primarily made to them, and was literally and remarkably fulfilled at
the day of Pentecost, when the Holy Ghost came down as a mighty rushing wind,
and also when three thousand were pricked to the heart by Peter's preaching;
yet, as the apostles were the representatives of the whole body of believers,
we must infer, that this promise must be looked upon as spoken to us, and to
our children, and to as many as the Lord our God shall call.

My design from these words, is to show the manner in which the Holy Ghost
generally works upon the hearts of those, who, through grace, are made vessels
of mercy, and translated from the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of
God's dear Son.

I say, generally: for as God is a sovereign agent, his sacred Spirit blows
not only on whom, out when and how it lists. Therefore, far he it from me to
confine the Almighty to one way of acting: or say, that all undergo an equal
degree of conviction; no, there is a holy variety in God's methods of calling
home his elect. But this we may affirm assuredly, that, wherever there is a
work of true conviction and conversion wrought upon a sinner's heart, the Holy
Ghost, whether by a greater or less degree of inward soul-trouble, does that
which our Lord Jesus told the disciples, in the words of the text, that he
should do when he came.

If any of you ridicule inward religion, or think there is no such thing as our
feeling or receiving the Holy Ghost, I fear my preaching will be quite
foolishness to you, and that you will understand me no more than if I spoke to
you in an unknown tongue. But as the promise in the text is made to the world,
and as I know it will be fulfilling till time shall be no more, I shall proceed
to explain the general way whereby the Holy Ghost works upon every converted
sinner's heart; and I hope that the Lord, even whilst I am speaking, will be
pleased to fulfill it in many of your hearts. "And when he is come, he will
reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment."

The word which we translate reprove, ought to be rendered convince; and in the
original it imp^^es a conviction by way of argumentation, and coming with a
power upon the mind equal to a demonstration. A great many scoffers of these
last days, will ask such as they term pretenders to the Spirit, how they feel
the Spirit, and how they know the Spirit? They might as well ask, how they
know, and how they feel the sun when it shines upon the body? For with equal
power and demonstration does the Spirit of God work upon and convince the soul.
And,

First, It convinces of sin; and generally of some enormous sin, the worst
perhaps the convicted person ever was guilty of. Thus, when our Lord was
conversing with the woman of Samaria, he convinced her first of her adultery:
"Woman, go call thy husband. The woman answered, and said, I have no husband.
Jesus said unto her, Thou have well said, I have no husband: for thou have had
five husbands, and he whom thou now have, is not thy husband; in this said
thou truly." With this, there went such a powerful conviction of all her other
actual sins, that soon after, she "left her water pot, and went her way into
the city, and says to the men, Come, and see a man that told me all things
that ever I did: Is not this the Christ?" Thus our Lord also dealt with the
persecutor Saul: he convinced him first of the horrid sin of persecution;
"Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" Such a sense of all his other sins,
probably at the same time revived in his mind, that immediately he died; that
is, died to all his false confidences, and was thrown into such an agony of
soul, that he continued three days, and neither did eat nor drink. This is the
method the Spirit of God generally takes in dealing with sinners; he first
convinces them of some heinous actual si^^ and at the same time brings all
their other sins into remembrance, and as it were sets them in battlearray
before them: "When he is come, he will reprove the world of sin."

And was it ever thus with you, my dear hearers? (For I must question you as I
go along* because I intend, by the divine help, to preach not only to your
heads, but your hearts.) Did the Spirit of God ever bring all your sins thus to
remembrance, and make you cry out to God, "thou writest bitter things against
me?" Did your actual sins ever appear before you, as though drawn in a map? If
not, you have great reason (unle^^ you were sanctified from the womb) to
suspect th^^ you are not convicted, much more not converted, and that the
promise of the text was never yet fulfilled in your hearts.

Farther: When the Comforter comes into a sinner's heart, though it generally
convinces the sinner of his actual sin first, yet it leads him to see and
bewail his original sin, the fountain from which all these polluted streams do
flow.

Though every thing in the earth, air and water; every thing both without and
within, concur to prove the truth of that assertion in the scripture, "in Adam
we all have died;" yet most are so hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,
that notwithstanding they may give an assent to the truth of the proposition in
their heads, yet they never felt it really in their hearts. Nay, some in words
professedly deny it, though their works, too, too plainly prove them to be
degenerate sons of a degenerate father. But when the Comforter, the Spirit of
God arrests a sinner, and convinces him of sin, all carnal reasoning against
original corruption, every proud and high imagination, which exalts itself
against that doctrine, is immediately thrown down; and he is made to cry out,
"Who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" He now finds that
concupisence is sin; and does not so much bewail his actual sins, as the inward
perverseness of his heart, which he now finds not only to be an enemy to, but
also direct enmity against God.

And did the Comforter, my dear friends, ever come with such a convincing power
as this into your hearts? Were you ever made to see and feel, that in your
flesh dwells no good thing; that you are conceived and born in sin; that you
are by nature children of wrath; that God would be just if he damned you,
though you never committed an actual sin in your lives? So often as you have
been at church and sacrament, did you ever feelingly confess, that there was no
health in you; that the remembrance of your original and actual sins was
grievous unto you, and the burden of them intolerable? If not, you have been
only offering to God vain oblations; you never yet prayed in your lives, the
Comforter never yet came effectually into your souls; consequently you are not
in the faith properly so called; no, you are at present in a state of death and
damnation.

Again, the Comforter, when he comes effectually to work upon a sinner, not
only convinces him of the sin of his nature, and the sin of his life, but also
of the sin of his duties.

We all naturally are legalists, thinking to be justified by the works of the
law. When somewhat awakened by the terrors of the Lord, we immediately, like
the Pharisees of old, go about to establish our own righteousness, and think we
shall, find acceptance with God, if we seek it with ^ears; finding ourselves
damned by nature and our actual sins, we then think to recommend ourselves to
God by our duties, and hope, by our doings of one kind or another, to inherit
eternal life. But, whenever the Comforter comes into the heart, it convinces
the soul of these false rests, and makes the sinner to see that all his
righteousnesses are but as filthy rags; that his best works are but so many
splendid sins; and that, for the most pompous services, he deserves no better
doom than that of the unprofitable servant, to be thrown into outer darkness,
where is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

And was this degree of conviction ever wrought in any of your souls? Did the
Comforter ever come into your hearts, so as to make you sick of your duties, as
well as your sins? Were you ever, with the great apostle of the Gentiles, made
to abhor your own righteousness which is by the law, and acknowledge that you
deserve to be damned, though you should give all your goods to seed the poor?
Were you made to feel, that your very repentance needed to be repented of, and
that every thing in yourselves is but dung and dross? And that all the
arguments you can ^etch for mercy, must be out of the heart and pure unmerited
love of God? Were you ever made to lie at the feet of sovereign grace, and to
say, Lord if thou will, thou may save me; if not, thou may justly damn
me; I have nothing to plead, I can in no wise justify myself in thy sight; my
best performances, I see will condemn me; and all I have to depend upon is thy
free grace? What say you? Was this ever, or is this now, the habitual language
of your hearts? You have been frequently at the temple; but did you ever
approach it in the temper of the poor publican; and, after you have done all*
acknowledge that you have done nothing; and upon a feeling experimental sense
of your own unworthiness and sinfulness every way, smite upon your breasts, and
say, "God be merciful to us sinners?" If you never were thus minded, the
Comforter never yet effectually came into your souls, you are out of Christ;
and if God should require your souls in that condition, he would be no better
to you than a consuming sire.

But there is a fourth sin, of which the comforter, when he comes convinces the
soul, and which alone (it is very remarkable) our Lord mentions as though it
was the only sin worth mentioning; for indeed it is the root of all other sins
whatsoever: It is the reigning as well as the damning sin of the world. And
what now do you imagine that sin may be? It is that cursed sin, that root of
all other evils, I mean the sin of unbelief. "Of sin, because they believe not
on me."

But does the Christian world, or any of you that hear me this day, want the
Holy Ghost to convince you of unbelief? Are there any infidels here? Yes (O
that I had not too great reason to think so) I fear most are such: Not indeed
such infidels as professedly deny the Lord that bought us (though I fear too
many even of such monsters are in every country) but I mean such unbelievers
that have no more faith in Christ than the devils themselves. Perhaps you may
think you believe, because you repeat the creed, or subscribe to a confession
of faith; because you go to church or meeting, receive the sacrament, and are
taken into full communion. These are blessed privileges; but all this may be
done without our being true believers. And I know not how to detect your false
hypocritical faith better, than by putting to you this question, How long have
you believed? Would not most of you say, as long as we can remember, we never
did disbelieve. Then this is a certain sign that you have no true faith at all:
No, not so much as a grain of mustard seed: For if you believe now (unless you
were sanctified from your infancy, which is the case of some) you must know
that there was a time in which you did not believe on the Lord Jesus Christ;
and the Holy Ghost, if ever you received it, convinced you of this. Eternal
truth has declared, "when he is come he will convince the world of sin, because
they believe not on me."

None of us believe by nature: But after the Holy Ghost has convinced us of the
sin of our natures, and the sin of our lives and duties, in order to convince
us of our utter inability to save ourselves, and that we must be beholden to
God, as for every thing else, so for faith (without which it is impossible to
please, or be saved by Christ) he convinces us also that we have no faith. Do
thou believe on the Son of God? is the grand question which the Holy Ghost now
puts to the soul: At the same time he works with such power and demonstrations,
that the soul sees, and is obliged to confess, that it has no faith.

This is a thing little thought of by most who call themselves believers. They
dream they are Christians because they live in a Christian country: If they
were born Turks, they would believe on Mahomet; for what is that which men
commonly call faith, but an outward consent to the established religion? But do
not you thus deceive your ownselves; true faith is quite another thing. Ask
yourselves, therefore, whether or not the Holy Ghost ever powerfully convinced
you of the sin of unbelief? You are perhaps so devout (you may imagine) as to
get a catalogue of sins, which you look over, and confess in a formal manner,
as often as you go to the holy sacrament: But among all your sins, did you ever
once confess and bewail that damning sin of unbelief? Were you ever made to cry
out, Lord, give me faith; Lord, give me to believe on thee; O that I had faith!
O that I could believe! If you never were thus distressed, at least, if you
never saw and felt, that you had no faith, it is a certain sign that the Holy
Ghost the Comforter, never came into and worked savingly upon your souls.

But is it not odd, that the Holy Ghost should be called a Comforter, when it
is plain, by the experience of all God's children, that this work of conviction
is usually attended with sore inward conflicts, and a great deal of
soul-trouble? I answer, the Holy Ghost may well be termed a Comforter, even in
this work; because it is the only way to, and ends in, true solid comfort.
Blessed are they that are thus convicted by him; for they shall be comforted.
Nay, not only so, but there is present comfort, even in the midst of these
convictions: The soul secretly rejoices in the sight of its own misery, blesses
God for bringing it out of darkness into light, and looks forward with a
comfortable prospect of future deliverances, knowing, that 'though sorrow may
endure for a night, joy will come in the morning."

Thus it is that the Holy Ghost convinces the soul of sin. And, if so, how
wretchedly are they mistaken, that blend the light of the Spirit with the light
of conscience, as all such do, who say, that Christ lights every man that
comes into the world, and that light, if improved, will bring us to Jesus
Christ? If such doctrine be true, the promise in the text was needless: Our
Lord's apostles had already that light; the world hereafter to be convinced,
had that light; and, if that was sufficient to bring them to Christ, why was it
expedient that Christ should go away to heaven, to send down the Holy Ghost to
do this for them? Alas! all have not this Spirit: It is the special gift of
God, and, without this special gift, we can never come to Christ.

The light of conscience will accuse or convince us of any common sin; but the
light of natural conscience never did, never will, and never can convince us of
unbelief. If it could, how comes it to pass, that not one of the heathens, who
improved the light of nature in such an eminent degree, was ever convinced of
unbelief? No, natural conscience cannot effect this; it is the peculiar
property of the Holy Ghost the Comforter: "When he is come, he will reprove (or
convince) the world of sin, of righteousness, and judgment."

We have heard how he convinces of sin: We come now to show,

Secondly, What is the righteousness, of which the Comforter convinces the
world?

By the word righteousness, in some places of scripture, we are to understand
that common justice which we ought to practice between man and man; as when
Paul is said to reason of temperance and righteousness before a trembling
Felix. But here (as in a multitude of other places in holy writ) we are to
understand by the word righteousness, the active and passive obedience of the
dear Lord Jesus; even that perfect, personal, allsufficient righteousness,
which he has wrought out for that world which the Spirit is to convince. "Of
righteousness (says our Lord) because I go to the Father, and ye see me no
more." This is one argument that the Holy Spirit makes use of to prove Christ's
righteousness, because he is gone to the Father, and we see him no more. For
had he not wrought out a sufficient righteousness, the Father would have sent
him back, as not having done what he undertook; and we should have seen him
again.

O the righteousness of Christ! It so comforts my soul, that I must be excused
if I mention it in almost all my discourses. I would not, if I could help it,
have one sermon without it. Whatever infidels may object, or Arminians
sophistically argue against an imputed righteousness; yet whoever know
themselves and God, must acknowledge, that "Jesus Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness (and perfect justification in the sight of God) to every one
that believes," and that we are to be made the righteousness of God in him.
This, and this only, a poor sinner can lay hold of, as a sure anchor of his
hope. Whatever other scheme of salvation men may lay, I acknowledge I can see
no other foundation whereon to build my hopes of salvation, but on the rock of
Christ's personal righteousness, imputed to my soul.

Many, I believe, have a rational conviction of, and agree with me in this: But
rational convictions, if rested in, avail but little; it must be a spiritual,
experimental conviction of the truth which is saving. And therefore our Lord
says, when the Holy Ghost comes in the day of his power, it convinces of this
righteousness, of the reality, completeness and sufficiency of it, to save a
poor sinner.

We have seen how the Holy Ghost convinces the sinner of the sin of his nature,
life, duties, and of the sin of unbelief, and what then must the poor creature
do? He must, he must inevitably despair, if there be no hope but in himself.
When therefore the Spirit has hunted the sinner out of all his false rests and
hiding-places, taken off the pitiful fig leaves of his own works, and driven
him out of the trees of the garden (his outward reformations) and placed him
naked before the bar of a sovereign, holy, just, and sin-avenging God; then*
then it is, when the soul, having the sentence of death within itself because
of unbelief, has a sweet display of Christ's righteousness made to it by the
holy Spirit of God. Here it is, that he begins more immediately to act in the
quality of a Comforter, and convinces the soul so powerfully of the reality and
all sufficiency of Christ's righteousness, that the soul is immediately set a
hungering and thirsting after it. Now the sinner begins to see, that though he
has destroyed himself, yet in Christ is his help; that, though he has no
righteousness of his own to recommend him, there is a fullness of grace, a
fullness of truth, a fullness of righteousness in the dear Lord Jesus, which, if
once imputed to him, would make him happy for ever and ever.

None can tell, but those happy souls who have experienced it, with what
demonstration of the Spirit this conviction comes. O how amiable, as well as
all-sufficient, does the blessed Jesus now appear! With what new eyes does the
soul now see the Lord its righteousness! Brethren, it is unutterable. If you
were never thus convinced of Christ's righteousness in your own souls, though
you may believe it doctrinally, it will avail you nothing; if the Comforter
never came savingly into your souls, then you are comfortless indeed. But

What will this righteousness avail, if the soul has it not in possession?

Thirdly, The next thing therefore the Comforter, when he comes, convinces the
soul of, is judgment.

By the word judgment I understand, that wellgrounded peace, that settled
judgment, which the soul forms of itself, when it is enabled by the Spirit of
God to lay hold on Christ's righteousness, which I believe it always does, when
convinced in the manner beforementioned. "Of judgment (says our Lord) because
the Prince of this world is judged;" the soul, being enabled to lay hold on
Christ's perfect righteousness by a lively faith, has a conviction wrought in
it by the Holy Spirit, that the "Prince of this world is judged." The soul
being now justified by faith, has peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, and can triumphantly say, it is Christ that justifies me, who is he
that condemns me? The strong man armed is now cast out; my soul is in a true
peace; the Prince of this world will come and accuse, but he has now no share
in me: The blessed Spirit which I have received, and whereby I am enabled to
apply Christ's righteousness to my poor soul, powerfully convinces me of this:
Why should I fear? Or of what shall I be afraid, since God's Spirit witnesses
with my spirit, that I am a child of God? The Lord is ascended up on high; he
has led captivity captive; he has received the Holy Ghost the Comforter, that
best of gifts for men: and that Comforter is come into my heart: he is faithful
that has promised: I, even I am powerfully, rationally, spiritually convicted
of sin, righteousness and judgment. By this I know the prince of this world is
judged.

Thus, I say, may we suppose that soul to triumph, in which the promise of the
text is happily fulfilled. And though, at the beginning of this discourse, I
said, most had never experienced any thing of this, and that therefore this
preaching must be foolishness to such; yet I doubt not but there are some few
happy souls, who, through grace, have been enabled to follow me step by step
and notwithstanding the Holy Ghost might not directly work in the same order as
I have described, and perhaps they cannot exactly say the time when, yet they
have a w^ll grounded confidence that the work is done, and that they have
really been convinced of sin, righteousness, and judgment, in some way, or at
some time or another.

And now what shall I say to you? O thank God, thank the Lord Jesus, thank the
ever blessed Trinity, for this unspeakable gift: For you would never have been
thus highly favored, had not he who first spoke darkness into light, loved you
with an everlasting love, and enlightened you by his Holy Spirit, and that too,
not on account of any good thing foreseen in you, but for his own name's sake.

Be humble therefore, O believers be humble: Look to the rock from whence you
have been hewn: Extol free grace; admire electing love, which alone has made
you to differ from the rest of your brethren. Has God brought you into light?
Walk as becomes the children of light. Provoke not the Holy Spirit to depart
from you: For though he has sealed you to the day of redemption, and you know
that the Prince of this world is judged; yet if you backslide, grow lukewarm,
or forget your first love, the Lord will visit your offenses with the rod of
affliction, and your sin with spiritual scourges. Be not therefore highminded,
but fear. Rejoice, but let it be with trembling. As the elect of God, put on,
not only humbleness of mind, but bowels of compassion; and pray, O pray for
your unconverted brethren! Help (...), help me now, O children of God, and hold
up my hands, as Aaron and Hur once held up the hands of Moses. Pray whilst I am
preaching, that the Lord may enable me to say, This day is the promise in the
text fulfilled in some poor sinners' hearts. Cry mightily to God, and with the
cords of a holy violence, pull down blessings on your neighbors heads. Christ
yet lives and reigns in heaven: The residue of the Spirit is yet in his hand,
and a plentiful effusion of it is promised in the latter days of the church.
And O that the Holy Ghost, the blessed Comforter, would now come down, and
convince those that are Christ less among you, "of sin, of righteousness, and
of judgment!" O that you were once made willing to be convinced!

But perhaps you had rather be filled with wine than with the Spirit, and are
daily chasing that Holy Ghost from your souls. What shall I say for you to God?
"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do." What shall I say from
God to you? Why?" that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself:"
Therefore I beseech you, as in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. Do not
go away contradicting and blaspheming. I know Satan would have you begone. Many
of you may be uneasy, and are ready to cry out, "What a weariness is this!" But
I will not let you go: I have wrestled with God for my hearers in private, and
I must wrestle with you here in public. Though of myself I can do nothing, and
you can no more by your own power come to and believe on Christ, than Lazarus
could come forth from the grave; yet who knows but God may beget some of you
again to a lively hope by this foolishness of preaching, and that you may be
some of that world, which the Comforter is to convince "of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment?" Poor Christ-less souls! do you know what a
condition you are in? Why, you are lying in the wicked one, the devil; he rules
in you, he walks and dwells in you, unless you dwell in Christ, and the
Comforter is come into your hearts. And will you contentedly lie in that wicked
one the devil? What wages will he give you? Eternal death. O that you would
come to Christ! The free gift of God through him is eternal life. He will
accept of you even now, if you will believe in him. The Comforter may yet come
into your hearts, even yours. All that are now his living temples, were once
lying in the wicked one as well as you. This blessed gift, this Holy Ghost, the
blessed Jesus received even for the rebellious.

I see many of you affected: But are your passions only a little wrought upon,
or are your souls really touched with a lively sense of the heinousness of your
sins, your want of faith, and the preciousness of the righteousness of Jesus
Christ? If so, I hope the Lord has been gracious, and that the Comforter is
coming into your hearts. O do not stifle these convictions! Do not go away, and
straightway forget what manner of doctrine you have heard, and thereby show
that these are only common workings of a few transient convictions, floating
upon the surface of your hearts. Beg of God that you may be sincere (for he
alone can make you so) and that you may indeed desire the promise of the text
to be fulfilled in your souls, Who knows but the Lord may be gracious? Remember
you have no plea but sovereign mercy; but for your encouragement also, remember
it is the world, such as you are, to whom the Comforter is to come, and whom he
is to convince: Wait therefore at Wisdom's gates. The bare probability of
having a door of mercy opened, is enough to keep you striving. Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, the chief of them: You know not but he
came to save you. Do not go and quarrel with God's decrees, and say, if I am a
reprobate, I shall be damned; if I am elected, I shall be saved; and therefore
I will do nothing. What have you to do with God's decrees? Secret things belong
to him; it is your business to give "all diligence to make your calling and
election sure." If there are but few who find the way that leads to life, do
you strive to be some of them: You know not but you may be in the number of
those few, and that your striving may be the means which God intends to bless,
to give you an entrance in. If you do not act thus, you are not sincere; and,
if you do, who knows but you may find mercy? For though after you have done all
that you can, God may justly cut you off, yet never was a single person damned
who did all that he could. Though therefore your hands are withered, stretch
them out; though you are impotent sick, and lame, come lie at the pool. Who
knows but by and by the Lord Jesus may have compassion on you, and send the
Comforter to convince you of sin, righteousness, and of judgment? He is a God
full of compassion and long-suffering, otherwise you and I had been long since
lifting up our eyes in torments. But still he is patient with us!

O Christ-less sinners, you are alive, and who knows but God intends to bring
you to repentance? Could my prayers or tears effect it, you should have volleys
of the one, and floods of the other. My heart is touched with a sense of your
condition: May our merciful High Priest now send down the Comforter and make
you sensible of it also! O the love of Christ! It constrains me to beseech you
to come to him; what do you reject, if you reject Christ, the Lord of glory!
Sinners, give the dear Redeemer a lodging in your souls. Do not be
Bethshemites; give Christ your hearts, your whole hearts. Indeed he is worthy.
He made you and not you yourselves. You are not your own; give Christ then your
bodies and souls, which are his! Is it not enough to melt you down, to think
that the high and lofty One who inhabiteth eternity, should condescend to
invite you by his ministers? How soon can he frown you to hell? And how know
you but he may this very instant, if you do not hear his voice? Did any yet
harden their hearts against Christ, and prosper? Come then do not send me
sorrowful away: Do not let me have reason to cry out, O my leanness, my
leanness! Do not let me go weeping into my closet, and say, "Lord they will not
believe my report; Lord, I have called them, and they will not answer; I am
unto them as a very pleasant song, and as one that plays upon a pleasant
instrument; but their hearts are running after the lust of the eye, the lust of
the flesh, and the pride of life." Would you be willing that I should give such
an account of you, or make such a prayer before God? And yet I must not only do
so here, but appear in judgment against you hereafter, unless you will come to
Christ. Once more therefore I entreat you to come. What objections have you to
make? Behold, I stand here in the name of God, to answer all that you can
offer. But I know no one can come, unless the Father draw him: I will therefore
address me to my God, and intercede with him to send the Comforter into your
hearts.

O blessed Jesus, who art a God, whose compassions fail not, and in whom all
the promises are yea and amen; thou that sit between the cherubims, show
thyself amongst us. Let us now see thy outgoings! O let us now taste that thou
art gracious, and reveal thy almighty arm! Get thyself the victory in these
poor sinners' hearts. Let not the word spoken prove like water spilt upon the
ground. Send down, send down, O great High Priest, the Holy Spirit, to convince
the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. So will we give thanks and
praise to thee O Father, thee O Son, and thee O blessed Spirit; to whom as
three Persons, but one God, be ascribed, by angels and archangels, by cherubims
and seraphims, and all the heavenly hosts, all possible power, might, majesty,
and dominion, now and for evermore. Amen, Amen, Amen.

SERMON IX.
THE CONVERSION OF ZACCHEUS.
LUKE xix. 9, 10. And Jesus said unto him, This day is salvation come to this
house, forasmuch as he also is the son of Abraham. For the Son of man is come
to seek and to save that which was lost.
SALVATION, every where through the whole scripture, is said to be the free
gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Not only free, because God is a
sovereign agent and therefore may withhold it from, or confer it on, whom he
pleases; but free, because there is nothing to be found in man, that can any
way induce God to be merciful unto him. The righteousness of Jesus Christ is
the sole cause of our finding favor in God's sight: This righteousness
apprehended by faith (which is also the gift of God) makes it our own; and this
faith, if true, will work by love.

These are parts of those glad tidings which are published in the gospel; and
of the certainty of them, next to the express word of God, the experience of
all such as have been saved, is the (...) and as I take it, the most undoubted
proof, (...) God might teach us every way, he has been (...) to leave upon
record many instances (...) the power of his grace exerted in the salvation
(...) several persons, that we hearing how he dealt with them, might from
thence infer the manner we must expect to be dealt with ourselves, and learn in
what way we must look for salvation, if we truly desire to be made partakers of
the inheritance with the saints in light.

The conversion of the person referred to in the text, I think will be of no
small service to us in this matter, if rightly improved, I would hope, most of
you know who the person is, to whom the Lord Jesus speaks; it is the Publican
Zaccheus, to whose house the blessed Jesus said, salvation came, and whom he
pronounces a son of Abraham.

It is my design (God helping) to make some remarks upon his conversion
recorded at large in the preceding verses, and then to enforce the latter part
of the text, as an encouragement to poor undone sinners to come to Jesus
Christ. "For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost."

The evangelist Luke introduces the account of this man's conversion thus, ver.
1. "And Jesus entered and passed through Jericho." The holy Jesus made it his
business to go about doing good. As the sun in the firmament is continually
spreading his benign, quickening, and cheering influences over the natural; so
the Son of Righteousness arose with healing under his wings, and was daily and
hourly diffusing his gracious influences over the moral world. The preceding
chapter acquaints us of a notable miracle wrought by the holy Jesus on a poor
blind Bartimeus; and in this, a greater presents itself to our consideration.
The evangelist would have us take particular notice of it; for he introduces it
with the word behold: "And behold, there was a man named Zaccheus, who was the
chief among the Publicans, and he was rich."

Well might the evangelist usher in the relation of this man's conversion with
the word behold! For, according to human judgment, how many insurmoutable
obstacles lay in the way of it! Surely no one will say there was any fitness in
Zaccheus for salvation; for we are told that he was a Publican, and therefore
in all probability a notorious sinner. The Publicans were gatherers of the
Roman taxes; they were infamous for their abominable extortion; their very name
therefore became so odious, that we find the Pharisees often reproached our
Lord, as very wicked, because he was a friend unto and sat down to meat with
them. Zaccheus then, being a Publican, was no doubt a sinner; and, being chief
among the Publicans, consequently was chief among sinners. Nay, he was rich.
And one inspired apostle has told us, that not many mighty, not many noble, are
called. Another says, "God has chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith."
And he who was the Maker and the Redeemer of the apostles, assures us, "that it
is easier for a camel (or cable-rope) to go through the eye of a needle, than
for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God." Let not therefore the rich
glory in the multitude of their riches.

But rich as he was, we are told, verse 3 that he sought to see Jesus." And
that was a wonder indeed! The common people heard our Lord gladly, and the poor
received the gospel. The multitude, the very mob, the people that kn^w not the
law, as the proud highpriests called them* used to follow him on foot into the
country, and sometimes stayed with him three days together to hear him preach:
But did the rich believe or attend on him? No. Our Lord preached up the
doctrine of the cross; he preached too searching for them, and therefore they
counted him their enemy, persecuted and spoke all manner of evil against him
falsely. Let not the ministers of Christ marvel, if they meet with the like
treatment from the rich men of this wicked and adulterous generation. I should
think it no scandal (supposing it true) to hear it affirmed, that none but the
poor attended my ministry. Their souls are as precious to our Lord Jesus
Christ, as the souls of the greatest men. They were the poor that attended him
in the days of his flesh: These are they whom he has chosen to be rich in
faith, and to be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Were the rich in this
world's goods generally to speak well of me, woe be unto me; I should think it
a dreadful sign that I was only a wolf in sheep's clothing, that I spoke
peace, peace, when there was no peace and prophesied smoother things than the
gospel would allow of. Hear ye this, O ye rich. Let who will dare to do it, God
forbid that I should despise the poor; in doing so, I should reproach my Maker.
The poor are dear to my soul; I rejoice to see them fly to the doctrine of
Christ, like the doves to their windows. I only pray that the poor who attend,
may be evangelized, and turned into the spirit of the gospel: "If so, blessed
are ye; for yours is the kingdom of heaven."

But we must return to Zaccheus. He sought to see Jesus. This is good news. I
heartily wish I could say, it was out of a good principle: But, without
speaking contrary to that charity which hopes and believes all things for the
best, we may say, that the same principle drew him after Christ, which now
draws multitudes (to speak plainly, it may be multitudes of you) to hear a
particular preacher, even curiosity: For we are told, that he came not to hear
his doctrine, but to view his person, or to use the words of the evangelist, to
see who he was. Our Lord's same was now spread abroad through all Jerusalem,
and all the country round about: Some said he was a good man; others, nay, but
he deceives the people. And therefore curiosity drew out this rich Publican
Zaccheus to see who this person was, of whom he had heard such various
accounts. But it seems he could not conveniently get a sight of him for the
press, and because he was little of stature. Alas! how many are kept from
seeing Christ in glory, by reason of the press. I mean, how many are ashamed of
being singularly good, a^^ therefore follow a multitude to do evil, because
they have a press or throng of polite acquaintance! And* for fear of being set
at naught by those with whom they used to sit at meat, they deny the Lord of
(...), and are ashamed to confess him before men. This base, this servile fear
of man, is the bane of true Christianity; it brings a dreadful snare upon the
soul, and is the ruin of ten thousands: For I am fully persuaded, numbers are
rationally convicted of gospel truths; but not being able to brook contempt,
they will not prosecute their convictions, nor reduce them to practice. Happy
those, who in this respect, at least, like Zaccheus, resolved to overcome all
impediments that lie in their way to a sight of Christ: For finding he could
not see Christ because of the press, and the littleness of his natural stature,
he did not smite upon his breast, and depart, saying, "It is in vain to seek
after a sight of him any longer, I can never attain unto it." No, finding he
could not see Christ, if he continued in the midst of the press, "he ran before
the multitude; and climbed up into a sycamore tree, to see him; for he was to
pass that way*"

There ^s no ^eeing Christ in glory, unless we run before the multitude, and
are willing to be in the number of those despised few, who take the kingdom of
God by violence. The broad way in which so many go, can never be that straight
and narrow way which leads to life. Our Lord's flock was, and always will be,
comparatively a little one: And unless we dare to run before the multitude in a
holy singularity, and can rejoice in being accounted fools for Christ's sake,
we shall never see Jesus with comfort, when he appears in glory. From
mentioning the sycamore-tree, and considering the difficulty with which
Zaccheus must climb it, we may farther learn, that those who would see Christ,
must undergo other difficulties and hardships, besides contempt. Zaccheus,
without doubt went through both. Did not many, think you, laugh at him as he
ran along, and in the language of Michal, Readiness daughter, cry out, how
glorious did the rich Zacheus look today, when, forgetting, the greatness of
his station, he ran before a pitiful, giddy mob, and climbed a sycamore-tree,
to see an enthusiastic preacher! But Zaccheus cares not for all that; his
curiosity was strong: If he could but see who Jesus was, he did not value what
scoffers said of him. Thus, and much more will it be with all those who have an
effectual desire to see Jesus in heaven: They will go on from strength to
strength, break through every difficulty lying in their way, and care not what
men or devils say of or do unto them. May the Lord make us all thus minded, for
his dear Son's sake!

At length, after taking much pains, and going (as we may well suppose) through
much contempt, Zaccheus has climbed the tree; and there he sits, as he thinks,
hid in the leaves of it, and watching when he should see Jesus pass by: "For he
was to pass by that way."

But sing, O heavens, and rejoice, O earth! Praise magnify, and adore
sovereign, electing, free, preventing love; Jesus the everlasting God, the
Prince of peace, who saw Nathaniel under the fig tree, and Zaccheus from
eternity, now sees him in the sycamore-tree, and calls him in time.

Ver, 5. "And when Jesus came to the place, he looked up, and saw him, and said
unto him, Zaccheus, make haste and come down; for this day I must abide at thy
house." Amazing love! Well might Luke usher in the account with behold! It is
worthy of our highest admiration. When Zaccheus thought of no such thing, nay,
thought that Christ Jesus did not know him; behold, Christ does what we never
hear he did before or after, I mean, invite himself to the house of Zaccheus,
saying, "Zaccheus make haste and come down; for this day I must abide at thy
house." Not pray let me abide, but I must abide this day at thy house. He also
calls him by name, as though he was well acquainted with him: and indeed well
he might; for his name was written in the book of life, he was one of those
whom the Father had given him from all eternity: therefore he must abide at his
house that day. "For whom he did predestinate, them he also called."

Here then, as through a glass, we may see the doctrine of free grace evidently
exemplified before us. Here was no fitness in Zaccheus. He was a Publican,
chief among the Publicans; not only so, but rich, and came to see Christ only
out of curiosity: but sovereign grace triumphs over all. And if we do God
justice, and are effectually wrought upon, we must acknowledge there was no
more fitness in us than in Zaccheus; and, had not Christ prevented us by his
call, we had remained dead in trespasses and sins, and alienated from the
divine life, even as others. "Jesus looked up, and saw him, and said unto him,
Zaccheus, make haste and come down; for this day I must abide at thy house."

With what different emotions of heart may we suppose Zaccheus received this
invitation? Think you not that he was surprised to hear Jesus Christ call him
by name, and not only so, but invite himself to his house? Surely, thinks
Zaccheus, I dream: it cannot be; how should he know me? I never saw him before:
besides, I shall undergo much contempt, if I receive him under my roof. Thus, I
say, we may suppose Zaccheus thought within himself. But what says the
scripture? "I will make a willing people in the day of my power." With this
outward call, there went an efficacious power from God, which sweetly
overruled his natural will: and therefore, verse 6. "He made haste, and came
down, and received him joyfully," not only into his house, but also into his
heart.

Thus it is the great God brings home his children. He calls them by name, by
his word or providence; he speaks to them also by his Spirit. Hereby they are
enabled to open their hearts, and are made willing to receive the King of
glory, For Zaccheus' sake, let us not entirely condemn people that come unto
the word, out of no better principle than curiosity. Who knows, but God may
call them? It is good to be where the Lord is passing by. May all who are now
present out of this principle, hear the voice of the Son of God speaking to
their souls; and so hear that they may live! Not that men ought therefore to
take encouragement to come out of curiosity. For perhaps a thousand more, at
other times, came to see Christ out of curiosity, as well as Zaccheus, who were
not effectually called by his grace. I only mention this for the encouragement
of my own soul, and the consolation of God's children, who are too apt to be
angry with those who do not attend on the word out of love to God: but let them
alone. Brethren, pray for them. How do you know but Jesus Christ may speak to
their hearts? A few words from Christ applied by his Spirit, will save their
souls. "Zaccheus, says Christ, make haste and come down. And he made haste, and
came down, and received him joyfully."

I have observed in holy scripture, how particularly it is remarked, that
persons rejoiced upon believing in Christ. Thus the converted Eunuch went on
his way rejoicing; thus the jailor rejoiced with his whole house; thus Zaccheus
received Christ joyfully. And well may those rejoice who receive Jesus Christ;
for with him they receive righteousness, sanctification, and eternal
redemption. Many have brought up an ill report upon our good land, and would
fain persuade people that religion will make them melancholy mad. So far from
it, that joy is one ingredient of the kingdom of God in the heart of a
believer; "the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost." To rejoice in the Lord, is a gospel duty. Rejoice in the Lord always,
and again I say, rejoice. And who can be so joyful, as those who know that
their pardon is sealed before they go hence and are no more seen? The godly
may, but I cannot see how any ungodly men can rejoice: they cannot be truly
cheerful. What if wicked men may sometimes have laughter amongst them? It is
only the laughter of fools; in the midst of it there is heaviness; at the best,
it is but like the crackling of thorns under a pot: It makes a blaze, but soon
goes out. But, as for the godly, it is not so with them; their joy is solid and
lasting. As it is a joy that a stranger intermeddleth not with, so it is a joy
that no man takes from them, it is a joy in God, a joy unspeakable and full of
glory.

It should seem that Zaccheus was under soul-distress but a little while;
"perhaps," says Guthrie, in his book entitled, The trial concerning a saving
interest in Christ, "not above a quarter of an hour;" I add, perhaps not so
long: For as one observes, sometimes the Lord Jesus delights to deliver
speedily. God is a sovereign agent, and works upon his children in their
effectual calling, according to the counsel of his eternal will. It is with the
spiritual, as natural birth: All women have not the like pangs; all Christians
have not the like degree of conviction. But all agree in this, that all have
Jesus Christ formed in their hearts: And those who have not so many trials at
first, may be visited with the greater conflicts hereafter; though they never
come into bondage again, after they have once received the spirit of adoption.
"We have not (says Paul) received the spirit of bondage again unto fear." We
know not what Zaccheus underwent before he died: However this one thing I know,
he now believed in Christ, and was justified, or acquitted, and looked upon as
righteous in God's sight, though a Publican, chief among the Publicans, not
many moments before. And thus it is with all, that, like Zaccheus, receive
Jesus Christ, by faith into their hearts. The very moment they find rest in
him, they are freely justified from all things from which they could not be
justified by the law of Moses; "for by grace are we saved, through faith, and
that not of ourselves, it is the gift of God."

Say not within yourselves this is a licentious, Antinomian doctrine; for this
faith, if true, will work by love, and be productive of the fruits of holiness.
See an instance in this convert Zaccheas: No sooner had he received Jesus
Christ by faith into his heart, but he evidences it by his works; for ver. 8.
we are told Zaccheus stood forth, and said unto the Lord, "Behold, Lord, the
half of my goods I give unto the poor; and if I have taken any thing from any
man by false accusation, I restore him four fold."

Having believed on Jesus in his heart, he now makes confession of him with his
mouth to salvation. Zaccheus stood forth: He was not ashamed, but stood forth
before his brother Publicans; for true faith casts out all servile, sinful fear
of men; and said "Behold, Lord." It is remarkable, how readily people in
scripture have owned the divinity of Christ immediately, upon their conversion.
Thus the woman at Jacob's well; "Is not this the Christ?" Thus the man born
blind; "Lord, I believe; and worshipped him." Thus Zaccheus, "Behold, Lord." An
incontestible proof this to me, that those who deny our Lord's divinity, never
effectually felt his power: If they had, they would not speak so lightly of
him; they would scorn to deny his eternal power and Godhead. "Zaccheus stood
forth, and said, Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if
I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him
fourfold." Noble fruits of a true living faith in the Lord Jesus! Every word
calls for our notice. Not some small, not the tenth part, but the half. Of
what? My goods; things that were valuable. My goods, his own, not another's: I
give: Not, I will give when I die, when I can keep them no longer; but, I give
now, even now. Zaccheus would be his own executor. For whilst we have time we
should do good. But to whom would he give half of his goods? Not to the rich,
not to those who were already clothed in purple and fine linen, of whom he
might be recompensed again; but to the poor, the maimed, the halt, the blind,
from which he could expect no recompense till the resurrection of the dead. "I
give to the poor." But knowing that he must be just, before he could be
charitable, and conscious to himself that in his public administrations he had
wronged many persons, he adds, "And, if I have taken any thing from any man by
false accusation, I restore him fourfold." Hear ye this, all ye that make no
conscience of cheating the king of his taxes, or of buying or selling run
goods. If ever God gives you true faith, you will never rest, till, like
Zaccheus, you have made restitution to the utmost of your power. I suppose,
before his conversion he thought it no harm to cheat thus, no more than you may
do now, and pleased himself frequently, to be sure, that he got rich by doing
so: But now he is grieved for it at his heart; he confesses his injustice
before men, and promises to make ample restitution. Go, ye cheating Publicans,
learn of Zaccheus, go away and do likewise; if you do not make restitution
here, the Lord Jesus shall make you confess your sins before men and angels,
and condemn you for it, when he comes in the glory of his Father to judgment
hereafter.

After all this, with good reason might our Lord say unto him, "This day is
salvation come to this house; forasmuch as he is the son of Abraham;" not so
much by a natural as by a spiritual birth. He was made partaker of like
precious faith with Abraham: Like Abraham, he believed on the Lord, and it was
accounted to him for righteousness: His faith, like Abraham's, worked by love;
and I doubt not, but he has been long since sitting in Abraham's harbor.

And now are you not ashamed of yourselves, who speak against the doctrines of
grace, especially that doctrine of being justified by faith alone, as though it
leaded to licentiousness? What can be more unjust than such a charge? Is not
the instance of Zaccheus a sufficient proof to the contrary? Have I strained it
to serve my own turn? God forbid. To the best of my knowledge I have spoken the
truth in sincerity, and the truth as it is in Jesus. I do affirm that we are
saved by grace, and that we are justified by faith alone: But I do also affirm,
that faith must be evidenced by good works where there is an opportunity of
performing them.

What therefore has been said of Zaccheus, may serve as a rule, whereby all may
judge whether they have faith or not. You say you have faith; but how do you
prove it? Did you ever hear the Lord Jesus call you by name? Were you ever made
to obey that call? Did you ever, like Zaccheus, receive Jesus Christ joyfully
into your hearts? Are you influenced by the faith you say you have, to stand up
and confess the Lord Jesus before men? Were you ever made willing to own, and
humble yourselves for, your past offenses? Does your faith work by love, so
that you conscientiously lay up, according as God has prospered you, for the
support of the poor? Do you give alms of all things that you possess? And have
you made due restitution to those you have wronged? If so, happy are ye;
salvation is come to your souls; you are sons, you are daughters of, you shall
shortly be everlasting^ blessed with faithful Abraham. But, if you are not thus
minded, do not deceive your own souls; though you may talk of justification by
says, like angels, it will do you no good; it will only increase your
damnation. You hold the truth, but it is in unrighteousness: Your faith being
without works, is dead; you have the devil, not Abraham, for your father.
Unless you get a faith of the heart, a faith working by love, with devils and
damned spirits shall you dwell for evermore.

But it is time now to enforce the latter part of the text; "For the Son of man
is come to seek and to save that which was lost." These words are spoken by our
Savior, in answer to some selfrighteous Pharisees, who instead of rejoicing
with the angels in heaven, at the conversion of such a sinner, murmured, "that
he was gone to be a guest with a man that was a sinner." To vindicate his
conduct, he tells them, that this was an act agreeable to the design of his
coming: "For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost."
He might have said, the "Son of God." But O the wonderful condescension of our
Redeemer! He delights to style himself the Son of man. He came not only to
save, "but to seek and to save that which was lost." He came to Jericho to seek
and save Zaccheus; for otherwise Zaccheus would never have been saved by him.
But from whence came he? Even from heaven, his dewlling place, to this lower
earth, this vale of tears, "to seek and save that which was lost;" or all that
feel themselves lost, and are willing, like Zaccheus, to receive him into their
hearts to save them; with how great a salvation? even from the guilt, and also
from the power of their sins; to make them heirs of God, and joint-heirs with
himself, and partakers of that glory which he enjoyed with the Father before
the world began. Thus will the Son of man save that which is lost. He was made
the Son of man on purpose that he might save them. He had no other end but this
in leaving his Father's throne, in obeying the moral law, and hanging upon the
cross: All that was done and suffered, merely to satisfy, and procure a
righteousness for poor, lost, undone sinners, and that too without respect of
persons. "That which was lost:" all of every nation and language, that feel,
bewail, and are truly desirous of being delivered from their lost state, did
the Son of man come down to seek and to save: For he is mighty, not only so,
but willing, to save to the uttermost all that come to God through him; he will
in no wise cast them out. For he is the same today as he was yesterday. He
comes now to sinners, as well as formerly; and, I hope, has sent me out this
day to seek, and, under him, to bring home some of you, the lost sheep of the
house of Israel.

What say you? Shall I go home rejoicing, saying, that many like sheep, have
gone astray, but they have now believed on Jesus Christ, and so returned home
to the great Shepherd and Bishop of their souls? If the Lord would be pleased
thus to prosper my handiwork, I care not how many legalists and self-righteous
Pharisees murmur against me, for offering salvation to the worst of sinners:
For I know the Son of man came to seek and to save them; and the Lord Jesus
will now be a guest to the worst Publican, the vilest sinner that is among you,
if he does but believe on him. -- Make haste then, O sinners, make haste, and
come by faith to Christ. Then, this day, even this hour, nay this moment, if
you believe, Jesus Christ shall come and make his eternal abode in your hearts.
Which of you is made willing to receive the King of glory? Which of you obeys
the call, as Zaccheus did? Alas! why do you stand still? How know you, whether
Jesus Christ may ever call you again? Come then, poor, guilty sinners; come
away, poor, lost, undone Publicans: Make haste, I say, and come away to Jesus
Christ. The Lord condescends to invite himself to come under the filthy roofs
of the houses of your souls. Do not be afraid of entertaining him; he will fill
you with all peace and joy in believing. Do not be ashamed to run before the
multitude, and to have all manner of evil spoken against you falsely for his
sake: One sight of Christ will make amends for all. Zaccheus was laughed at;
and "all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution." But
what of that? Zaccheus is now crowned in glory; as you also shall shortly be,
if you believe on, and are reproached for Christ's sake. Do not, therefore, put
me off with frivolous excuses; there is no excuse can be given for your not
coming to Christ. You are lost, undone without him; and if he is not glorified
in your salvation, he will be glorified in your destruction; if he does not
come and make his abode in your hearts, you must take up an eternal abode with
the devil and his angels. O that the Lord would be pleased to pass by some of
you at this time! O that he may call you by his Spirit, and make you a willing
people in this day of his power! For I know my calling will not do, unless he,
by his efficacious grace, compel you to come in. O that you once felt what it
is to receive Jesus Christ into your hearts! You would soon, like Zaccheus,
give him every thing. You do not love Christ, because you do not know him; you
do not come to him, because you do not feel your want of him: you are whole and
not brokenhearted; you are not sick, at least not sensible of your sickness;
and, therefore, no wonder you do not apply to Jesus Christ, that great, that
almighty physician. You do not feel yourselves lost, and therefore do not seek
to be found in Christ. O that God would wound you with the sword of his Spirit,
and cause his arrows of conviction to stick deep in your hearts! O that he
would dart a ray of divine light into your souls! For if you do not feel
yourselves lost without Christ, you are of all men most miserable: your souls
are dead; you are not only an image of hell, but in some degree hell itself:
you carry hell about with you, and you know it not. O that I could see some of
you sensible of this, and hear you cry out, "Lord, break this hard heart; Lord,
deliver me from the body of this death; draw me, Lord make me willing to come
after thee; I am lost; Lord, save me, or I perish!" Was this your case, how
soon would the Lord stretch forth his almighty hand, and say, be of good cheer,
it is I; be not afraid? What a wonderful calm would then possess your troubled
souls! Your fellowship would then be with the Father and the Son: Your life
would be hid with Christ in God.

Some of you, I hope, have experienced this, and can say, I was loft, but am
found; I was dead, but am alive again. The Son of man came and sought me in the
day of his power, and saved my sinful soul. And do you repent that you came to
Christ? Has he not been a good Master! Is not his presence sweet to your souls?
Has he not been faithful to his promise? And have you not found, that even in
doing and suffering for him, there is an exceeding present great reward? I am
persuaded you will answer, Yes. O then, ye saints, recommend and talk of the
love of Christ to others, and tell them what great things the Lord has done for
you! This may encourage others to come unto him. And who knows but the Lord may
make you fishers of men? The story of Zaccheus was left on record for this
purpose. No truly convicted soul, after such an instance of divine grace has
been laid before him, need despair of mercy. What if you are Publicans? Was not
Zaccheus a Publican? What if you are chief among the Publicans? Was not
Zaccheus likewise? What if you are rich? Was not Zaccheus rich also? And yet
almighty grace made him more than conqueror over all these hindrances. All
things are possible to Jesus Christ; nothing is too hard for him: he is the
Lord almighty. Our mountains of sins must all fall before this great Zerubabel.
On him God the Father has laid the iniquities of all that shall truly believe;
and in his own body he bare them on the tree. There, there, by faith, O
mourners in Sion, may you see your Savior hanging with arms stretched out, and
hear him, as it were, thus speaking to your souls; "Behold how I have loved
you! Behold my hands and my feet? Look, look into my wounded side, and see a
heart flaming with love: Love stronger than death. Come into my arms, O
sinners, come wash your spotted souls in my heart's blood. See here is a
fo^ntain opened for all sin and all uncleanness! See, O guilty souls, how the
wrath of God is now abiding upon you: Come, haste away, and hide yourselves in
the clefts of my wounds; for I am wounded for your transgressions; I am dying
that you may live for evermore. Behold, as Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, so I am here lifted up upon a tree. See how I am become a curse for
you: The chastisement of your peace is upon me. I am thus scourged, thus
wounded, thus crucified, that you by my stripes may be healed. O look unto me
all ye trembling sinners, even to the ends of the earth! Look unto me by faith,
and you shall be saved: For I came thus to be obedient even unto death, that I
might save that which was lost"

And what say you to this, O sinners? Suppose you saw the King of glory dying,
and thus speaking to you? Would you believe on him? No, you would not, unless
you believe on him now -- For though he is dead, he yet speaks all this in
the scripture, nay, in effect, says all this in the words of the text, "The Son
of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost -- Do not therefore any
longer crucify the Lord of glory, bring those rebels, your sins, which will not
have him to reign over them -- Bring them out to him, though you cannot slay
them yourselves, yet he will slay them for you, the power of his death and
resurrection is as great now as formerly -- Make haste therefore, make haste, O
ye publicans and sinners, and give the dear Lord Jesus your hearts, your whole
hearts. If you refuse to hearken to this call of the Lord, remember your
damnation will be just, I am free from the blood of you all: You must acquit my
Master and me at the terrible day of judgment. O that you may know the things
that belong to your everlasting peace, before they are eternally hid from your
eyes! Let all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity say, Amen.

SERMON X.
THE POWER OF CHRIST's RESURRECTION.
PHILIP. iii. 10. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection.
THE apostle, in the verses before the text, had been cautioning the
Philippians to beware of the concision, Jadaizing teachers, who endeavored to
subvert them from the simplicity of the gospel, by telling them, they still
ought to be subject to circumcision and all the other ordinances of Moses. And
that they might not think he spoke out of prejudice, and condemned their tenets
because he himself was a stranger to the Jewish dispensation, he acquaints
them, that if any other man thought he had whereof he might trust in the flesh,
or seek to be justified by the outward privileges of the Jews, he had more: for
he was circumcised the eighth day; of the stock of Israel (not a proselyte, but
a native Israelite;) of the tribe of Benjamin (the tribe which adhered to Judah
when the others revolted;) an Hebrew of the Hebrews, a Jew both of the father
and mother's side) and as touching the law, a pharisee, the strictest sect
among all Israel. To show that he was no Gallio in religion, through his great
though misguided zeal, he had persecuted the church of Christ; and as touching
the righteousness of the law (as far as the Pharisees exposition of it went) he
was blameless, and had kept it from his youth. But, when it pleased God who
separated him from his mother's womb, to reveal his Son in him, What things
were gain to me, (he says) those privileges I boasted myself in, and sought to
be justified by, I counted loss for Christ. And that they might not think he
repented that he had done so, he tells them, he was now more confirmed than
ever in his judgment. For, says he, "yea doubtless," (the expression in the
original rises with a holy triumph)" and I do count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord." And that they might not
object that he said, and did not, he acquaints them, he had given proofs of the
sincerity of these professions, because for the sake of them, he had suffered
the loss of all his worldly things, and still was willing to do more; for, "I
count them but dung (no more than offals thrown out to dogs) so that I may win,
(or have a saving interest in) Christ, and be found in him, (as the manslayer
in the city of refuge) not having my own righteousness which is of the law,"
not depending on having Abraham for my father, or on any works of righteousness
which I have done, either to atone or serve as a balance for my evil deeds, but
that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by
faith, a righteousness of God's appointing, and which will be imputed to me, if
I believe in Christ, "that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection;"
that I may have an experimental knowledge of the efficacy of his resurrect on
by feeling the influences of his blessed Spirit on my soul. In which words two
things are implied.

First, That Jesus Christ did rise from the dead. Secondly; That it highly
concerns us to know the power of his rising again.
Accordingly in the following discourse I shall endeavor to show First, That
Christ is risen indeed from the dead; and that it was necessary for him so to
do; and, Secondly, That it highly concerns us to know and experience the power
of his resurrection. First, Christ is indeed risen.


That Jesus should rise from the dead was absolutely necessary.

First, on his own account. He had often appealed to this as the last and most
convincing proof, he would give them that he was the true Messiah, "There shall
no other sign be given you, than the sign of the prophet Jonas. And again,
Destroy this temple of my body, and in three days I will build it up." Which
words his enemies remembered, and urged it as an argument, to induce Pilate to
grant them a watch, to prevent his being stolen out of the grave. "We know that
deceiver said, whilst he was yet alive, after three days I will rise again." So
that had he not risen again, they might have justly said, we know that this man
was an impostor.

Secondly, It was necessary on our account. "He rose again, says the apostle,
for our justification;" or that the debt we owed to God for our sins, might be
fully satisfied and discharged.

It had pleased the Father (for ever adored be his infinite love and free
grace) to wound his only Son for our transgressions, and to arrest and confine
him in the prison of the grave, as our surety for the guilt we had contracted
by setting at naught his commandments. Now had Christ continued always in the
grave, we could have had no more assurance that our sins were satisfied for,
than any common debtor can have of his creditor's being satisfied whilst his
surety is kept confined. But he being released from the power of death, we are
thereby assured, that with his sacrifice God was well pleased, and that our
atonement was finished on the cross, and that he had made a full, perfect, and
sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the world.

Thirdly. It was necessary that our Lord Jesus should rise again from the dead,
to assure us of the certainty of the resurrection of our own bodies.

The doctrine of the resurrection of the body was entirely exploded and set at
naught among the Gentiles, as appears from the Athenians mocking at, and
calling St. Paul a babbler and a setter forth of strange doctrines when he
preached to them Jesus, and the resurrection. And though it was believed by
most of the Jews, as is evident from many passages of scripture, yet not by
all; the whole sect of the Sadduces denied it. But the resurrection of Jesus
Christ put it out of dispute. For as he acted as our representative, if he our
Head is risen, then must we also, who are his members rise with him. And as in
the first Adam we all died, even so in him our second Adam we must all, in this
sense, be made alive.

As it was necessary, upon these accounts, that our blessed Lord should rise
from the dead; so it is plain beyond contradiction, that he did. Never was any
matter of fact better attested; never were more precautions made use of to
prevent a cheat. He was buried in a sepulcher, hewn out of a rock, so that it
could not be said that any dug under, and conveyed him away. It was a
sepulcher also wherein man never was laid; so that if any body did rise from
thence, it must be the body of Jesus of Nazareth. Besides, the sepulcher was
sealed; a great stone rolled over the mouth of it; and a band of soldiers
(consisting not of friends, but of his professed enemies) was set to guard it.
And as for his disciples coming by night and stealing him away, it was
altogether improbable: for it was not long since, that they had all forsaken
him, and they were the most backward in believing his resurrection. And
supposing it was true that they came whilst the soldiers slept; yet the
soldiers must be cast into a deep sleep indeed, that the rolling away so great
a stone did not awake some of them.

And our blessed Lord's afterward appearing at sundry times, and in diverse
manners, to his disciples, as when they were assembled together, when they were
walking to Emma^s, when they were fishing; nay, and condescending to show them
his hands and feet, and his appearing to above five hundred brethren at once,
put the truth of his resurrection out of all dispute.

Indeed there is one objection that may be made against what has been said,
that the books wherein these facts are recorded were written by his dissciples.

And who more proper persons than those who were eyewitnesses of what they
related, and eat and drank with him after his resurrection? "But they were
illiterate and ignorant men." Yet as good witnesses of a plain matter of fact,
as the m^st learned masters in Israel. Nay, this rendered them more proper
witnesses. For being plain men, they were therefore (...) to be suspected of
t^l^ing or making a lie, particularly, since they laid down their lives for a
testimony of the truth of it. We read indeed of Jacob's telling a lie, though
he was a plain man, in order to get his father's blessing. But it was never
heard since the world began, that any man, much less a whole set of men, died
martyrs for the sake of an untruth, when they themselves were to reap no
advantage from it.

No, this single circumstance proves them to be Israelites indeed, in whom was
no guile. And the wonderful success God gave to their ministry afterward, when
three thousand were converted by one sermon; and twelve poor fishermen, in a
very short time enabled to be more than conquerors over all the opposition men
or devils could make, was as plain a demonstration, that Christ was risen,
according to their gospel, as that a divine power, at the sound of a few ram
horns, caused the wall of Jerich^ to fall down.

But what need we any farther witnesses? Believe you the resurrection of our
blessed Lord? I know that you believe it, as your gathering together on this
first day of the week in the courts o^ the Lord's house abundantly testifies.

What concerns us most to be assured of, and which is the

Second thing I was to speak to, is, Whether we have experimentally known the
power of his resurrection; that is, Whether or not we have received the Holy
Ghost, and by his powerful operations on our hearts, have been raised from the
death of sin, to a life of righteousness, and true holiness.

It was this, the great apostle was chiefly desirous to know: the resurrection
of Christ's body he was satisfied would avail him nothing, unless he
experienced the power of it in rai^ing (...) dead soul.

For another, and that a chief end of our blessed Lord's rising from the dead,
was to enter heaven as our representative, and to send down the Holy Ghost to
apply that redemption he had finished on the cross, to our hearts, by working
an entire change in them.

Without this, Christ would have died in vain. For it would have done us no
service to have had his outward righteousness imputed to us, unless we had an
inward inherent righteousness wrought in us. Because, being altogether
conceived and born in sin, and consequently unfit to hold communion with an
infinitely pure and holy God, we cannot possibly be made meet to see and enjoy
him, till a thorough renovation has passed upon our hearts.

Without this we leave out the Holy Ghost in the great work of our redemption.
But as we were made by the joint concurrence and consultation of the blessed
Trinity; and as we were baptized in their name, so must all of them concur in
our salvation: as the Father made, and the Son redeemed, so must the Holy Ghost
sanctify and seal us, or otherwise we have believed in vain.

This then is what the apostle means by the power of Christ's resurrection, and
this is what we are as much concerned experimentally to know, as that he rose
at all.

Without this, though we may be moralists, though we may be civilized,
good-natured people, yet we are no Christians. For he is not a true Christian,
who is only one outwardly; nor have we therefore a right, because we daily
profess, to believe that Christ rose again the third day from the dead. But he
is a true Christian who is one inwardly, and then only can we be styled true
believers, when we not only profess to believe, but have felt the power of our
blessed Lord's rising from the dead, by being quickened and raised by his
Spirit, when dead in trespasses and sins, to a thorough newness both of heart
and life.

The devils themselves cannot but believe the doctrine of the resurrection, and
tremble; but yet they continue devils, because the benefits of this
resurrection have not been applied to them, nor have they received a renovating
power from it, to change and put off their diabolical nature. And so, unless we
not only profess to know, but also feel that Christ is risen indeed, by being
born again from above, we shall be as far from the kingdom of God as they: our
faith will be as ineffectual as the faith of devils.

Nothing has done more harm to the Christian world, nothing has rendered the
cross of Christ of less effect, than a vain supposition, that religion is
something without us. Whereas we should consider, that every thing that Christ
did outwardly* must be done over again in our souls; or otherwise, the
believing there was such a divine Person once on earth who triumphed over hell
and the grave, will profit us no more than believing there was once such a
person as Alexander who conquered the world.

As Christ was born of the Virgin's womb, so must he be spiritually formed in
our hearts. As he died for sin, so must we die to sin. And as he rose again
from the dead, so must we also rise to a divine life.

None but those who have followed him in this regeneration, or new birth, shall
sit on thrones as approvers of his sentence, when he shall come in terrible
majesty to judge the twelve tribes of Israel.

It is true, as for the outward work of our redemption, it was a transient act,
and was certainly finished on the cross; but the application of that redemption
to our hearts, is a work that will continue always, even unto the end of the
world.

So long as there is an elect man breathing on the earth, who is naturally
engendered of the offspring of the first Adam, so long must the quickening
Spirit, which was purchased by the resurrection of the second Adam, that Lord
from heaven, be breathing upon his soul.

For though we may exist by Christ, yet we cannot be said to exist in him, till
we are united to him by one spirit, and enter into a new state of things, as
certainly as he entered into a new state of things, after that he rose from the
dead.

We may throng and crowd round about Christ, and call him Lord, Lord, when we
come to worship before his footstool; but we have not effectually touched him,
till by a lively faith in his resurrection, we perceive a divine virtue coming
out of him, to renew and purify our souls.

How greatly then do they err who rest in a bare historical faith of our
Savior's resurrection, and look only for external proofs to evidence it?
Whereas were we the most learned disputers of this world, and could speak of
the certainty of this fact with the tongue of men and angels, yet without this
inward testimony of it in our hearts, though we might convince others, yet we
should never be saved by it ourselves.

For we are but dead men, we are like so many carcases wrapped up in grave
clothes, till that same Jesus who called Lazarus from his tomb, and at whose
own resurrection many that slept arose, does raise us also by his quickening
Spirit from our natural death, in which we have so long lain, to a holy and
heavenly life.

We might think ourselves happy, if we had seen the holy Jesus after he was
risen from the dead, and our hands had handled that Lord of life. But more
happy are they who have not seen him, and yet having felt the power of his
resurrection, therefore believe in him. For many saw our divine Master, who
were not saved by him; but whosoever has thus felt the power of his
resurrection, has the earnest of his inheritance in his heart, he has passed
from death to life, and shall never fall into final condemnation.

I am very sensible that this is foolishness to the natural man, as were many
such like truths to our Lord's own disciples, when only weak in faith, before
he rose again. But when these natural men, like them, have fully felt the power
of his resurrection, they will then own that this doctrine is from God, and say
with the Samaritans, "Now we believe not because of thy saying," for we
ourselves have experienced it in our hearts.

And O that all unbelievers, all letter-learned masters of Israel, who now look
upon the doctrine of the power of Christ's resurrection, or our newbirth, as an
idle tale, and condemn the preachers of it as enthusiasts and madmen, did but
thus feel the power of it in their souls, they would no longer ask, how this
thing could be? But they would be convinced of it as much as Thomas was, when
he saw the Lord's Christ; and like him, when Jesus ^id him reach out his hands
and thrust them into his side, in a holy confusion they would cry out, "My
Lord, and my God!"

But how shall an unbeliever, how shall the formal Christian come thus to "know
Christ, and the power of his resurrection?" God, who cannot lie, has told us,
"I am the resurrection and the life, whosoever lives and believes in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live." Again says the apostle, "By faith we
are saved, and that not of ourselves, it is the gift of God."

This, this is the way, walk in it. Believe and you shall live in Christ, and
Christ in you; you shall be one with Christ, and Christ one with you. But
without this, your outward goodness and professions will avail you nothing.

But then, by this faith we are not to understand a dead speculative faith, a
faith in the head; but a living principle wrought in the heart by the powerful
operations of the Holy Ghost, a faith that will enable us to overcome the
world, and forsake all in affection for Jesus Christ. For thus speaks our
blessed Master, "Unless a man forsake all that he has, he cannot be my
disciple."

And so the apostle, in the words immediately following the text, says, "being
made conformable to his death;" thereby implying, that we cannot know the power
of Christ's resurrection unless we are made conformable to him in his death.

This we have shadowed out by the custom of baptizing by immersion in the
primitive church, and (which is also recommended by our own) their putting the
infants under the water, signified their obligation to die unto sin; as their
taking them out of the water, signified their rising again to newness of life.
To which the apostle plainly alludes, when he says, "we are buried with him in
baptism."

If we can reconcile light and darkness, heaven and hell, then we may hope to
know the power of Christ's resurrection without dying to ourselves and the
world. But till we can do this, we might as well expect that Christ will have
concord with Belial.

For there is such a contrariety between the spirit of this world, and the
spirit of Jesus Christ, that he who will be at friendship with the one, must be
at enmity with the other: "We cannot serve God and mammon."

This may, indeed, seem a hard saying; and many, with the young man in the
gospel, may be tempted to go away sorrowful: but wherefore should this offend
them? For what is all that is in the world, the lust of the eye, the lust of
the flesh, and the pride of life, but vanity and vexation of spirit?

God is love; and therefore, could our own wills, or the world, have made us
happy, he never would have sent his own dear Son Jesus Christ to die and rise
again, to deliver us from the power of them. But because they only torment and
cannot satisfy, therefore God bids us to renounce them.

Had any one persuaded profane Esau not to lose so glorious a privilege, merely
for the sake of gratifying a present corrupt inclination, when he law him about
to sell his birthright for a little red pottage, would not one think that man
to have been Esau's friend! And just thus stands the case between God and us.
By the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ, we are newborn to an heavenly
inheritance among all them which are sanctified; but our own corrupt wills
would tempt us to sell this glorious birthright for the vanities of the world,
which, like Esau's red pottage, may please us for a while, but will soon be
taken away from us. God knows this, and therefore rather bids us renounce them
for a season, than for the short enjoyment of them lose the privilege of that
glorious birthright, to which, by knowing the power of the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, we are entitled.

O the depth of the riches and excellency of Christianity! Well might the great
St. Paul count all things but dung and dross for the excellency of the
knowledge of it. Well might he desire so ardently to know Jesus, and the power
of his resurrection. For even on this side eternity it raises us above the
world, and makes us to sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

Well might that glorious company of worthies, recorded in the holy scriptures,
supported with a deep sense of their heavenly calling, despise the pleasures
and profits of this life, and wander about in sheepskins, and goat skins, in
dens and caves of the earth, being destitute, afflicted, tormented.

And O that we were all like-minded! that we felt the power of Christ's
resurrection as they did! How should we then count all things as dung and dross
for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord! How should we
then recover our primitive dignity, trample the earth under our feet, and with
our souls be continually gasping after God.

And what hinders but we may be thus minded? Is Jesus Christ, our great High
Priest, altered from what he was? No, he is the same yesterday, to day and for
ever. And though he is exalted to the righthand of God, yet he is not ashamed
to call us brethren. The power of his resurrection is as great now as formerly,
and the Holy Spirit, which was assured to us by his resurrection, as ready and
able to quicken us who are dead in trespasses and sins, as any ^aint that ever
lived. Let us but cry, and that instantly, to him that is mighty and able to
save; let us, in sincerity and truth, without secretly keeping back the least
part, renounce ourselves and the world; then we shall be Christians indeed. And
though the world may cast us out and separate from our company, yet Jesus
Christ will walk with, and abide in us. And at the general resurrection of the
last day, when the voice of the archangel and trump of God shall bid the sea
and the graves to give up their dead, and all nations shall appear before him,
then will he confess us before his Father and the holy angels, and we shall
receive that invitation which he shall then pronounce ^o all who love and fear
him, "Come, ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the beginning of the world."

"Grant this, O Father, for thy dear Son's sake, Jesus Christ our Lord; to
whom, with thee and the Holy Ghost, etc."

FINIS
SUBSCRIBERS.
ABRAHAM PERKINS, Newburyport. Abel Greenleaf, Ditto. Anstis Day, Ditto. Abel
Boardman, Ditto. Abbington Davenport, Boston. B. NORTON, Newburyport. Betfy
Hoyt, Ditto. Benjamin H. Cheever, Ditto. Benjamin Davis, jun. Ditto. Benjamin
Shaw. Ditto. CHARLES W. MILTON, Newburyport. Constantine Norton, Ditto. Caleb
Haskell, Hampton-Falls. DANIEL ADAMS, Newburyport. David Woods, Boxford. Daniel
Choate, Newburyport. David Hale, Ditto. ENOCH GERRISH, Newburyport. Enoch Hale,
Ditto. Eunice Pritchard, Ditto. Eunice Wells, Ditto. Elizabeth Day, Ditto.
Eunice Day, Ditto. GILMAN WHITE, Ditto. HANNAH JOHNSON, Ditto. Henry Dole,
Newbury. JON. BOARDMAN, Newburyport. Jonathan Atkinson, Ditto. Jonathan
Wheeler, Rowley. Jesse Dorman, Newburyport. John Holland, Newburyport. Isaiah
Palmer, South Hampton. John Tufts, Newburyport. Jacob March, Sanborntown. Jacob
Bowen, Newburyport. Jacob Adams, Ditto. John Cheever, Ditto. Isaiah Short,
Ditto. John Dole, Ditto. Joseph Moulton, Ditto. Joseph Plummer, Ditto. Jona
Plummer, Ditto. Isaac Pierce, Boston. John Owen Curtis, Ditto. Joseph Thomas,
Ditto. Jeremiah Pearson, Newburyport. Josiah Bartlet, Ditto. Jonathan Morse,
Ditto. John Davis, Ditto. Joseph Thowell, Dartmouth. Jonathan Dalton,
Newburyport. James Tappan, Gloucester. Jonathan Stickney, Newburyport. James
Atwood, Ditto. Joseph Mitchell, Ditto. James Hadlock, Newburyport. LYDIA KNAP,
Ditto. Louis Hoyt, Ditto. MOSES HOYT, Ditto. Moody Davis, Ditto. Moses Hoyt,
jun. Ditto. Moses Short, Newbury. Moses ^^sley, Ditto. Mary Lunt, Newburyport.
Hon. Moses Gill, Boston. Martin Cushen, Bath. Moses Cair, Newbury. Moses
Spofford, Rowley. NATHANTEL BUTLER, Newburyport. Nathan Pierce, Ditto. Nancy
Pierpont, Roxbury. Nathaniel Moody, Newbury. Nathan Plummer, Newburyport.
Nathaniel Knap, Ditto. PHINEAS HASKELL, Westborough. Philip Morrill, Salisbury.
ROBERT LONG, Newburyport. Richard Short, Newbury. Rebeckah Hackett,
Newburyport. STEPHEN HOLLAND, Newburyport. Simeon Plummer, Newbury. Samuel
Knap, Newburyport. Samuel Dose, jun. Newbury. Silas Short, Ditto. Stephen
Tilton, Newburyport. Solomon Haskell, Ditto. Stephen Caldwell, Hampton-Falls.
Sally Chadwick, Boxford. THOMAS NORWOOD, Newburyport. Timothy Noyes, Ditto.
Timothy Jackman, Newbury. Thomas Kendall, Boston. Thomas Day, Ipswich. URIAH
FLETCHER, Newburyport. WILLIAM BROWN, Hampton-Falls. William B. Leonard,
Newburyport. William Davis, Newbury. William Stickney, Ditto. William Gerrish,
Ditto. William Young, Boston. Warren A. Kendrick, Wellfleet. William Cobb,
Newburyport.

