BOSTON, 24 th Sept. 1796.
AT this important crisis, GEORGE WASHINGTON having declined to serve as
President of the United States, after the 4th of March next, and JOHN ADAMS
having been held up as a candidate to succeed him in that office, it is
conceived a duty to submit to the consideration of the citizens of the United
States, sundry political doctrines and opinions on government, written by Mr.
ADAMS, whilst Minister at the court of London, in his book, entitled, "A
Defense of the American Constitution."

Let the independent Citizens of America, now determine how far Mr. ADAMS has
apostatized from all his former sentiments in favor of American liberty and
independence, by writing this Eulogium of Monarchy and the British
Constitution, and consequently, how far he is to be regarded as a fit person to
be elected President of the United States.

AMERICANUS.

VOL. I.
Page 8. A limited Monarchy may be justly denominated a Republic. 110. Wealth,
Birth, Family Pride respected by all people. 116. Wealth, Birth and Virtue,
form the best men. 159. A Commonwealth can no more consist of a people without
gentry, than of a gentry without people. 206. Kingly government best, Tyranny
worst: No city is more wretched than that under Tyranny, nor any more happy
than that under regal power. 294. If the power of negotiation and of treaty be
in one man, there can be no intrigue. 321. Had Epaminandos lived to display his
talents as a Legislator, the world might have been blessed with an English
Constitution, two or three thousand years sooner than it was. 324. Limited
Monarchy the best government; superior to Republicanism. 360. Distinctions of
Poor and Rich, as necessary as labor and good government: Poor are destined to
labor; the Rich, by advantages of education, independence and leisure, to
superior stations. 373. Men of property and family, fittest for pubic service.
375. Rich, well born, well educated, must be preferred to OFFICE, otherwise the
people themselves will despise them. 379. Ministers of the Executive, only
ought to be responsible.

