Doctor BELKNAP's SERMON BEFORE THE Convention of the Clergy, IN BOSTON, 1796.

A SERMON, DELIVERED BEFORE THE CONVENTION OF THE CLERGY OF MASSACHUSETTS, IN
BOSTON, MAY 26, 1796.

BY JEREMY BELKNAP, MINISTER OF THE CHURCH IN FEDERAL-STREET, BOSTON.

-- Laudatur ab his, culpatur ab illis.
-- Hic murus aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere culpa.
HORACE. Printed by SAMUEL HALL, No. 53, Cornhill, BOSTON. 1796.

2 TIMOTHY, I.8. -- BE THOU PARTAKER OF THE AFFLICTIONS OF THE GOSPEL,
ACCORDING TO THE POWER OF GOD.


WHEN the great Apostle of the Gentiles was first called to be an ambassador of
Jesus Christ, the Lord was pleased to show him how great things he must suffer
for his name's sake; and during the whole course of his ministry, the Holy
Ghost witnessed that in every city, bonds and afflictions awaited him. But such
was his invincible resolution in the service of his divine Master, that none of
these things moved him, nor did he count his life dear to himself, so that he
might finish his course with joy, and the ministry which he had received of the
Lord.

HAVING passed through a course of laborious and faithful service; having
endured every affliction, and surmounted every difficulty which lay in his way,
and having arrived so near the end of life as to be able to say, "I am now
ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand;" he does, in this
epistle, (one of the last which he wrote) encourage his son Timothy to imitate
his example, and not to be ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, nor of him who
was then a prisoner for his sake; but to be a partaker with him of the
afflictions of the gospel.

HAD Paul himself been ashamed of the cause he had undertaken to support, or
had he been conscious of an error therein, natural affection would have
prompted him (as is common with dying malefactors) to warn his beloved friend,
of the danger of following his example, and to exhort him to a different course
of life: but knowing in whom he had believed; knowing the dignity and
importance of the work to which Timothy had been ordained, and the certain
reward which awaited the faithful minister; knowing that the spirit by which
they both were animated was not the spirit of fear, but of power and love and
of a sound mind, his tenderness toward him operated in a different way, and
prompted him rather to desire that Timothy should continue steadfast in his
Master's work, and patiently endure the afflictions of the gospel.

SUCH a pathetic exhortation, enforced by so striking an example, could not but
have great force on the mind of this young evangelist; and, as it was written
not for his sake alone, but for a standing direction to gospel ministers, we
have reason to believe that it has had a very extensive influence in the past
ages of Christianity. It still continues on record for our admonition and
encouragement.

IT was more especially necessary that the primitive ministers should have such
an exhortation addressed to them, because of the peculiar and extraordinary
trials which many of them had to undergo. The genius of Christianity was so
opposite to all the prevailing religious opinions and establishments in the
heathen world, and made such a surprising progress in turning men from darkness
to light, and from serving dumb idols to worshipping the living God, that the
ruling powers became jealous of its growth, and labored, by the most
sanguinary terrors, to suppress or eradicate it. The public ministers of
Christianity being always distinguished by their office, were often
distinguished by their sufferings; and in this respect, as well as others, they
were called to be examples to the flock; examples of patience and fortitude in
their adherence to Christ and his cause, amidst the most terrible opposition of
their enemies; whom neither reason could persuade, nor experience convince, of
the folly of their attempt. The profession of Christianity, and especially the
public character which the ministers of the gospel sustained, was then attended
with the greatest hazard; and therefore they needed some special support and
encouragement. But though the ministers and disciples of Jesus Christ are not
now exposed to the peril of their lives for the sake of Christ and his
religion; yet the exhortation in the text has a very important use; and the
Holy Ghost, who indicted it, knew that there would always be sufficient need of
it. The world has not lost that spirit of opposition to the truth, which it had
in the primitive times; the mode of its operation is changed; but the
inveteracy of it remains; it is often brought into view, and produces
disagreeable effects. There are still many afflictions to which the ministers
of the gospel are exposed, and which they may certainly expect to meet with, if
they continue steadily and earnestly engaged in their duty, and are determined
to keep a conscience void of offense toward God and man.

IN common with other men, we are subject to all those providential afflictions
which God sends as fatherly chastisements to correct his people for their
errors, to try their virtues, and make them partakers of his holiness. But
beside these, WE are subject to afflictions of a peculiar kind, which may, with
strict propriety, be called "the afflictions of the gospel," because they befall
us on account of our peculiar character as the ministers of Jesus Christ. These
afflictions arise from those corrupt lusts and passions which are always
working in opposition to divine truth, under the influence of the prince of
darkness.

HAPPY would it be for us, if we did not experience much affliction arising
from our own unmortified lusts and passions. We are, like other men, compounded
of flesh and spirit; and we often find, to our sorrow, that the flesh lusts
against the spirit, so that we cannot do the things which we would; and when we
would do good, evil is present with us. But if, through grace, we do obtain, in
some degree, the mastery over our own corruptions; yet we shall not find it so
practicable to keep the lusts and passions of other men, of those with whom we
have a necessary connection, yea of our dearest friends, in the same degree of
subjection. We shall find very sharp and severe afflictions arising from this
source; of these we are exhorted to be partakers; and we shall find sufficient
comfort and support in the divine word to enable us to bear them with patience.

IT may be proper to enumerate some of those peculiar trials which may be
justly called the afflictions of the gospel; and then show why, and in what
sense, the power of God is given as a reason of the exhortation to be partakers
of these afflictions.

1. ONE of these afflictions, of which we are called to partake, is the
unsuccessfulness of our labors. Who has believed our report? is an old
complaint among the ministers of God. The world, and the things of the world,
have taken such firm hold of men's hearts as to engross the principal part of
their attention, and leave little room for things of a spiritual nature.
Present things afford some prospect of present good; whilst things unseen and
eternal are imagined to be at a great distance, and not to require our present
attention. This is the general temper of the world, and this is what shuts the
gospel out of men's hearts. Custom, and a sense of decency, will induce some of
them to an outward observance of religious duties, and attendance on divine
institutions, and even to treat us with a degree of respect, because of our
sacred character; but their hearts will not be touched with a serious sense of
divine things, nor will their lives and behavior be regulated by the gospel.
Such were the people to whom the Prophet Ezekiel ministered: "They come to thee
as the people comes, and they sit before thee as my people, and they hear thy
wor^^ but they will not do them; for with their mouth they show much love, but
their heart goes after their covetousness. And lo, thou art to them as a very
lovely song of one that has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an
instrument, for they hear thy words, but they do them not." Such a kind of
behavior in people may suit one who is seeking his own ease and comfort and
popularity; but the true minister of Jesus Christ, though he cannot but be
pleased with outward tokens of respect, because they are in a degree
subservient to his usefulness; yet is not satisfied with them, as answering the
end of his ministry. He knows the value of souls, and of that precious blood
which was shed to redeem them. He knows the great importance of the work which
he has undertaken, and the solemn account which he must render of his
stewardship; and therefore his heart's desire and prayer to God is, that they
may be saved. He longs to see the truth take hold of their hearts, and show its
happy fruit in their holy and exemplary lives. But as a course of
disappointment in any of our darling expectations is a grief and burden to the
mind, so it may be concluded, that the faithful minister suffers great
affliction from a view of the unsuccessfulness of his labors. When, after all
his intense studies, his watchings and self-denial, he finds that his hearers
are still hardened through the deceitfulness of sin, deaf to the calls and
invitations of the gospel, and blind to their true interest; when he reflects
that his earnestness in seeking their good may prove an aggravation of their
guilt; when he sees them dropping, one after another, into the grave, and has
reason to fear that many of them will perish through their own negligence and
folly; these things must affect him with the most sensible grief, whilst he
silently adores that tremendous justice which suffers so many unhappy souls to
plunge themselves into the misery of the future world.

2. THE levity and inconstancy, which appear in men's religious conduct, prove
another source of affliction to the ministers of the gospel. Where people have
been used to a variety of preaching, they are very apt to grow nice and tasty,
to discover a fondness for novelty, and to be pleased or displeased with some
external circumstances attending the preacher, as his looks, his voice, his
gesture, his style and manner, without any regard to the truth preached, or the
consequence of receiving or rejecting it. If it comes attended with some
particular circumstances, then it is pleasing, not for the sake of its own
intrinsic worth and excellency, but on account of those external circumstances;
whereas if the truth be ever so plainly and faithfully delivered, yet if it be
destitute of those ornaments which attract the fancy and please the taste, it
is despised and rejected. Men's persons are had in admiration because of some
external advantages, and they are not esteemed highly in love for their work's
sake. How painful must it be to a true gospel minister, who has been
assiduously laboring to come to his people, and bring them the sincere milk of
the word, that they may grow thereby, to find his labors slighted because of a
deficiency in those external accomplishments, which are no essential part of
the furniture of a gospel preacher. The Apostle Paul experienced much of this
affliction. He came not with excellency of speech, nor in the words of man's
wisdom; his bodily presence was weak, and his speech contemptible; and when he
preached the gospel in the learned and inquisitive city of Athens, the
compliment paid him by that polite assembly was, "What will this babbler say?"
But the servant must not expect to be greater than his Lord. Jesus himself, the
best friend of mankind, was received by his audience with such contemptuous
language as Can any good thing come out of Nazareth? This man is a wine-bibber
and a drunkard, a friend of publicans and sinners. Was it not an occasion of
grief to his holy soul, and to his faithful Apostles, to find themselves so
disrespectfully and ignominiously treated? and can it be otherwise to every
sincere minister of Jesus Christ, to find himself despised, and his testimony
rejected, by such idle and superficial hearers? Or if he has not so large a
share of it himself, yet does it not grieve him, to see and hear any of his
brethren, with whom he is jointly laboring in the Lord's vineyard, and for
whom he entertains a cordial and sympathetic affection, thus basely treated;
whilst, on the other hand, he sees multitudes of people carried away by an
empty noise, and dazzled by a false glare of impudent attractions, when there
is no solid food for their souls; leaving the substantial entertainment,
prepared for them by the strictest care, and running after the frothy trash
which is presented to them in a manner flattering to their imagination, and
gratifying to their passions. Let such trials lead us to reflect, how vain a
thing is mere popularity! how low in the esteem of him who was despised and
rejected of men! and how earnestly should we seek the more valuable
accomplishment of being able, by manifestation of the truth, to commend
ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

3. ANOTHER of the afflictions of the gospel is the opposition which we
sometimes meet in the way of our duty. We are commanded not only to preach the
word, but to reprove and rebuke offenders, either privately, in close
conversation, or publicly, in the way of church discipline. This is a very
necessary, but difficult and unpleasing part of ministerial duty, and we go to
it as soldiers go on a forlorn hope: for as it is a direct attack on the lusts
and passions of mankind, so it is natural to expect a repulse. Though armed
with resolution, and conducted by wisdom and judgment, yet we often find the
voice of reason too weak to be heard, where lust and passion have usurped the
government of the mind. There are some tempers which will hearken to nothing
which presumes to contradict the reigning desire, or bring the lawfulness of it
into question. Men will readily condemn what they observe amiss in others, as
David did when he heard Nathan relate the story of the rich man who took away
the poor man's lamb; but when it comes close to the conscience, as did the
application of that parable, "Thou art the man," it requires a great degree of
patience, humility and tenderness of mind, to receive the shock in the same
manner that David did; and as these qualities are not to be found in every man,
so wherever they are wanting, we may expect opposition and ill success. Instead
of having our reproof received with meekness, we shall hear the voice of
recrimination; and the proverb, "Physician, heal thyself," will be retorted. Or
we shall be thought hard and cruel, or charged with falsehood, or want of
charity, or taking up an ill report. Or they will endeavor to revenge
themselves, by inventing lies against us, where there is no real ground of
accusation. The prophet complains of those to whom he was obliged to administer
reproofs in the name of the Lord, that they conspired against him, saying,
"Come, let us devise devices against Jeremiah, let us smite him with the
tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words." And the Apostle Paul
was, by some of his brethren, counted an enemy because he told them the truth.

THE principal difficulties of this kind arise from the hypocrisy which too
often reigns among professors of religion. As a hollow tree makes a much
greater noise, when struck, than one which is sound; so the hypocrite, when his
faults are reproved with christian fidelity, will make a loud noise, either in
vindicating his own character, or finding fault with his reprover; whereas a
true christian receives a rebuke with meekness and patience. Let the righteous
smite me, said David, and it shall be a kindness, and their reproof shall be an
excellent oil, which shall not break my head. A reproof, says Solomon, enters
deeper into a wise man than a hundred stripes into the back of a fool. The
wounds of God's true children will bear to be searched, and are soon healed;
but the wounds of the hypocrite are full of proud flesh, which keeps them
always sore.

BESIDES the opposition which we meet in the way of reproof and discipline,
there is much difficulty arising from the ignorance, the weakness, the
prejudices, and the narrow views of some of our brethren, whom we charitably
hope to be sincere. These causes will sometimes produce a degree of obstinacy,
and even violence, which may be mistaken for religious zeal, and operate to the
disturbance of order and peace in christian societies. Such things are a great
affliction to the ministers of Jesus Christ. It grieves them to see that their
most laborious, and, as they hope, prudent and faithful endeavors to remove
scandals, to convince gainsayers, to eradicate errors, to awaken men from a
delusive, dangerous, hypocritical sleep, to pluck them out of the fire, and to
preserve or restore the purity of churches and divine ordinances, meet with so
much opposition from the pride, the perverseness, and the prejudices of
mankind, though they are assured, and their Lord has forewarned them, it is
impossible but that offenses will come.

4. ANOTHER affliction to which we are subjected is the contempt and reproach
of the profane. The world has always been an enemy to the truth. Satan loves to
keep his strong hold in peace; but when this guilty peace is in danger of being
disturbed by the plain and faithful preaching of the gospel, or the exemplary
conduct of its ministers, his endeavor is to render their work unsuccessful by
exciting his instruments to reproach, to ridicule, and despise them. If any,
who bear the character of gospel ministers, are so unhappy as to fall into open
sins, reproach is liberally cast on the whole order, and we are said to be all
alike, though our faults are not made so public. How many base reflections,
sneering jokes, and contemptuous sarcasms are cast on us, as if we preach only
for hire; how little allowance is made for our unavoidable infirmities,
interruptions and temptations; and how much more is expected of us than is
reasonable. If we fail in any part of our duty, how much greater share of
reproach do we suffer than other men in the same circumstances. How often is
the tongue of slander let loose upon us; our most innocent actions are looked
upon with an eye of suspicion, and our private conduct pried into with a busy
and impertinent curiosity! If we preach against any particular sins, or
describe any particular sort of bad character, some person or other will think
he is pointed at, will be offended, and show his resentment. On the other hand,
if we speak only in general terms, to avoid giving offense, then we are
censured as general preachers, who do not speak close to the consciences of our
hearers. Both our public performances and our private conversation are exposed
to the attacks of malicious, cavilling and prejudiced tempers; and he must be
more than human, who can behave so uprightly and circumspectly as in all cases
to avoid giving offense; especially when we consider that we can recommend no
duty but what some person neglects, and condemn no sin but what some person
commits.

IT is inconsistent with the character of a gospel minister to be a
man-pleaser. "If I yet pleased men," says the Apostle Paul, "I should not be
the servant of Christ." Indeed we ought to be condescending to men's capacities
and peculiarities in things of indifference; for the same Apostle says, that he
became all things to all men, and that he pleased men for their good to
edification. But beyond this, christian fidelity will not warrant us to go; and
yet if we find ourselves obliged to speak or act in a manner contrary to men's
old established opinions and inveterate prejudices; yea, if we do not actually
fall in with, and humor them, we shall incur their resentment and forfeit
their favor. We often find, by our own experience, that the tempers of mankind
are such as our Lord described the Jews to be. "Whereto shall I liken this
generation? It is like children sitting in the market, and calling to their
fellows, saying, We have piped to you, and ye have not danced; we have mourned
to you, and ye have not lamented. For John came neither eating nor drinking,
and ye say he has a devil. The son of man is come eating and drinking, and ye
say, Behold a man gluttonous, a wine-bibber, a friend of publicans and sinners.
But wisdom is justified of her children."

5. ANOTHER of the afflictions to which we are exposed, is the resentment of
pretended patriots, when we oppose their views in endeavoring to serve our
country. There is a monopolizing spirit in some politicians, which would
exclude clergymen from all attention to matters of state and government; which
would prohibit us from bringing political subjects into the pulpit, and even
threaten us with the loss of our livings if we move at all in the political
sphere. HAD this discourse been delivered twenty or twenty-five years ago, it
might have been conjectured that the politicians here meant were tories, and
under British influence! The same language is now held by some who think
themselves the best friends of America!
But, my brethren, I consider politics as intimately connected with morality,
and both with religion. If the political character of a people is bad, their
morals are equally bad, and their religion is good for nothing. The same man
who appears in the character of a politician, is also a subject of moral
government, and a candidate for immortality. Therefore if he act right or wrong
as a politician, he acts equally right or wrong as a subject of God's moral
government; his character as a politician will be brought into the grand review
at the last day, and his future state will be determined accordingly. This
doctrine, I am sensible, is not agreeable to the practice of some men, who act
with a tolerable regard to the principles of morality in their common business;
but when they get into a political body, relax their ideas of morality, and
endeavor to carry a point by any means whatever. Against such an idea of
politics, I think it my duty to protest; for I believe that honesty is the best
policy, both in private and public life.

NOW if it be the duty of gospel ministers to preach morality, it is their duty
to preach it to public as well as private men. Did not the ancient prophets
warn the princes of Israel and Judah of their duty, and reprove them for their
misconduct in their political characters? Did not our Lord Jesus Christ
recommend to the Jews to render to Caesar the things which were Caesar's, in
direct and decided contradiction to the principles of the disorganizing
Pharisees? Did not the Apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Romans, describe the
character of good and bad rulers, and teach the Christians how to distinguish
one from the other? Did not the Apostle Peter pointedly denounce the judgment
of God against those who despise government, and speak evil of dignities,
stigmatizing them with the epithets of presumptuous and self-willed;
characterizing them as political hypocrites, who, whilst they promise liberty,
are themselves servants of corruption; comparing them to Balaam, who loved the
wages of unrighteousness; and applying to them that true proverb, The dog is
turned to his own vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
mire? See 2 Peter, chap. ii. ver. 10, 1^, 19, 22.
This, in the apostolic age, was plain, honest, gospel preaching; and if there
appear any such characters among us, why should not the ministers of the
gospel, in the same manner, expose them to the public odium? It is true, that
the Apostles did not call such men by their proper names, but only drew their
character, and left it to be applied where it belonged. The like prudence
should we use; but if men will condescend to wear such a character, they must
blame themselves for the reproach which is necessarily attached to it.

THE Roman government, under which the Apostles lived, was a mixture of the old
republican forms with military despotism: That government was established; but
the Jews, though protected and indulged in the free exercise of their religion,
were continually uneasy, and frequently exciting insurrection and revolt, not
only in the province of Judea, but in their various dispersions through the
empire. To this disorganizing faction, the apostolic reproofs were addressed;
for as the Christian Religion was not designed to overthrow any of the kingdoms
of this world, so it inculcated a spirit of peace and loyalty on all who
professed it.

HAD the Apostles lived in these days, and among us, who have the privilege of
choosing our own rulers, I have no doubt that they would have exhorted us to
exercise our privileges by none but honest and lawful means. They would have
advised the people to carry the principles of Christian morality to a
town-meeting as well as to the exchange. They would have advised legislators to
carry the same principles to the senate and house of assembly; they would have
advised executive and judicial officers to carry the same principles to the
bar, to the bench, to the council board, and to the Governor's chair. They
would have advised us to be consistent and uniform in our regards to God and
man, in every situation, private or public* and this is the duty of gospel
ministers.

IT is very strange that we may not preach on the same subjects which are
recommended to us as subjects of prayer. In the annual proclamations for fasts
and thanksgivings we are exhorted to pray and give thanks on a great variety of
political subjects, foreign and domestic. And what good reason can be given why
these same subjects should not be discoursed on, as well as prayed over? It is
expected, that we bring them into the pulpit in our prayers, and it is by some
people highly resented if we do not. When we have them in our mind as proper
subjects for devotion, why should we not speak and discourse on them for the
instruction of our hearers? Must we make an address to God on political
subjects, and may we not make an address to our brethren on the same subjects?
I would not be guilty of so strange an inconsistency.

IT should be considered that we are men of like passions with others. We feel
ourselves interested equally with our brethren in the same religious, moral,
and political matters; and where there is freedom of speech, as I trust there
always will be in this happy country, we ought not to be blamed if we use the
liberty of Americans to speak our minds at proper times, and in a decent
manner, on political as well as on moral and religious topics.

BUT "there is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, though their teeth
are as swords!" And how liberal are some tongues, some pens, and some presses,
with their abuse, when we appear warm and zealous in the cause of our country!
When we speak or write in support of its liberties, its constitution, its peace
and its honor, we are stigmatized as busy-bodies, as tools of a party, as
meddling with what does not belong to us, and usurping authority over our
brethren.

WHATEVER may be the views of those who are of a different opinion from me,
respecting this matter, yet I consider their principle, that the clergy have no
right to meddle with politics, and their endeavor to stop our mouths, as
"pregnant with mischief," tending to keep the people in ignorance, and exposing
them to be misled by those who would always pretend that the people shall
govern, provided that they shall govern the people.

THE time has been, when some of these same persons were very fond of engaging
the clergy in politics, encouraging them to write and preach, or, to use a
phrase of their own, "blow the trumpet," in defense of the liberties of their
country. But, alas, how changed, how fallen! From such politicians, and such
patriots, the good Lord deliver us!

6. THERE is another affliction of the gospel, which I would gladly omit, if
the omission might not be deemed improper, and that is the difficulty which we
sometimes experience for want of a competent temporal support. Though the
Apostles in the infancy of the church, labored with their hands that they
might not be chargeable to the new converts, yet they challenged it as a right,
not only for themselves, but for all succeeding ministers, that those who
preach the gospel should live of the gospel. This is a dictate of reason and
justice, an injunction of the law of God, and of the government under which we
live. But in many instances it happens, that through covetousness, or
carelessness, or prejudice, or a spirit of evasion and procrastination, the
support we receive is either insufficient in itself, or is so long in coming,
that we are reduced to straits and sufferings for want of it. In these cases,
we have but a choice of difficulties. If we complain, we are censured as
impatient and querulous. If we lie still, and do nothing to help ourselves, we
are said to be careless and improvident. If we solicit benefactions, we are
stigmatized as beggars. If we work with our hands, or engage in any literary
labors, we are called worldly minded, and negligent of our proper business. If
we appeal to the laws of our country, and compel our people to do us justice,
it is a wonder if there be not such a spirit of resentment raised against us,
as will either make a continual uneasiness, or else terminate in a separation.

ENOUGH has now been said, to convince all who could entertain any doubt, that
the profession of the gospel ministry is necessarily attended with
difficulties, and subjects us to peculiar afflictions and trials. If I should
say that most of these ideas are the result of my own experience, I am sure
that many of my fathers and brethren, who hear me, can from their experience
testify to the truth of them. Others might be mentioned with as much propriety
as any of these; but it must be sufficiently apparent that the exhortation in
the text is of very important use, Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the
gospel. Two ideas seem to be implied in this exhortation; one is, that we do
not suffer alone, but are partakers with each other in these afflictions; the
other is, that we should have our minds prepared for them, so as not to be
disappointed or discouraged. If we suffer in company with our fathers and
brethren, we have the benefit of their example and of their advice; and it is a
consolation to us to reflect that we are partakers with the best of men in
these trials and difficulties. This consideration will help to prepare our
minds to receive them, and keep us from sinking under them. But there is
another motive suggested by the Apostle, which merits our particular attention.
Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel, according to the power of
God.

LET us then inquire, why, and in what sense, the power of God is given as a
reason of the exhortation in the text.

IN the preceding verses the Apostle had represented the divine power as part
of the gift which Timothy had received; "Stir up the gift that is in thee, by
the putting on of my hands, for God has not given us the spirit of fear, but
of power, and love, and a sound mind." By which we learn, that a spirit of
power is reckoned among the ministerial gifts, and necessary to the discharge
of the ministerial office. The meaning of this, as far as it respects the
ordinary ministers of the church, I take to be, that the Holy Spirit is always
ready, with his powerful influence, to support and comfort the ministers of the
word; to communicate to them all the energy, boldness and patience which they
need, to enable them to bear the trials, and go through the duties of their
important station; and the recollection of the gift received in their
ordination or appointment to this office, the gift of a spirit of power, will
so put them and continue them in the way of their duty, as that they may
confidently rely on the aid of the divine spirit, for their support. Christ has
promised to be with his ministers to the end of the world; and when they are
engaged with resolution and fidelity in his service, he who has a feeling of
their infirmities, and is ever attentive to their wants and requests, will
enable them, by his power, to persevere in the way of their duty, and so far to
overcome all the opposition which may be made against them, as that the cause
of truth shall, on the whole, prosper in their hands, and be promoted by their
ministry.

IN humble reliance, therefore, on this divine power, we should set ourselves
resolutely and earnestly about our Master's work, and not be moved from our
stedfastness by any of the afflictions of the gospel. For if we have a proper
faith in this power; and a proper knowledge of the manner in which it is
conveyed, and has been exercised, we shall be satisfied that it is sufficient
for the purpose for which it is given.

AND here, we may, with propriety, look back to the primitive times of
Christianity, and see how this divine power was manifested in supporting the
first preachers of the gospel, in times of far greater difficulty than the
present. They had to encounter the most fierce and formidable opposition from
inveterate prejudices, from malicious passions, from overheated zeal, and from
a combination of powerful interests. They had to travel among all sorts of
people, civilized and savage, learned and unlearned, by sea and by land,
without any certain temporal revenues or means of support. They had to preach a
new doctrine, and introduce a rational and simple form of worship, in defiance
of ancient superstition, the craft of priests, the eloquence of orators, the
authority of magistrates, and the policy of princes. The persons employed in
this service were in general illiterate, void of art, actuated by an honest
regard to their duty. They were fully convinced themselves of the truth of what
they reported, but were destitute of those natural and external advantages,
which human wisdom would deem necessary to introduce a new religion, and
recommend it to the notice and esteem of the world. Yet they went out on their
arduous and benevolent work without fear; they persevered in it with wisdom and
boldness, and they were greatly successful in their endeavors to promote the
cause of their Master, and subdue the hearts of men to the obedience of the
truth. And to what means can this remarkable success be ascribed, but to a
divine power, upholding and supporting them, and cooperating with their
exertions to produce this mighty effect. To this cause, the Apostles themselves
ascribe it. "Our gospel came to you not in word only, but in power, and in the
Holy Ghost, and in much assurance." "My preaching was not with enticing words
of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of power."

SOME may think, that in the idea of this power, might have been comprehended
the gift of miracles, by which they were enabled to make a direct appeal to the
senses of mankind, and prove that they had an extraordinary commission from
God. But this was a temporary thing. There is a power accompanying gospel
preaching, distinct from the gift of miracles; a power, by which they were
supported in the exercise of their office, and by which their preaching was
rendered effectual to the end for which it was appointed. This was a divine
energy, communicated to them, by which they were strengthened and animated to
go on boldly and courageously with their Master's work, in defiance of all the
opposition which the world could throw in their way. It is not easy to describe
this energy but by its effect; and of this we have a remarkable instance, in
the different conduct of Peter, before and after he was endowed with the spirit
of power. Before our Lord's death, we find this forward, sanguine disciple,
failing of his duty in a most shameful manner. One hour professing, "Though all
men should forsake thee, yet will I never forsake thee;" "Though I should die
with thee, yet I will not deny thee;" and the next, denying that he knew his
Master; and when closely pressed on the subject, adding oaths and curses to
confirm the denial. We find him afraid not only of the high priest and rulers,
but even of their servants; and though he seemed to recover from this fall, and
shed tears of remorse for his folly, yet, when his Lord was actually led to
execution, he was one of those who forsook him, and fled. This was an affecting
instance of inconstancy and timidity, which would seem to have disqualified
Peter from being an Apostle of Christ, and a preacher of his gospel. But, mark
the difference in his conduct, after the descent of the Holy Ghost upon him.
Then he could declare to the Jewish multitude, "This Jesus, whom ye have taken,
and with wicked hands have crucified and slain, God has raised up, of which
all we are witnesses. God has made the same Jesus both Lord and Christ." Then
he could tell the Jewish rulers, when assembled in council, "The God of our
fathers has raised up Jesus, whom ye slew, and hanged on a tree." And when he
and his brother John were forbidden, by the Jewish council, to preach in the
name of Jesus, he could boldly answer, "We ought to obey God rather than Men."
Here we have a complete specimen of the effect of that spirit of power, with
which the primitive ministers were endowed; which enabled them to persevere
with a holy fortitude in confessing Christ before men, who were enraged against
them, and thirsted for their blood. We see that this power can make the feeble
strong, and transform the coward into a hero.

WITH this spirit of power, all the true ministers of Christ are endowed. It
was not like the gift of miracles, confined to the primitive age; but it is
diffused universally. Every minister of Jesus Christ has, or may have, a share
of it; and, were it not for this, it would be impossible for us to support our
character, or endure the trials and afflictions to which we are subject, and
which will befall us in the course of our ministry. Were it not for this, we
should sink under the burden of our labors and sufferings; or else, forsake
the service of Christ, and, like Demas, seek our portion and enjoyment in the
things of this vain world. The Apostle, therefore, wisely refers to this divine
energy, as the proper ground of encouragement to Timothy, in partaking of the
afflictions of the gospel. He knew that there was a spirit of power in him, and
communicated to him by his divine Master, which would uphold and support him in
affliction and tribulation; which would enable him to endure hardness as a good
soldier of Jesus Christ, and carry him safely and honorably through his
christian warfare. The same ground of comfort there is to every faithful
servant of Jesus Christ. We are exhorted, therefore, to be partakers of the
afflictions of the gospel, according to the power of God. These afflictions are
permitted to befall us by our wise and gracious Lord, who knows how to
proportion our trials to our strength; who, having given us a spirit of power,
gives us also opportunity to exercise it; that in much tribulation we may
approve ourselves faithful to his cause, and diligent in his service.

FROM what has now been observed, agreeable to the text, we may infer, the
mistake of those persons who affect to think the work of the gospel ministry an
easy thing. It has been often said, by superficial observers, that ministers
lead an easy life, because they do not work for their living, but are
maintained by their people. Granting the premises to be true, yet the
conclusion will not follow. If our Lord has excused us from manual labor, and
if our people comply ever so well with his directions in supporting us, yet he
must be a great stranger to the duties of the ministry, who thinks our work
easy, and that we have not business enough to give us full employment.

IT is a fact, confirmed by long and repeated experience, that the work which
we are obliged to do, and the trials which we are called to endure, are more
wasting to the health and spirits than any kind of bodily labor which men
usually perform. Exercise of body tends to confirm and establish the health;
but the exercise of the mind, which falls to our lot, often proves ruinous to
the health, and wears away the constitution in a most unaccountable manner. The
thoughtfulness, the watchfulness, the self-denial, the anxiety, the close
application, and intense stretch of the mental powers in deep study and
contemplation, which form an essential part of our work, are exercises unknown
to the bulk of mankind. If, on any particular occasion, they are called to such
kind of labor, how painful and tedious is it to them, and how eagerly do they
embrace the first opportunity to get rid of it! But it is our constant
employment. The inward labor of our mind, our conflicts with our own
corruptions, and our application to sacred studies, are objects which the world
does not see, and therefore can form no idea of them. Our public discourses are
the result of deep thought and strict inquiry; and yet how often does it happen
that those discourses are least regarded; whilst the tinsel trumpery of him
"that beats the air" is admired as the perfection of wisdom and rhetoric! the
beaten oil of the sanctuary is quickly consumed, and its light appears to have
been spent in vain! whilst the twinkling of an ignis fatuus shall draw after it
crowds of admirers! If our brethren did but know the labor, the patience, the
self application, the trials and discouragements, which fall to our lot, they
would pity us, and pray for us, rather than think our work light and easy.

BUT notwithstanding all these trials and discouragements, yet we are not
without our share of comfort; there are consolations, as well as afflictions,
of the gospel; and he who has appointed us to the one, knows how to impart to
us the other. His grace is sufficient for us, and his strength is made perfect
in our weakness. The Apostle Paul could say, "Blessed be God, even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort,
who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them
who are in any trouble, by the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted of
God; for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ." And I doubt not, my fathers and brethren, that as ye have
been partakers of the afflictions, so ye have also been partakers of the
consolations of the gospel. If some persons have been instructed, converted,
and edified by our ministry, the knowledge which we have of these good effects,
wrought in the minds of our hearers, affords us proportionable satisfaction,
that we have not wholly labored in vain. God often gives us to see some good
fruit produced by our ministry; and though we see not so much as we could wish,
yet we may have been instrumental of doing more good than ever has, or ever
will, actually come to our knowledge in this world. The husbandman, in the
parable, is represented as sowing his seed, and sleeping and rising night and
day, while the seed springs and grows up he knows not how; so it is our duty
to keep ourselves employed in our ministerial labors, leaving the success of
them to the secret, imperceptible influence of divine truth, which operates not
by external might or power, but by the spirit of him who has free and perfect
access to the human heart at all times. We see a fountain pouring out constant
streams of water for ages, and yet now and then only some thirsty person comes
to drink. From the analogy between natural and spiritual objects we may learn
that God's word will not return to him void, but shall accomplish the purpose
for which it is sent; and though only now and then some thirsty sinner comes to
drink, yet we should rejoice that the water of life has not been flowing in
vain.

IF we are faithful in our Master's service, though we may be despised by the
thoughtless and profane, yet we shall be respected by the wise and good; we
shall have such a share of influence over mankind as we may use to their
advantage, both in a moral and political view; and we shall receive such
outward tokens of friendship as will help to support us, and keep our courage
from failing even in the most difficult trials. Though we sow in tears, we
shall reap in joy; and at the great harvest-day, and not before, we shall see
the whole fruit of our labor, to our abundant satisfaction.

MY brethren, of this whole congregation, you have heard some enumeration of
the afflictions of the gospel; and among them, the want of a competent temporal
support, which often falls to the lot of its ministers and their families. It
has been the laudable practice of this convention, for many years, and it may
be justly reckoned the best part of our business at these annual meetings, to
contribute to the relief of the widows and orphans of our deceased brethren,
who are sometimes left in destitute circumstances. This is a species of
consolation which it is in every one's power to administer in some degree; and
if it be ever so small, it will be accepted by him who has said, "He that
receives a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward;
and he that receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man shall
receive a righteous man's reward; and whosoever shall give to one of these
little ones that believe in me, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a
disciple, verily I say to you, he shall in no wise lose his reward."

IF the time would allow, I might urge your attention to this part of duty by a
variety of considerations; but there is one, which I cannot omit, because I
think it is founded in fact, and yet has not, perhaps, been so much attended to
as it deserves. It is well known, that many of our order have but a small
income; it is also well known, that many of our families make a decent
appearance, both at home and abroad. To what cause can this be owing, but to a
principle of economy, which is, I believe, generally, a characteristic of our
families? I do not mean to speak without exception, because it would not be
consistent with truth. This principle, being once formed into habit, is not
easily lost; but when the wife becomes a widow, and the children orphans, it is
of unspeakable advantage to them.

IT is also well known, that our brethren are generally disposed to give their
children a good education. Having no prospect of leaving them an inheritance,
and being sensible of the great advantage of education, and the great
disadvantage of a state of dependence, they are earnest to put their children
into a way of being able to get their own living independently, and, at the
same time, of being useful to the community. The good effect of these causes is
visible in every part of the country, and this town contains some valuable
examples of it. Take a general view of our citizens, and you will find, or by
inquiry you may soon be informed of the sons of clergymen, who make a capital
figure in all the departments of business. You will see them among our most
active and enterprising merchants, and our most industrious and reputable
tradesmen. You will see them shine, at the bar, on the bench, in the medical
faculty, in the pulpit, in our legislative assemblies; and even the chief seat
of our government was lately filled with a gentleman of this description. Look
into the female line, and you will find among the daughters of clergymen some
of the brightest ornaments of the sex.

WHEN these things are considered, you will permit me to say, that in
soliciting charity for the widows and orphans of my brethren, I am pleading the
cause, not of those who are too proud or too lazy to work, but of those who,
with a little assistance, in their present circumstances, may, in time, become
ornaments of their country, and pillars of church and state.

TO conclude. Let us never be weary in well-doing. We serve a good Master, and
we cannot serve him too much; he is a vigilant observer of our conduct, and he
views not only the outward appearance, but the heart. Let sincerity and
uprightness, then, govern our whole deportment. Let us be ready to every good
work; and we shall find, by our own experience, that in serving God, we are
serving ourselves; and that in suffering according to his will, we are
promoting our own true happiness, both here and hereafter.

THE END.

