AN ORATION, PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN
INDEPENDENCE; JULY 4, 1796.

BY FRANCIS BLAKE, ESQUIRE.

PRINTED AT Worcester, MASSACHUSETTS BY THOMAS, SON and THOMAS, SOLD BY THEM AT
THEIR WORCESTER BOOKSTORE. -- JULY, A. D. 1796.

AT a MEETING of a numerous body of CITIZENS, at WORCESTER, on the FOURTH of
JULY, A. D. 1796, for the purpose of celebrating the DAY -- A committee, being
appointed to convey their thanks to FRANCIS BLAKE, ESQUIRE. for his animated and
patriotic ORATION, and to request a copy thereof for the PRESS, waited upon the
Orator for those purposes, who politely expressed his "sense of the honor which
had been done him," and complied with their request.

AN ORATION: PRONOUNCED AT WORCESTER, JULY 4, 1796.
ON this DAY, FELLOW COUNTRYMEN, we celebrate the nativity of FREEDOM. We are
this day assembled to commemorate the dawning of our political existence. On
this glorious day, the voice of heaven announced to the world, that AMERICA
dared to be free. On this ever memorable day, her name was recorded with the
favored nations of the earth, who had successfully resisted the invasions of
arbitrary power, and bid defiance to the vengeance of TYRANTS.

THE occasion, deeply interesting in itself, as the era of our independence, is
yet more seriously important, as it recalls to our minds the causes which
gradually produced, the effects which have rapidly succeeded this glorious
revolution. As the joyful jubilee of our emancipation from the shackles of
servitude, it awakens our liveliest gratitude to that GOD who directed our
councils and guided our armies. As a solemn memorial of the feelings and
principles which led to this great national event, may it indelibly impress, on
our minds, the inestimable value of LIBERTY, and eternal enmity to TYRANTS!

A REVIEW of the events which preceded our final separation from Britain, a
recurrence to the earlier scenes of our revolution, will emphatically display
the principles which originated, the feelings which irresistibly urged this
solemn appeal to the SUPREME ARBITER of nations.

WHEN our ancestors fled from the ecclesiastical tyranny of England; when they
explored the untrodden wilds of America, in search of a peaceful asylum from
religious oppression, ere they rested from their labor, the seeds of liberty
were sown, with a solemn vow to heaven, that they would sacredly watch its
progress and forever cherish its growth.

THE soil was found favorable to the culture; and the scion of freedom, though
severed from its parent stock, here flourished in full vigor, and soon yielded
to our fathers, who had so anxiously fostered it, the first fruits of their
paternal exertions. They here tasted the sweets of unmolested repose; they here
enjoyed, in pleasing reality, what they had so often contemplated, in delusive
theory, the first, the most important axiom in nature, that MAN IS BORN TO BE
FREE.

THIS ever living principle was adopted as the first article of their political
creed, was inculcated with the earliest exertions of parental assiduity; and
their children were taught to believe that they were born to the enjoyment of a
life, free as the air they breathed. But, to their praise be it spoken, in the
luxury of this hard earned repose, they remembered the nation, from which they
derived their existence; and forgetting the persecution that drove them from
their native land, the second lesson of their infant education, impressed on
their minds, undeviating loyalty and attachment to their king.

THUS early instructed in a knowledge of their rights and their duties, an
inference, obvious and irresistible, forced itself upon their minds -- that
oppression would release them from the obligations of loyalty, and render
resistance an indispensable duty. -- That when the sacrilegious hand of a
tyrant should dare to attack the vitals of their political existence, the voice
of God and Nature commanded them to ward the blow and arm in defense of their
freedom.

WITH these sacred impressions the colonies of America gradually rose into
being; united among themselves by the cementing influence of similar opinions
-- united to Britain by the still stronger ties of filial attachment -- long
did their fealty support them with zealous devotion, in the service of their
parent country. Long did they labor with unremitting ardor, in the advancement
of her wealth and her honors. Long did this harmonious intercourse continue,
undisturbed by the encroachments of arbitrary power, or the discordant clamors
of sedition.

WHEN the dignity of the crown was invaded, the hearts of the colonists ever
trembled with resentment, and their hands were ever ready to grasp the
faulchion in defense of an injured sovereign. Impelled by the irresistible
impulse of an instinctive affection, they advanced as a band of brothers, to
protect the honor of a parent; and while the immortal CHATHAM successfully
directed the councils of Britain, it was his pride to acknowledge, that to the
colonies she was indebted for the rapid increase of her power, and the glorious
conquest of her enemies.

WHILE America was now rapidly advancing among the nations of the earth, and,
by daily accretions of wealth and of power, was progressively enriching and
strengthening the British empire, a scene terrible and unexampled, was
gradually unfolded; a scene at which the guardian genius of Britain frowned
with severest indignation; and, appalled at the barbarous project, fled in
terror from her once favorite abode. A scene which displayed to an astonished
world, a parent, with more than Medean madness, meditating the murder of her
devoted children.

AN entire revolution in the British cabinet had, at this period, produced an
entire revolution in the system which related to the government of her
colonies. The conciliatory councils of a CHATHAM and a CAMBDEN had now yielded
to the brutal ferocity of a BUTE and a GRENVILLE. The wealth, which Britain had
derived from a long commercial intercourse with America, first originated the
infernal machinations of ministerial rapacity, first suggested to their
imaginations a scene of warrantable plunder, which would inevitably result from
the subjection of the colonies. In pursuance of this object, a scheme was
devised, intended to filch from us the last remnant of our freedom, while it
consigned to us the consolatory task of contributing to the scandalous luxury
of our plunderers.

TO the phlegmatic mind of a German potentate; to a monarch whose measures have
ever been molded by the impulse of his ministry, it was easy to render it
plausible, and establish the infernal project, by the mechanical force of his
sanction. Secure of their prey, these harpies of hell had already sharpened
their talons, and were now battening, in idea, on the spoils of their murdered
victims.

A PLOT, thus matured in Er^bian darkness, was first ushered into light, by the
arbitrary assumption of a power, aimed at the very basis of our freedom. When
the right of taxation was asserted, our jealousy roused us to a respectful
opposition. We petitioned, we remonstrated, in language decent, but energetic.
Our petitions, our remonstrances were answered by a charge of sedition, by a
threatening appeal to the thunder of their arms. But when this unprecedented
violation of our rights, was succeeded by an act intended to enforce the
arbitrary doctrine, the slumbering lion was roused from his repose, and roared
resistance to oppression, in a voice that soon reached the throne, in a voice
of terror that convinced his deluded pursuers he would never tamely surrender
his liberty.

AN immediate repeal of an act thus obnoxious, afforded a temporary relief to
our anxiety. But alas! It was a momentary suspension of the plot. The last
scene of this ministerial drama was not yet ripe for execution, and the
managers, for a while, artfully delayed the closing catastrophe. But the signal
was at length given, and the curtain was drawn. What heart is there that does
not, even at this moment, shudder with horror at the remembrance of the
sanguinary scenes which ensued! A horde of mercenary ruffians now darkened our
land, armed with the implements of death; demanding at the point of the bayonet
implicit obedience to the will of a tyrant.

BUT even at this hopeless period, our loyalty, for a long time, supported the
conflict with our reason. The throne, that exalted pinnacle of royal depravity,
was, even at this dreary moment, surrounded with supplicants, breathing the
spirit of harmony, and an anxious solicitude, for the restoration of peace. But
the monster was deaf to our entreaties, and HAVOC was the watchword of his
ravenous blood hounds!

A RAPID succession of oppressive measures now blackened the records of a
cringing parliament. The trial by jury, that fundamental attribute of our
republican system, was repeatedly suspended by their omnipotent authority. Our
lives and our liberties were daily exposed to the sanguinary rigor of military
law. Our charters were sacrilegiously invaded; our legislatures tyrannically
abolished. Our fellow citizens were incited to become the executioners of their
countrymen; our towns were ravaged and plundered by the minions of merciless
despotism.

BUT to perpetuate the remembrance of our accumulated injuries, or the patient
endurance with which they were long sustained, requires not the aid of an
annual recital. Their history is engraven on our hearts, and with the name of
Britain, our pulse will never fail to beat in tumult, at the memory of her
injustice. To attempt a detail of the progressive usurpations, which first led
us to renounce our allegiance to the crown, is but displaying a series of
unprecedented cruelties, which are already recorded in the first pages of our
political history; a record, which, from the commencement of the conflict, has
been sacredly deposited in the undecaying temple of FAME; which she has long
since trumpeted to the world, as an eternal reproach to the nation with whom we
contended.

CAN we ever forget the last, the most wanton exertion of savage ferocity? When
our tawny brethren were beckoned from the peaceful wilderness, were instructed
to search for the hatchet which had so long been buried; and wield it against
the lives of their devoted victims. While our enemies, as if anxious to evince
to the world, that a Briton could rival the barbarity of a savage, closed the
infamous catalogue of their aggressions, by an incendiary deed that outstripped
the fury of their fiercest allies.

THE sun, which rose on that disastrous morning, that witnessed the
CONFLAGRATION OF CHARLESTOWN, had not the age of miracles elapsed, had stood
still as it did once in Gibeon, till we were avenged of our enemies; and veiled
his face from a people, that dared thus insult the majesty of their GOD! The
flames which on that fateful day rolled in volumes to the gates of Heaven, bore
with them a record, which on the great day of accounts, shall be solemnly
announced, to close the awful summary of British transgression.

THE gauntlet thus being thrown; our dearest rights thus outrageously invaded;
our lives and our liberties thus daily endangered; the crisis of our fate now
called for a decisive effort of our courage. At this period* deliberation would
have been the most abject cowardice: -- At this awful moment, continued loyalty
to Britain would have been the basest treason to America.

UNDER these solemn impressions, the watchful guardians of our nation, with a
decent respect to the opinions of mankind, proclaiming the causes which
impelled to the separation, imploring the protection of heaven, and appealing
to the SUPREME JUDGE of the world, for the rectitude of their intentions, now
boldly pronounced that we were absolved forever from our allegiance to Britain.
With an undaunted firmness, that would have honored a Roman senate; at the same
time, with feelings of humanity, inspired by reflecting on the melancholy
cause, they solemnly pledged their lives, their fortunes and their sacred
honor, while they wept at the remembrance of the friendship, which was thus
forfeited forever.

STRUGGLING, at this moment, with internal commotions, deficient in pecuniary
resources, oppressed with national embarrassments, contending with an empire
whose arms had made the elder world to tremble, our infant country was
convulsed with the agonies of impending destruction. To resist the myriads of
myrmidons, trained in the field of battle, who were now daily invading our once
peaceful shores, we had only to oppose the desperate efforts of an
undisciplined peasantry, who, till this period, had warred only with the
stubborn glebe. But the GOD OF ARMIES had listened to our prayers, had decreed
to us victory and freedom. Our earth then teemed with warriors, and, as in the
fabled story of CADMUS, they once sprang from the teeth of the dragon, our
fields bristled with armies accoutred for the contest.

TO retrace the scenes of rapine and desolation which followed the footsteps of
their armies, and the heroism which marked the progress of our own, is a task
which has already roused the enthusiasm of the poets, the historians, the
orators of the elder world; and although they have cautiously palliated the
outrageous cruelties of our enemies; to their praise it must be acknowledged,
that, to the magnanimity of Americans, they have scarce ever denied a just
tribute of applause. An eulogy from our adversaries cannot fail to soothe the
melancholy remembrance of our friends who have fallen in the conflict; and
while each revolving sun shall add fresh verdure to the laurels they gathered
in the tented field; the cypress that blossoms on their graves shall bear
witness, that their deaths have been lamented, that their deeds are not
forgotten.

BUT for the heroes, who more successfully stemmed the torrent of invasion; who
rested not from their labors, till the glorious work was accomplished; who
sheathed not their swords, till they had vanquished the invaders, and driven
them from our land; the grateful homage of a people rescued from Egyptian
bondage shall be their eternal reward. A feeble repetition of a nation's
plaudit would be but an ostentatious mimickry of those immortal honors, which
are already registered in the grateful hearts of their countrymen. But while we
glory in the achievements of a WASHINGTON; how painful the remembrance that the
treason of an ARNOLD had well nigh baffled his exertions. Yet, though we blush
that our cause was disgraced by this infamous apostate; with the true spirit of
christians, let us leave his punishment to the upbraidings of a guilty
conscience.

GREAT as were, at this time, the exertions of our countrymen; with the
unexampled wisdom displayed in the cabinet; and the military ardor exhibited in
the field, the struggle was, for a long time, dreadful and desperate. At this
period the cloud, which had so long been gathering over our devoted country,
was bursting in peals of thunder. The vail of our political temple was rent in
twain, while the melancholy bird of omen, perched on its summit, shrieked in
dismay, and portended approaching destruction. At this awful moment, the hearts
of our bravest warriors were appalled; and we should long since have bowed our
heads, and been buried in the ruins, had not that gallant nation of heroes, who
fought and bled with us in the glorious conflict, impelled by the voice of
Heaven, rushed to our relief, and propped the tottering fabric!

FROM this moment the tide of fortune turned rapidly in our favor, nor did it
cease to flow, till it had deluged our enemies.

THE pride of Britain, thus unexpectedly humbled, the scheme of an ambitious
ministry thus suddenly arrested in its progress, their nation groaning under
the heavy pressure of taxes, their soldiers revolting from the unnatural
conflict, the world, which had so often trembled at their vengeance, now
exultingly smiled at their defeat. They now beheld Babylon in ruins, and saw
this once mighty empire reluctantly suing for peace of an infant republic,
which, with murderous hands, she had just attempted to strangle in her cradle.

OUR vengeance appeased by the penitence of our oppressors, we cheerfully
listened to the conciliatory voice of their sovereign, and with a mutual spirit
of harmony, though on our part with an inflexible firmness, a peace was at
length concluded, not less honorable to America, than humiliating to her
adversaries. A peace, which secured to us forever the enjoyment of that boon,
for which we had so cheerfully proffered our lives and our fortunes. A peace,
which displayed to the world a new era in the history of man, from whence has
since been dated the downfall of despotism and the triumph of freedom!

AMERICA, thus relieved from the convulsive agonies which so long retarded her
growth, now sought for a renewal of her strength in the tranquil bosom of
repose. But she had scarce enjoyed a momentary respite from her labor, when her
slumbers were again disturbed by alarming symptoms of internal disorder. A
general debility had succeeded the late arduous struggle; an entire derangement
of her system was the result of this premature exertion of her strength. An
inevitable delinquency in the fulfillment of her pecuniary engagements, with a
rapid accumulation of taxes, to supply the immediate exigencies of an exhausted
treasury, had excited an alarming clamor which resounded through every part of
our continent.

ON searching for the primary cause of these complicated evils, it was at
length discovered, that our national government was as deficient in energy, as
it was discordant in its operations. That the thirteen planets of our union,
designed to revolve around one common center, from the want of a sufficient
concentrating attraction, were continually jostling with each other, and
disturbing the harmony of the whole.

TO remedy this dangerous defect, the wisdom of our nation was once more
summoned into action. The task they had now to accomplish, was to unite, in one
grand national compact, the feelings and interests of thirteen sovereign,
independent republics: -- To secure the rights and privileges of all, while
they rendered the prosperity of each individual government subservient to the
promotion of the general welfare. To the attainment of this important object,
our late feeble confederation was found totally inadequate. A new system was
therefore concerted, and respectfully submitted for its sanction to the
sovereign will of the people. That it might not fail from that want of energy,
which had weakened the operations of our former constitution, powers were
delegated, which, at first, appeared dangerously extensive, to infringe too far
upon the sovereignty of the separate governments.

AMONG a people, who had been so recently taught in the school of oppression*
to be jealous of every encroachment, who had so lately contended with domestic,
as well as with foreign enemies* it is not* therefore, surprising* that a
temporary opposition prevailed. The supporters of our federal system had to
contend with the most powerful passions and prejudices of the human heart. But
a generous confidence in the disinterested integrity of those illustrious
characters who had presented it for their acceptance, at length lulled the
suspicions of the people, and our triumph was complete by the adoption of a
government, which, we trust in GOD, will permanently secure to us the enjoyment
of our freedom.

YET, while we cheerfully concur in a merited eulogium on the authors of our
FEDERAL SYSTEM, it is with pain we are compelled to remember, that a most
alarming disunion of sentiment has, almost from the commencement of its
administration, distracted our national councils; -- that this dangerous
diversity of opinion has been rapidly extending among the people, and unhappily
created an opprobrious distinction, intended to designate the principles of
political parties. -- How painful! how distressing! that a people who have
struggled together in one common cause; who have fought, hand in hand, for the
attainment of one common object, should be thus embittered against each other,
by the extraneous influence of foreign commotions!

YET, while we regret, that a late measure of our government has excited a
general disquietude among our southern sisters of the union, let us
congratulate ourselves, that among us, the late rancorous spirit of
fermentation appears to be rapidly subsiding, and we trust, a general
coalescence of sentiment will ere long restore us to our wonted harmony!

WITHOUT arrogating to decide on the merits of our late negotiation with
Britain; without hazarding a conjecture on its operation, or the possibility of
uniting ourselves in amity with a nation, from whom we are now daily suffering
the most insolent and unprecedented outrages -- suffer me to express a firm, an
unqualified reliance, in the quiet acquiescence of the people, suffer me*
FELLOW COUNTRYMEN, to express a belief, that it will ever be the pride of
AMERICANS, whatever may be their private feelings and sentiments, without
remonstrating against the exercise of a constitutional discretion, to submit,
with a respectful deference, to the decision of their constituted authorities.
But let us even hope, hopeless as may be the prospect, that the anxious
apprehensions of its opposers may be relieved by its favorable operation. May
the issue evince to us the fallacy of their gloomy predictions, and prove that
the living embers of British resentment may yet be extinguished by this
conciliatory effort!

BUT while we rely on this proffered pledge of their friendship, let us be
constantly watchful that our rights are not renewedly invaded; -- let us not be
piratically molested in our commercial pursuits; let us not supinely suffer our
gallant sons of the ocean to become the unwilling slaves of despotism; to be
barbarously impressed to a service from which their hearts must recoil with
horror. -- But, by a spirited, a manly protection of our privileges as a
neutral nation, let us announce to the enemies of France, that we will never
become subservient to the cause we abhor.

WHILE lamenting the temporary discord which impeded our negociations with
Britain, we cannot fail to rejoice, that a general unanimity of sentiment has
sanctioned the treaties which secure to us a peace with the savage tenants of
our wilderness, and the yet more savage disciples of MAHOMET, who have so long
warred against the cause of reason and humanity. -- That while we are again
smoking the calumet, with the sachems of our western world, and are relieved
from the embarrassments of a distressing and expensive war; we shall also
rescue from slavery and wretchedness, our fellow countrymen, who so long
groaned beneath the galling chains of heathen barbarity, whose lamentations
have so often reached our peaceful abodes, and loudly demanded, in the name of
humanity, our warmest exertions for their redemption.

UNDER a government, thus energetic in its operations, we now enjoy the
pleasing reflection that our labors have been crowned with an abundant reward
-- and while on this day we offer up our annual sacrifice, at the ALTAR OF
LIBERTY, let us solemnly swear, in the presence of that GOD, who has given us
the boon, that we will never relinquish it but with our LIVES! Let us sacredly
pledge ourselves to our country, that we will forever protect the rights we
have thus secured, from the encroachments of prerogative, and the desperate
efforts of faction. -- That the blood, with which they were purchased, shall be
the only price of their forfeiture, that we will never relax in our exertions
to transmit them to our latest posterity, pure and undefiled.

IN thus reviewing the causes, which led to the event of this joyous
anniversary, in tracing the effects which have resulted to America, in
searching for the principles which impelled to the contest, in recalling the
feelings which supported us in the struggle, it cannot fail to occur to us that
the causes have not been confined to the limits of our continent; that the
effects have extended far beyond the boundaries of our nation; -- that the
glorious example, with electrical rapidity, has flashed across the Atlantic;
that guided by the same principles, conducted by the same feelings, the people,
who so gallantly fought and bled for the security of our lives and our
liberties, are now fighting and bleeding in defense of their own.

ON this day, therefore, religiously devoted to the consecration of our
independence, it becomes us, as the votaries of freedom, as friends to the
rights of man, and bound to support them whenever invaded, to turn our
attention, with a grateful enthusiasm, to the scenes of their sufferings, their
revolt and their victories. While exulting in the full enjoyment of peace and
tranquillity, shall not a tear for the unexampled distresses of this
magnanimous nation, check, for a moment, the emotions of our joy? They have
sworn eternal hatred to tyrants! They have sworn that they will live FREE or
DIE! They have solemnly sworn, that the sword, which has been drawn in defense
of their country, shall never be returned to its scabbard, till it has secured
to them victory and freedom, or is sheathed in their own bosoms, reeking with
the blood of their oppressors! Let us then breathe forth a fervent ejaculation
to heaven, that their vows may be remembered; that the cause of our former
allies may not be deserted, till they have scourged their invaders; till they
have driven them back in confusion to the REGIONS OF TERROR, FROM WHENCE THEY
EMERGED!

WHILE we remember with horror the continued effusion of blood, which darkened
the morning of their revolution, let us not forget that their vengeance was
roused by the treachery of a tyrant, who has since perished on the scaffold; by
the champions of despotism, whose lives have since justly atoned for the crimes
they committed! While we lament the sanguinary scenes, which clouded its
progress, let it not be forgotten that they arose from the bloody manifesto of
a band of tyrants, combined for the hellish purpose of again rivetting the
chains they had broken. The league of PILNIT^, like the league of Satan and his
angels revolting against the MAJESTY OF HEAVEN, was professedly fabricated, to
arrest forever the progress of freedom; to usurp the dominion of France, and
divide the spoil among this band of royal plunderers. -- Have we not heard,
that the noble, the generous, the grateful monarch of the forest, that fawned
at the feet of ANDROCLES, when remembering his former friendship, will ever
turn with fury on his pursuers, and when robbed of his whelps, rests not till
his fangs are crimsoned in the blood of the aggressor? Shall then the fervor of
our friendship be abated, by remembering the transitory frenzy of a people
distracted with the enthusiasm of freedom, and irritated to madness by the
dreadful prospect of losing what they had enjoyed but for a moment? Let it
never be said of us, as of Rome and of Athens, that ingratitude (...) the
common vice of republics! Was it to the crowned monarch named LOUIS the
sixteenth, or to the people of France, that we were indebted, for the blood and
treasure that were so profusely lavished in our cause? Shall then their
services be forgotten, in the remembrance of their momentary excesses? Or shall
we refuse our most cordial concurrence in the feelings, which impel them to the
present contest with the RUFFIAN POTENTATES of Europe? In the name of that GOD,
who has so signally displayed himself in the advancement of their victories,
let us remember they are bleeding in the cause of mankind! Can we doubt, for a
moment, which is the cause we are bound to support with our sanction, when we
behold the winds and the seas, those dreadful ministers of Heaven's vengeance,
commissioned to advance their progress, and deluge their enemies? When we
behold ARIEL, with his attendant spirits, gently hovering over their navies,
and wafting them to victory on the bosom of the ocean, while NEPTUNE and BOREAS
have combined against the league of their oppressors, to overwhelm in the deep
these deluded followers of PHARAOH! Have we not seen them fed, as with manna
from heaven, the waters divided, IN the winter of the year 1793, while the
French were marching through the Netherlands, and before the surrender of
Amsterdam, a large river, which obstructed their progress, was frozen over at
the moment of their approach, and gave them an easy passage into the heart of
the country. It had not been frozen before for a great number of years.
and the walls of Jericho falling before them, while the fair prospect of
liberty has led them in triumph through the wilderness, as a cloud by day, and
a pillar of fire by night!!

AMERICANS! Let us join in a fervent supplication, that the sacred charters of
humanity, which we have once sealed with our blood, may be forever preserved
from the deadly grasp of TYRANTS!

FRENCHMEN! Be firm, be undaunted in the struggle you have thus miraculously
supported! Evince to the world, now gazing with admiration at your exploits in
the field of battle, that you have virtue equal to your courage; that you are
friends to the friends of humanity; that your arms are nerved only against the
enemies of man. Let not the sacred name of LIBERTY be polluted by the frenzy of
licentious passions; but may your present glorious constitution, while it
protects your freedom from the unhallowed ravages of tyranny, remain an
unshaken bulwark against the destructive fury of FACTION!

TYRANTS! Turn from the impious work of blood in which your hands are imbrued,
and tremble at the desperation of your revolting subjects! Repent in sackcloth
and ashes! For behold ye that have been exalted up to heaven, shall, ere long,
be cast down to hell! The final period of your crimes is rapidly approaching!
The grand POLITICAL MILLENNIUM is at hand; when tyranny shall be buried in
ruins; when all nations shall be united in ONE MIGHTY REPUBLIC! WHEN the four
ANGELS, that stand on the four corners of the GLOBE, shall, with one accord,
lift up their voices to heaven; proclaiming, PEACE ON EARTH, AND GOOD WILL TO
ALL MEN!

FINIS.

