EXPLANATION OF SCRIPTURE PROPHECY.

THE SIGNS OF THE TIMES; OR THE DARK PROPHECIES OF SCRIPTURE ILLUSTRATED BY THE
APPLICATION OF PRESENT IMPORTANT EVENTS.

Written in Great Britain, during the Years 1793, 1794 and 1795.

BY J. BICHENO.

PRINTED AND SOLD BY RICHARD DAVISON, IN WEST-SPRINGFIELD. SOLD ALSO BY THE
DISTRIBUTERS OF THE AMERICAN INTELLIGENCER, etc. etc.

PART I.
ADVERTISEMENT.
HISTORY no where informs us of any event so extraordinary as the late
revolution in France. If viewed on all sides, with its attending circumstances,
by an attentive and unprejudiced eye, it must surely excite the greatest
astonishment; and those who have been used to unite in their minds the
providence of God with human occurrences, (whether they approve of this great
change of things or not,) cannot help inquiring, Is this from men, or is it
from God? Is it one of those commotions produced by the conflicting passions of
men, that rise and sink, and are soon forgotten; or is it one of those events
which mark the great aeras of time, and from which originate new orders of
things? -- If the latter, it is undoubtedly the theme of prophecy.

Appearances indicate that this will be a fatal stroke to the Papal
usurpations, and to the reign of despotism. Those prophecies, therefore, which
direct our hopes to that interesting period, when all Antichristian tyrannies
are to perish, deserve, at this time, peculiar attention. But where shall we
find a clue to guide us in our inquiries? The author of the following thoughts
consulted commentators the most generally approved, on the Prophecies of Daniel
and the Revelation of John. He found much to edify and excite curiosity, but
was still in the midst of a wilderness. At length he was determined to commit
himself to his own investigations, and explore these regions of wonders,
without placing implicit confidence in any guide. Circumstances led him to
conjecture, that the beast which John saw coming up out of the earth, was Lewis
the Fourteenth, or the French tyranny perfected by him, and supported by his
successors, and that it was this beast which slew the witnesses. This is the
clue which he has followed, and he thinks it is that by which the mazes of
these wonderful visions, at least as far as they have been accomplished, may be
traced with precision, and some things which are yet to come be conjectured
with great advantage. But without this to guide us, all seems confusion.

A serious application to the study of the prophecies, and an attentive
observation of the signs of the times, have produced in my mind the strongest
persuasion, that the utter downfall of the Papacy, (...) of despotism, the
restoration of the Jews, and the renovation of all things, are near at hand;
and that every year will astonish us with new wonders. "As the days of Noe
were, so shall also the coming of the Son of Man be. For as in the days that
were before the flood, they were eating and drinking, and marrying and giving
in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark, and knew not until
the flood came and took them all way, so shall also the coming of the Son of
Man be Matt. xxiv. 37 -- 39.
." From this persuation arises the indispensable duty of calling the attention
of mankind, with peculiar earnestness, to the things which belong to their
peace. "Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain:
let all the inhabitants of the land tremble; for the day of the Lord coming,
for it is nigh at hand Joel ii. 10.
."

I know what an author, who writes on subjects like these, has to expect. But
my heart tells me, that I publish these thoughts with the purest intentions,
and that my only aims are to serve the interests of Chirstianity, to promote
the welfare of my countrymen and the common cause of humanity, by inviting men
to consider the signs of the times; that, as individuals, and as a nation, we
may examine our ways, repent, and reform; that thus the Divine displeasure may
be averted, and that constitution, which has secured to this empire so many
blessings, to which most other nations are strangers, may be purified and
strengthened, and by these means be continued to our posterity. I do therefore
most fervently pray, that God may succeed this feeble attempt, and bless us,
and all men, with peace.

NEWBURY, Jan. 19, 1793.
PREVIOUS THOUGHTS.
THE kingdom which God was to set up under the Melliah, according (...)
prophets was to be a kingdom of righteousness, peace and (...) Only us a child
is born -- the government shall be upon his (...) -- Of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be (...). -- The (...) and the lamb shall feed
together. He shall speak peace (...) Isa. ix. 6, 7.
, who have long been the prey of destroyers, and of one another. If we
contemplate the principles of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, they promise fair to
produce the enjoyment of all that which the prophets predicted. But where is
the effect? The annals of the Christian world, as well as those of the Pagan,
discover to us little more than the history of ambition, superstition, and
bloodshed. The career of this kingdom began in piety toward God, and in love
and peace to all mankind. But systems of error, superstition, and oppression,
soon interrupted its progress, and perverted its principles. Christianity has
been converted into a system of commerce, and those called the ministers of
Christ, have been a corporation of traders in the souls and liberties of
mankind.

Were I to attempt to define the character of Antichrist, I should say, It is
all that which opposes itself to the kingdom of Christ, whether it flow from
the ecclesiastical or civil powers. The civil constitutions of nations, as well
as the ecclesiastical, so far as they accord with, or have a tendency to
promote, that pride and that ambition which lead to oppression, persecution,
and war, are Antichristian. Whatever in religion is destructive of union among
Christians, which leads to domination over conscience, to hinder free enquiry
after truth, or any way oppresses and persecutes men for matters cognizable
only by God, is Antichristian. Whenever there is intolerance: wherever we find
conditions of communion among Christians impotest, which Christ has not
clearly enjoined; wherever creeds and modes of worship are enforced by human
power, and men are made to forfeit any of their civil rights, or are
stigmatized on these accounts, there is that spirit which is not of God.
Wherever one Christian, or sect of Christians, assumes the seat of authority
and judgment in the church of Christ, whether they call for fire to destroy
those who dissent from them, or only exclude them from their communion and
affection, there is a portion of that spirit of Antichrist which has so long
opposed itself to the benign principles of the kingdom of the Prince of Peace,
has been the cause of so many evils to humanity, and the occasion of making the
inconsiderate esteem the amiable religion of Jesus, as a source of mischief
instead of benevolence? Alas, how much of this spirit remains amongst us all!
How few have learned, that 1 Cor. vii. 19.
in Jesus Christ circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but
the keeping of the commandments of God.

But we are assured from the scriptures, that all these usurpations and
Antichristian principles shall have an end; and that the gospel will produce
the various happy effects which are predicted. The religion of Christians shall
then no longer consist in Romans xiv. 17.
meat and drink, but in righteousness, peace, and joy: the practice of justice,
the cultivation of harmony, and the diffusion of happiness.

The question is, When may we hope to see these predictions accomplished? Long
have a pious few had their eyes fixed on the promises of God with ardent
expectation, and been crying, How long, O Lord, ere thou will avenge the blood
of thy saints, and create Jerusalem a quiet dwelling place, and Zion the joy of
all the earth? Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly! -- Behold I come at an hour when
ye think not! blessed is he that watches.

Some suppose, that all our inquiries about the time of the accomplishment of
the predictions relative to the downfall of Antichrist, which is to prepare the
way for the peaceful kingdom of the Redeemer, are in vain. If so, wherefore is
it said, Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy? Rev. i. 3. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the
number of the beast, xiii. 18.

Though the meaning of the prophecies is necessarily wrapped up in modes of
expression not easy to be understood, as they would otherwise operate against
their own accomplishment; yet they may not be absolutely inserutable; and
especially when their accomplishment approaches nearer, and increasing light is
cast upon them by the arising of circumstances connected with them. This seems
to be intimated by the angel, Dan. xii. 4, 9, 10. But thou, O Daniel, shut up
the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end: many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. -- The words are closed up and
sealed till the time of the end. None of the wicked shall understand, but the
wise shall understand. The meaning of these words, according to the learned Dr.
Lowth, is, "The nearer the time approaches for the final accomplishment of the
prophecy, the more light shall men have for the understanding it; for the
gradual completion of this and other prophecies shall direct observing readers
to form a judgment concerning those particulars which are yet to be fulfilled.
From hence we may observe the reason of the obscurity of several prophecies in
scripture; and it may be observed, that generally those prophecies are most
obscure, the time of whose completion is furthest off. For the same reason, in
interpreting the prophecies relating to the latter times of the world, the
judgment of the latter writers is to be preferred before that of the ancients;
because the moderns, living nearer the times when the events were to be
fulfilled, had surer marks to guide them in their expositions." Lowth's Expos.
Dan. xii. 4. Ver. 9, he paraphrases thus: "Be content with what has been made
known to thee, (Daniel): for the fuller explication of this prophecy is
deferred till the time of its accomplishment draws near." The opinion then of
this learned commentater was, that God would so dispose things, that observing
men should, from the sign^ of the times, be led to understand the true meaning
of these prophecies, relating to the latter times of the world, which had not
been before understood, so as hence to foresee the approaching downfall of
Antichrist, and those other great events connected with it; and by which means
the divine word will be much accredited, men be cured of their infidelity, and
God hereby be honored.

My mind has of late been much affected with the appearances of things in the
Christian world, and with the occurrences which have, within these few years,
burst upon us. Occurrences which are unpa^ed in the history of nations.

In America a revolution has taken place, which is singular in its
consequences, and especially as they concern the state of religion. We have
long been told, that if the Christian religion were left unprotected by
establishments, and unsupported by emoluments, it would soon he borne down, and
all its solemnities forsaken and despised. The experiment has here been made,
and fact demonstrates the fallacy of such conclusions. The people are cased of
a heavy burden, and pure and undefiled religion flourishes more than ever.
Hirelings have withdrawn, but piety and virtue, charity and union increase. But
a few years after this grand event, one of the first nations in Enrope, long
enslaved, and blinded by superstition, at once broke its chains, and tore away
the bandages with which Popish priests had bound the eyes of the multitude.
Civil liberty had long been forgotten, and, for more than a hundred years, no
liberty of conscience was permitted to the insulted people: And, as a nation,
they had for ages been made, by their tyrants, the scourge of all their
neighbors. This people have, to the astonishment of the whole civilized world,
arose up as in one day, and, in opposition to the combined power of their king,
their priests and nobles, have dared to say, We will be free -- We will have
just and equal laws -- No man shall punish, and no man shall be punished, but
as the law commands -- The poor as well as the rich shall be protected --
Conscience is the property of God, and every man shall worship his Maker as he
pleases -- We will never make war, but in self-defence, and will embrace all
men as our brethren. And this was not the resolution of a few, it was the
solemn covenant of twenty-six millions or people. What a phenomenon in the
history of man! What an epoch in the history of the church! But German despots
and their creatures, whose existence depends on the ignorance and servility of
mankind, fearing the influence of such an example, have been exerting all their
power to crush this rising spirit of liberty, and to support the falling
Papacy. By whose hand was it that they and their remnant were driven back with
loss and shame? His, who makes the wrath of man to praise him. -- Alas! the
calamities which opposition to the most benevolent sentiments has occasioned!
The passions of men have been enraged, and in the paroxysm of resentment, fear,
and despair, the best of causes, the cause of liberty, has been stained by the
commission of crimes which afflict a great majority of their own nation; and
all the genuine friends of liberty and justice throughout the world. None can
contemplate them but with the keenest anguish, except those who are watching
for occasions to slander all who resist oppressors. The circumstances of this
wonderful revolution, mark it as an event of vast importance, and as probably
big with consequences beyond all conjecture.

The prophecies respecting the downfall of the Antichristian usurpations, must
have their accomplishment in some era; it may be the present. It is therefore
surely worth our while to inquire how far the predictions of God's word will
agree with the rise and progress of known events.

Thus it has appeared to me; and the more I examine and think upon the subject,
the more I am convinced, that the last days spoken of by God's servants the
prophets, are fast approaching; when Babylon the Great shall come in
remembrance, and God will avenge the blood of his saints, and the kingdoms of
this world shall become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; by not
only professing the religion of Jesus, but by acting under its influence, and
copying after his example, who was meek and lowly in heart, and who came "not
to destroy men^ lives, but to save them." And this kingdom shall not be a
kingdom of anarchy, but a state of things, in which the governors and the
governed, and all the different ranks in society, will unite to promote the
general good. It is not impossible that the present shaking of nations should
bring about this desirable event. Some however object, that the progress of the
French revolution has been marked with too much outrage and blood; and that the
persons engaged in it are of a character too bad to admit it to be from God, --
a work which he approves, and which he intends as the introduction to those
happy days of which the prophets have spoken.

It would not be a very difficult task to prove, that those German princes, and
domestic foes to liberty, who have opposed the emancipation of France from the
yoke of royal and priestly tyrants, have been the occasion of almost all the
horrors which have been committed; and as their hands will much of the blood be
required, which has been, or may hereafter be shed, in this mighty and
interesting struggle, between men roused up by the severity of their
sufferings, to claim the rights they had long been robbed of, and those
continental tyrants who, for ages, have been the scourges of the human race.
But granting that the leaders in the French revolution have been as
attrociously wicked as represented, this does not, in the slightest degree,
affect our hypothesis.

Though many of the instruments which Providence employs may be unworthy
characters, and though the extraneous evil connected with the revolution in
France may afflict our hearts, and provoke not only our censure, but our
indignation, still the great principles of it may demand our homage, and the
end to be hoped for, the triumphs of truth and justice over superstition,
persecution, and oppression, may excite our joy. Cyrus waded through the blood
of kings and armies to plunder the earth, and subject nations to his will; (he
spared not children. Isa. xiii. 18.); but we have been taught to venerate his
memory, as the righteous man of the east. And why? Not because all his
exploits, us his, were righteous, but because we have seen the issue, and been
informed, that he was made an instrument in the hand of God, to execute his
righteous judgments; that it was He who gave nations before him, and made him
rate over kings, that Babylon might fit in the dust, and captive Israel go
free. What was Henry the Eighth, who began our reformation? A monster! Wh^^
were his motives? The gratification of his fulls. What were the means which he
employed? -- How blind is man! We only know, that in God dwell the attributes
of wisdom, justice, and goodness, but we are incumble of tracing the sphere of
their operations. He saw fit to make use of the Jewish rulers, and to direct
the worst of human passions, for the purpose of effecting our redemption, by
the death of Jesus Christ. Are established systems of superstition and tyranny
to be overthrown by a few smooth words of benevolence and wisdom? Happy if they
could! Are the dragon and the beasts which have so depopulated the earth for
ages, to perish without convulsion? Read -- Rev. xvi. 6.
They have shed the blood of saints and prophets, and thou have given them
blood to drink, for they are worthy. When (...) period shall arrive, there will
be much work to do, for the execution of which the meek of the earth are by no
means qualified. To censure disorder, to shudder at bloodshed, and to practice
mercy is our duty; for neither God's secret counsels, nor his providential
judgments, are to be the rule of our conduct. We know who has said, Love your
enemies, and do good to them that hate you. This is our rule.

Sir Isaac Newton had a very sagacious conjecture, which he told to Dr. Clark,
from which Mr. Whiston says be received it, viz. "That the overbearing tyranny
and power of the Anchristian party, which has so long corrupted Christianity,
and enslaved the Christian world, must be put a stop to and broken to pieces by
the prevalence of infidelity, for some time, before primitive Christianity
could be restored; which seems to be the very means now working in Europe for
the same good and great end of Providence." "Possibly," says the relater, "he
might think that our Savior's words (Luke, xviii. 8.) imply it. When the Son
of Man comes, shall he find says on the earth? O^possibly he might think no
other way so likely to do it in human affair. It being, I acknowledge, too
sadly evident, that there is not at present religion enough in Christendom, to
put a stop to such Antichristian gyranny and persecution upon any genuine
principles of Christianity." Whiston's Essay on the Revelation of St. John.
Second edit^ page 331. Printed in the year 1744.

This was a very sagacious conjecture indeed; and it is not unlikely that it
may soon be realized. There are reasons for fearing, that are long infidelity
will as generally prevail as the name of Christianity has done. It is in vain
to flatter. It is too evident, that though the Christianity of individuals,
among all ranks and sects, has been genuine, yet that of nations has been only
in name. By their fruits shall ye know them. The generality of governments have
been oppressive; a great majority of the ministers of religion have not only
been men of the world, who have sought after nothing but gain, but they have
been cruel lords over God's heritage, persecuting instead of feeding the flock;
teaching men to hate, oppress, and murder one another, for opinions; instead of
inculcating those lessons of love taught by Jesus Christ. Among the rich and
great even the forms of religion are scarcely to be found. The speil of the
poor is in their houses, and because they are full they forget God, and are
waxed wanton. If we descend, pride, covetousness, deceit, oppression, riot;
impurity, irreligion, r^piety, perjury, and baseness, present themselves,
without secret search, at every step. And yet these are all Christians! But be
who was taught the religion of Christ, not by man, but by the revelation of
Jesus Christ, has said, Faith without works is dead. Alas! they have walked in
a vain show. But it is probable that this disguise, before the consummation of
all things, will be stripped off, and the nations be made to appear in their
true character, and thus may be fulfilled, in a sense that has not been
suspected, that prediction of the prophet Isaiah (chap. xxv. 7.) He will
destroy the face of the covering (the mask) cast over all people, and the vail
that is spread over all nations. My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are
your ways my ways, says the LORD.

The French revolution then may be of God, and designed to issue in good,
although conducted by infidels, and disgraced by outrages which nothing can
justify.

FIRST INQUIRY.
IN endeavoring to make good this hypothesis, that the signs of the times
indicate the speedy downfall of all that spiritual and civil tyranny, which for
so many ages has prevailed, in opposition to the principles of the kingdom of
Christ, the Prince of Peace, there are three inquiries which claim our
attention.

The first respects the dragon and the beasts, which John saw in his visions.
Rev. xi. 7. xii. and xiii.

The second respects the witnesses, Rev. xi. -- and the third inquiry is,
Whether all numbers of Daniel and John, which refer to the latter days, will
agree with the present times? Let us, with that reverence and devout candor
which become us when we apply to the word of God for instruction, attend to
these several inquiries.

The grand scene of the prophetic visions of John opens in the fourth chapter
of the Revelation, and is continued to the end of the book. The whole may be
considered as a number of scenic pictures. Chapter the eleventh is a miniature
picture of the history of the church (the western church especially) from the
earliest times to the downfall of all Antichristian usurpations. The following
visions are of the same picture variegated, for our instruction, on a larger
scale.

As there are some, into whose hands those pages may fall, who have not been
used to attend to subjects like these which we are going to discuss, it may be
proper briefly to consider the origin of that sort of language, and of those
hieroglyphic, or more properly symbolical, representations, which we meet with
in the prophets.

The first mode of writing appears to have been by pictures of things, and it
must have been a long time before mankind arrived at any degree of perfection
in the science of letters, as we now have it. To express ideas by a combination
of letters, syllables, words, and sentences, is a more wonderful invention than
most people imagine. The most natural way of communicating our conceptions by
marks and figures, is by tracing out the images of things; and this is actually
verified in the case of the Mexicans, whose only method of writing their laws
and history, when the Spaniards first visited them, was by this picture
writing. The hieroglyphics and symbols of the Egyptians and Hebrews, were an
improvement on this rude and inconvenient essay toward writing. It would be
improper to enter far into this subject here; I shall therefore say no more
than just what may be thought necessary to show that the figurative style, and
the symbolical representations, which we meet with in the scriptures, are not
so out of the way as some may be apt to imagine; nor the workmanship, as Dr.
Warburten See Warburton's Divine Legation, book iv. sect. 4. passim.
expresses it, of the prophet's h^^ted and wild imagination, as our modern
libertines would persuade us, but the sober, established language of their
times.

In the symbols and hieroglyphics of the ancients, a lion stood for strength
and courage; a bullock was a representation of agriculture; a horse of liberty;
a spkinx of subtilty; a pelican of paternal affection; a river-horse of
impudence; horns of strength and pre-eminence. Among the Phenicians a horn was
the ensign of royalty; and hence they came to be used by the prophets, to
denote sovereignty and domination, states and kingdoms. The sun, moon, and
stars also, were the symbols of states and kingdoms, kings, queens, and
nobility; their eclipse stood for the temporary difasters which afflicted them,
and their extinction, for their entire overthrow. If this be considered, we
need not wonder at what we meet with in the holy scriptures, and especially in
the prophecies. The prophets speak in the language of the times in which they
lived, and represent things under symbols then well understood; and though this
mode of representing things is not so usual among us, yet we have something of
it too. Modern heraldry is a sort of hieroglyphics, and we here meet
productions as fictitions and monstrous as a lion with the wings of an eagle,
or as a beast with seven heads and ten horns.

In the prophetic writings, fierce and savage beasts are the hieroglyphic
emblems of tyrannic monarchies and states, and the peculiarities of these
monarchies and states are represented by suitable creatures, and by such
appendages, as are proper to identify them, and describe their characters. Thus
in Dan. vii. 4. the kingdom of Babylon is reprepresented under the image of a
lion with eagle's wings, to type out, not only its power, but the rapidity of
its conquests, and the height of splendor to which it was raised. The kingdom
of the Medes and Perfians, (ver. 5.) is represented by a bear with three ribs
in its mouth, to which it was said, Arise, devour much flesh. This was to show
the cruelty of these people, and their greediness after blood and plunder.
Their character was that of the all-devouring bear, which has no pity. The ribs
in the mouth of it represent those nations which they especially made a prey
of. -- The kingdom of the Macedonians, or Grecians, is characterized (ver. 6.)
by a leopard, with four heads, and four wings of a fowl. The leopard is
remarkable for its swiftness; hence, and especially with the wings on its back,
it was a fit emblem of the conquests of the Macedonians under the command of
Alexander, who conquered part of Europe and all Asia in six years. As the lion
had two wings, to represent the rapidity of the Babylonian conquests, so this
leopard has four, to signify the swifter progress of the Macedonians. The four
heads also are significant. They are intended to represent the same
circumstance as the four horns of the he-goat in the eighth chapter. Fifteen
years after the death of Alexander, his brother, and two sons being murdered,
his kingdom was broken, or divided, by Cassander, Lysimachus, Ptolemy and
Seleucus, into four lesser kingdoms, which they seized for themselves.

It may not be amiss in this place, to take notice, that whereas, in this
vision in the seventh chapter, the Medo Persian empire is represented under the
emblem of a bear, and that of the Macedonians under that of a leopard; in that
of chapter the eighth, the former is typed out by a ram (ver. 3.) with two
horns, one higher thau the other, and the higher came up last; and the latter
by a he-goat, etc. These were most apt representations of these two empires.
For a ram was the royal ensign of Persia, as the eagle was that of the Remans,
and as the lion is of England; and the figures of rams' heads with horns, the
one higher than the other, are still to be seen among the remains of the ^ins
of Persephlis, as Sir John Chardin takes notice in his travels. That which came
up last was highest, to denote that the Persian kingdom, though it was of a
later date, should overtop the Medes, and make a greater figure in the world
than the other; as it did from the time of Cyras, under whom the two kingdoms
were united in one. A he-go^^ was also very properly made the type of the
Macedoman or (...) empire, for this was the emblem, or, as we nowadays
express it, the arms of Macedon; and they were called the goats people, for
Carquas, their first king, going with a multitude of Greeks, to seek a new
habitation, was, as it is said, commanded by the oracle, to ^ake the go^ for
his guide; and afterward, seeing a flock of goats flying from a violent storm,
he followed them to Edeffa, and there fixed the se^ his empire, made the goals
his ensign, and called the city Aegeae, or the goats' town. But to return.

The fourth kingdom is represented (ver. 7) by a fourth beast, dreadful and
terrible, and strong exceedingly; and is had great iron teeth, it devoured and
brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it. And it was diverse
from all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten horns. This dreadful
representation made a great impression on Daniel's mind, and he therefore
inquires particular^ what this might mean. Ver. 19. Then I would know the truth
of the fourth beast, which was diverse from all the others, exceeding dreadful.
The angel informed him (ver. 23.) that the fourth beast shall be the fourth
kingdom upon earth, which shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour
the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.

That which appeared in the imagination of Nebuchadnezzar as the legs and feet
of a great image, whose brightness was excellent, (Dan. ii. 31 -- 45.) and the
form terrible, is here represented to Daniel as a fierce and ravenous beast.
This is the Roman empire, which succeeded the Macedonian. "This beast," says
Bishop Newton, "was so great and horrible, that it was not easy to find an
adequate name for it; and the Roman empire was dreadful and terrible, and
strong exceedingly, beyond any of the former kingdoms. It was diverse from all
kingdoms, not only in its republican from of government, but likewise in
strength and power, and greatness, length of duration, and extent of dominion.
It devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of it It
reduced Macedon into a Roman province about 168 years; the kingdom of Pergamus
about 183 years; Syria about 65 years, and Egypt about 30 years, before Christ.
And besides the remains of the Macedonian empire, it subdued many other
provinces and kingdoms; so that it might, by a very usual figure, be said to
devour the whole earth, and to tread it down and break it in pieces, and became
in a manner, what the Roman writers delighted to call it, terrarum orbis
imperium, "the empire of the whole world." Ver. 7. And it had ten horns. And
according to the interpretation of the angel, (ver. 24.) the ten horns out of
this kingdom are ten kings, or kingdoms, that shall arise. Four kings, a little
before, (ver. 17.) signify four kingdoms; and so here ten kings are ten
kingdoms, according to the usual phraseology of scripture. "We must look," says
this learned author, "for these ten kingdoms, among the broken pieces of the
Roman empire. This empire, as the Romanists themselves allow, was, by means of
the incursions of the northern nations, dismembered into ten kingdoms; and
Machiavel, a Papist, little thinking what be was doing, (as Bishop Chandler
observes,) has given us their names. 1. The Ostrogoths, in Maesia. 2. The
Visigoths, in Panonia. 3. The Sueve and Alans. in Gascoigne and Spain. 4. The
Vandals, in Africa. 5. The Fran^^, (...) France. 6. The Burgandians, in
Burgundy. 7. The Herul^ and Turingi, in Italy. 8. The Saxons and Angles, in
Bri^^^a. 9. The Huns, in Hungary. 10. The Lombards, first upon the (...),
afterward in Italy."

(...), Louman, Sir I. Newton, Whiston, and others, have enumerated these ^en
kingdoms, with some little variation, but all agree in the main. Bishop (...)
makes them all to rise between the years 336 and 527. A. C. They have not
always been exactly this number, sometimes more, sometimes less; but as Sir I.
Newton observes, (p. 73. upon the prophecies.) "This was the number in which
the western empire became divided at its first breaking, that is, at the time
of Rome's (...) and taken by the Goths, Some of these kingdoms at (...), and
new one's arose; but whatever was their number a^terw^^^^, they are still
called the ten kingdoms, from their first ^^^^ber." And we may observe, that
they always were, and still are, about this number.

But besides the (...) Ten horns or kingdoms, there was another little horn to
spring up among them, which was to be much distinguished by its abomination,
ver. 8. I considered the horns, and behold there came up among them another
little horn, before whom there t^^re three of the first horns plucked up by the
roots. As Daniel was d^^rous of being informed about the ten horns, so of this;
and the angel acquaints him (ver. ^4.) that this shall rise up after the
others, or (...), as Mede renders it, unobserved till he overtops them, and he
shall be diverse from the first, and he shall subdue three kings, or kingdoms;
and he shall speak great words against the Most High, and shall wear ^^e the
saints of the Most High, and shall think to change times and laws; and they
shall be given into his hands, until a time, and times, and the dividing of
time. But the judgment shall fit, and they (...) take away his dominion, to
consume it, and destroy it unto the end. "This is to be sought for," says
Bishop Newton, "among the ten kingdoms of the western empire; I say the western
empire (Europe), because that was properly the body of the fourth beast.
Greece, and the countries which say eastward of Italy, belonged to the third
beast; for the former beasts were ^^ill subsisting, though their dominion was
taken away." (ver. 12.) This is no other than the Popedom, or Antichrist, who
has, raised himself to great power by seizing three principalities, or
kingdoms, which Sir Isaac Newton reckons up to be the exarchate of Ravenna, the
kingdom of the Lombards, and the senate and dukedom of Rome. And it is ^ence
that the Pope wears a triple crown.

What is here represented under the emblem of a horn of the fourth beast, is
the same tyranny which is shown to John (Rev. xiii. 1 -- 10.) as a beast. In
this all our best commentators are agreed. Nor let it seem strange that what is
here prefigured by the horn of the fourth beast, the Roman dominion, should be
represented in another vision, as a beast with seven heads and ten horns. For
nothing is more usual (...) to describe the same person or thing under
different images, upon different occasions; and besides, in this vision, the
spiritual tyranny of the Roman empire is not meant to be described at large.
Here notice is only given of it in the general representation of the Roman
domi^^on^; when the time of the appearance of this tyranny draws near, (...) a
more enlarged description is given. And what ^s here represented (...) one
image, is there represented under two, a dragon and a beast, (...) having seven
heads and ten horns. The slightest attention is sufficient to convince us that
the horn here, and the first ^ea^t in Rev. xiii. (...) the same tyranny; if we
compare the two descriptions, their language, their enormities, their duration,
and end are the same.

The saints are said to be given into the hand of the horn for a time, times,
and dividing of times, and it is given to the beast to continue forty and two
months, and in Rev. xi. 3. it is said to be 1260 days. The same period of time
is meant; for a time is a year, times two years, and the dividing of times,
half a year, that is, three years and a half (or forty-two months of
thirty-days) which are the same as the 1260 days; for the ordinary Jewish year
consisted of 360 days, which multiplied by three and a half, amount to that
number. And in the prophetic style, a day is reckoned for a year. Compare Numb.
xiv. 34. Ezekiel. iv. 6, Dan. iv. 16. xii. 7. Rev. xi. 2, 3. xii. 14. xiii. 5.
This continuance signifies, that he is to practice and prosper thus long, for
the Greek word refers to the time of his prevailing, not of his existing. He
will exist a little longer, for he will be some time a slaying after he is
attacked.

Thus, as preparatory to the consideration of the following subjects, I have
endeavored, in as brief a way as possible, to show the origin of hieroglyphic
or symbolical representations, and the aptness and propriety of such as we have
in the writings of the prophets. We will now enter upon our inquiries.

Let us first consider the visions in the twelfth and thirteenth chapters, and
especially the vision of the second beast, chap. xiii. 11 -- 18. for if these
be understood, we shall have a key to unlock, not only the mysteries of the
eleventh chapter, but of many others which follow. Chap. xii. 3. And there
appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold a great red dragon, having seven
heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads. And his tail drew the
third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth, etc. Most of
the authors whom I have consulted, though they allow this chapter to contain a
representation of the persecutions of Pagan Rome, yet have strangely
spiritualized this dragon, so that whilst we are cautioned of our danger from
invisible spirits, the true object is forgotten, and we beat the air.

There can be no doubt, but the devil is a principal agent in all tyrannies,
ecclesiastical and civil; but what is here represented by the most terrific
imagery, appears to be no other than that cruel civil tyranny of the Romans,
which cast down all the powers, and swept away all the remains of liberty, in
Europe, the then supposed third part of the world; and which, while the
imperial head remained in full power, persecured with unrelenting cruelty the
church of Christ in its infancy; and under all the despotisms which have arisen
from it, has, more or less, continued to oppose the kingdom of Christ. If we
compare what is said of the dragon in this book with Psalm. lxxiv. 13, 14. Isa.
xxvii. 1. li. 9. Psalm. lxxxvii. 4. lxxxix 10. Ezekiel. xxix. 2 -- 5. and xxxii. 2.
it much confirms our hypothesis. The tyranny of Egypt, which oppressed and
persecuted the people of Israel, was the type of this; but as this is so much
more cruel, additional tropes are therefore crowded together, to impress us
with its enormity; and it is not only the dragon and the serpent, but the devil
and satan. While the first beast in the next chapter is the representation of
ecclesiastical or spiritual tyranny, as exercised by the Antichristian clergy,
this dragon represents the civil tyranny exercised by the Roman Emperors, and
by their successors, so far as they have been, or are tyrannic, in the several
kingdoms which have arisen out of the ruins of that empire; and especially by
those who are now called the Emperors of Germany, who profess, more
immediately, to succeed the despots of ancient Rome. They have the same origin,
and their jurisdiction is alike extensive; and hence they both appear with
seven heads and ten horns. This dragon, we shall find, gave to the beast his
power and his seat, and great authority; but he still continued, and although
wounded, remains to this day, nor has he ever ceased to practice destruction.
All the world have worshipped him that gave power unto the beast; yea, so base
and servile have men been, that they have paid divine homage and passive
obedience to their destroyer, and have said, in the fullness of their folly, not
only of spiritual tyranny, Who is like unto the beast! But of civil despotism,
Who is like unto the dragon!

Chapter the thirteenth, verse the first. I stood upon the sand of the sea, and
saw a beast rise up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon
his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of blasphemy. And the beast
which I saw was like unto a leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a bear
and his mouth as the mouth of a lion; and the dragon gave him his power, and
his seat, and great authority. Having said so much concerning the fourth beast,
and the little horn, in the vision of Daniel; and seeing that all Protestants
are pretty well agreed that, by this beast, the Papal power, as exercised by
the Bishop of Rome, supported by his clergy, and by those princes who have
acknowledged his jurisdiction, is intended, the loss need be said in explaining
these verses. As the great red dragon was the civil power of Rome, exercised by
the emperors and their agents, so this is the Roman ecclesiastical tyranny,
exercised by the Pope and Antichristian clergy, who have converted the
benevolent religion of Jesus into a system of traffic and persecution, and, as
has been observed, is the same with the little horn in Daniel the seventh. Its
rising out of the sea may refer to those commotions of nations which very much
favored the rising of the Papal tyranny. The seven ^eads were not only the
emblems of the seven hills on which Rome was built (chap. xvii. 9.10.) but also
of the seven forms of government to which Rome had been, and was to be subject.
Five were already fallen, when John saw the vision, (chap. xvii. 10.) viz.
those by kings, consuls, dictators, decemvirs, and military tribunes with
consular authority. The imperial then prevailed, and the papal was to follow.
The ten horns are the ten kingdoms and states crowned with sovereign authority,
of which we have already had occasion to speak -- To this beast the dragon gave
his power and his seat, and great authority; that is, it was by the assistance
of the emperors, by virtue of laws and grants issuing from them, that the
bishops of Rome and the clergy arrived at their great power. And, by the seat
of the imperial government being removed from Rome, first by Constantine to
Byzontium (Constantinople), and afterward into France by Charlemagne, from
whence it passed into Germany, the Popes became possessed of Rome, the old seat
of the imperial government.

Vet. 3 -- 10. And I saw one of his heads, as it were wounded unto death, and
his deadly wound was healed; and all the world wondered after the beast. And
they worshipped the dragon which gave power unto the beast, saying, Who is like
unto the beast? Who is able to make war with him? And there was given unto him
a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies: and power was given unto him to
continue forty and two months. And he opened his mouth (...) Rev. xlii. 12.
blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heaven. And it was given unto him to make war with the saints,
and overcome them, and power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and
nations. And all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, whose names are not
written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.
If any man have an ear let him hear. He that leads into captivity, shall go
into captivity; he that kills with the sword must be killed with the sword.
Here is the patience and the faith of the saints.

The wound which was given to one of the heads of this breast, some have
interpreted to be that which the Papacy received at the Reformation in the
sixteenth century; but this wounding appears to refer not to Papal Rome, but
to, the wound which imperial Rome received, when it was no longer the seat of
government, but became subject to the exarchate of Rav^nna. But though it was
thus forsaken by the imperial court, and lost its civil pre-eminence, yet it
soon became again the mistress of the world, by assuming a spiritual dominion,
in lieu of the temporal one it had lost, and which alteration did not a little
astonish mankind; but who, instead of resisting the arrogant claims and profane
pretensions of this new power, did not only tamely obey those laws of the
emperors, which set the bishop of Rome above all human jurisdiction, but they
entered most heartily into all the new superstitions and idolatries of this
novel tyranny. Nor was this Papal beast backward in exerting the power which he
had acquired from the liberality of the imperial dragon, but quickly enjoined
all sorts of abominations, and enforced acquiescence, on pain of death, with
all his profane and blasphemous pretensions. Thus encouraged, he went on his
impious career, enjoining not only the worship of saints and angels, but of
images and relies, teaching that he was God's vicegerent and Christ's vicar on
earth; and that, as such, he had power to grant indulgences, and to pardon
sins, and thus, by these, and a great many other abominable dogmas, he
blsasphemed and scandalized the perfections, prerogatives, and laws of God; and
dishonored the memory of them that dwell in heaven, as if they approved of
such wicked idolatry and priestly craft -- And not only was this ecclesiastical
power exercised at Rome, but over distant and numerous nations, and great has
been the slaughter which he has made among those, who, in respect to the divine
authority, and the rights of conscience, have rejected his abominable errors,
and resisted his arrogant pretensions. The time of the prevalence and
prosperity of this corrupt and savage tyranny shall be forty and two months of
years, or 1260 years, reckoning, agreeable to the prophetic style, a year for a
day; at the end of which period, though ardently supported by a tyranny (...)
to his own, he shall perish, and as he has showed no mercy, so he shall find
no mercy.

Ver. 11. And I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and ^e had
(...) horns like a lamb, and he (...) as a dragon. And he exercises all the
power of the first beast before him, and causes the (...) them which dwell
therein, to worship the first beast, etc. Dr. Doddridge, in his not (...) ^his
passage, observes, "As I look upon the former to be the Papal power, I am
ready, with the best critics I know, to interpret this of the religious orders
of the church of Rome. This beast is said to ascend from the earth, whereas the
other ascended from the sea, to make the distinction between them the more
remarkable, but what other my^^ery may be suggested, I cannot conjecture." Dr.
Goodwin understands by the first beast the temporal power which the Pope has
received from the kings of the ten Antichristian kingdoms; and by the second
beast the spiritual power which the Pope and his clergy claim of binding and
loosing, of pardoning sin, and of cursing men to hell. Mr. Lowman supposes it
to represent the ecclesiastical princes of Germany, who have been such great
supporters of the power of the first beast. Most agree, that although he is
thus represented as a distinct beast, yet he rises out of the empire of the
first, and is subordinate to him "It must, in all likelihood, signify some
distinct persecuting power, of a like nature and kind with the first,
supporting and advancing his authority." Lowman, p. 136. where may be seen the
various opinions on this subject.
. But inferior as I am to these learned men, I beg leave to propose a
conjecture which I think has more weight than at first view we may be willing
to admit.

May we not understand by this second beast Lewis XIV. or at least that tyrann^
which the family of the Capets have exercised, to the great oppression of the
Christian church, and to the destruction of mankind? Why might not Lewis XIV,
or the Capets and their tyranny, be the objects of John's vision, as well as
Alexander or Antiochus, or any other tyrant, that of Daniel's? Read their
political history and private memoirs. If pre-eminence in vice, oppression, and
murder, entitle to this distinction, who so abhorrent and vile? Who such
enemies to the truth of God, and the happiness of mankind? Their tyranny has
been the scourge of France, of Europe, and the world No country ever had such a
race of tyrants as France, and till with in these few months there was not an
English man who did not wish this tyranny to be extirpated from the earth. The
restless and cruel ambition of the kings of France and their court within these
few years, has occasioned the slaughter of unnumbered thousands of our friends
and country men, and contributed toward loading us with a debt which makes all
the nation groan, and the consequences of which cannot be calculated. Not the
people of France, let us remember, but their despots, against whose oppressions
they have lately risen up, have been the authors of all these evils. And as
long as the old system remained, there was no hope of remedy. How happy
therefore would it have been for the surrounding nations, if the people of
France had been permitted to settle their new constitution, which promised
peace and security to all their neighbors as well as to themselves I But for
the interference of foreign courts, all would now have been peace.
. What cruelties did Lewis XIV. especially perpetrate toward his Protestant
subjects; and what devastation and woe did he spread over Europe in his cruel
wars! Examine the description. And I beheld another beast coming up out of the
earth, and he had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon. John saw the
other beast, the Papal tyranny, (which is the usurpation of a foreigner),
advance, plunging through the waves of that sea of civil commotions, and
religious contentions, which at the time of his rising agitated the Roman
empire, and what was called the Christian church; but this comes up out of the
earth Perhaps by the first beast's coming up out of the sea, nothing more may
be intended than that foreign jurisdiction which the Papacy was to exercise;
and by the second beast's coming up out of the eart^ that his tyranny (...) to
bed^m^stie, and exercised rather over his own (...) try than foreign nations.
This agrees perfectly with the difference between (...) Papal usurpations and
the tyranny of Lewis XIV.
, it rises at home, and from circumstances somewhat more settled, and in times
not so agitated by commotions. If this be the beast in chap. xi. 7. which was
to overcome and slay the witnesses, (as I am thoroughly persuaded it is) there
we have a more descriptive account of his origin. The beast which ascends out
of the bottomless pit; not which arose or did ascend, but which is rising out
of the abyss, as if he were now rising, or was just now become a perfect tyrant
when he slew the witnesses.

The second ^east is said to come up out of the earth, from what our
translators render the bottomless pit; from the abyss, or pit, or whirlpool, of
infinite depth. And from what a bog of vice, treachery, and cruelty on the one
hand, and of superstition, servility, and baseness on the other, did the French
tyranny arise! Or, if you please, from a whirlpool which draws into its vortex,
and swallows up every thing, the most precious to man.

Historians have represented Lewis XIV. as raising the French monarchy to the
pinnacle of its glory. And if pride and ambition, persecution and bloodshed,
constitute supreme glory, he did so. But, the wisdom of the world is
foolishness with God. O the folly and cruelty of men! They create devourers, as
if for the pleasure of witnessing and celebrating their exploits of blood; and
even think it impiety to complain when their own turn arrives to be devoured!

How perfectly do these two descriptions of the second beast agree! The angel
describes him as ascending out of the abyss; John sees him rising out of the
earth. And what sort of a spot may we suppose the theater of his rising to be?
The choicest spot which nature can furnish? Rather, where Behemoth* makes his
bed, in the coverts of the needs and fens, from whence he drags his filthy
limbs to the mountains of slaughter, where all the beasts of the field play.

And he had two horns like a lamb. Here we may observe, that the Bourbons,
formerly kings of Navarre only, on the extinction of the family of Valois, in
1589, which reigned over France, were become possessed of both kingdoms; and
Henry IV. grandfather of Lewis XIV. in whom the kingdoms were united, took the
titles of King of France and Navarre. These were his two horns like a lamb.

And he spoke as a dragon. His profession of that religion which teaches to be
meek and harmless, presents an appearance of innocence, but when he opens his
mouth, the accents are those of a dragon, which bespeak him formed for
mischief, and not for the benefit of mankind. All this agrees exactly with the
French tyranny, and particularly with Lewis XIV. who was at once a
superstitious devotee and a cruel despot; who, though styled the Most Christian
King, practiced the enormities of the dragon, who made war with them who kept
the commandments of God, and had the testimony of Jesus. Witness the
persecutions with which he harassed the Protestants, and his attempts to
extirpate the Reformed by the revocation of the Edict of Nants; a persecution
more cruel than any since the days of persecution commenced. See Claude's
Complaints of the Protestants. The Edict of Nants, issued in 1598, granted to
the Protestants the free exercise of their religion; many churches in every
part of France, and judges of their own persuasion; a free access to all places
of honor and dignity, an hundred places as pledges of their future security,
and funds to maintain both their ministers and garrisons. But no sooner was
Lewis XIV, arrived to years than he formed the resolution of destroying the
Protestants. Did we not know him to have been a beast, we could hardly give
credit to the report of the motive which pushed this resolution into practice.
"Soon after be came to the crown," says Mr. Claude, page 43. "there arose in
the kingdom a civil war which proved so sharp and de^perate, as brought the
state within a hair's breadth of utter ruin. Those of the reformed religion
still kept their loyalty so inviolable, and accompanied it with such a zeal,
and with a fervor so extraordinary, and so successful, that the king found
himself obliged to give public marks of it by a declaration made at St.
Germains in the year 1652. Then, as well at court as in the armies, each strove
to proclaim loudest the merits of the Reformed." But, can you believe that
there is so much depravity in human nature? Their enemies said, "If on this
occasion this party could preserve the state, this shows likewise that they
could have overthrown it; this party must therefore by all means be crushed."
Lewis, and the abettors of his tyranny, instantly set about it. "A thousand
^readful blows," says Mr. Saurin, "were struck at our afflicted churches before
that which destroyed them; for our enemies, if I may use such an expression,
not content with seeing our ruin, endeavored to taste it." As soon as the
kingdom was settled in peace, they fell upon them, and persecuted them in every
imaginable way. They were excluded from the king's household, -- from all
employments of honor and profit, -- all the courts of justice, erected by
virtue of the Edict of Nants, were abolished, so that in all trials their
enemies only were their judges, and in all the courts of justice the cry was, "
I plead against a heritic *
: I have to do with a man of a religion odious to the state, and which the king
is resolved to extirpate."

Orders were printed at Paris, and sent from thence to all the cities and
parishes of the kingdom, which empowered the parochial priests, churchwardens,
and others, to make an exact inquiry into whatever any of the Reformed might
have done or said for twenty years past, as well on the subject of religion as
otherwise, to make information of this before the justices of the peace, and
punish them to the utmost extremity. Thus, the prisons and dungeons were every
where filled with these pretended criminals; orders were issued, which deprived
them in general of all sorts of offices and employments, from the greatest to
the smallest, in the farms and revenues; they were declared incapable of
exerciting any employ in the custom-houses, guards, treasury, or post office,
or even to be messengers, stage-coachmen, or waggoners. Now a college was
suppressed, and then a church shut up, and at length they were forbid to
worship God in public at all, by the revocation of the Edict of Nants, in 1685.
"Now," says Saurin, "we were banished; then we were forbidden to quit the
kingdom, on pain of death. Here we saw the glorious rewards of those who
betrayed their religion; and there we beheld those who had the courage to
confes^ it haled to a dungeon, a scaffold, or a galley. Here we saw our
persecutors drawing o^ a fledge the dead bodies of those who had expired on the
rack: there we beheld a false friar tormenting a dying man, who was terrified
on the one hand with the fear of hell, if he apostatized; and on the other,
with the fear of leaving his children without bread, if he should continue in
the faith." When the arguments of priests, and every other mean failed, cruel
soldiers were quartered in their houses, to exert their ski^^ in ^^^ments, to
compel them to become Catholics. "They cast some," says Mr. Claude, "into large
fires, and took them out when they were half roasted; they hanged others with
ropes under their armpits, and plunged them several times into wells, till
they promised to renounce their religion; they tied them like criminals on the
rack, and poured wine with a funnel into their mouths, till, being intoxicated,
they promised to turn Catholics. Some they flashed and cut with pen-knives^;
some they took by the nose with red-hot tongs, and led them up ^^d down the
room, till they promised to turn Catholics. These (...) proceedings made eight
hundred thousand persons quit the kingdom." The story which lies before me,
related by Mr. Bion, chaplain on board the Supurbe Galley in 1703, and who was
converted from Popery, by means of the scene of suffering and patience, which
was exhibited on board that vessel, when eighteen Protestants were bastinadoed
for refusing to bow the knee, in honor of the mysteries of the mass, is too
excrutiating to tell. As also the sufferings of poor M. Marolles, a gentleman
of virtue, sensibility, and eminent piety, condemned to suffer in the galleys,
among the vilest of felons, and this for no crime but what state policy made
such. This little story leaves a deeper stain of baseness upon the character of
Lewis and his court, than, perhaps, all their other enormities. It was adding
that sort of wanton cruelty to slate oppression, which is peculiarly abhorent
in the estimation of a generous mind. And let us remember, this same system of
despotism and persecution remained till overthrown in 1789. None of these cruel
laws against the Protestants were repealed, nor a particle of arbitrary power
surrendered. Thus, in that country from whence the light of reformation first
issued, and where there were more faithful witnesses against the Papal apostasy
than in any other nation of the world; and from whose number and influence, and
the laws in their favor, the old persecuting power was greatly reduced; there,
the uncontrouled reign of of Antichrist was restored.

Ver. 13, 14. And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from
heaven on the earth, in the fight of men, and deceives them that dwell on the
earth by the means of those miracles which he had power to do in the fight of
the beast. No one can suppose that these are miracles in the strictest sense of
the word. Nor does the original word rendered wonders in ver. 13. and miracles
in ver. 14. necessarily signify those acts which are supernatural. Our
lexicographers translate the word signum, miraculum, argumentum., indicium,
vexillum, simulachrum, a sign, miracle, argument, etc. And the Hebrew word,
which in the Greek version of the Old Testament is rendered by this, has the
same sort of latitude. Though this is the word generally used to denote proper
miracles, yet it is as often used in other senses. But let it be observed, that
its meaning generally includes in it the idea of an argument, that which
persuades, convinces, brings over to a purpose and confirms. In Genesis i. 14. it
means, that the sun and moon are to be for the regulation of time; in Genesis
xvii. 11. and Romans iv. 11. circumcision is thus, spoken of, though evidently
neither a miracle nor wonder, but merely a token or memento; in Exodus iii. 12.
and in a multitude of other places, it means nothing more than a token or
evidence; in Isa. viii. 13. and Luke ii. 34. it means an object of de^ision; in
Jer. x. 2. those comets and meteors, and other phenomena of nature are
intended, at which weak and superstitious minds were (...) De^^. (...). 46. it
means those calamities which should ^cit^ astonismen^^ and be a lesson to teach
men to fear God; in Psalm, lxxiv. 4. it may signify the standards of the enemy,
or perhaps those (...) engines with which they battered down, burnt and
destroyed the ^^cred building; in Ezekiel. xxxiv. 15. this word means nothing more
than a stick or a stone set up as a mark to point out the place where lay a
dead man's bone.

It appears to me that this figurative representation of the exploits of this
b^ast, designs nothing more than those violent means and seducing arts which
this tyrant (or succession of tyrants) was to use, as so many arguments to
bring men into his measures, and to frighten them into submission to his
impositions. His great wonders were his alarming edicts; and the sire which he
made to come down from heaven on the earth, in the sight of m^n, signifies, in
the hieroglyphic and highly figurative language of prophecy, the thunder of
excommunication which he sent forth against those who refused to acknowledge
his authority in religion, and the war and destruction which he carried on
against all those who stood our against Papery; pretending (as all tyrants ever
have done) to have authority from Heaven for all these abominations. Every iota
of this agrees with the practices and pretensions of Lewis XIV. and his
successors.

And he commanded that they should make an image to the beast, which had the
wound by a sword and did live, i. e. This tyrant caused a system of dominion
over conscience, a system of persecution to be established, which was the image
of the first Papal beast; for although it was not so extensive a tyranny, as
that exercised by the Pope, being confined to one kingdom, yet it was the
similitude of it. The ecclesiastical tyranny now established was peculiar; it
was at once independent, and yet in support of the tyranny of the Papal beast.
In all the other kingdoms where Popery prevails, the spiritual power is
exercised by the Pope; hereties, as they are called, are accused, tried, and
condemned in his courts, by virtue of laws issuing from him, and by his
ministers. The kings are only his executioners. B^^ it became otherwise in
France. Lewis XIV. from the plentitude of his own power, issued edicts, erected
courts, and appointed officers for the punishment of his Protestant subjects.
Thus, by virtue of powers derived from the king, and not from the Pope, the
Protestants were accused, pursued^ tried, condemned, and executed. This was a
tyranny perfect in us kind, and unknown in other countries; the similitude of
the beast which had the wound by a sword and did live -- the beast, of Rome.
And he had power to give life to the image of the beast, that the image of the
beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not worship the image
of the beast should be hilled. He gave new vigor to the dying Papacy in
France, and power to the Popish party to issue their mandates, and command
apostasy, on pain of death.

Thus far, I think, the likeness is perfect; and allowing Lewis XIV. or the
French tyranny, brought to perfection by him, and supported by his successors,
to be the object of the vision, it appears easy to be understood; but on every
other hypothesis which I have seen, it is encu^^bered with inexplicable
difficulties. Dr Doddrige says, "What the image of the beast so, distinct from
the beast itself, I confess I know not."

This part of our inquiry, upon which matters of no small importance are
suspended, will, I hope, be attentively considered; as likewise whatsoever
concerns this second beast, and the conformity of the tyran^ic proceedings of
Lewis and his successors, to the character and conduct here predicted. The fact
here contended for, being proved, we have a master key to ^nlock the greater
part of the prophecies before us, particularly that in the eleventh chapter,
from ver. 7. And even such lesser mysteries as those contained in chap. xvi. 2.
where the first (...) is poured out upon two descriptions of men; upon them who
have the mark of the beast, Papists; and upon those who only worship or serve
his image, those Protestants who yield assistance to the Antichristian party in
France.

And he caused all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and ^ond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their forehead, and that no man might
buy or sell save he that had the mark It was customary to mark slaves and
soldiers with some impression on the hand or forehead, that it might be known
to what master or commander they belonged: and it was a practice also with
devout ^^^^^ters, to mark themselves with the signature of the god they
worstipped. The name was sometimes expressed by letters, and at others by the
number which the numerical letters in their name amounted to, as we shall see
in the 28th verse. To these customs there is here an allusion.
, or the number of his name. There is certainly a difficulty in so
understanding this part of the description, as to give a perspicuous
explanation. It was intended, that it should be envelo^ed in considerable
obscurity. I make no great pretensions to critical acumen, but it appears to me
that here are two conditions represented as requisite to the enjoyment of the
lowest rights of citizens; unlimited submission to the authority of the church,
the Pope, and his clergy; and passive obedience to the despotism of this second
beast. Where these were refused, no man might buy or sell. With this
description the Claude's Complaints of the Protestants, p. 55.
cruel laws of Lewis XIV. respecting the freedom of companies and handicraft
trades, by which the Protestants were hindered from earning bread for their
families, perfectly agree.

To exclude mankind from any of their civil rights, for their adherence to
matters of conscience, and to gratify a party, that that party, (...) return,
may support the views of ambitious men, is of the dragon and the beast: but
that to please the priesthood, and strengthen despotism, a man, for being a
Protestant, should be excluded from acting as a custom-house officer, a
stage-co^chman, or a waggoner, was a most wanton exercise of Antichristian
power indeed; and this was the exact case in the matter under consideration;
for not only Lewis, but Mazarine, his minister, and the other petty despots
about the throne, found their account in these proceedings. In this manner did
they get rid of a body of men who were dangerous enemeis to their schems of
ambition. The court gratified the priests, and, in return, the priests
supported (...) measures, and helped Lewis, not only to get rid of these
friends to liberty and justice, but also to crush the Parliaments, which till
now possessed considerable power.

But how shall we count the number of the name of the beast? No man might buy
or sell save he that had the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of
his name. Here is wisdom, let him that hat^ understanding count the number of
the beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666. Not to specify
particularly what others have said about this number, there are two ways of
calculating it which agree with Lewis XIV. as the person in whom the French
monarchy became a perfect beast. And perhaps the text suggests that there
should be two, the number of the beast, and the number of his name. The numeral
letters in the name of Lewis, as written in Latin, give 666. Thus, L 50 U 5 D
500. O 0 V 5 I 1 C 100 U 5 S 0 666

But it may be asked, Why is the Latin language referred to rather ^han either
the Hebrew, the Greek, or French? For these reasons. (...) the time this
prediction was given, the Latin was the most general language in the Roman
empire; and after the empire was divided, i^ ^^came the universal language in
the western part, where (...) scene of John's vision chiefly lay. -- It is also
the language used in all the services of that church which this beast was to
support; and thus the names of the French king's have been written in their
communications with the Pope in public inscriptions, and on coins.

Although so much stress is not, perhaps, to be laid upon the foll^^ing way of
calculating this number of the second beast, yet it is worth taking notice of;
and possibly the Holy Spirit might point out that, by a remarkable providence,
a twofold way of counting this number should be afforded, that thus the
identity of the person and tyranny might by more clearly ascertained. The first
way of calculating ascertains (...) name of the man who should bring the
tyranny to pertection; the following, the length of time it should be in
perfecting, since the ange^y of that man began it. And on examination we find,
that from the (...) when Hugh Capet seized the throne of France, to the time
when (...) French, under Lewis XIV. began that career of blood, which for (...)
years, proved so calamitous to Europe, and especially to the Protestants, was
exactly 666 years. Hugh capet seized the throne in 987; Lewis XIV. came to the
throne on the death of his father, Lewis XIII. in 164^; came to his majority in
1652, and in the sollowing year war was made upon Spain. Now he emerges from
that bog in which his tyra^^, had been gendering for 666 years.

Thus, though other tyrannies may have some of the features of this beast, yet
that of the Capets only possessed them all; and, if I am not deceived, there is
every proof which can be expected, proof which amounts much neater to a
demonstration than is usual on such subj^^^, that the French monarchy was the
second beast which came up out of the earth. And though I would guard against
rash confidence, I feel a persuasion which I cannot (...) that (...). And if it
be; the consequences which are united with it are to the ^ast degree
in^^^^sting, both to the church and to mankind at large; and could my feeble
voice be heard amidst the din of war, and the noise of party contentions, I
would say, "Take heed -- be wise -- refrain from these men, and let them alone;
for if this counsel, or this work, be of men, it will come to naught; but, if
it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found to fight against
God Acts v. 38.
," in struggling to support that which he has decreed to fall. -- Should it
prove so, however enraged your malice, or however mighty your power, "He will
make your wrath to praise him, and dash you to pieces as a porter's vessel
Psalm, ii, lxx i. 10.
." -- Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are
thy ways! -- All nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy judgments
are made manifest!

SECOND INQUIRY.
HAVING endeavored to prove that Lewis XIV. or the tyranny of the Capets, as
perfected by that unequalled despo^, was represented to John in his vision of
the second beast; the second Inquiry respects the two witnesses in Rev. xi.

This inquiry involves in it four questions. 1. Who are the witnes^^^? 2. Who
is to stay them, and where are their dead bodies to lie unburied? 3. What
length of time is intended by the three days and a (...), during which their
dead bodies are to lie in the street of the great ^ity? 4. What will be the
consequences attending their resurrection?

1. Who are these two witnesses? Rev. xi. 3. I will give power unto my two
witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days
clothed in sackcloth. The most prevailing opinion is, that the faithful
ministers of the gosp^^, and all those who b^^r testimony against the errors
and usurpations of Antichrist, are intended, and that the number two is
mentioned in allusion to the law of Moses, which required two witnesses, at
least, to make a testimony valid. Dishop Lloyd supposes them to be the
Waldenses and Albigenses, the (...) witnesses in France and its vicinity,
against the corruptions of Popery. Dr. More explains it of unpolluted pri^sts
and faithful magistrates. But I have long thought, that, by these witnesses,
the spirit of prophecy intended the witnesses for gospel truth against the
spiritual dominations and corrupt errors of the Papal apostasy: and all those
who bear witness for civil liberty against the tyrannies and oppressions of
those princes and governo^s, whose passions have enslaved mankind, and
desolated the earth. The number of these witnesses has in general been but
small; yet, though they have prophesied in sackcloth, God, in ^s good
providence, has always preserved to mankind a succession of both descriptions.
Even wise and good men have not, perhaps, sufficiently considered the worth and
importance of the witnesses of the latter description, in fulfilling the great
designs of God's goodness toward men; and hence they have almost always
interpreted this prophecy as relating to the state of religion only; as if the
civil and political state of men were held in little consideration by the Lord
of the whole earth. But can any man show a good reason why the Hampdens,
Sydneys, Locks, and Hoadleys, may not be con be considered as God's witnesses,
in their exertions in the cause of civil liberty, though it may be esteemed an
inferior capacity, as well as those who have been employed in the defense of
pure religion only? Both have wrought in the cause of God, and both have
prophesied in sackcloth.

If we heartily consider the matter, the fourth verse seems to confirm the
foregoing ideas. And although what is said in the fifth and sixth verses is
more obscure, yet, as far as I can understand them, they are not inapplicable
to either of these characters. Ver. 4, These are the two elive trees, and the
two candlesticks, standing before the God of the whole earth. We have long been
used to affix to these two beautiful tropes, olive trees and candlesticks, the
idea of saints; but this is by no means essential, for they necessarily imply
no more than excellence in that character which is sustained, whether religious
or civil. Allusion is here made to the emblems under which Joshua and
Zerubbabel were represented to the prophet Zechariah (chap. iv. 11-14.); one of
whom was employed in re-establishing (after the captivity, and in a time of
religious and civil peesecution) the religious, and the other the civil polity
of the Jews. And what have the champions, in all ages, and in all countries,
who have combated tyrants in the cause of liberty and justice, as well as the
advocates for the uncorrupted truth of Jesus, been, but golden candlesticks,
whose lights have illuminated this dark world, and which have at once made
conspicuous the rights of men and the enormities of oppressors -- the truth of
Jesus, and the impieties of Antichrist? And but for the zeal of both these, in
their different characters, being kept burning, by that oil of benevolence
toward man, and love to the truth of God's word, which the olive trees
repres^nt, the earth had been involved in universal darkness, and the triumphs
of oppressions and error had been complete.

What follows is still more highly figurative. Ver. 5, 6. And if any man will
hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their enemies. And
if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed. These have power
to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy: and have power
over waters, to turn th^n to blood, and to smite the earth with all plagues, as
often as they will. What is here affirmed, has never been literally fulfilled,
nor is it likely that it ever will. There is some similarity between these
plague^, and those to be inflicted under the first four vials. Rev. xvi. There,
on the pouring out of the first vial, there fell a grievous sore upon the men
who had the mark of the beast, and upon them who worshipped his image; here,
the witnesses smit the earth with all plagues. -- There, on the pouring out of
the second and third vials, the sea and the rivers became blood; here, the
witnesses turn the waters into blood, and restrain the rain of heaven. There,
on pouring out the fourth vial upon the sun, men were scorched with great heat;
here, fire proceeds out of the mouths of the witnesses to devour their enemies.
May not this highly figurative description be made more intelligible thus? The
witnesses for religious truth and civil liberty, although they shall defend
their cause under great oppressions, yet such, under Providence, shall be the
effect of their zeal, cloonence, and exertions, in the cause of God and man,
that they shall occasion great vexations to their enemies, and kindle a fire,
which, in the end shall consume their oppressors, and their sy stems together.
And such advantages shall they have, from the spirit of their attacks, and the
succeeding providence of God, that, from the mode of war which will then
prevail, fire will seem to issue from their mouths, and destroy their opposers
In this vision which John had, we must suppose, that the parties in their
conflicts passed in review before him. As fire arms were then unknown, it was
not possibly for John, when he saw a vision of one of our modern battles to
under (...) ^^^^iples of what he saw, unless he was favored with particular
instruction from the angel; and which, as it was not necessary, is not
probable. Suppose, then, that on the rising ground before him, he sew the
armies of the witnesses, and of their opposers, drawn up in battle array; the
witnesses, of course, occupying the highest g^^ and in the s^^^e, and
possessing most of his attention. The conflict commences. He sees the fire run
from column to column along the ranks, and her to the thunder. He beholds the
enemy sail, and the with. ^es finally triumphant. In such a vision, the sire
would seem to come out of their mo^ths and devour their enemies.
. Such shall be the effects of their arguments and exertions on the minds of
men, that the political heavens shall refuse to yield that rain which used to
swell those rivers that fed the great sea of oppression. And all the rivers
shall be dry. Such shall be the effects of their unexampled efforts in the
cause of truth and equity -- in the cause of injured man -- that, in the end,
avenging justice shall turn upon their enemies, and render to them according to
their deeds. -- If something of this kind be not meant by these powers which
are given to the witnesses, I own I am at an utter loss to conceive what the
Holy Spirit intended.

But not only may the wickedness of the French people, as has been noticed, be
considered as an objection to their cause being of God, but some may suppose
that the calamities which they endure, and the disappoint ments which they
experience, must be looked upon as a proof that their rising against their
oppressors, is not the commencement of the resurrection of the witnesses, even
though we should consider it as a political one. -- By no means. The gathering
of the dispersed Jews, preparatory to their conversion, is their political
resurrection ( Er^. xxxvii.) and yet we are informed by many prophecies, that
after this, they are to endure great suffecings, and by which a great part of
them are to perish, both in their way to their own land, and after their
arrival there; (Ezekiel. xx. 38. Zech. xii. 2, 3. xiii. 8, 9. xiv. 2, 3, 7.) and
it will not be till the rebels are purged out from among them, nor till the
last extremity, that the Lord will appear for their deliverance and thorough
conversion.

And when they had finished their testimony, i. e. when the thousand two
hundred and threescore days are about to draw to a conclusion, the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them and kill them.
Here our second question presents itself. Who, or what is it, that is set forth
by this beast?

If the polition respecting the second beast in the thirteenth chapter be made
good, I answer, the French tyranny under Lewis XIV. who came up out of the
bottomless quagmire. For as the abyss does not necessarily mean what is
commonly understood by the bottomless pit, hell, (though, in a sense, from
thence he came), there appears a peculiar propriety in thus explaining it: for,
taken altogether, and considering that some particular part of the
Antichristian city By the Antichristian city, or what in the book of the
Revelation, is called the city of Babylon, and Babylon the Great, we are not
always to understand Rome only: but the mystical Babylon is that Antichristian
tyranny and system of corruption which has, in different ages, more or less,
spread itself over all Europe. Rome is the center ^d court, and the ten
kingdoms, or states, appear to be c^dered as the streets of this city.
, is to be the scene of the sufferings, death, and resurrection of the
witnesses, the beast described in this eleventh chapter, agrees better with the
second beast in the thirteenth chapter, than with the first. And let us
remember it must be one of them, or we create a third beast which was not shown
to John in any of the following explanatory visions; and it is not probable
that so interesting an object would be presented in this miniature picture,
which is not to be found in any of those which are on a larger scale. With
Lewis it perfectly agrees. We have heard how he made war, both upon the
witnesses for the pure religion of Jesus Christ, and upon those for civil
liberty too, and slew them. By his continued and multiplied persecutions and
usurpations, and particularly by the revocation of the edict of Nants, he slew
the former especially, but with them the greater part of those of the latter
description; for the true f^^ends of religion and of religious liberty, if they
know any thing of their principles, are the firmest friends of civil liberty
also; as that which is most intimately connected with the designs of Christ,
and the triumphs of that uncorrupted truth wherewith Christ has made us free.

There is no nation existing which, first and last, has produced such a number
of faithful witnesses against Papal corruptions and tyrannies, as France. No
people have so long a list of martyrs and confessors to show, as the
Protestants of that country; and there is no royal family in Europe which has
shed, in the support of Popery, half the blood which the Capets have shed. Who
deluged the earth with the blood of the Waldenses and Albigenses, that
inhabited the southern parts of France, and bore testimony against the
corruptions and usurpations of Rome? -- The cruel kings of France slew above a
million of them -- Who set on foot and headed the executioners of the massacre
of Bartholomew, which lasted seven days, and in which, some say near fifty
thousand Protestants were murdered in Paris, and twenty-five thousand more in
the provinces I -- The royal monsters of France. A massacre this, in which
neither age nor sex, nor even women with child, were spared; for the butchers
had received orders to slaughter all, even babes at the breast, if they
b^longed to Protestants. The king himself stood at the windows of his palace,
endeavoring to shoot those who fled, and crying to their pursuers, kill'em,
kill'em. For this massacre public rejoicings were made at Rome, and in other
Chatholic countries. -- Unnumbered thousands of Protellants were slain in the
civil wars of France, for their attachment to their principles. But as if Lewis
XIV. had determined to outdo all his predecessors in persecution, he
perpetrated, by the base instruments of his despotism, all the enormities
co^nected with the revocation of the edict of Nants. Those who wish to see a
full account of the cruelties of this horrid (...), a persecution which did not
wholly cease till the Revolution in (...), may consult Mr. Claude's Complaints
of the Protestants of France. After setting forth the unheard of barbarities
which were practis;ed previous to the revocation of this edict, and ^^umerating
the artic^^s of the edict which crushed the cause of Protestantism in that
country, he says, (p. 114.) "In the execution of this edict, in the very same
day that it was registered and published at Paris, they began to demolish the
church at Charenton. The oldest minister thereof (Mr. Claude) was commanded to
leave Paris within four and twenty hours, and forthwith to quit the kingdom.
His colleagues were little better treated: they gave them forty-eight hours to
leave Paris. The rest of the ministers were allowed fifteen days. But it can
hardly be believed to what vexations and cruelties they were exposed; they
neither permitted them to dispose of their estates, nor to carry away with them
any of their movables. Besides, they would not give them leave to take along
with them, either father or mother, brother or sister, or any of their kindred,
though they were many of them infirm, decayed, and poor, who could not subsist
but by their means. They went so far as even to deny them their own children,
if they were above seven years old; nay, some they took from them that were
under that age, and even such as yet hanged on their mothers' breasts; and
refused them nurses for their newborn infants, which their mothers could not
give suck to. -- In some fro^^er places they stopped, under various pretenses,
the banished ministers, and put them in prison. Then after they had thus
detained them, they would tell them, that the fifteen days of the edict were
expired, and they could not now have liberty to retire, but must be sent to the
galleys.

"As to the rest, whom the force of persecution and hard usuage constrained to
leave their houses and estate, and fly the kingdom, it is not to be imagined
what dangers they exposed themselves to. Never were orders more severe, or more
strict, than those that were given against them. They doubled the guards in
seaport cities, highways, and sords; they covered the country with soldiers;
they armed even the peasants, either to stop or kill those that pasted. By
these means they quickly filled all the prisons in the kingdom: for the dread
of the dragoons, who were quartered upon them to oblige them to embrace Pope^y;
the horror of seeing their consciences forced, and their children taken from
them, and of living for the future in a land where there was neither justice
nor humanity for them; obliged every one to think of escape, and to abandon all
to save their persons. All the poor prisoners have been treated with unheard of
rigor, confined in dungeons, loaded with heavy chains, almost starved with
hunger, and deprived of all converse but with their persecutors. They put many
into monasteries, where they have experienced the worst of cruelties. Some,
indeed, have been so happy as to die in the midst of their torments; but others
have at length sunk under the weight of the temptation: and some, again, by the
extraordinary assistance of God's grace, do still sustain it with an heroic
courage. This was the state of things (p. 122.) in the latter end of the year
1685, and the full accompli^hment of the threats the clergy had made us three
years before, toward the end of their pretended pastoral letter, in which they
say, Ye must expect miseries incomparably more dreadful and intolerable, than
all those which hitherto your revolt and your schism have drawn upon you. And
truly they have not been worse than their word." -- Cruel clergy! Are these the
ministers of the merciful Jesus? -- Fiends from hell! Cruel government! Are
these the powers which are ordained of God, and which men are bound to obey on
pain of the divine displeasure? -- To maintain such a position is a slander on
the justice and goodness of the Creator. Such positions are among the
blasphemies of perishing oppressors. (Rev. xvi. 9, 11, 12.) When this (...),
and such inhuman tyra^nics fall, and their base instran^nts p^ish, under the
vengence of the oppressed, is it any wonder that the (...) sheat, Thou art
righteous, O Lord! they have she I the ^d of s^y and prophets, and thou have
given them blood to drink, for they are (...)? Shall not God take vengeance? He
^ly will. He has promised that he will. The false friends of Ch^stianity, and
all the creatures of tyranny, will howl and cry, Alas! (...)! that great city!
But God will say, Rejoice over her, thou heaven! ^geance is min^. I will repay.

But does not this persect the beastly character of Lewis? He it was, also, who
gave the death-wound to the civil liberties of France, by taking (...) he (...)
all their remaining power, and from France (...) shadow of freedom. Their
ancient constitution had been long imp^ing. It was undermined by the (...)
Lewis XI. and had been ^ly swept away by the d^^ing and sarguinary councils of
Richelieu, ^^der Lewis XIII. The assembly of the states had been disused ever
since the beginning of this monarch's reign. The last time of its meeting was
in the year 1614. But all civil liberty did not then expire. I^ ^mplete
ex^ction was left for this tyrant. "For heretofore," says Pussendors, in the
style of a court (...), "the Parliament of Paris u^d to oppose the king's
designs, under a pretense that they had ^ch a right. That the king could not do
any thing of moment without its consent. But the king has taught it only to
intermeddle with ^udicial business, and some other concerns, which the king now
and then is pleased to leave to its decision Thus did this tyrant establish a
perfect despotism, and from his days to the time of the revolution-in 1789,
(with but a little abarement), the people were strangers to both civil and
religious liberty. It is true, that persecution and violence have not continued
ever since to rage in the same degree. If they had, that king^om must have been
depopulated, and not an object left to be tyrannized over, and not only that
country laid waste, but all the accessible world. The some system of oppression
was pursued, though not always to the same length; the same tyrannic laws
continued in force, and were exercised whenever the king or his courtiers
conceived it necessary for the promotion of their measures. The late
banishments and imprisonments of the members of the Parliame^^ of Part, ^or
resusing to register those loans (because they thought ^em oppressive to the
people) which the court demanded, are in every once's memory. And though some,
to answer their own unworthy puposes, may endeavor to persuade us to the
contrary, yet, to the disinterested and dispassionate, these tyrannic
proceedings appear manifestly to have been the things which hastened the
downtal of the unhappy Lewis XVI.
."

Thus per^shed liberty, thus perished the renowned reformers of France, whose
faithfulness will be had in everlasting remembrance, and whose ^ings will be
avenged in the downf^l of that tyranny which infected them. For though their
dead b^dies shall lie in the street of the ^rul city, of my stical Babylon,
which spiritually is called, on account of its ^ewdness and persecutions, Sod^m
and Egypt, where also our Lord, in his members, was cru^isied, (ver. 8.); and
though the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, see their d^ad
bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer them to be put unto graves,
(ver. 9.); though few or none of the nations will, comparatively This
indifference is perfectly consistent with the asylum which the hunted
Protestants of France, who could escape from their country, found in the
neighboring states and kingdoms; for whatever sympathy individuals might feel,
and all true Christians certainly felt, and though, for the sake of their
manufactures, property, increase of population, and in pity for their
sufferings, they received and encouraged them; yet what nation ever armed in
their defense, or even moved a finger, comparatively, for the relief of all the
thousands, who were first unarmed, and then offered the mark of the beast, or
banishment, the galleys, the dungeon, the rack, and death? What Protestant
nation did any thing worth calling an exertion in favor of all the thousands
and hundreds of thousands who were hunted, like wild beasts, by Popish priests
and their bloodhounds, and driven from their country, or murdered, -- of all
the thousands and tens of thousands, who for a good conscience, were torn from
their families, immured in dungeons, condemned to the galleys, or delivered
over to the insolence and cruelty of the dragoons: -- Not one! When an
opportunity offered for doing something for them, at the peace of Ryswick, in
1697, and again of Utrecht in 1713, at which time four hundred were still
groaning on board the galleys, or perishing in dungeons, there was not one
stipulation in their favor! But the fall of that tyranny which inflicted these
enormities, produces a shock which is felt from one end of the earth to the
other. Whence is this? What, will the issue be; and what the fate of liberty?
, have any pity on them, to yield them assistance, or to do for them any office
of humanity; but may even rejoice over them (many of them at least) and make
merry, and send gifts one to another, because these two prophets who tormented
them are slain, (ver. 10.) though, instead of assisting them, they may wish
their everlasting extinction, or exert themselves ever so much against them, --
when the days are fulfilled, they shall awake in their children and successors,
and shake and overturn, from its deepest foundations, the tyranny which slew
them. And after three days and a half, the spirit of life from God entered into
them, (ver. 11.)

Here the third question presents itself. What duration of time are we to
understand by these three days and a half?

Before I offer my interpretation of this number, there is one consideration
which claims our attention. On a careful examination, we shall find, in all the
predictions of the prophets, that although they give us assurance of the facts,
yet the time of their accomplishment is left in a state of uncertainty. And
even where dates are fixed, as in the predictions respecting the return of the
Jews from Babylon, after 70 years captivity, and the appearance of the Messiah
after 70 weeks, or 490 years; yet the commencement of these periods, or the
mode of calculation, is involved in obscurity, till light is thrown upon them
by the event. It never was intended that men should know with certainty when
any future event is to take place, and this for an obvious reason. The
prophecies, we should remember, were designed not to gratify our curiosity, but
to confirm our faith in the truth of the divine word, by their accomplishment.
And hence the necessity that these three days and a half should have a
different meaning from the common prophetic days, that thus the time might not
so easily be ascertained, till the accomplishment should lead men to their true
intention. Were the prophecies so clear, that every one could precisely know
the circumstances, and the time to which they refer, hindrances, if we may
speak thus, would be thrown in the way of God's designs; and, in many cases, a
cheek would be given to the necessary exertions and pursuits of men. All the
latter part of the last century, thinking people of all countries were
expecting the accomplishment of the 1260 years, (the time of the beast's
power). On the revocation of the edict of Nants, the whole Protessant world,
and especially the poor One of them, Peter Jurie^, says, (...) I know not from
what time God shall please to begin the reckoning of the three years and a
half. Not but that I strongly hope, that God intends to begin it at the time of
the revocation of the edict of Nants, but this does not rise to a full
assurance." No, it did not comport with the designs of God, that any man should
certainly know before the accomplishment.
afflicted French, were of opinion, that the unequalled persecutions which were
then endured, were the slaying of the witnesses; and they were of on tip-toe
looking for the end of the three days and a half See Bishop Newton on the
Prophecies, in locum.
. What is here laid down, particularly, that the days here should have a
different meaning from those other days in this book, being granted, (as I
think it must), let us proceed to seek an answer to this very interesting
question: What length of time is intended by these three days and a half?

My answer is, that days in this 11th verse are the same with months in the 2d
verse; or, if you please, (...) day reckoning, as the Jews did, thirty days to
a month, and, as is the method in calculating the above forty-two months, to
make them agree with the 1260 days in verse the third Some have supposed that
these three days and a half are to be reckoned as we reckon the time, and
times, and half a time, (chap. ii. 14.) taking them for Jewish years (360 days)
and then reckoning the days for years, i e. 1260 years. But this is subversive
of all that is said from the seventh verse and on; it makes the whole duration
of their prophesying the same with their finishing it. The idea of ^^^ar days,
or months, seems a vast deal more feasible.

Originally, the Jews measured their months by the sun, and then every month
consisted of thirty days. But after they came out of Egypt, they measured them
by the course of the moon, and then the first was of thirty days, the next of
twenty-nine, and so alternately; that which had thirty days was called a
complete month, and that which had but twenty-nine an incomplete month. From
change to change are 29 days, 12 hours, and 44 minutes. And it may not be amiss
to recollect, that one l^^ar month is the length of the moon's day, for she
turns round her axis exactly in the time that she goes round the earth.


.

Thirty multiplied by three, adding fifteen for the half day, makes 105. When
this way of ^reckoning first occurred to my mind, I had no idea of the events
which this number connected; for I did not recollect the year when the edict of
Nants was revoked. But looking over Quick's Synodic^^, I found it to be October
18, 1685, to which if 105 be added, it brings us to 1790; take off a few months
(if that should be thought necessary) for the event taking place before the
half day is quite expired, and it brings us to 1789, when the witnesses were to
be quickened. Whether this may strike others as it struck me, when I first
observed the coincidence, I cannot tell; but, from this agreement of the number
105, with the time which elapsed between one of the greatest persecutions that
was ever experienced by Christians, and this wonderful revolution which has
taken place, a thousand ideas rushed upon my mind. Is it probable, is it
pollible, that this can be the quickening of the witnesses What! the olive
trees? she candlesticks? I have always supposed these to be all faints There
are doubtless many characters among the French reformers who seem not to
deserve the honorable title of witnesses; but was there ever a cause however
good, which agitated a nation, in which some had characters did not mingle with
the exc^llent? A mixture of good and evil seems inseparable from the present
state of things. And let it be recollected, that as God in his providence may
employ even bad men in a good work, especially if, to effect the good, it
should be necessary to use them as instruments to inflict the divine
judgments, as is to be the case when Papal tyrannies perish; so also, for the
part which they act as the instruments of God, and not on account of their
moral character, they may be distinguished by an honorable title, like this of
witnesses. Thus the idolatrous and cruel Medes and Persians, who had no pity,
are denominated God's sanctified ones, (Isa. xiii. 3.) and Cyrus, their leader,
is adorned even with that title which is one of the chief distinctions of the
(...) God -- his Messiah, his Christ or Anointed, (Isa. xlv. (...) and leading
principles for which the French reformers ha^^ born witness, the principles of
civil and religious liberty, are no novel nostrums of philosophers, but such as
were coeval with human nature, and which have been long recognized in this
country, and what makes our happy Constitution the boast of Englishmen, and
which, it is to be hoped, they will never cease to cherish.
! And ^an that zeal which has fired Frenchmen to combat for civil and
religious liberty, be the spirit of life from God? Is this resurrection, in the
vision, the rising to this civil and religious liberty, previous to better
days? -- I will do all that I can to discover the truth.

But it may possibly be asked, Are days used in this sense in any other place
of the holy scriptures? If not, this is a reason for rejecting this mode of
calculation. -- Could we adduce a passage directly to the point it would
certainly strengthen the hypothesis very much; but though we may not be able to
do this, all that can be argued from the failure is, that it weakens, but not
that it destroys the whole probability of the truch of the conjecture I find
that I am not the first who has supposed that a day, in the figurative language
of the prophets, may mean a month, as well as a year. See Poli Synop. Dan viii.
14. 'Per dies 2300 intell^ it m^nsez totidem qui constitunnt 180 annos a
Principlo Regni Graecorum us^ut ad ^^ti^chum." Sa^d in Wi^^etus.
. All allow that the language of these kinds of prophecies is very enigmatical,
and that days, in scripture, are often of a very indeterminate signification.
But let us imagine a similar case. Suppose, on the appearance of our Savior, a
Jew had said to his neighbor, "I think that by the seventy weeks of Daniel,
(chap. ix. 24 -- 27.) we are to understand seventy weeks of years, (seventy
times seven) or four hundred and ninety years, and that they are now about to
be accomplished; and hence it deserves inquiry whether this Jesus be not the
Messiah." It might have been objected, "But where, in our sacred scriptures,
does a week intend seven years?" -- "No where. But though this be the case, yet
as this manner of reckoning seems to be quite consistent with the enig^^atical
language of prophecy, the hypothesis deserves attention." -- It is true that
the etymology of the Hebrew word is applicable to seven of years, as well as to
seven of days; but, as the venerable Mede says, (p. 599 of his works), "The
question lies not in the etymology: but the use, where the Hebrew word always
signifies seven of days, and never seven of years: wheresover it is absolutely
put, it means of days, is no where used of years. Genesis xxix. 27. The week which
Laban would have Jacob fulfill before he gave him Rachel, was not the seven
years service, but the seven days of Leah's wedding feast, as the Targum
translates, and the Vulgar, Impel hebdomadam dierum hujus copulae, nor can it
be otherwise, by the age of Rachel's children."

Many have taken it for granted, that that general expectation of the Messiah's
speedy coming, which prevailed among the Jews, about the time of our Lord's
appearance, originated from their interpretation of these weeks of Daniel. But
this appears to be taken for granted without proof. It is more likely that
their expectation arose from a tradition of a prophecy of Elias, which is well
known to have been generally received among them, viz. that the world was to
stand seven thousand years; two thousand without the law, two thousand under
the law, two thousand under the Messiah, and that then was to follow the
sabbatical thousand; as also from the visit of the wise men from the east; the
testimonies of Simeon and Anna, and the ministry of John the Baptist, whom all
the people took for a prophet. I can no where find that Jews ever reckoned
these weeks as seven of years. The objection then would have been as valid in
the supposed case, as it is here respecting lunar days. But whatever the
reader's opinion may be respecting the^e days, or the two witnesses, and the
time of their being slain, I hope he will remember that this does not at all
affect our main argument, respecting the second beast being the tyranny of the
Lewises, and the French revolution being the prelude to the ushering in of the
third woe, the calamities which are to bring to an end all the tyrannies of the
world, both civil and ecclesiastical.

We have long been praying, thy kingdom come, and is there any probability that
the precludes to it are arrived, the earthquakes Every one that is acquainted
with prophetic language, knows that these are figurative representations of
commotions in nations, and of the fall of princes and great men, as has already
been observed.
which shake the kingdoms of the world, the signs in heaven above, and on the
earth beneath; the darkening of the sun and moon, and the falling of the stars
from heaven? And shall we be unconcerned about the signs of the times? It is
deserving the most serious examination, whether the revolution in France be not
the beginning of the fulfillment of this prophecy. I say beginning; for,
according to the prophecies, if this be the event pointed out by the
resurrection of the witnesses, we have as yet seen but the dawn of what is to
come, nor shall we perhaps for some time. Black and conflicting clouds will
darken the hemisphere and obscure our prospect; but they will spend themselves
and vanish. But where we sure that this event is what we conjecture, yet no man
could say how long it would be before the spirit of life from God would, by
those more excellent operations, and in that larger degree which we look for,
enter into the witnesses for gospel truth; for they may be quickened with
political life, and yet remain some time with a small share of spiritual life.
Thus it is to be with the Jews; for after their political resurrection as a
people, the great body of them will remain wicked, and therefore experience the
heavy judgments of God. Ezekiel (...)
. But

Here the fourth question which this Inquiry about the witnesses suggests
arises, What are to be the consequences of their resurrection? Although a
general idea may be formed of that which is to take place, yet it does not
appear possible to mark out with certainty, what relates to future events,
wrapped up in sigures like those which follow in this book, But we may
conjecture: our part is to compare those events which have taken place with the
predictions, and judge how far the prophecies are fulfilled, and not pry into
futurity with an over-anxious curiosity.

Ver. 11. And after three days and a half the spirit of life from God entered
into them. When their enemies thought them perished for for ever, then, as
under an impulse from God The expressions, The spirit of life from God, and a
great vioce from heaven, are Jewish phrases; for when that people would
represent any thing as very great, or out of the common way, they said it was
from the Lord, and from heaven, as an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him,
i. e. a very evil spirit. The trees of the Lord are full of sap, i. e. the
immensely large cedars of Lebanon. How art thou fallen from heaven! i. e. from
what a height of dignity and greatness.
, an unexampled zeal for liberty and truth Although the French people are
actuated by an astonishing zeal for civil and religious liberty, yet their
character seems very far from agreeing with what we expect from the witnesses
for gospel truth. In the things of religion they appear to be no further
enlightened at present, than to see the rights of conscience, and the
absurdities and cruel oppressious of the Papal system, This is certainly an
important part of truth, and what promises to pave the way for the triumphs of
pure religion, and perhaps, considering the greatness of that darkness emerged
from, it may be as much as could rationally be expected at the beginning of
such a reformation. But of true godliness there appears but little at present;
and it is to be seared that they, as well as most other nations, must endure
great sufferings before we shall see that repentance which must precede the
happy days promised in God's word.
, suddenly actuated them. And they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell
upon them that saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto
them, Come up hither. The supreme power, by abolishing the laws under which
they suffered political death, invited them to quit their state of bondage, and
assume equal liberty with their fellows. And they ascended up to heaven -- to a
more dignified slate. And their enemies beheld them -- Their old oppressors,
and their abettors, contemplated the change which was taking place, both with
astonishment and malice.

Ver 12. And the same hour there was a great earthquake, and a tenth part of
the city fell. -- Instantly on these witnesses for civil and religious liberty
being stirred up, as by a supernatural impulse on their mind^, 40 claim and
vindicate their imprescriptible rights, this monarchy, which was one of the ten
horns of the Papal beall, (and the tenth, as it was that which rose last), or
one of the ten streets of the Antichristian city Set Bp. Newton, Dr Goodwin,
Mede, and Lowman on this passage.
, was so agitated by the conflict between the witnesses for liberty and the
supporters of despotism, that it fell, and its abominable oppressions issued in
its utter ruin; and that as in one hour. The progress of liberty, in the
destruction of established tyrannies, is generally flow; and that which was
ages in erecting, is ages also in pulling down; the change of things here is
not according to the common course of events; the witnesses awake, the
conflict-commences, and the tyranny falls, as in one hour.

And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand. Thus it is in our
translation, but in the original it is, There were slain seven thousand names
of men By seven thousand, we are not to suppose, that exact by this numbe^ is
to perish. By a common figure of speech, it is a certain number f^ an
uncertain. Or as a perfect number, it may intend all, i. e. all the titles of
men in that country.
. The violence of war used to be directed against the persons of men, but now
against their names. -- Those titles and privileges, under the shield of which
they have been wont to commit, with impunity, so many cruel oppressions.

And the remnant gave glory to the God of heaven. After a violent conflict, for
some time, between the witnesses and their opposers, the former prevailed, and
those who had been rather spectators of the contest, than actors in it, united
themselves to their cause; and thus, though, at least, many of them might not
be actuated by these views, they glorified God in promoting his grand and good
designs in this change of things which he was now effecting, in the overthrow
of Antichristian despotism and persecution. -- Ye can discern the face of the
sky, but can ye not discern the signs of the times Matthew. xvi. 3.
? Why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right Luke xii. 57.
? Ah! the answer to this question is too obvious. -- The Lord forgive them,
who, to promote their own designs, have blinded your eyes and perverted your
judgment! In doing this they have -- But, the Lord reigns, let the earth
rejoice. -- Clouds and darkness are round about him; but righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of his throne Psalm. xcvii. 1, 2.
.

Ver. 14. The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes quickly. The
two former woes respecting the Saracens and Turks, which are denominated woes,
on account of the terrible calamities which they occasioned to mankind, being
now passed by, and this internal commotion, in the country where the witnesses
first begin to arise, being pretty well settled, behold a state of things
follow, which introduces a scene replete with woe.

Ver. 15. Behold the third woe comes quickly. And the seventh angel sounded,
and there were great voices in heaven, saying. The kingdoms of this world are
become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever. We are not to understand by this, that, on the founding of the
seventh trumpet, the kingdom of righteousness, peace, and universal happiness
is inslantly to commence; but that that great scene now opens which is to
prepare the way for it. The eighteenth verse obliges us to interpret it thus:
The nations were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that
they should be judged: -- the time when thou wiit avenge the blood which
tyran's have thed, and destr^y them which have destroyed the earth. The nations
will be enraged at this change of things, and unite to oppose it, and great
woes are to follow; -- woes which all descrptions of men, it is likely, will
feel, that they may be brought to repentance; but which will, in their issue,
fall chiefly upon the heads of Antichristian oppressors, the upholders of the
Papacy. Now the angels begin to pour out the vials of the wrath of God; for, as
we have already observed, thi^ chapter contains a complicated vision of a long
course of events, i^ miniature, which is afterward illustrated by several
dislinct visions on ^ larger scale.

But before we enter upon the consideration of the vials, permit me to adduce
some authorities, which, especially if we consider the time when they were
written, more than a hundred years ago, tend very much to strengthen the
argument in favor of my hypothesis respecting the witnesses, their slaying and
resurrection. The first I shall mention is Peter Jurieu, a French Protestant
minister, whose works were published in English in 1687. He says, "The tenth
part of the city which here fell, will, at some future time, appear to be the
kingdom of France, where a revolution will take place about the year 1785, and
a separation from the Papacy follow, when the names of Monks and Nuns, of
Carmelites, Augustines, Dominicans, etc. shall perish for ever, and all those
vain titles, and armorial bearings, which serve for ornament and pride, shall
vanish; and brotherly love make all men equal. Not that there shall be no
distinctions; for it is not a kingdom of anarchy, but government shall then be
without pride and insolence, without tyranny and violence, and subjects shall
obey their governors with an humble spirit." The time required, according to
this author, after the quickening of the witnesses ( i. e. from the time of the
revolution) to destroy Autichrist, will be twenty-five years; and that it will
take about seventy years more for the abolishing of sects and parties among
Christians, and for the conversion of the Jews and Heathens. "And all this" he
says, "cannot be broughtabout without confusion and tumult. The Popish empire
cannot fall, but it must cause blood and a mighty noise." Thus far Juricu.

Dr. Goodwin, who wrote a hundred and fifty years since, in his Exposition upon
the Revelation, Part I. chap. 7. has a great deal which is as astonishing as it
is apposite to the present argument. He says, sect. 6. "The saints and churches
of France, God has made a wonder to me in all his proceedings toward them,
first and last; and there would seem some great and special honor reserved for
them yet at the last; for it is certain, that the first light of the gospel, by
that first and second angei's preaching in chapter the fourteenth (which laid
the foundation of Antichrist's ruin) was out from among them, and they bore and
underwent the great heat of that morning of persecution, which was as great, if
not greater, than any since. -- And so, as that kingdom had the first great
stroke, so now it should have the honor of having the last great stroke in the
ruin of Rome."

Sect. 5th. he says, on Rev. xi. "By the earthquake here is meant a great
concussion or shaking of states, political or exclesiastical. -- The effect of
this earthquake, and fall of this tenth part of the city, is killing seven
thousand of the names of men. -- Now, by men of name, in scripture, is meant
men of title, office, and dignity. -- As in the case of Corrah's conspiracy, so
here a civil punishment falls upon these. -- For having killed these witnesses,
themselves are to be killed (happily) by being bereft of their names and titles,
which are to be rooted out for ever, and condemned to perpetual forgetfulness."

The singular agreement of present events with what these authors foretold from
the prophecies, so many years ago, is a circumstance which merits the serious
attention of all wise and considerate men; for it certainly adds great weight
to the conjecture, that what has taken place in France, is the beginning of the
final downfall of the Papal usurpations and tyrannies. And if it should be so,
woe be to them who attempt to uphold what God has willed to fail! In the
ordinary wars which nations have waged, they have, perhaps, lost one or two
hundred thousand lives, and slaughtered as many of their enemies: countries
have been laid waste, and taxes incurred, to the oppression of the industrious;
but in other respects they may have sat down much as they were: but if the
present contest be what there is reason to suspect it, not m^^^ly a war of man
against man, but of God against Antichristian usurpations and oppressions, the
issue to those who oppose his designs, most be different. Though, as was the
case with the Assyrians, and with Cyrus Isa. x. 5 -- 7.
, the instruments which he uses may not know him, nor mean to fa^^l Isa. xiv. 4.
his will, yet they may be the rod of his anger to accomplish his councils.

Let us now revert to the question, What are to be the consequences of the
resurrection of the witnesses? Soon after it, the seventh trumpet is to sound,
which is the signal for the seven angels to pour out their vials of God's wrath
upon the Antichristian kingdom. -- Has this seventh trumpet been blown? Is it
founding? Or is it about to sound for the angels to prepare to execute the
vengeance of God, on the mother of harlots and all abominations? My heart
trembles at the idea of those caramities which are to sweep the earth, and of
those convulsions which shall make kingdom and nations! "Who would not fear
thee, O King of nations? for to thee does it appertain Jer. x. 7 -- 10.
! At thy wrath the earth shall tremble, and the nations shall not be able to
abide thine indignation!"

As to the gathering of the harvest and vintage in the fourteenth chapter, the
time seems not yet come for their elucidation. I am inclined to to think that
they properly fall under one or more of the vials. The latter, as Dr Goodwin
has explained it, seems to be a vision of the ven(...) which is to be executed
upon the Protestant party; for the wine press is said to be trodden without the
city, i. e. without the jurisdiction or reach of the city of Rome; and
represented in a separate vision, on purpose to show that vengeance will fall
even upon such kingdoms and nations as had call off the Pope's supremacy. Dr
Gill and diners have supposed, that the Preteilant nations will again return to
Popery, and persecute with great violence. But Dr Goodwin's idea is more
probable. He says, in his Exposition, part II. chap. I. "Whether the winepress
will be brought into this country, he only knows who is the Lord both of the
harvest and the vintage;" (reader, mark well what follows): "only this may be
more confidently affirmed, that those carnal Protestants in England, and other
places, who, like the outward court, have been joined to the people of God,
shall yet, before the exporation of the beast's kingdom and number The number
of the beast, as we have endeavored to prove above, is the tyranny of the
Lewises; and as to have the mark of the beast, is to pay homage to the first
beast, the usurped power of the Pope and his clergy; so to have this number is
to be devoted to the support of the tyranny of the second beast.
, be more or less given up to the Papists, and be made to vail to them, if not
all of them, by bloody wars, and conquests, yet by some base unwothy yielding
to them, as a just punishment of their carnal profession of the gospel." And
the wine press was trodden without the city, and the blood came out of the
wine-priss, even unto the horses' bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs. The Lord avert from this country such a judgment!

How incompetent is man to judge of the ways of God -- While the trumpet is
blowing, and the angels are preparing to pour the divine vengeance on the heads
of tyrants and their supporters, and to spread desolation and woe for the sins
of men, the great army of saints and martyrs in heaven sing, Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou
King of saints! -- All nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgments are made manifest Rev. xv. 3.
!

Rev. xvi. 1. And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven
angels, Go your ways and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.
-- It appears to me, that although we must suppose a conformity to the order of
the vision, in inflicting the plagues of these seven vials, yet, perhaps, it
will not be such a formal one, as to exclude all mixture. It strikes me, that
although the vial which is to be poured out upon the earth, will commence
first, and that on the sea follow, yet their failing streams will mingle; and
although the fall torrent of the latter vials may not commence, yet some small
portion of them may be dashed upon the rivers, the sun, or the throne of the
beast, while the first are pouring out; and although the plagues of the latter
vials will commence last, as in the vision, yet the streams of the former may
still be cunning. The angel's saying of this woe, that it comes quickly, and
the encumstance of the seven angels with their vials all appearing, and being
sent out at the same time, supposes that they will all be employed together, to
execute their missions on the leveral objects of the divine displeasure. And we
may hope that these judgments will soon be over.

Were I to detail half the opinions of authors on the following objects of the
Divine vengeance, adding to them my own conjectures, this pamphlet would swell
into a folio; but as I apprehend that the events which are here represented
have not yet taken place, or at most, are but now commencing, my reflections
shall be short.

Ver. 2. And the first went and poured out his vial upon the earth, and there
fell a noisome and grievous fore upon the men which had the mark of the beast,
and upon them which worshipped his image. The pouring out of this vial upon the
earth may possibly refer to some particular country on the main, where the
judgments of God are to commence; or, perhaps, we may be taught by this emblem,
that the downfall of the Antichristian kingdom shall begin with terrible wars on
land, in which God's wrath shall be manifested against those armies of land
forces which have for so many ages been the basis of tyrannic power, and who,
at the nod of despots, have slaughtered their fellow creatures, without either
thinking or caring about the justice or injustice of the cause; who have been
the base instruments, without a motive, of desolating nations, and of carrying
unnumbered woes from one end of the earth to the other. But the time of judging
the cause of the dead is come, and both they who have the mark of the beast, i.
e. who are the subjects and slaves of the Papacy, and they who worship, or only
serve and endeavor to support the image of the beast, (which, according to
what appears from chap. xiii. is the tyranny of the Antichristian party in
France, all such as serve this image of the beast, though not Papists and
flaves to Rome) shall experience such enastisements and disappointments in
their attempts to support what God has determined to overthrow, and such
violent and successful attacks on their power, that they shall be deeply
wounded, and grievously vexed; or, a noisome disease shall get into their camp,
and cover the earth with their dead: that thus men may see the hand which
smites them, and give glory to God, * Ye can discern the face of the sky, but
can ye not discern the signs of the times? Who drove back, and cut off, by a
noisome and grievous disease, the invading army of Brunswick? He, who turns
the way of the wicked un^^de down.

Ver. 3. And the second angel poured out his vial upon the sea, and it became
as the blood of a dead man, and every living soul died in the sea. As in Isa.
lx. 5. "The abundance of the sea shall be cunverted unto thee," means the
inhabitants of Islands, or of lands come at by sea; and as by the sea, chap.
viii. 8. was intended the mariting countries of Europe, and as "woe to the
inhabitants of the earth and of the sea," chap. xii. 12. means woe to the
inhabitants of continents and of Islands, all mankind, so the pouring our of
this second vial on the sea, may indicare those calamities which God will bring
upon his enemies, the supporters of Papal tyrannies, in such situations; or, if
the meaning of the pouring out of this second vial of wrath is not to be
restricted to this sense, it may probably refer also to the destruction of
naval armaments, whether in battle, or by God's more immediate judgments. And
so great will the destruction be, that the sea will not only be stained with
blood, but become as the blood of a dead man.

Ver. 4. And the third angel poured out his vial upon the rivers and fountains
of water, and they became blood, etc. This may be a representation of those
judgments which are to fall on the inhabitants of roland countries, and where
rivers abound and have their sources; or, as i^ has been generally explained,
of that just vengeance which is to be inflicted upon those orders of men, who,
by the abuse of power, both civil and ecclesiastical, have been the chief
sources of human misery, and the great feeders of the sea of oppression. The
calamities which are to attend this vial, are to be peculiarly grievous. This
may be concluded from the following circumstance: I heard the angel of the
waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord! -- Thou have given them blood to drink,
for they are worthy. The former judgments pass in silent solemnity, (...)
though the objects of them were less conspicuous in guilt, but no sooner is
this vial poured out than it excites acclamations of praise. If this refer to
the inland countries of Europe, more especially where the people are held in
vassalage, and where both the priests and nobles, above most others, rule the
people with a rod of iron, there appears a peculiar fitness in these
acclamations. The blazing star, or comet, which fell upon the third part of the
rivers and fountains of water, chap. viii. 10. appears to have head its
fulfillment in the wars which laid waste the countries ^^^dering on the Danube,
the Rhine, and the Po, and especially the (...) latter, when Attila, with his
Hun, made his terrible irruption, (...) the year 452: it will therefore be
worth our while to observe the progress of things in these countries.

Ver. 8. And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the (...) This appears
to be either a representation of God's awful vengeance (...) visiting the
nations with unfriendly seasons, that thus they may at once be humbled under
his mighty band, and be more disposed to forward (...) designs in the overthrow
of Antichristian systems of error and oppression, or it is a prediction of the
display of God's wrath against these systems of pride and despotism, which by
their splend^ have been dazzling, and by their violence consuming mankind. Mr
Mede supposes this sun to be some splendid potentate of Europe, as the Emperor,
or the King of Spain. But if it be not the emblem of unfriendly seasons, I
should rather suppose it to represent the extinction of despotism in general,
than of an individual monarch or monarchy A friend has favored me with an
extract from the works of Mr R. Fleming, who, in a sermon, printed 1701,
applies it to the French monarchy, and says; "Whereas Lewis XIV. took the sun
for his emblem, and for his motto, Nec pluribus impar, he may at length, or
rather his successor, and the monarchy itself, before the year 1794, be forced
to acknowledge, that in respect to neighboring potentates he is fingulis
impar; but as to the expiration of this vial, I fear it will not be before the
end of the year 1794." What a singular agreement between present circumstances
and this good man's calculation!

If by this vial's being poured out on the sun, we are to understand a drought
then the Greek word may refer to the sun, but if it be an emblem of much rain,
or of the wrath which is to be poured out on despotism, then I think, with Dr
Goodwin, that it refers to the angel, who, by the pouring out of this vial, is
to afflict tyrants, and their supporters, with scorching calamities.


.

Ver. 10. And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the sea^ of the beast.
This must be considered as referring to those calamaties which God intends to
bring more immediately upon the Pope, and upon that city and country where the
throne of the beast stands. And we may expect soon to see heavy judgments fall
upon the Roman Pontificate; and that city to be sucked and burnt which has been
the source of so many corruptions, and which has tyrannized, for so many ages,
with spiritual despotism, over those kingdoms that have given their power to
the beast.

Ver. 12. And the sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river
Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the
east might be prepared. The Turkish empire also shall experience the wrath of
God for their abominable oppressions, and not only tidings from the north
(Russia) but from the east (Persia and Arabia) shall trouble him, as predicted
Dan. xi. 44, and thus a way be prepared for the return of the Jews to their own
land, previous to their conversion to Christianity. But the beast does not yet
expire.

Ver. 14. And I saw three unclean spirits like frog: come out of the mouth of
the From comparing this passage with chap. xii. I am induced to suppose, that
by the dragon here the emperor of Germany, the more immediate successor of the
Roman emperors, is intended: by the beast, the Pope and his clergy, and by the
false prophet, (as Bishop Newton and Dr Doddridge understand it) the second
beast in chap. xiii. 11. (i. e. the French monarchy.) This will evidently
appear to every impartial person, to be the second beast, if we compare this
place with chapters xiii. 13. 14. and xix. 20. He is thus called, because, like
the false prophets of old, he engages himself in support of tyranny and
idolatry. The word Naba, the root of Nabia, a prophet, signifies in general, to
declare the mind of another. Thus Aaron (Ex. vii. 1.) is styled Moses's
prophet. And with equal propriety might Lewis XIV. or the race of the Capets,
be styled the false prophet of the Pope. These tyrannic powers are to exert
themselves to engage all the kings of the earth, in support of the falling
Papacy, and declining despotism.

They are the spirits of devils working miracles. No one supposes these to be
true miracles. This figurative language is used to set forth those violences,
impostures, lies, and frauds, with which they are to deceive or frighten men,
and thus bring them into their destructive measures.


dragon, and out of the mouth of she beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet; for they are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth
unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of that great day of God Almighty. Here it may be proper to remember,
that in symbolic hieroglyphics, a frog was the figure by which the ancients
represented an impostor, and hence the Oneiro-critics, or interpreters of
dreams, taught, that as to dream of a dragon fignified majesty; of a serpent,
disease; of a viper, money, etc. so to dream of frogs signified impostors. See
Warb. Div. Leg. B. iv. sect. 4. These unclean spirits, therefore, (for God
condescends to speak to men in their own way) represent the odious impostors
who are to act as the agents of these tyrannies to betray the kings of the
earth and their armies into measures for the support of the old Antichristian
system, against every attempt which will be made for its destruction. But all
these efforts will be in vain -- the wrath of man shall praise God. It is his
battle, and he will overthrow his enemies, and the enemies of mankind, with all
their hosts.

Ver. 15. Behold I come as a thief! Blessed is he that watches. This will take
place at a time when men in general will have no expectation of it, but will
say in their heart, 2 Pet. iii. 4.
"Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep, all
things continue as they were from the beginning." They will calculate events on
common principles, and deceive themselves into ruin. Blessed is he that
watches.

Ver. 16. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew
tongue Armageddon, or the mountain of Megiddo, thus called because it shall be
a place more remarkable for slaughter than Megiddo ever was. Judges v. 19. 2
Kings ix. 27. and Zech. xii. 11. May our country, in that day, whether it be
near or afar off, if not engaged on the side of the King of kings, be far from
the mountain of slaughter! In this country, above most others, the civil and
religious rights of mankind have been protected. Let us hope, therefore, that
when the Judge of all the earch shall make inquisition for blood, that we shall
find mercy; or if, with the rest of the nations who are to be purified by
affliction, we must share in the cup of trembling, here is ground for
confidence in prayer, that mercy may be mixed with judgment; for the judgment
of God will be a judgment of proportion. Where there has been most oppression,
where sin has been most triumphant, and especially where there has been most
persecution of conscience, there will the heaviest woes fall. Let us therefore
repent and seek God; This is at all seasons necessary, but an additional motive
enforces it, when the signs of the times suggest some very fignal crisis to be
at hand. For whether men will see it or not, all things do not continue as they
were from the beginning, Psalm. xii. 5.
"For the oppression of the poor, for the fighing of the needy, now will I
arise, says the Lord."

It is but to read a few of these prophecies which speak of the wars and
judgments of the latter times of the world, to conceive the most tremendous
idea of the carnage which will be made of mankind, and of the fury of the
vengeance then to be poured out. When the prophets describe these judgments, it
is generally, though not always, under the names of those nations which
bordered upon Palestine, and which were the more inveterate and dangerous
enemies of Israel, such as Assyria, Egypt, Moab, Edom, and others. This must be
concluded, as Lowth, Mede, and others of our most able commentators argue,
because those judgments which they denounce are often spoken of as decisive
strokes, that should thoroughly vindicate the cause of oppressed truth and
innocence, and put a final period to idolatry, and to all the miseries and
oppressions of God's people. They are often represented as the immediate
preludes of the refloration of Israel, and the season of universal peace.

To times yet to come are such prophecies as these to be referred. Isa. xiv.
24. "The Lord of hosts has sworn, surely as I have thought, so shall it come
to pass, that I will break the Assyrian in my hand; then shall his yoke depart
from off thee. -- This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth,
and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all nations." -- Chap. xxvi.
20. "Come, my people, enter into thy chambers, hide thyself, as it were, for a
little moment, until the indignation be overpast. For behold the Lord comes
out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity.
The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain. In
that day (chap. xxvii. 1.) the Lord, with his sore, and great, and strong
sword, shall punish leviathen, the piercing serpent, even leviathen that
crooked serpent, and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea." Chap. lxiii.
1-6. "Who is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozrah? -- I
that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou red in thine
apparel, and thy garments like him that treads in the wine fat? -- I have
trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me; for I
will tread them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood
shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will stain all my raiment. For the
day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come."

The prophet Joel, also prophesying of these calamities, says, (chap. iii.)
"Behold, in those days, and in that time, (when God will show wonders in the
heavens, and in the earth, chap. ii. 30. [namely, the political heavens and
earth, states and kingdoms] when I shall bring again the captivity of Judah and
Jerusalem, I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the
valley of Jehoshaphat, (which may mean any place where the Lord will execute
judgment, for so the word Jehoshaphat signifies in the original, and by valley,
may be intended some low country, called in the 14th verse the valley of
decision,) and will plead with them there for my people." Ver. 9. "Proclaim ye
this among the Gentiles, prepare war, wake up the mighty men, let all the men
of war draw near, let them come up. Beat your plow-shares into swords, and your
pruning hooks into speaks: let the weak say, I am strong. Assemble yourselves
and come, all ye heathen, and gather yourselves together round about: thither
cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord. (Thy mighty angel, says Lowth, to
discomfit thine enemies.) Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley
of Jehoshaphat, for there will I fit to judge all the heathen round about. Put
ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come, get ye down, for the press is
full, the fats overflow, for their wickedness is great. Munitudes, multitudes,
in the valley of decision."

In Zech. xiii. 7-9. there seems to be a prediction of the same times. All are
agreed, that the twelth and fourteenth chapters refer to the restoration,
conversion, etc. of the Jews; nor is there but one objection that is at all
plausible, to the whole of this thirteenth being applied to the same times.
Part of verse 7. at least the sense of it, is applied (Matthew. xxvi. 31.) to the
scattering of Christ's disciples at his death. I will smite the Shepherd, and
the sheep of the flock shall be scattered abroad. But this appears to have been
only an accommodation of this passage, or of the sense of this and of other
passages, a usual practice with the New Testament writers. (See Matthew. ii.
15-17. xiii. 35. John xv. 25.) Or our Lord might speak thus in conformity to a
commonplace maxim. "Smite the shepherd, cut off the leader, and his followers
will disperse." The thread of the prophecy seems to require a different
interpretation than what has been usually given to this passage. Unity of
design should always be attended to in the study of the prophetic writings, as
well as of other compositions; nor should we suppose so violent a break in the
discourse of a prophet, as some suppose here, unless we should be involved in
an evident contradiction without it.

In chap. xi. is predicted the rejection of the Messiah by the Jews, and their
punishment and dispersion on this account. In chap. xii. we have their return
and conversion. In the beginning of the xiiith the pardoning grace which shall
be extended to them. Then follows the destruction of idolatry, and the contempt
under which the Antichristian-clergy, who have the mark of the beast in their
hands, (Rev. xiv. 9.) and who have worn garments to deceive the simple, shall
fall, and the shifts to which they shall be reduced to escape the vengeance of
mankind.

Verse the seventh is a call to the sword of justice to awake against the man
of sin, who opposes and exaleth himself above all that is called God, or that
is worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 4. He calls himself the vicar of Christ,
and God's vicegerent upon earth, arrogating to himself the attributes and
prerogatives of deity, and is here therefore ironically called God's fellow.
Against him is God's sword to awake, and the priesthood, and all those orders
which have been his supporters, are to be scattered. And in all the land two
parts therein shall be cut off and die, but the third shall be left therein.
Great is to be the destruction, and great the trials of those who are not
destroyed. But being brought to repentance, then is to be fulfilled that
promise which is peculiarly appropriated to the latter days. Ver. 9 They shall
call on my name, and I will hear them; I will say, It is my people; and they
shall say, the Lord is my God.

The fourteenth chapter more largely describes the destruction of God's
enemies, and the happy days which are to follow; when (ver. ^1.) There shall be
no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts. Or, as the Chaldee and
Vulgate translate the words, "There shall be no more any merchant in the house
(the church) of the Lord of hosts." The Christian church shall no longer be
made a market, where worldings convert religion into a trade, and enrich and
exalt themselves at the expense of the liberties and souls of mankind. We might
enumerate many of the predictions of our Savior and his apostles, all of which
go prove the great wars and calamities of the latter days. But I pass on to the
last plague.

Ver. 17. And the seventh angel poured his vial into the air, and there came a
great voice out of the temple of heaven from the throne, saying, It is done.
And there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and there was a great
earthquake such as was not since men were upon the earth, so mighty an
earthquake and so great. And the great city was divided into three parts, and
the cities of the nations f^ll, and great Babylon came in remembrance before
God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath, and
every island fled away, and the mountains were not found, etc. There shall be
unexampled convulsions of nations. And perhaps this vial may intend also, that
God, in his providence, will cause the state of the air to he such that nature
shall be thrown into terrible commotions, plagues shall be gendered, and
famines occasioned, that thus blind and obdurate men, who would not see his
judgments in war, may behold his hand in those more conspicuous tokens of his
wrath, which will affect the rich as well as the poor, and may be brought to
repentance; and that the kingdom of Satan, who is called the Prince of the
Power of the Air, shall now fall.

Babylon the Great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, the
source of oppressions and all tyrannies, falls; and not only the mother, but
all her children, all the cities of the nations, all the tyrannic p^ntics which
have despised and oppressed the servants of God, and all mankind, and no place
is found for them. The beast and the false prophet are taken * Rev. xix. 20. --
But perhaps some inquisitive mind may say, The beast of Rome spiritual tyranny,
and the false prophet, the beast of France, his reat supporter, are taken, and
exemplary justice is inflicted on them for their abominations, but the dragon,
civil tyranny, is not taken with them. No; he arose first, and he will continue
longest. But his career is short. Chap. xx. And I saw an angel come down from
heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit. And he laid hold on the dragon,
that old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years.
And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him,
that he should deceive the nations no more till the thousand years should be
fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season. Now commences the
first resurrection, as predicted by Ezekiel (chap. xxxvii.) Now the Jews, and
others with them, will find that mercy which will be as life from the dead
(Romans xi. 15.) And as Elias lived in John the Baptist, so shall the former
confessors and martyrs live in the Christians of this generation. And they
shall sit upon thrones of judgment, and act so much under the influence of
gospel principles, and establish such systems of justice and righteousness,
that tyranny, which has bound so many, shall itself be bound, and be cast into
the bottomless pit. Now liberty and peace, righteousness and joy, will reign
undisturbed, for what is here termed a thousand years; after which the dragon
is to be loosed for a little season.

The events here predicted are evidently the same with those foretold in Ezekiel.
xxxvii. xxxviii. and xxxix. and in Zech. xiv. What length of time then are we
to understand by these thousand years? I suppose that all which is here said is
figurative, and that the years are not what we generally understand by this
term. I am inclined to judge thus for two reasons. Not only from a comparison
of the different prophecies concerning the return of the Jews, the after
persecutions of Gog and Magog, etc. which do not seem to allow of so long a
term as a thousand years between the shutting up of the dragon and his loosing,
but also from the general prophetic use of such terms. Days, weeks, etc. In the
prophecies are generally used in a mystical sense, and for the obvious reason
which has been mentioned. I suppose therefore, that by this thousand years, a
thousand weeks or months are intended. Time only can ascertain this; but I
think the other prophecies restrain this period to a thousand weeks, or a
little more than nineteen years. The proper and usual meaning of the Greek word
is a year, but prophetically it may, perhaps, stand for any change or
revolution of time. John was a Jew, let us therefore examine the Hebrew word
for a year, and hear what Buxtorf says, Shanah Annus, absteratione dictus, quod
sole, ad punctum, unde digrediceperat, redeunte, iteretur, and in sesua per
vestigia semper volvatur and redeat, Now seeing that the word year in Hebrew
means a repetition, or revolving round and returning by the same steps, this is
as applicable to a week as a year.

Thus it appears probable from the prophecies, that after the bloody dragon,
civil tyranny, whose horrid character no objects in visible nature are
sufficiently vile to represent; after this crafty serpent, which is the devil
and satan, has been confined for about nineteen years, he will again get out of
his prison, and make a desperate effort against the kingdom of righteousness,
peace, and joy; but He who, by his providential judgments, cast the beast and
the false prophet into the lake of fire, will manifest himself in still more
conspicuous judgments, and cast this dragon into the same place of torment, and
thus put an everlasting end to all tyranny, ecclesiastical and civil. -- Now a
prospect opens, which transports the heart, and figures are used proportioned
to the sublimity and felicity of the scenes which follow. Let the wise and
pious anticipate by hope these happy days! We look for new heavens and a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness!!!


and cast into a lake of fire, i. e. exemplary justice is inflicted on them;
and now that economy of righteousness and peace which Jesus the Prince of
Peace has in charge, from his Father, (...) on immovable foundations, till
(...) not only human tyrannies shall perish, but the wi^es for (...) ^^ligion
of Jesus shall be so in^rea^ed and quick ^ed by an energy from above, and such
an influence from God attend his gospel, while all nature shall conspire to
prepare (...) that Satan's empire shall b^ overturned, the earth (...) with the
knowledge of the Lord, and they shall learn war no (...). EVEN SO COME LORD
JESUS!

THIRD INQUIRY.
WE are now come to the third Inquiry. Will all the numbers, of Daniel and
John, which refer to the state of things that we are looking for, agree with
the present time? Let us examine.

In d^^^^^ing the numbers of Daniel, I shall not take up much time in examining
questions, and in endeavoring to solve difficulties which might be started,
nor in inquiring whether any of these numbers terminated in Antiochus
Epiphanes. I think, and I have very respectable authorities on my side, that
they refer to the overthrow of the Papal apostasy, and all those systems of
tyranny which have been so much at enmity with the kingdom of Christ, to the
purification of the Gentile church, and to the restoration and conversion of
the Jews. To save time, and to spare the reader's patience, I shall take some
things for granted, which may be seen argued at length in more voluminous
writings.

In the first place, let us consider Daniel's vision in chap. viii. It opens
with the appearance of a ram, (ver. 4.) having two horns, pushing westward, and
northward, and southward. This the angel interprets (ver. 30.) to be the kings
of Media and Persia. The next object in the vision is an he-goat, (ver. 5.)
which came from the west, with a notable horn between his eyes. This, the angel
Tays, (ver. 21.) is the king of Grecia, the Grecian empire, and the great horn
between his eyes, the first king, or kingdom, under Alexander, his brother, and
two sons. This horn was broken, (ver. 8.) and after it came up four others; the
four empires which sprung up out of the conquests of Alexander. And out of one
of them came a little horn, (ver. 9.) which waxed exceeding great, toward the
south, and toward the east, and toward the pleasant land, and by him the place
of the daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of his sanctuary was cast
down, etc. Ver. 13. Then I heard one saint speaking, and another saint said
unto that certain saint which spoke, How long shall be the vision concerning
the daily sacrifice, and the transgression of desolation, to give both the
sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot? And he said unto me, Unto two
thousand and three hundred days, then shall the sanctuary he cleansed.

It seems natural to reckon these 2300 days (or years) either from the first
part of the vision, the pushing of the ram, or the latter end, the violences of
the little horn, or from the time when Daniel saw the vision Dr. Newton, Bishop
of Bristol, concludes from ver. 13. that these days are to be calculated from
the beginning of the vision. "As the question was asked," says he, "not how
long the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the transgression of
desolation continue, but also, how long the vision shall last: so the answer is
to be understood, and these two thousand and three hundred days denote the
whole time from the beginning of the vision to the cleansing of the sanctuary."
Dissert on the Proph. vol. i. p. 331. Dr Lowth, in his comment on this passage,
says, "The words may be readered more agreeably to the Hebrew thus: For how
long a time shall the vision last, the daily sacrifice be taken away, and the
transgression of desolation continue.
If we calculate from the time when Daniel saw the vision, the termination of
the 2500 years is past forty or fifty years, and the sanctuary is not cleansed.
If from the latter part of the vision, (as understood of Antiochus) it will
carry us to about the year A. D. 2130, which appears too far; for supposing the
1260 years power of the beast, predicted in the Apocalypse, were to be
calculated from the time when the Pope became a temporal prince, from the
exarchate of Ravenna, being given to him by Pepin, A. D. 755, or by Charlemagne
A. D. 774, (some thinking that he was not a perfect beast till then) this would
fall short of Daniel's number by more than a hundred years; but seeing that the
power, idolatry, corruptions, and usurpations of the Papacy, were such, at
least in the sixth century, as appear sufficient to denominate it a beast, and
it is certain, that he began to rise much earlier; the most probable time for
the fixing the commencement of Daniel's 2300 years, and that which will
altogether agree best with the other numbers of Daniel, and the predictions in
the Apocalypse, is the beginning of the vision, the pushing of the ram, by
which is intended some distinguished exertions of the Persian empire for
conquests. And to what period of that empire does this so well agree as to the
times of Xerxes and that particular push which he made when he invaded Greece
Prideaux's Con. Part. I, Book 4. (...)
with an army of 2,641,610 fighting men, reckoning 517,610 on board his sleet,
which consisted of 1207 ships of the line of battle, 3000 galleys, transports,
victuallers, etc. besides the 220 ships which the nations on this side the
Hellespont added, on board of which were 24,000 men? Of his land forces, 80,000
were horse. And besides this multitude, as many more are reckoned to have
followed the camp, servants, eunuchs, etc. so that the whole number of people
engaged in this expedition was at least 5,000,000. What a push was this for
conquest! And, (though he had been pushing for three or four years before, yet)
nothing else forbidding it, what period could be more proper for the angel to
begin his reckoning from? He passed the Hellespont B. C. 480: four years before
this he pushed at Egypt and reduced it; the next year he prepared for this
invasion; the following he entered into a league with the Carthaginians against
the Greeks, and in the year 481 B. C. marches as far as Sardis, on his way
toward Greece, where he winters, and in the spring passes the Hellespont.

Suppose we six the year 481 B. C. for the commencement of Daniel's 2300 years,
(allowing our chronology to be correct), this carries us to the year of Christ
1819, when the sanctuary and host are no longer to be trodden under foot. i. e.
the land of Palestine is no longer to be in the possession of the enemies of
the Jews, but they are to be restored, and the church freed from Antichristian
abominations.

But it may be objected, that as the Jewish year consisted but of 360 days,
five days and a quarter short of our solar year, this will make a difference of
thirty-one years short. To which I answer, A single Jewish year consisted but
of 360 days, and when we consider three or four years only, this mode of
reckoning may be admitted, but, as we have leap years to regulate our
measurement of time, so had the Jews. When it was necessary, they intercalated
their month Ador; sometimes even a whole month, and this they were obliged to
do to make their feasts of the Passover, Penticost, and Tabernacles, happen at
their proper seasons. The Targum of Chron. xii. 32. says of the children of
Issachar, that "they were skilful in the knowledge of times, and wise to six
the beginning of the years; dextrous at setting the new moons and fixing their
feasts at their seasons." Hence it follows, that though the Jewish ordinary
year is to be attended to when but a few years are under consideration, yet, in
a long succession of time, they are not to be noticed, for by intercalations
they amount to the same with solar years.

In Dan. xii. we have three different numbers. (The first agrees with that in
chap. vii. 25.) Ver. 7, I heard the man clothed in liven, which was upon the
waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto the
heaven, and swear by Him that lives for ever, that it shall be for a time,
times, and an half time. Three years and a half, ^r forty-two months of years,
viz. 1200. And when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy
people, all these things shall be finished. Again, ver. 11. And from the time
that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that m^^eth
desolate set up, there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days. Ver.
12. Blessed is he that waits and comes to the thousand and three hundred and
five and thirty days. As the first number agrees with the predictions in the
Revelation of John, respecting the commuance of the power and prosperity of the
Antichristian beast; and as the numbers appear to contradict each other if they
are confined to the tyranny of Antiochus, (though he might be pointed at as the
type of Antichrist), I consider them as harmonizing with the New Testament
predictions. According to Rev. xi. 2. the holy city is to be trodden under foot
of the Gentiles forty and two months; and in ver. 3. the two witnesses are to
prophesy twelve hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth. Chap. xii. 7. we
have the same number; and in ver. 14. we learn that the woman was to be
nourished in the wilderness for a time, and times, and half a time. Chap. xiii.
5. power is given unto the beast (the first beast remember, not the second) to
continue, or practice forty and two months. The same time, 1260 years, is
intended by all these numbers Here let me again remind the reader, that in the
style of the prophets, a day is a year, a month thirty years, and a year 360
years, there being so many days in the Jewish month and year. A time is the
same as a year, (Dan. iv. 16.) times, two years, and the dividing of time, half
a year, which put together, amount to 1260 prophetic days, or years.
.

But how can we reconcile those three different numbers of Daniel with the
seven (two in Daniel and live in the Apocalypse) which agree?

In the first place, let it be allowed, that the convulsions which are to bring
about the predicted final overthrow of Antichrist began with the revolution in
France in 1789, and then reckon thus.

Daniel's time, times, and half a time, (1260 years) begin and end with the
five numbers in the Apocalypse, and as they are 1260 years, and supposed to end
at the French revolution, they must begin A. D. 529, and end in 1789. Daniel's
2300 years begin 481 years before Christ, and end in 1819, when some other
great event, or events, will take place. The beast and the false prophet, (Rev.
xix. 20.) i. e. the Papacy and the French tyranny, having previously been
brought to an end, then, perhaps, the dragon, civil despotism, will be bound,
(Rev. xx. 2.) and the Jews, the dry bones in the valley of vision, (Ezekiel.
xxxvii.) be raised to political life, and restored to their own land. --
Daniel's 1260 years begin with his time, times, and half a time, and with the
former five numbers of John in the Apocalypse, i. e. at the commencement of the
reign of the beast, A. D. 529, and end with the former number, (2300, in 1810,
and which they must, for they are to accomplish the same event, as may be seen
by comparing Dan. viii. 12. with chap. xii. 11. This agreement deserves
particular attention. His 1335 years (the end of which, according to him, will
eminently he a blessed time) begin in the same year of Christ 529, and
terminate in 1864, when perhaps the Jews are to be converted by that remarkable
appearance of the Lord in their favor, which is predicted in Ezekiel. xxxviii.
xxxix. and in Zech. xii. and xiv. Thus the final attack on the beast commences
in 789. Thirty years are employed in the overthrow of the Papacy, the Turks,
and other tyrannies: a season, it is likely, of great calamities, but
especially to the enemies of Christ's kingdom. The next forty-five years, to
1864, to which time Daniel's 1335 years extend, may be spent in gathering the
Jews (who, according to Jer. xvi. 16. will be unwilling to return to their own
land), and in purifying them by those trials which, according to the prophets
Jer. xxx. 3 -- 8. 11 -- 16. Ezekiel. xx. 32 -- 3^. xxxv. 24, ^, 31, 13. Zeph. iii.
7 -- 14. Zech. xii. xiii. xiv.
, are to take place on their first return; as well as in purifying, and in
bringing to an end all the sects and parties of the Gentile Christians; and
which may be effected by that greater light which is to shine upon the
Christian church in the latter days, previous to that greater glory and
superior slate of felicity which is to commence, perhaps, (as we have
conjectured from Daniel's number of 1335), about the year 1864, on the
conversion of the Jews, and of those heathen nations not before gathered to
Christ.

But, perhaps it may be asked, What arguments are there which favor the
conjecture of the 529th year of Christ being that from which the power of the
beast is to be dated? I own I have put this year down by accident, as the
measurement back from 1789. To demonstrate, that in this year be came to such a
state of maturity (for this mystery of iniquity was forming in the apostle's
days 2 Tuess. ii. 7,
, and continued to grow for ages) as to constitute him a beast, is not
essential to the making good our hypothesis. But though no man, from the
history of past times, can determine the exact year from which God dates the
kingdom of Antichrist, yet there are good reasons from which a probable
conjecture may be formed, that it was as early as the sixth century.

The apostle Paul, speaking of that which hindered the progress of this wicked
one, says, (2 Thessalonians. ii. 6 -- 11.) the mystery of iniquity does already work;
only he who now lets will let, until he be taken out of the way; and then
shall that wicked one be revealed, etc. Our most approved commentators suppose,
that by he who lets, the imperial power is intended, and that we must not
expect to find this wicked one arrived at maturity till the fall of the western
empire. This took place A. D. 476. Soon after this, therefore, we may expect
the ecelesiastical tyranny to be matured.

Some of our most able critics, as Bishop Newton and Mr. Lowman, are of
opinion, that by the wound which the first beast received, chap. xiii. 3. we
are to understand the blow which was given to the majesty and power of Rome, by
subjecting it to the exarchate of Ravenna; and that by its being healed, is
intended its restoration to its former dignity, by this exarchate being given
to the Pope, by which he became a temporal prince. Now, this wounding took
place A. D. 568, and continued 206 years. If this be well considered, it tends
much to strengthen our argument; for though, when the Pope was made a temporal
prince, at the time of this healing, the world wondered more than ever after
the beast, (Rev. xiii. 3.) yet the Papal beast existed before, and this only
gave him increasing eclat. But farther to confirm our hypothesis, consider the
state of society, and particularly the state of what was called the church, in
this sixth century. Now, magistrates were tyrants, and priests were wicked,
superstitious and intolerant, beyond any former age. Now, numberless laws and
regulations were obtruded upon the church by human authority, which at once
violated the authority of Christ, defaced Christianity, and robbed Christians
of their dearest liberties. And in this very year 529, which we are looking
for, the Justinian code was first published, by which those powers, privileges,
and immunities were secured to the clergy; that union perfected between things
civil and ecclesiastical, and those laws imposed on the church which have
proved so injurious to Christianity, and so calamitous to mankind. And which
code, through the zeal of the clergy, has been received, more or less, as the
foundation of the jurisprudence of almost every state in Christendom; and that
not only in things civil but ecclesiastical; and by this means, as some author
has observed, the old fancy of the Romans, about she eternity of their command,
is thus far verified. We may add also, that this same Justinian, if not in 529,
yet as early as 534, declared the Pope the head of all churches; all were to be
subject to his judgment, but himself to be judged by none Mr. Mann, explaining
the heads of the Roman beast, writes, "Quis igiturex septimus erit? Nimirum
ipse Papa. Nam ex que A. D. 534. cum ecclesiarum omnium caput declaravit
Justinianus, alii o^nium judicem ipsum a nullo judicandum, tanta reverentia
(...) obsequio ab imp. ipsis cultus est, tanta authoritate ipsos subinde
reprebendit, interdum etiam anathemate perculit, ut non minus decendus sit
regnasse in spiritualibus, quamvis se subditum semper servumque serverum
diceret, quam in temporalibus, im^eratores," etc. See ^^ishop Newton's
Dissertations, vol ii. p. 332.


That this pamphlet, which is already larger than intended, may not be swelled
into a volume, permit me to refer to Mosheim's Eccl. Hist. Cent. VI. and
especially part II. chap. 2d, 3d, and 4th. All sorts of absurdities were
imposed; the grossest ignorance and wickedness prevailed among the clergy; the
Bishop of Rome grasped at absolute authority over conscience, and unlimited
supremacy over the whole Christian church: and though he did not altogether
succeed in the east, in this western part of the world, where the scene of
John's visions chiefly lay, his dominion was acknowledged, and parasitical
panegyrists, among other blasphemous assertions, maintained, that the Roman
Pontiff was constituted judge in the place of God, which he filled as the
vicegerent of the Most High; so that now was fulfilled that prediction of the
apostle, 2 Thessalonians. xi. 3, 4. As God he fitteth in the temple of God, showing
himself that he is God. Now, the wicked were taught that remission of sins was
to be purchased by their liberalities to the church and its ministers; now
those doctrines which taught men the worship of saints and images, the efficacy
of observing human rites and institutions toward the attainment of salvation,
the power of relics, and a thousand more errors and absurdilies were brought to
perfection. Now did monkery overrun the world, and marriage was forbidden, as
unworthy of those who aspired to be saints. -- And in this very year 529 also,
a new order of monks, which in a manner absorbed all the others established in
the west, was instituted by Benedict of Nursia. In process of time, this order
having acquired immense riches, they sunk into luxury, intemperance, and sloth;
abandoned themselves to all sorts of vices; extended their zeal and attention
to worldly affairs; insinuated themselves into the cabinets of princes; took
part in political cabals and court factions; made a vast augmentation of
superstitious rites; and, among other meritorious enterprises, labored most
ardently to swell the arrogance, by enlarging the power and authority of the
Roman Pontiff. This and the other monastic orders, (sinks of ignorance,
indolence, and vice!) were the fountains from whence issued all sorts of
abominations, and the rivers which carried superstition, oppression, and
violence, to all parts of the earth. They taught princes to tyrannize, and the
people to cringe.

Was not the time of the publishing of the forementioned code of Justinian, and
of the rising of this (...) of monks, a period, in the history of the apostasy,
in which we may suppose the Almighty, with distinguished propriety, to begin to
reckon the 1260 years of the beast's power, and the treading down of the holy
city? The conjecture is probable a priori: but, if present events, and these
compared with other events, agree to recommend this date, 529, the probability
is much increased.

To say no more of this concurrence of several numbers, thus issuing from
different periods, and these the most interesting in the history of nations,
and of the church, and yet harmonizing in their termination so conformable to
what the prophets seem to point out, respecting the events of the last days; a
concurrence which is not the effect of labored contrivance, as some, at first
sight, may imagine, but the natural and necessary consequence of taking the
French Revolution, in 1789, as the termination of the 1260 years of the
prophets, and the point from which to measure all their other numbers, is a
circumstance which gives great probability to the hypothesis, that the time is
arrived for the downfall of the Antichristian tyranny, when God will rebuke the
nations, and they shall learn war no more Isa. ii. 4.
; when he will consume the idolatrcus and persecuting man of sin with the
spirit of his mouth, and utterly destroy him with the brightness of his coming
2 Thessalonians. ii. 8.
. from a distinguishing pushing of the Persians for conquest, to the cleansing
of the sanctuary, begin in the year. 481

when Xerxes set out to invade Greece, with 5,000,000 of followers, and whose
wars were prefigured, Dan. viii. 4, 20. by the pushing of a ram, and end in the
year A.C. 1819

The 1260 years, Dan. vii. 25. xii. 5. Rev. xi. 2, 3. xii. 6.14. xiii. 5. the
period of the prosperity of the Papal beast, till the commencement of the
decisive attack on his usurpations, begin in the year A.C. 529

The 1290 years, Dan. xii. 11. which comprehend, beside the 1260 years, 30
years more for the conflict with Antichrist, begin in the same year A. C. 529

The 1335 years, Dan. xii. 12. which are to bring to a still more blessed
period, begin in the same yea A.C. 529

When the code of Justinian (the strong-hold of clerical tyranny) was first
published, and about which time this same emperor declared the Bishop of Rome
the judge of all, but himself to be judged by no one, and when also the order
of Benedictine monks, the great support of the Papacy, was founded; and end in
the year A.C. 1789 when his prosperity terminates.

and end in the year A.C. 1819 When the transgression of desolation shall end,
(Dan. viii. 13.) and the abomination which has made desolate the church of
Christ, and the nations of the earth, shall be brought to (...) period, (Dan.
xii. 11.)

and end in the year A.C. 1864

The Witnesses (Rev xi. 7.) were slain by Lewis XIV. when he repealed the edict
of Nants, and tormented, plundered, banished, and murdered, near 2,000,000 of
the Protestant subjects, in the year A.C. 1685

But who, after being politically dead three lanar days and a half, or about
105 years, began to revive in the year. A.C. 1789 When the French Constituent
Assembly de^l^^e^t for civil and religious liberty.

Thus the decisive attack of the Witnesses for civil and religious liberty,
upon the errors, usurpations, and ryrannies of the Papal beast, commences in
the year A.C. 1789

To destroy the Papacy, and other Antichristian despotisms, at least, so far as
to make way for the restoration of the Jews, and to prepare mankind for greater
blessings than have ever yet been known upon earth, will take thirty years, the
period for the executing the judgments predicted in Isa. xxvi. 20, 21. xxvii.
1. Joel iii. 9 -- 15. Zeph. iii. 8. as also for the gathering the vintage and
pouring out of the vials, which are to be the means of cleansing the sanctuary.
A.C. 30

To gather and try the Jews preparatory to their conversion, to destroy the
remains of tyranny, and to purify and enlarge the Gentile church, will occupy
forty-five years more; at the end of which, it is likely, there will be that
glorious appearance of the Lord in favor of his servants, promised in Ezekiel.
xxxviii. xxxix. and Zech. xii. 8 -- 14.xiv. and, it is prohable, in Rev. xx. 9.
Now the Jewish nation is born at once, (Isa. lxvi. 8.) and the distant heathens
are to be converted to Christianity, (Isa. iii. 10 -- 15. Jer. xvi. 19. Ezck.
xxxix. 21.) This is the time of which Danicl says, Blessed is he that comes to
it, and which is the year A.C. 45 1864

CONCLUSION.
WHAT remains, but that the reader, unbiafied by a party spirit, seriously
revolve in his mind, the proofs which have been adduced, of that tyranny which
has so long been exercised in France, to the grievous oppression of the people
of that country, and the great injury of surroanding hations, being that
beastly power which, according to God's word, was to slay the witnesses for
truth and liberty; and whether the time for their rising from their civil and
political death be arrived? The consequences connected with the truth of this
fact are unspeakably interesting to every nation in Europe, and even to all the
world. -- Are the distressing calamities which we have heard of, chastising
judgments for sin? Their cry, to all surrounding nations, is, Amos iv. 12.
Prepare to meet your God. -- Let every man and every nation -- repent and
reform.

God hearkeneth to hear if any man repent him of his wickedness, saying, What
have I done! (Jer. viii. 6.) Let every one, then, break off his fins by
righteousness -- let the church return to its original ^umble demeznour, its
primitive purity, and its first love -- let every government reform its abuses,
and, by the practice of justice and mercy, break every heavy yoke, and by these
means make the wilderness and the solitary place glad. Thus might they expect a
blessing. But if men be still incorrigible in sin, if systems of oppression,
persecution, and war, be still pertisted in, if the nations league themselves
with Papal Antichrist, for the purpose of supporting him in his corruptions,
robberies, usurpations, and tyrannies, in vain will they trust in the wisdom of
their counselors, the multitude of their riches, or in the power of their
numerous fleets and armies. He that fitteth in the heavens will have them in
derision. When they take counsel, he will bring it to naught; when they
associate themselves, he will break them to pieces: -- the Judge stands
before the door. And without repentance and reformation, his judgments will
speedily come.

It is the duty of every member of the community to contribute what in him lies
to the peace and happiness of his country. Who are the best friends both of our
king and constitution; and who perform the best services to their
fellow-citizens? -- they who exert all their power to perpetuate imperfections
and abuses, and who flatter where they ought to condemn; or those who plead for
timely reform, that we may ward off the evils inseparable from revolutions, and
who list up their voice against the crying crimes of the nation, that men may
repent, and thus the displeasure of God be averted, and his blessing continued
to future generations? Who promote most the general interest and happiness? --
they who labor to blind mankind and pervert their judgments; or those who
invite them to dispassionate examination, that they may beware of precipitating
themselves into destructive measures: -- they who, either by riot and
intemperance, or by misre, presentation and calumny, inflame the passions of
men, that they may engage them to forward their own interested views; or those
who exhort them to serious thoughtfulness, and a peaceable pursuit of those
measures which may prolong the quiet and prosperity of our country? He that
speaks truth shows forth righteousness; but a false witness deceit.

I may have failed in the execution; but my aim has been to serve my King and
Country, and to promote our common happiness, by investigating a most
interesting subject. In doing it, I believe that I have performed, though a
small, yet an acceptable service to God. -- May it be a useful one to my
countrymen! With a heart agitated and overflowing with anxious concern, I pray
that the war which threatens us, may be averted; and that the angry clouds
which are gathering around may sweep by this long favored country, and spend
their stores of vengeance only on the heads of inveterate oppressors.

PART II.
AVERTISEMENT.
THE many excellent things which have been written by the friends of liberty,
of our constitution, and of humanity, against the present war, and on the
necessity of reformation, and a change of measures, may make it seem almost
needless to say more than has been said; for interested men would not believe
though one should rise from the dead. But although little that is new can be
expected to be advanced on a subject which is soplain to the dispassionate and
disinterested, yet, as the argument in the following pages is placed, if not in
a new point of light, yet, in such an one as has not been considered in any
degree propertioned to its vast importance, I am therefore induced to submit it
to the public attention.

It may be thought that the Author has not entered so fully into the discussion
of some particulars as he should have done, nor bestowed the pains upon them
which their importance required. As to those in the former part of the book, as
they have been so ably treated on by numerous voluminous writers, and as he had
but little to produce that was new, he did not think it necessary to enter
farther into the consideration of them than appeared needful for preparing the
way for the vindication of what he advances respecting those subjects which
some may be disposed to reject because novel. And as to the execution of the
whole, he must beg leave to plead the constant toils of his profession, which
leave him but now and then an hour for such investigations. -- Nothing but a
conviction of duty could have induced the Author to present this to the Public;
he has no selfish or party views to serve; and he hopes for all the indulgence
which candor, with justicce, can beslow, and no more.

The love of peace, anxious apprchensions for trembling liberty, concern for
the fate which threatens our country, benevolence toward mankind, and a motive
which a Christian and a Proteslant ought not to be ashamed to avow, urge me
again to address my fellow subjects at this dangerous and awfulcrisis. -- May
the evils which the Signs of the Times portend, and of which I have such strong
apprehensions, never fall upon my country! -- May those measure, which alone
(...) save us be speedily adopted! -- But, should it be otherwise, may the
hearts of the true friends of our constitution and liberties never have to
accuse them that they soresaw the approating evil, but wanted virtue to exert
their ^^lents, great or small, on the cause of peace and order, justice and
liberty! -- May the ge^^^one servants of God, who worship not the mommen^ of
unrighteousness (...) of (...) Bible ^ composition of Jables, never shrink from
their duty, because the world frowns and scoffers revile!

Religion is a reality; uncorrupted Christianity is the greatest benefit that
ever God bestoned upon mankind; but the deformities occasioned by the
corruptions of priests, and the perversions of statesmen, have brought it into
long disgrace, and prevented the intended good. The all-wise God, for reasons
insorutable to us, has permitted it to be so. This is one of the many mysteries
of his providence; but his word will be accomplished; the kingdom of Antichrist
will perish, and uncorrupted Christianity will revive from the moment of its
ruin. We are sure of the event; but by what particular means this is to be
accomplished, and when, is not so clearly ascertained. These are left for
events to elucidate. Our duty is to watch the Signs of the Times, and be ready
whenever the season of reckoning may come. That its approach is to be knowable
is put beyond a doubt, for otherwise the delincation of the signs, and the
command to inquire and watch, as well as the promise that the wise shall
understand, would all be nugatory.

There is a prevailing prejudice that deserves some attention, and of which it
may be as proper to take notice in this place as any where. It is very usual to
hear people say of the prophecies, and particularly of those in the book of
Revelation, "They are so obscure, and the opinions of the learned respecting
them are so various, that it seems impossible to come at any certainty: and I
therefore never trouble myself about them." It is true that there are a great
diversity of opinions, and many strange and wild interpretations and
conjectures have been started. But to what description of prophecies does this
chiefly apply? Not to those which have long been accomplished, but to such as
remain unfulfilled; for though there may not be an exact conformity of
sentiment as to every particular respecting these former, yet there is a pretty
generalagreement among our writers in their interpretation of them. What wild
and incoherent notions had the fathers, as they are called, the writers of the
early centuries, about Antichrist, the man of sin, and the beast with seven
heads and ten horns, in Rev. xiii. And why? Because these prophecies were not
sufficiently realized. But what Protestant commentators differ about these
predictions now? Scarcely any. To say nothing concerning the propheties in the
Old Testament, which reserred to the humiliation of the Messiah, and which were
never understood till after their fulfillment, observe the progress of the
elucidation of the book of Revelation. The prophetic parts, to the end of the
ninth chapter, are tolerably well understood, and though there may not be an
exact, yet there is a pretty general agreement in the interpretations of our
most approved writers, at there is also about those other parts that have, for
some time, been accomplished. For inslance, scarcely any lady now doubts but
that the fifth and sixth trumpets refer to the deprodations of the Saracens and
Turks; and almost all allow that the corruptions and persecufions of the Papal
church, and its supporters, are represented by the treading under foot the holy
city for forty and two months, and by the witnesses prophesying in sachcloth
1200 days, or years, chap. xi. The reason of this general a^reement is, because
me see the fulfillment. But, in the interpretation of some other parts of this
book, authors are very various, and for this covious reason, because
unaccomplished. But this is not always to be the case. When therefore they are
fulfilled, and the correspondence of events with the predictions suggests the
true interpretation, it would be the height of folly to reject such
interpretations on account of their novelty, or because former commentators
entertained different opinions. I do not pretend to have any clear and specific
ideas of what remains unfulfilled, but I apprehend that the events signified in
the tent^ and in the eleventh chapters of Revelation, so far as extends to the
nations being angry, and the coming of the wrath of God, are now accomplished,
or accomplishing. I think this is as demonstrable as a thing of the kind can
possibly be -- as demonstrable as that the seventy weeks of Daniel referred to
the coming of the Messiah, or, as that the fifty-third of Isaiah was a
prediction of his sufferings and exaltation.

Some, it is probable, way think that the Author has expressed too much
confidence respecting the supposed approaching calamities, and too much of what
some will call enthusiasm, for the occasion; he can only say, that whatever
diffidence he may entertain as to some single and detached hypotheses, both in
this part and in the former, yet he has no doubt remaining as to the great
facts, and expected events: and under the impression of this confidence, it
would be criminal apathy to treat them as common occurrences, and to feel as
though but little were at stake. -- When Jesus beheld the capital of his
guilty, devoted country, he wept over it. -- Whether I write as a wild
enchusiast, or as one in his sober senses, who has some reason for what he
advances, a short time will determine; and, if the reader will suppress his
censures, and engage himself diligently to watch the Signs of the Times but for
a few years only, I am willing to refer to suture events for the proof that
what is now bursting upon us tends to no common issue. -- Yes, it is more than
probable, that many will think the Author a mistaken enthusiast; but were this
the universal opinion, (which is far from being the case), he is not destitute
of support against immoderate mortification.

If I am deceived by seeming correspondencies, or led away by the illusions of
fancy, to adopt sentiments which way have a tendency to create unnecessary
uncasiness, I shall esteem myself under obligations to the man who will
endeavor heartily to convince me of my delusions: and if such an one can
produce any well-grounded arguments to overturn what is advanced in the
following pages, or in the former part of The Signs of the Times, I hope I am
neither so pertinacious, nor so enthusiastic, as to be incapable of conviction.
But while no better arguments are advanced than, "Others have been deceived --
opinions are various -- when an author wishes to support an hypot hefis of this
kind, it is no difficult task, in any age, to find events suited to his purpose
-- these prophecies might be applied to any other country or events as well as
to those brought forward," etc. I must beg leave still to maintain my
confidence.

Christians believe that the predictions of the prophets are sometime to be
fulfilled. Whenever that time comes, and a certain number of the predicted
events have taken place, it is likely that things will be placed in such a
point of light as to convey conviction, to the pious and attentive observer, of
the true intent of the Spirit of God; and it is to be expected, that this will
be in proportion to the advancement of the great scheme to its perfect
completion. Whether such a number of these events have taken place, and whether
things are now placed in such a point of light, I hope the reader will heartily
and seriously inquire. The Author thinks it is so; and though he does not
pretend to determine, from unfulfilled prophecies, either the exact time, or
manner, of the accomplishment of any particular event, yet he thinks that, from
what has taken place, a pretty positive conclusion may be drawn respecting the
main events, and that they are very near; namely, the downfall of the Papacy,
and of all religious corruptions and usurpations; the overthrow of all tyranny
and oppression; the general reformation and renovation of mankind, and of the
overflowing culamities which are to effect, or prepare the way for all this.

Such is the temper of the times, that some filly or party spirited people
will, possibly, be ready to suspect the Author of want of loyalty to the king,
of veneration for the constitution, and of love for his country; for to similar
suspicion^ was a wiser and better man exposed, (Jeremiah xxxviii. 4.) and all
for a conduct which avouched the very contrary, and for which, instead of
persecution and a dungeon, he deserved the thanks of his country. Should it be
thus, the Author will be content to console himself with that consciousness
which he possesses of the falsehood of such surmises, of the rectitude of his
intentions, and the hope of His approbation who is the Judge of all, and to
whom, and not to the will of men, we ought to live.

The Author does not profess to set himself up for the apologist of the French
people; and far be it from him to attempt to justify their rash and wicked
deeds: he has not even supposed that every other people, in like situations,
and with like provocations, would have acted the same part which they have; for
that would be no alleviation of their guilt. The utmost that he has contended
for, or suggested is, that the overthrow of monarchy and Ropery in that country
is the accomplishment of God's word, and in judgment for oppression and
corruption; that their great leading principles are good, and that they have a
right to legislate for themselves, and choose what sort of government they
please, uncontrouled by any other power on earth.

Whether the French be right or wrong, in this or that, is no part of the
question which it has been thought necessary to enter very deeply into; -- yet
the truth seems to be, that there is a strange mixture of the greatest good and
the greatest evil: much to be applauded and much to be lamented. But the
argument against the present war is drawn from a higher source than either the
principles or practices of the French reformers; and the Author thinks that,
whether the French be right or wrong, whether they triumph or perish, yet most
of the nations who have made war upon them have involved themselves in great
blame by the rashness of their proceedings, and that they hazard great danger,
by attempting to support that, which not only inspired wisdom, but general
reason, has doomed to fall. -- But more than this; though the war, on the part
of the combined powers, were ever so just, though as just as that of Israel
against the ^roud king of Assyria, or of any of the ancient empires against
their cruel and ambitious invaders, it would not at all affect the question. As
in their cases it was for the accumulated guilt of successive ages, and for the
general depravity of their character, and not for the plame of that particular
quarrel in which they fell, that God made these invaders his instruments for
their chastisement and overthrow, and which destination Inspiration had
foretold -- so, for the accumulated guilt, and general depravity, of modern
nations, chastisement is to be expected, and Inspiration has put it beyond a
doubt that it will one day come, when the beast with ten horns will be slain,
and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame, (Dan. vii. 11.). From
comparing the signs of the times with the declarations and indications of
prophecy, there is great reason to apprehend that the time is at hand.
Whatever, then, our provocations might be, the danger is much the same, and
there is no hope of escape or alleviation, but by instant Repentance and
Reformation. -- Never, therefore, was that exhortation more in time, Repent,
for the kingdom of Heaven is as hand.

Newbury, March 11, 1794.
A RETROSPECTIVE VIEW OF THE EVENTS PREDICTED IN THE FIFTH. SIXTH, SEVENTH,
EIGHTH, AND NINTH CHAPTERS OF REVELATION.
BEFORE we enter upon our inquiries, permit me to put a plain question: not
whether thou art interested in the continuance and triumph of corruption in
this country, or in the support of despotism and Popery in France? questions
proper enough in themselves, for interest has a mighty influence in corrupti^
the heart and perverting the judgment; but, art thou a Christian? (...) ^he
reader believe that the prophets in old time spoke and wrote under the
inspiration of God, and that the things which they foretold will have their
accomplishment? If not, he may be assured that the following pages will not be
to his taste. -- In a Christian country, when questions of the last importance
are in agitation, and the fate of nations is at slake, there is a peculiar
propriety in referring to those sacred records which we all believe to be from
God, to see whether they contain any information which may assist us in forming
a right judgment, and ^s prevent our pursuing a criminal and ruinous conduct.
He cannot be a Christian who desp^^es this appeal, and especially as it is
allowed, almost by general consent, that we have here deleinated the
circumstances and fate of nations, to the end of time.

The apostle Paul (Romans xv. 4.) declares, respecting the writings of the
prophets, that "Whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our
learning, that we, through patience and comfort of the scriptures, might have
hope;" and in the beginning of that prousound and difficult, but important and
instructive, book of Revelation, it is written, (chap. i. 3.) "Blessed is he
that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those
things which are written therein: the time is at hand." Is it not therefore a
strange piece of ^ly, not to say profaneness, in Christians, to maintain, that
these prophecies are of a kind which it is as vain as it is unprofitable to
inquire into? This is to arraign the wisdom of God, and despise those methods
of instruction which the Inspirer of prophecy has chosen. Far be this from us!
Let us better understand that saying of the apostle to Timothy; "All scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that the man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works." Many things in this book
may be hard to be understood, and especially before their fulfillment, or the
taking place of some events so immediately connected with them as to afford the
inquirer a clue in his investigations; but it does not thence follow, that we
are not to search into the mind and meanig of the Spirit of God, but rather
that we ought to redouble our diligence in inquiry, and abound the more in
prayer to God, for the teachings of that Spirit who gave the word, and gave it
in this form, not that it might never be understood, but that, whilst the
purposes and operations of God, in providence, should be hid from the careless
eyes of a wicked world, they might, at the proper season, be discoverable to
the pious and diligent inquirer, for the consolation of the upright, and, in
the end, for the general conviction and edification of mankind. What the angel
said to Daniel (chap. xii. 3. 10.) is in point as to the present question, and
a ground of encouragement to invigorate our researches. Shut up the words and
seal the book, even to the time of the end. Many (that is, about the time of
the end) shall run to and fro. (shall inquire and investigate) and knowledge
shall be increased. None of the wicked shall understand, but the wise shall
understand. The wicked will not see what God is doing, though they themselves
may be the instruments; but the wise, who search into the word of God, and
observe and compare the signs of the times with its predictions, shall
understand. -- With these sentiments let us enter upon the consideration of our
subject.

Previous to our considering what is recorded in the tenth chapter of the
Revelation, and comparing it with the eleventh; and from which comparison I
suppose such signs of the ^es to be discoverable, as may assist us to form a
judgment of the period in which we live, and of the events we have to expect,
it will be proper to take a cursory view of what goes before. In the fifth
chapter we have an account of a book sealed with seven seals, which Jesus,
(...) Lamb of God, was alone found worthy to open. This book is the
representation of the providence of God, which is committed to the execution of
the exalied Redeemer of the world. The opening of the seals indicates to us the
different periods of history, from the first preaching of the gospel to the
comsummation of all things. In the sixth chapter we have an account of the
opening of six of the seven s^als. These bring us to the overthrow of the
heathen Roman empire, by the emperor Constantine, who, about the year 311,
embracing Christianity, effected a most astonishing revolution in the history
of idolatry, and procured for the Christian church a respite from the
persecutions which had long harrassed it, and which seemed to threaten its
utter extirpation. Now (A.D. 323.) were the four winds of heaven holden (chap.
vii.), that they should not blow on the earth, nor on the sea, nor on any tree,
till 144,000 of the servants of God were sealed in their foreheads, with the
seal of the ^^ing God. The former commotions and persecutions gave place to
peace and quietness, till Christianity should acquire strength and permanency
by the addition of numerous converts. But tares sprung up among the wheat. The
seeds of Antichristian error, pride, and domination, had long been sown, and
now the sunshine of court-favour produced a plentiful crop. Christianity, or
something called by that name, was brought to court; she was carresled, loaded
with riches and honors; was dehauched by her alliance with the world, and
quickly became the mother of barlots. The true religion of Jesus Christ was
adulterated with the maxims of statesmen, and the reveries of enthusiasls. The
persecuted became the persecutors, and universal corruption, reviling, and
oppression succeeded. Hence the judgments which follow:

Chap. viii. "And when he had opened the seventh seal, there was silence in
heaven about the space of half an hour." Was this mence, as some interpet it,
the short quiet which the church enjoyed on the late change of circumstances;
or, (for this quiet had been represented before chap. viii. 1.) was it not
rather the amazement of heaven, on the ^ing of the seventh seal, at the
corruption which followed, and a^ the judgments of God, which were about to
succeed? There may also be an allusion, as some suppose, to a ceremony among
the Jews, who, while the sacrifices were offering, and while the priest went
into the temple to burn incense, remained silent without, praying to
themselves. "And I saw the seven angels which stood before God; and to them
were given seven trumpets." These seven trumpets are to be the signal for the
ushering in so many distinct judgments on apostate Christians: "And I saw
another angel come and flood at the altar, having a golden censer; and there
was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of
the saints upon the golden altar, which was before the throne. And the smoke of
the incense, which came with the prayers of the saints, ascended up before God,
out of the angel's hand." The corruption of the Christian church which had
taken place, and the evils which quickly followed in its train, became a
subject of serious concern to those who still adhered to the truth; and the
vindication of dishonored Christianity, as well as of oppressed innocence, was
the subject of their (...) prayers. God heard them. "And the angel took the
censer and filled it with fire of the altar, and cast it into the earth; and
there were voices, and thunderings, and lightenings, and an earthquake." All
these expressions are significant of wars and commotions of nations, and are
^ip^tions of what is to be expected under the following trumpets, or possibly
they were intended to represent those commotions which should agitate the Roman
empire, between the dead of Constantine and the sounding of the first trumpet,
which should bring the invasion of the Goths; that is, between the years 337
and 376. In this interval the family of Constantine, his three sons, who
divided the empire among them, and all his relations, perished, chiefly by
assassination and intestine wars, within the space of twenty-seven years. And
so fierce and bloody was the war between Constantius, who reigned in Asia and
the east, and Magnentius, who had procured the assassination of Constans, and
had assumed the purple in Italy, that, as Victor observes, it almost ruined the
whole strength of the Roman empire. But this was only the prelude to much
greater calamities.

Ver. 7. "The first angel sounded, and there followed hail, and fire, mingled
with blood, and they were cast upon the earth; and the third part of trees were
burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up." This first trumpet brings a
terrible storm from the north, the region of hail; and the nature of the storm
shows the nature of the judgment, it was hail and fire mingled with blood,
which denotes wars, and appears to have been a prediction of the terrible
inundarions of the Goths, who, about the year 376, broke in upon, and laid
waste a great part of Europe, that third part of the then known world, to which
the prophecy refers; for when the prophecy speaks of the judgment falling on a
third part, the western empire, or Europe, is to be understood. Great were the
calamities which were endured, for several years, from these invaders. A check
was at length given to their depredations: for attempting the conquest of
Normandy, A. D. 402, they were defeated, their immense treasures were taken;
the captives were delivered, and, as the dispersed wandered about for safety,
innumerable numbers were slaughtered. But another enemy quickly appeared.

Ver. 8. "The second angel sounded, and, as it were, a great mountain burning
with fire was call into the sea; and the third part of the sea became blood."
etc. This appears to be a prediction of the irruption of the Vandal^, who,
about the year 406, made a terrible invasion into the western and maritime
parts of Europe, and here down all before them; so that France, Spain,
Portugal, and Italy, were made a prey of, and Rome itself was made to pay for
its liberty. Here they settled themselves for a while, till, toward the period
of the third trumpet, they went into Africa, and there founded the kingdom of
the Vandals.

Ver. 10. "And the third angel sounded, and there fell a great star from
heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of the
rivers, and upon the fountains of water; and the name of the star is called
wormwood; and the third part of the waters became wormwood, and many men died
of the waters, because they were made bitter." This blazing star, or comet, is
Attila, who, with his Huns, A.D. 452, made a terrible invasion into the western
parts, laying waste the countries about the Danube and Rhine, the greatest
rivers in Europe, and especially Lombardy, which is watered by the Po. His
mission seems to have been particularly against this latter country. Right well
did he call himself, The scourge of God, and the terror of man. For fourteen
years he shook both the east and west with the most cruel fear, laying waste
the provinces, by plundering, fire, and sword. After having wasted Thrace,
Macedon, and Greece, he turned his arms against the western empire: he entered
Gaul with 700,000 men, set most of the cities on fire; but, going beyond the
bounds of this trumpet, he met with a successful resistance, on which he turned
his force against Lombardy, took and deslroyed Aquilea, with several other
cities, slaying the inhabitants, and laying the buildings in ashes. From the
Alps to the Appenine, all was slight, depopulation, slaughter, bondage,
burning, and desperation. He was preparing to march to Rome, but was diverted
from his purpose by a solemn embassy from the emperor, and the promise of an
annual tribute; and so concluding a truce, he retired out of Italy, and passed
into his own dominions beyond the Danube.

Whoever casts an eye upon a map of this country, which he thus ravaged and
depopulated, and which comprehended almost all the north of Italy, viz.
Piedmont, Milan, most of the territory of Venice, Mantua, Parma, Modena, and
several other provinces, he will instantly perceive the aptitude of the
description of this judgment: it was to fall upon the third part of the rivers
and fountains of water, and the waters were to become wormwood, etc. Beside its
lakes, no country in Europe is sointersected with rivers. There are not many
short of a hundred, reckoning the numerous branches, with their several
considerable streams, which fall into the Po. Perhaps, at some future time, not
far distant, the comparing of what may take place in the overthrow of
Antichrist, with this judgment which fell on those countries especially which
are watered by the Rhine and the Po, may help us to understand that other
judgment, represented in Rev. xvi. 4.7. by the pouring out of the third vial
upon the rivers and fountains of water.

Ver. 12. "And the fourth angel founded, and the third part of the sun was
smitten, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars; so as
that the third part of them was darkened, and the day shone not for a third
part of it, and the night likewise." This trumpet also relates to Europe, and
perfects that for which the other trumpets prepared the way, the extinction of
the western empire. We may here recollect what Sir I. Newton, in his
observations upon the prophecies, says, respecting this sort of figurative
language. "In sacred prophecy, which regards not single persons, the sun is put
for the whole race of kings, in the kingdom or kingdoms of the world politic,
shining with regal power and glory; the moon, for the body of the common
people, considered as the king's wife; the stars, for subordinate princes and
great men. Darkness is put for obscurity of condition, and for error,
blindness, and ignorance; darkening, smiting, or setting of the sun, moon, or
stars, for the ceasing of a kingdom, or for the desolation thereof,
proportional to the darkness; darkening of the sun, turning the moon into
blood, and falling of the stars, for the same."

There appear no events to which this extinguishing of the third part of the
sun, moon, and stars, can be so properly applied as to what took place toward
the end of the fifth century, when the western emperor, and his subordinate
governors, were utterly extinguished, and en entire end was put to the very
remainders of the Roman Caesar's. This was effected by the fourth inundation of
the barbarous nations, when the Heruli, under Odoacer, their leader, invaded
Italy, about the year 475 A. C. and, having conquered Augustulus, gave the
mortal blow to the western empire, and reduced all Italy under the dominion of
the barbarian, who assumed the title of King of Italy. About sixteen years
after this, Theodoric, king of the Ostrogoths, at the request of Zeno, emperor
of the east, made war upon these invaders in the new settlement, conquered
Odoacer in several battles, and obtained, as the fruits of his victories, a
kingdom for the Ostrogoths in Italy, which subsisted, under various turns of
sortune, from the year 493 to 552. The seat of government was now removed from
Rome to Ravenna. This extinction of the imperial government, and humiliation of
Rome, appears to be that to which the apostle Paul alludes, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 6, 7.
8. Thus he, or that which hindered the man of sin from perfecting his schemes
of ambition, was taken away, and free scope was given to the Popes to realize
that spiritual monarchy, after which they had so long panted, but could not so
easily effect while the Caesar's continued, and the civil government remained so
near them.

Thus have we seen the dissolution of the Roman empire in Europe effected by
the irruptions of the barbarous nations, not at once, but by degrees. From its
ruins sprung up the ten kingdoms, which had been shown to Nebuchadnezzar as the
ten toes of a great image, (Dan. ii. 42.) and to Daniel and John as so many
horns of monstrous and lavage breasts. Dan. vii. 7. Rev. xii. 3. xiii. 1.

What was the effect which all these great and constant calamities that we have
been reviewing, produced on the minds of the sufferers? Did they put a stop to
corruption, and reduce mankind to repentance? Instead of this, immorality,
superstition, priestcraft, and cruel oppressions, civil and religions, seemed
to increase in proportion to the corrections of Providence, and even to
outstrip the calamities which precipitated the down^fal of the Roman empire.
Instead of turning to God by repentance; and seeking to him for protection,
they multiplied their gods; and the only exhortations of the clergy were, "The
holy martyrs, our defenders, are present; they would be entreated, and they
seek that they may be sought. Seek, therefore, unto these helpers of your
prayers, find out these proteciors of your guiltiness. Let St. Peter be now
your helper in all things, tha afterward he may be able to forgive you your
sius. Chant to the cross, wherein is the wood of the Lord's cross, and the hair
of John the Baptist: we fetch always the comfort of our Savior through the
intercession of his forerunner." Thus idolatry was grafted on the Christian
profession; and these Antichristian apostates thought, by these devotions, and
by making converts by sire and sword to the holy Catholic church, to atone for
their sins, and bribe the Divinity to interpose in their favor. But while they
are chanting to saints and relies for peace, and shedding the blood of the
saints as the price of safety, behold an angel flying through the midst of
heaven, (ver. 13.) saying, with a loud voice, "Woe, woe, woe, to the
inhabitants of the earth, by reason of the other voices of the trumpet of the
three angels which are yet to found!" The three last trumpets are called woe
trumpets, and this because the plagues which were to come, either on account of
their much greater severity or longer duration, would be much more terrible
than the four former.

Chap. ix. 1. "And the fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star fall from heaven
unto the earth, and to him was given the the key of the bottomless pit." Our
commentators are generally agreed, that the judgment intended by this trumpet
is very obvious, and cannot be easily mistaken. This falling star, or comet, is
the grand impostor Mahomet, who, in the unsearchable operations of Providence,
was the instrument of preparing a race of men, or monsters rather, for the
scourging of apostate Christians. Mahomet commenced his career about the year
of Christ 608. Then he began to propagate his imposture, and take to himself
the title of The Apostle of God. He did not pretend to deliver a new religion,
but to revive that which had been given to Adam. In the year 622 he began to
teach his disciples, that God had ordered him to propagate and enforce his
religion by fire and sword. Accordingly, in 623, they began to put in practice
this pretended mission. Ver. 2. "And he opened the bottomless pit, and there
arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and
the air were darkened by reason of the smoke of the pit." This smoke is his
erroneous doctrine. Ver. 3. "And there came out of the pit locusts upon the
earth, and to them was given power as the scorpions of the earth have power."
It does not comport with my limits, nor is it necessary to my design, to enter
into the minutiae of this part of John's vision; I shall only observe, that by
these locusts we are to understand the Saracens, the disciples of Mahomet, who,
for so many years, were the scourge of the Greek and Latin churches, Asia and
Europe. Here is no mention made of the third part, as in the other trumpets,
but their commission was against all the men who had not the seal of God in
their foreheads, that is, who were not the servants of God, but had apostatised
from the truth to superstition, idolatry, and persecution, which was the case
with the pretended Christians both of Asia and Europe, both of those who
acknowledged the supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome, and of those who did
not. But these locusts were not to kill these men, but only to torment them.
This does not signify, in the strictest sense, that they were not to inflict
death on any, for this they did on innumerable multitudes; but it means that,
though they were to be the authors of numberless, torments to both the Greek
and Latin churches, yet they were not to destroy them in their corporate
capacity. This was to be effected by the future woes.

As to the time during which these Saracen locusts were to torment them who had
not the seal of God in their foreheads, it is said, in the fifth verse, to be
five months, prophetic months undoubtedly, or 150 years. Again, it is said,
ver. 10. that "they had tails like scorpions, and there were stings in their
tails; and their power was to hurt men five months;" the same period of time
with that mentioned before, 150 years. There is some difficulty in reconciling
this time, which the prophecy allots, with the history of facts. Some suppose,
that an allusion only is here made to those hot summer months in which locusts
are wont to prevail and do mischief, without intending to markout any certain
time. Some, again, suppose, that as a prophetic month contains 30 years, the
period of 150 years was intended, and that this refers only to that period in
which the Saracens made their chief conquests, and occasioned the greatest
calamities. Others imagine, that both these five months are to be reckoned; and
then the period of their tormenting men is fixed to 300 years. But others have
thought, that here has been, through the mistake of copyists, some alteration
of the original text. See Whiston's Essay on the Revelations, p. 196. By this
hypothesis, John is supposed to have written I E or decapente and not E or
pente that is fiteen months instead of five, this being a period which seems to
agree much better with the history of the Saracens" for from the beginning of
the Saracen empire, or of the imposture of Mahomet, in 608, to the first grand
downfall of it, by the rise of the Turkish empire, at the inauguration of
Tangrolipix, (after the taking of the capital city of Bagdad), A.D. 1057 or
1058, are about 450 years. As it is not essential to my design, I shall not
labor to solve the difficulties which here present themselves, it being enough
for our present purpose, if this fifth trumpet be allowed to refer to the
depredations of this cruel people. I shall therefore only beg leave to suggest
to the curious, and to those who may have more ability and leisure for the
investigation, whether the first five months may not refer to the severest
period of their conquests and cruelties in Asia, where they had their
beginning, and the latter five months to the time of their chief and most
tormenting depredations in Europe. Those who wish to see a more labored
explanation of these trumpets, may consult Brightman, Mede, Lowman, Newton,
Whiston, and others. The latter of whom, except Mede, has the most originality;
and though he may have some peculiarities, and start some hypotheses which may
be thought to be unsupported by good argument, yet, altogether, he seems to
have had the most consistent ideas, and I acknowledge my obligations to him.

Ver. 12. "One woe is past, and behold there come two woes hereafter. And the
sixth angel sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden
altar, which is before God, saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet,
Loose the four angels which are bound in the great river Euphrates. And the
four angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a
month and a year, for to slay the third part of men." It is almost impossible
not to believe that this woe resers to the Turks, who overthrew and entirely
extinguished all that part of the Roman empire which they assaulted, by the
taking and ^king of Constantinople, A.D. 1453, and by the entire conquest and
passion of the ^^stern empire to this day. This people perfectly ^gree with the
follow^^^, (...). They were to be prodigiously numerous, (...) ^lly in cavalry.
(ver. 17.) Such has been the case with the (...) of them dispersed over the
several provinces of their empire. They (...) to have "breast-plates of fire,
and of jacinth, and brimstone; the heads of their horses were to be as the
heads of lions, and out of their mouths issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone.
And by these were the third part of men killed." (ver. 17, 18.) This is, as Mr.
Whiston observes, a most proper, or allegorical description of the way and
appearance of ba^les, since the woeful use of guns and gunpowder, which were
invented under this trumpet. By these they were enabled, in the infancy of this
art of killing and laying waste, to archieve some of their greatest exploits.
By means of his artillery, Amurath the Second broke into the Peloponnesus, and
took several strong places; and in particular at their most fatal action, the
taking of Constantinople, in 1453, such enormous guns were employed as had
never been seen before. One is described to have been of such a monstrous size,
that it was drawn by seventy yoke of oxen, and two thousand men. If we moreover
consider the cavalry as seen over the heads of their horses, not only do the
men seem to be as breast-plates of fire, but fire, and smoke, and brimstone,
appear to issne from the mouths of their horses.

But it being allowed as it is by almost all our writers, that the Turks are
intended by this woe, what chiefly concerns us is, when was this loosing
effected, of which the prophecy speaks, and for how long a time were these
angels prepared to slay the third part of men? Concerning these four angels,
see Mede's Key, p. 108, and Whiston's Essay, p. 199. They understand them to be
four sultanies or kingdoms, which the Turks had at or near the river Euphrates,
for several successions together, whose capital cities were Bagdad beyond that
river, and Iconium, Aleppo, and Damascus, on this side of it. For a great while
they were restrained to these parts, and could not extend their dominion as
they wished. Several circumstances operated to effect this restraint,
particularly the expeditions of the crusaders, in the 12th and 13th centuries,
and the power of the khans of Persia, who, till the beginning of the fourteenth
century exercised some contro^l over them. But it is evident, that the several
restraints of Providence which had bound them, began to be taken off toward
the end of the thirteenth, and the beginning of the fourteenth centuries. All
our writers on the ancient Turkish history, complain of the barrenness of their
materials, and the inaccuracy of dates; but let us trace this matter as well as
we can. First observe the rise of the Ottoman family itself. The first person
we read of, of this remarkable race, which has been such a scourge to
Christendom, is Solomon Shah, who attempted, about A.D. 1214, say some, later,
according to others, to retire out of Persia, to seek for himself and followers
a settlement under the Seljukidae, who then reigned in Asia Minor. In
attempting to pass the Euphrates he was drowned. This so discouraged his sons,
that two of them returned back into Persia; but Ortogrul, the third, with his
three son, Candoz, Sarubani, and Othman, or Ottoman, still remained in the
neighborhood of the Euphrates for some time, till Aladin, the sultan of
I^oniuin, received him, and gave him, and the four hundred families which
emigrated with him, a country to inhabit. Ortogrul died about the year 1289,
and his son Ottoman continued the subject and soldier of Aladin. By his valor
and success he raised himself to great eminence, and the race of the Seljukidae
terminating in Aladin, he fixed upon Ottoman to be his successor. Oppressed
with age and infirmities, he is said, in his lifetime, to have devolved on
Ottoman the cares and prerogatives of royalty. Mr. Gibbon fixes this in A.D.
1299; but it is generally determined to have been in 1300. From comparing what
is saia of the length of his reign and the beginning of the reign of his son
Urchan, and other circumstances, there is reason to conclude that he began his
reign in the year of the Hegira (the Turkish epoch) 699 or 700, probably the
latter. Now, as the Hegira began July 15. 622, A. D. and the Arabian years
being lunar, and the Turks reckoning them by thirties, nineteen of which
consist of 354 days, and eleven of 355, their year 700 would commence on
September 16, 1300. Thus the fourth month of the Turkish year would be,
according to the Christian era, 1301. Historians seldom take any notice of this
difference in the commencement of the Turkish years, and those of ours; but if
an event is said to have taken place in the 700th year of the Hegira, this year
commenceing in 1300 of our era, it is therefore set down as in that year. It is
probable that Ottoman was inaugurated in the year of the Hegira 700; but
history does not say on what day or month of that year; it might be toward the
latter end of it. M. Whiston endeavors very ingeniously to prove from certain
circumstances, that he began his reign May 19. 1301. It would certainly afford
some satisfaction, if we could prove to a day or a month from whence to date
the beginning of the Ottoman empire. But I question whether this would be
enough to prove the exact time of the loosing these four angels, or messengers
of destruction. In Ottoman, it is evident that all these sultanies were united;
but perhaps their loosing is to be reckoned from some great and successful
expedition undertaken some time after he had mounted the throne. I think it is
clear that it was soon after the commencement of his reign; and if we are not
able to prove the exact day or year, it does not invalidate the conclusion
which we mean to draw.

According to Chalcocondylas, quoted by Mr. Whiston, soon after Ottoman was
seated on the Turkish throne, the Turks made an irruption into Europe, even as
far as the Danube, and a second soon after. This second is ascribed to 1302.
But let us hear Mr. Gibbon, ( Hist, of the Rise and Fall of the Romans Emp. vol.
xi. p. 443.). who cannot be suspected of wishing to serve the cause of
Christianity. He laments, with all other writers on these subjects, the
obscurity of the Turkish annals. He dates the first breach which Ottoman made
upon the Greek empire, July 27. 1299, but says it was after the Seljukian
dynasty was no more. As authors are pretty well agreed as to the uncertainty of
the Turkish dates, and as it is pretty clear that Aladin did not die till 1302,
perhaps this date is not quite correct. However this may be, he says' "The
Seljukian dynasty was no more; and the distance and decline of the Mogul khaus
soon enfranchised him (Ottoman) from the control of a superior. He was situate
on the verge of the Greek empire; the Koran sanctified his gazi, or holy war.
against the infidels; and their political errors unlocked the passes of mount
Olympus, and invited him to descend into the plains of Bithynia. Till the reign
of Paleologus, these passes had been vigilantly guarded by the militia of the
country, who were repaid by their own safety, and by an exemption from taxes.
The emperor abolished their privilege, and assumed their office; but though the
tribute was rigorously collected, the custody of the passes was neglected, and
the hardy mountaineers degenerated into a trembling crowd of peasants, without
spirit or discipline. It was on the 27th of July, in 1299 of the Christian era,
that Othman first invaded the territory of Nicomedia; and the singular accuracy
of the date seems to disclose some foresight of the rapid and destructive
growth of the monster." In p. 431. he informs us, that till now "all the emir^,
who had occupied the cities or the mountains, confessed the supremacy of the
khan of Persia, who oftentimes interposed his authority, and sometimes his
arms, to check their depredations, and to preserve the peace and balance of his
Turkish frontier. The death of Cazan removed this salutary control; and the
decline of the Moguls gave a free scope to the rise and progress of the Ottoman
empire," This event he dates May 31, 1304. This looks very much like the
loosing of which the prophecy speaks. Between this and the year 1312 he dates
the conquest of the maritime country from the Propontis to the Meander, and the
isle of Rhodes, so long threatened, and so often pillaged; and that now (p.
437.) "the captivity or ruin of the seven churches of Asia was consummated, and
the barbarous lords of Ionia and Lydia still trample on the monuments of
classic and Christian antiquity." And but a few years after this, so humbled
were the proud Christians of Constantinople, the trembling capital of the
emperors in the east, that crowds of naked Christians, of both sexes, and of
every age, of priests and menks, of matrons and virgins, were exposed to sale
in their public markets; and all they could do was to deplore the fate of their
brethren, who were led away to the worst evils of temporal and spiritual
bondage. In 1357 or 1358 they entered the European seas with a very numerous
fleet of ships, and never ceased their conquests, nor received any effectual
check, till the latter end of the last century. In 1453 they took and sacked
Constantinople, entirely conqueredr the eastera empire, and made that imperial
city the capital of their vast dominions.

But for how long a period was their triumph to continue? Ver. 15. "And the
four angels were loosed which were prepared for an hour, and a day, and a
month, and a year, for to slay the third part of men." According to Mr.
Brightman, Dr. Lloyd, Bishop of Worcester, Dr. Cressner, Mr. Whiston, and
others, 890 yeaas, and some odd days, are here signified. They reckon, with a
little variation, thus: YEARS. DAYS. An hour 0 15 A day 1 0 A month 30 0 A year
of 3651/4 365 91 Total 396 106

It admits of a doubt whether the Jewish year of 360 days should be counted, or
the Julian year as above; but as it does not affect the hypothesis I mean to
establish, I shall not detain the reader to examine it. Mr. Whiston argues,
that it is probable that Ottoman began his reign May 19. 1301, and reckoning
from thence to September 1. O. S. 1697, when prince Eugene overthrew the Turks
at Zenta, we have exactly the time required. And it deserves to be remarked,
that ever since that overthrow they have never been able to make any effectual
head against the Christians, so called, but instead of being a plague to the
Christian nations, in the prophetic sense of the term, these nations have been
a plague to them, and their power has been constantly lessening: for though
they have made war several times, it has been almost almost uniformly to their
loss, at least with respect to the old western empire, or the Latin church; for
immediately after this, Providenc^ raised up Peter of Russia, who, by what he
effected among the people of his vast empire, prepared a scourge for those who,
for four centuries' had been so cruel a scourge to mankind. This is the
messenger who was to bring tidings from the north to trouble him, Dan. xl-44.
It deserves the attention of the learned inquirer, whether by his planting the
tabernacle of his palace between the seas, in the glorious holy mountain, be
not signified his making Constatinople, which is situated on the shores of the
Bosphorus, between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, the capital of his
empire: for as Jerusalem might be called the glorious holy mountain because the
capital of the Jewish church was become very corrupt, and the city polluted
with every crime, so might this city, which was the capital of the Greek
Christian church, and esteemed by them the holy metropolitan city, though
polluted with fimilar abominations, be spoken of in the same style.
and it ^s probable that Russia will be a principal instrument of his
destruction.

What some able writers have said on this subject deserves attention, as it
serves very much to strengthen the argument, which goes to prove, that the
hour, and day, and month, and year, for which this woe was prepared, terminated
about the end of the last century. The first whom I shall mention, is Mr.
Brightman, who wrote in the beginning of the last century. He says (in his
Exposition of the book of Revelation, p. 324. edition of 1644.) "A year. here
put simply, is understood to be a vulgar and usual Julian year, that consists
of 365 days and some hours, all which time being numbered from the year 1300,
shall expire at last about the year 1696, which is the last term of the Turkish
name, as other scriptures do also prove with mavelous consent." Dr. Crosner
and Dr. Lloyd, bishop of Worcester, foretold very nearly the peace of Carlowitz
from this passage. See what Bishop Burnet, in his History of his Own Times,
says of the latter, (vol. iv, p. 297, of 12mo. edit.) "Dr. Lloyd, the present
learned bishop of Worcester, who has now for above twenty years been studying
the Revelation with amazing diligence and exactness, had long before this year
said, the peace between the Turks and the Papal Christians was certainly to be
made in the year School, which he made out thus: The four angels, mentioned in
the fourteenth chapter of Revelation, that were bound in the river Euphrates,
which he expounds to be the captains of the Turkish forces, that till then were
subject to the sultan of Babylon, were to be loosed or freed from that yoke,
and to set up for themselves; and these were prepared to slay the third part of
men, for an hour, a day, a month, and a year. He reckons the year in St John is
the Julian year of 365 days; that is, in the prophetic style, each day a year;
a month is thirty of these days, and a day makes one, which added to the former
number makes 396. Now he proves from history, that Ottoman came and began his
conquests at Prousse, in the year 1302, to which the former number, in which
they were to slay the third part of men, being-added, it must end in the year
School; and though the historians do not mark the hours, or twelfth part of the
day or year, which is a month, that is, the beginning of the destruction the
Turks were to make, yet he is confident if that is ever known, that the
prophecy will be found, even in that, to be punctually accomplished. After this
he thinks their time of hurting the Papal Christians is at an end. They may
indeed still do mischief to the Muscovites, or persecute their own Christian
subjects, but they can do no hurt to the Papilins."

Dr. J. Mather, who wrote in 1710, says, in his Discourse concerning Faith and
Fervency in Prayer, p. 97. "We are assured that when the sixth trumpet, called
also the second woe, has done its work, the seventh trumpet, called the third
woe, will come quickly, Rev. xi. 14. Now there is reason to hope that the
second woe, is past, h. e. that the Turk shall be no more such a plague to the
apostate Christian world, as for ages past he has been. At the time when the
second woe passes away there is to be a great earthquake: In that earthquake^
one of the ten kingdoms, over which Antichrist has reigned, will fall. There is
at this day a great earthquake among the nations. May the kingdom of Erance be
that tenth part of the city which shall fall. May we hear of a mighty
Revolution there, we shall then know that kingdom of Christ is at hand."

When I consider the facts which give us reason to think that the four angels,
or ministers of destruction, which were bound in the river Euphrates, were
loosed, when the four sultanies above enumerated were united under Ottoman, and
freed, not only from the restraints laid on them by the crusaders, but from the
control of the khans of Persia; when I recollect that all this took place
about the latter end of the thirteenth century and the beginning of the
fourteenth, and that between the years 1299 and 1304, the Seljukian race being
extinct, and the control of the k^ans of Persia being no more, Ottoman founded
the present Turkish empire, broke in upon the territories of the eastern
Caesar's, and laid waste the apostate Christian churches; when, moreover, I
consider that since the peace of Charlowitz in 1669, though there have since
been wars between the Turks and the Papal powers, yet, that the latter have
generally been the aggressors, and that the Turks have almost ways come off
losers, so that their power is so much broken that their empire totters to its
very base, I conclude that the hour, and day, and month, and year, in which
they were to prevail, terminated about the end of the last century, probably on
Sept. 1. O. S. 1697, when they experienced that satal overthrow at Zenta in
Hungary, from the the armyunder Prince Eugene.

SIGNS OF THE LATTER DAYS.
BUT does the violence of the second woe terminate as we have endeavored to
prove; and is it because the men, against whom it was directed, are brought to
repentance? No. Ver. 20. "And the rest of men (the members of the Papal church)
which were not killed by these plagues, yet repented not of the works of their
hands, that they should not worship devils, and idols of gold, and silver, and
brass, and stone, and of wood, which neither can see, nor hear, nor with,
neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their
fornications, nor of their thefts" This is the exact slate of the Antichristian
nations; and systems of cheating and fraud, robbery and murder, persecution and
war. They have not repented.

Must we then give up all hope of better days? Will nothing bring the church to
a purer state, and the nations to repentance for their corruptions and murders?
Alas! the man of sin will never repent; Antichristian priests and tyrants will
never cease their corruptions and oppressions, robberies and murders, till
they, and their abominable systems, are utterly destroyed by the avenging
judgments of God. -- But we are not to despair. -- Here, in the tenth chapter,
an angel descends from heaven to brighten the gloomy scene, and to cheer our
drooping hopes, by announcing that the seventh trumpet shall soon be sounded,
and the mystery of God be finished, as he has declared to his servants the
prophets.

The gleam of consolation which breaks upon us in this chapter is very
seasonable and reviving; the great and lasting troubles predicted in the former
chapters, and which occupy a space of 1400 years, are enough to try the faith
and patience of the best. To hear of nothing but of hail and fire, of burning
mountains and seas of blood, of darkening of the sun, moon and stars, of horrid
monsters which vomit fire, and destroy innumerable myriads of men: to hear of
nohing but woe after w^^, without intermission or prospect of end, terrifies
the boldest spirits, and oppresses the strongest faith. The woes of the two
last trumpets had now afflicted the nations for near a thousand years; and the
enormities of Antichrist had prevailed for a longer period. To revive the
spirits, and to animate the hopes of God's servants, an angel appears at the
end of the sixth trumpet, or the second woe, to assure them that the time of
corruption, persecution, and calamity, shall not continue much longer, but that
the seventh and last trumpet shall soon be sounded, and that woe come upon
Antichristian oppressors which shall finish the mystery of God, and introduce
among men his glorious kingdom of righteousness, peace, and happiness. Seeing
then that there are the most cogent reasons for concluding, that the woe of the
sixth trumpet terminated about the year 1697, near a hundred years ago, and
that many good and eminent men have been daily expecting, since that time, the
judgments of the seventh trumpet, which are to bring the triumphs of Popery,
idolatry, oppression, and wickedness, to an end, and introduce the kingdom of
Christ, it becomes us to attend to the Signs of the times, and see whether the
fig tree is not shooting forth and annoucing the approach of summer. May the
Spirit of God direct and illumine our minds, that we may understand his word
and judge rightly!

Chap. x. 1. "And I saw another mighty angel come down from heaven, clothed
with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head, and his face was as it were the
sun, and his feet as pillars of fire; and he had in his hand a little book
open." This little open book appears to be a codicil to that book of which we
read in chap. v. coutaining some additional explanatory matter. The book with
seven seals contains a general representation of the slate of things under the
fourth monarchy of the world, (Dan. vii. 7.23.) or of the Roman empire, and the
kingdoms and states into which it has been divided, from the first preaching of
the gospel to the end of time, and does not take particular notice of the
events which more peculiarly concern the church of Christ. This little book
includes several distinct visions which represent more immediately the state of
the church, and which are related in the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
chapters, and in part of the fourteenth, if not the whole of it.

The observing of the greatest consequence to this is right understanding of
this interesting and instructive book.

Ver. 2. "And he set his right foot upon the sea, and his left foot on the
earth, and cried with a loud voice, as when a lion roareth, and when he had
cried, seven thunders uttered their voices, I was about to write; and I heard a
voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things which the seven thunders
uttered, and write them not. And the angel which I faw stand upon the sea, and
upon the earth, lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by Him that lives for
ever and ever -- that there should be time no longer;" Dr. Doddridge has well
expressed it, "the times of the judgments, to be signified by the pouring out
of the seven vials, should not be much longer delayed." And thus also do
Brightman and others explain it, as meaning that delay should be no longer, but
that the seventh trumpet should now speedily sound, and the judgments of God
bring Babylon the Great to a rapid end. And then (ver. 7.) the mystery of God
shall be finished, as he has declared to his servants the prophets. Then the
providence of God, in permitting the kingdom of his Son to be so long and so
successfully opposed; in permitting his church to be so grievously harrassed by
its enemies, and in suffering opposers so long to triumph, which has been
esteemed among the chiefest mysteries of the Divine conduct, shall be
illustrated, and all nations shall see, in the decisive woe upon Babylon, those
displays of wisdom and righteousness which shall vindicate the Divine
government from all the aspersions of infidelity.

Of this great event almost all the prophets have spoken, and all agree that
the calamities will be the most tremendous that the nations have ever
experienced; but the issue, as it concerns the liberty and happiness of mankind
in general, as well as the felicity of the church of Christ in particular, the
most glorious. A glory this very different from that which worldly wisdom and
carnal pride, for so many centuries, have been aiming at. All the governments
of the world will be framed on principles of impartial and general justice.
Pure and undefiled religion will revive. "Glory to God in the highest, and on
the earth peace, good will toward men," will again be sung; and both the
scattered Jews and the fullness of the Gentiles will be brought in to swell the
chorus, and to grace the triumphs of the Son of God. Long have the eyes of
believers been looking to the promises. and observing the signs of the times,
expecting the arrival of these promised days. But hitherto the time has been
delayed.

Here, after the sixth trumpet, or the second woe, is past, and the rest of the
men, who were not killed, repented not, and after the seven thunder had uttered
their voices, the angel swears by Him who lives for ever and ever, that delay
shall be no longer, but the seventh angel shall sound.

In the next chapter, which contains explanatory visions, we are informed that
the seventh angel does not sound his trumpet, to bring the decisive woe, till
after the witnesses are risen from the dead, in some one of the Antichristian
kingdoms, nor till that kingdom, or tenth part of the Antichristian city, is so
shaken by an earthquake that it falls. Here it is necessary to recollect what
has been advanced in the first part of The Signs of the Times. It is there
endeavored to be proved, that by the second beast, which came up out of the
earth, (Rev. xiii. 11 -- 19.) the French tyranny, as perfected by Lewis XIV,
and supported by his successors, was intended; that it was he who, by the
repeal of the edict of Nants, and the overthrow of all the remains of civil
liberty in France, slew the witnesses for religious truth and civil liberty;
that it was he who caused an image, to be made to the first beast (the Papacy)
by the establishment of a spiritual tyranny similar to that at Rome, and which,
contrary to the slate of things in any other country where the Pope's supremacy
in spirituals has been acknowledged, was at once independent of the Pope's
authority, and yet in support of his pretensions and corruptions. I have also
endeavored to prove, that it was here the witnesses lay politically dead for
three lunar days and a half, or 105 years; that the revolution in France in
1789 was the resurrection of the witnesses to civil life, and the commotions
which have followed, the prophetic earthquake here predicted; and that the fall
of the tenth part of the city is accomplished in the overthrow of the monarchy
or tyranny of France. Immediately after this the seventh angel sounds, and
ushers in the third woe, which is to be the means of hastening the kingdom of
God. The nations are angry, (compare chap. xi. 18. with xix. 19.) and gather
themselves together to oppose the designs of God: his wrath falls upon them,
and they are destroyed. This eleventh chapter we must remember, is a miniature
picture of the history of the Christian church, from its first beginnings to
the end of time, and belongs to the little book which treats of the affairs of
the church especially. When the visions of the book with seven seals are
resumed, (which book refers to the more mixed and general concerns of the
kingdoms), as in the fifteenth and following chapters, these events of the
seventh trumpet, or third woe, are exhibited on a larger scale, and related
with a more circumstantial detail.

Now let us compare tenth chapter with the eleventh. In the tenth chapter we
are informed that it was not till after the seven thunders had uttered their
voices that the angel lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by him that
lives for ever, that delay should be no longer, but that the mystery of God
should be finished by the sounding of the seventh angel. These seven thunders,
I think, evidently occupy the space between the ending of the sixth ^^^mpet and
the commencement of the seventh. But, what are these thunders? John was
forbidden to write what they uttered; and hence most commentators have past
over this part of the prophecy without even conjecturing what might be
intended, supposing that it would be presumptuous to do so. But this has not
been the case with all. Some have conjectured that though what they uttered was
not to be written at that time, yet they are explained in the after visions.
Brightman supposed them to be explained in the fourteenth chapter: Whiston
imagines that they belong to the last vial, chap. xvi. But all this seems very
unnatural. There are others who suppose, that though it was not proper to write
down what they uttered at that time, yet that, after their accomplishment, they
will be understood, and suppose them to be seven warnings which are to precede
either the seventh trumpet or the last vial. It appears to me that as John was
forbidden to write down what these thunders uttered in vision, it would be as
presumptuous as it would be useless, to inquire what it was till the vision is
realized, and the intent of these thunders is ascertained. For as it is likely
that it was forbidden to be written, lest the prophecy should be made too plain
before the time that God would have it understood, so to attempt an explanation
till events have (...) archetypes of the thunders quite clear, would be running
before God. But it does not hence follow that this is always to be the case;
for when the things signified are accomplished, they may info^m u^, in language
as plain as events can speak, of what we were not to know before. But, to say
nothing of what these munders might utter, we may observe, that as we are not
forbidden to inquire what the general meaning of these thunders themselves
might be, and as it is probable that they were intended to be some time
understood, to the end that they might serve as a guide to direct the inquirer
into the signs of the times, and as otherwise the mention of them would be
useless, it is therefore very proper to examine, with modesty, whether this
part of sacred writ may not assist us in forming a judgment of the times in
which we live, that thus we may be excited to redoubled watchfulness, and be
ready.

Our first inquiry should be, what is the meaning of thunder in the my (...)
and figurative language of prophecy? As in the natural world the things of
creation are comprised in the heavens and the earth, and the heavens are
considered as the nobler parts of the creation, so in the world politic, in
prophetic language, the heavens mean thrones and governments: the sun, moon,
and stars, emperors, kings, princes, and great men, as well as empires,
kingdoms, and slates; the earth signifies the great mass of the common people;
clouds mean multitudes; wind, have, storm, and thunder, as well as earthquakes,
signify wars and commotions among multitudes and nations. Thus in Isa. xxviii.
2. when God, by his prophet, threatens to punish by war, the language is, "The
Lord hath'a mighty and strong one, which, as a tempell of hail, and a
destroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters overflowing, shall cast down to
the earth." And again, chap. xxix. 6. "Thou shall be visited of the Lord of
hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and a great noise, with storm and
tempest, and a flame of devouring fire." The next verse explains what this
thunder and storm is: "And the multitude of all the nations that fight against
Ar^el shall be as a dream." Sir I. Newton, On the Language of Prophecy, p. 13.
says, "Tempestuous winds, or the motion of clouds, are put for wars; thunder,
or the voice of a cloud, for the voice of a multitude; a storm of thunder,
lightning, and hail, and overflowing rain, for a tempest of war descending from
the heavens and clouds politic." Dr. Warburton, in his Divine ^egation, book
iv. sect. 4. says, "The old Asiatic style, so highly figurative, seems, by what
we find of its remains in the prophetic language of the sacred writings, to
have been evidently fashioned to the mode of ancient hierogliphies both
^uriologic and tropical. -- Of the second kind, which answers to the trop ^al
hieroglyphic, is the calling empires, kings, and nobles, by the names of the
heavenly luminaries, the sun, moon, and stars; their temporary disasters, or
en^re overthrow, by eclipses and extinctions; the destruction of the nobility,
by stars falling from the firmament; hostile invasions, by thunder and
tempestuous winds; and leaders of armies, conquerors, and founders of empires,
by lions, bears, leopards, goats, or high trees. In a word, the prophetic style
seems to be a speaking hieroglyphic."

If we examine all the passages in the sacred writings where thunder is
mentioned in the prophetic style, we shall find that it generally, if not
always, signifies war. It is probable than that (...) and seventh trumpet,
which should afflict this western part of the world, or those nations which had
given their power to the Papal beast, or which in any form had assumed
Antichristian power in religion, and which wars should prepare the way for the
great scene which was to follow.

But here it will be proper to ask, (for frequent observation has convinced me
that such questions are not altogether needless,) Does the reader believe that
a prophecy can be fulfilled by the events which take place in his own day, and
which pass under his own observation, as well as by those of five hundred years
back, or five hundred years to come? Does he think the wars and great events of
nations which have or may take place in this age, and in these countries of
Europe, as worthy to be the subject of prophecy as what was foretold by Daniel,
(chap. xi.), respecting the invasion of Greece by Xerxes; or of the conquests
of Alexander, and the fate of his empire; or of Egypt, and which was formed
between Ptolemy Philadelphus, king of Egypt, and Antiochus Theus, king of
Syria, by the marriage of Berenice, the daughter of the former, with the
latter, and the consequences that followed that connection? I hope he does.

As the seven thunders appear evidently to occupy the space between the sixth
and seventh trumpet, and as thunder in the prophetic writings is allowed to be
the speaking hieroglyphic of war, and as it is likewise probable that the sixth
trumpet, or second woe, ended about the year 1697, it is worth while to
inquire, whether these thunders have ^^^c^ed their voices; that is, whether
there have been seven periods of war in Europe since that time. On examination,
the history of this century will inform us that, taking all the nations
together which do or have made up the body of the Papal beast; and among whom
the remains of religious corruption, usurpation, etc. continue, (and which
almost all allow to be the object of these visions), there have been just seven
of these thunders, or periods of war, neither more nor less. And it is worthy
of remark, that this is the case whether we take into the account those states
and kingdoms only which sprung out of the ruins of the old Roman empire, or all
those that compose the Latin church, or even the whole of Europe. We shall
consider those wars in which all Europe have been engaged, so far only as the
nations which are or have been subject to the Papacy, have been concerned in
them.

1. The first period of war commenced in 1700, and continued without
intermission till 1721 inclusive; for when other powers terminated their
destructions, and hushed the roar of war in some parts of Europe, by the peace
of Utrecht, in 1713, and by that of Rastadt, in 1714, then, as though alarmed
lest mankind should be too happy, the madman Charles the Twelfth of Sweden
roused himself from his bed of affected sickness at Dometica, and prosecuted
his war against Russia, Denmark, Prussia, Poland, Hanover, and Saxony, with
renewed vigor. In these wars the following powers were engaged: Sweden,
Russia, Denmark, Poland, England, Holland, the Emperor, Spain, France, the
Venetians, the Turks, etc. This was the first thunder,

2. The second, though very violent while it lasted was of shorter duration
than the former, continuing only through the three campaigns of 1733, 1734, and
1735. In this war there were engaged the Emperor, France, Spain, Sardinia,
etc.* The interval of peace was short; for.

3. In 1737 the third thunder began to roll; nor did it cease to lay the
fairest parts of Europe in ruins all 1748. In the wars which filled up this
period of destruction the following powers were engaged: the Emperor, Russians,
and Turks, led the way; England and Spain quickly followed; France, Prussia and
Holland, also united to increase the calamity.

4. In 1755 commenced another period of war, which soon set all Europe in a
flame. Great Britain, France, Prussia, Saxony, Austria, Sweden, Spain and
Portugal, experienced its effects. This period of wariasted till 1763, and was
the fourth thunder.

5. The fifth, though extremely violent where it raged, did not extend itself
so wide. The parties engaged were the Russians, Poles, and Turks. The French
and Corsicans also increased the roar. Poland was never so desolated. This
commenced in 1768, and continued five years.

6. Peace, as usual, was but of short continuance. The dispute of Great Britain
with her American colonies, which broke out into an open rupture in 1775, was
the occasion of a sixth general tempest breaking upon the chief maritime powers
of Europe, and which continued from 1778 to 1782, five years. The powers
engaged were Great Britain, France; Spain and Holland.

7. The seventh and last period of war was from 1788 to 1791, inclusive. The
parties engaged were the Russians and Austrians against the Turks; the Swedes
against the Russians and Danes; the Belgians also, who revolted against the
Emperor, increased the tempest. Denmark soon became neuter; and as far as the
Emperor and Swedes were concerned, peace was restored in 1790, but the Russians
and Turks continued their slaughter till 1791. This was the seventh thunder.

This last period of war seems, under providence, to have been among the
principal causes of the success of the revolutionists in France; for those who
may be thought to have been the most disposed to assist the French court were
otherwise employed. This circumstance has not been unnoticed by the writers of
the day. It has been observed, that it happened unfortunately with respect to
the aristocratical party in France, that Europe had seldom been, through a long
course of years, in a state less capable of affording the succors which were
now demanded by the princes, nobles, and clergy of that country, or in which
the minds of the people, or the dispositions of the sovereigns, were less
calculated for undertaking any enterprise, than at present. The mad ambition of
the Emperor Joseph, under the influence of the overwhelming power and vall
designs of Russia, to which he became so miserable a dupe, besides the ruin and
spirit of revolt which it spread through his own dominions, had, in no small
degree, deranged the general policy of Europe. And it is worthy to be observed,
that just when this prince was on the eve of making peace with the Turks, and
which being accomplished, he might then have been able to turn his attention to
the situation of his brother-in-law the king of France, he died, (Feb. 20.
1790.) His successor, Leopold, immediately set himself to accomplish what death
prevented Joseph from executing; but no sooner was peace concluded with the
Ottoman court, and his revolting subjects in Brabant brought to obedience, than
he died also, (March 1, 1791). All these happily extinguished just as it was
breaking out, and the expense of events counteracted every inclination which
the court of Vienna might have to oppose the progress of the French revolution,
and gave time for its gaining such a firm establishment, that before Francis,
the present emperor, could be prepared for the meditated attack, the people of
France were become too much enlightened into the enormities of the old system,
too much informed of their rights and strength, and too untted, to be easily
frightened into a retreat.

The courts of London and Madrid were occupied in a squabble about an object
scarcely bearing or deserving a name. The king of Sardinia, from the state of
his finances, of his army, of his fortresses, was not in a condition to hazard
any attempt in favor of the old despotism, till too late. We may add the
immense debts, contracted in the wars of the present century, (originating,
from the impolitic and ruinous practice of funding, which must in the end, and
perhaps very soon, terminate in events the most calamitous to those who have
had resort to such unwise measures): these debts, I say, and the consequent
derangement of the finances of all the powers in Europe, proved highly
favorable to the cause of the French reformers; and however great the fears of
some might he, respecting the influence of this example, or however much
inclined to listen to the supplications of humbled despotism, or to support the
cause of the mortified nobility and clergy, whose cries for vengeance filled
every court and every country, yet they were so shackled by circumstances as
not to be able to yield them immediate assistance.

Thus have the wars of this century been preparing the way for the
accomplishment of God's designs in the overthrow of the tenth part of the
Antichristian city, and the destruction of the power of those privileged orders
of men, who had been its chief supporters, which appears to be the slaying of
the seven thousand names of men, predicted Rev. xi. 13. and which events were
to be the prelude to the seventh trumpet, which is to bring those judgments
that are to perfect the overthrow of Papal corruption and tyranny.

Seeing that God, by his servants the prophets, has condescended in various
known and allowed cases, (as may be seen by comparing the writings of the
prophets with history) to reveal his purposes concerning the fate of nations,
and that for the confirmation of his word, and the edification of mankind, it
certainly becomes us to examine whether there be any takens or signs by which
we may know the present times, lest the judgments of God come upon us when we
are not aware, and find us, instead of waiting for him, as his faithful
servants, in arms against his providence, and in league for the support of his
enemies, and the enemies of his children.

There never were greater or more important events, since the world began, than
those to which we are witnesses; events apparently big with the most awful
consequences. Though what we have advanced respecting the termination of the
power of the Turks in or about the year 1697, and the accomplishment of the
seven thunders, by the seven periods of war which have been since that time,
may not, by itself, prove that the time is arrived for the founding of the
seventh trumpet, and for the commencement of that woe which is to bring
Antichristian idolatry, corruption, and oppression to an end, yet, in
conjuction with other prophecies and events, it is possible that it may form a
strong probability -- a probability as near to a demonstration as can be
expectcontained in chapter the eleventh, we are informed, that after the two
witnesses, or two descriptions of witnesses, had lain politically dead in one
of the streets of the Antichristian city, the mystical Babylon, for three
prophetic days and a half, the spirit of life from God entered into them, and
they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon them who saw them. This is
a Jewish manner of describing the great political changes of nations from
bondage to liberty, as may be seen by comparing this place with Isa. xxv. 6 --
12. xxvi. 12, 19, 21. Ezekiel. xxxvii. 1 -- 14. What the prophets, in the passages
referred to, have described as the resurrection of the Jews from the dead, is
allowed, on all hands, to be their rising to civil and political existence,
when they shall be restored from their dispersions and bondage to their own
land and to liberty; and the spirit which is promised, Ezekiel. xxxvii. 14. to be
put in them that they may live, is not that which is promised Jer. xxxi. 33.
and Ezekiel. xi. 19. but the spirit of political and civil life, preparatory
to^hat greater blessing of the renovating Spirit of God. Upon the rising of
these witnesses from their state of death, they heard a great voice from
heaven, (ver. 12.) that is, from the Supreme Power, saying unto them, "Come up
^^her," assume the privileges and rights of freemen. "And the same hour there
was a great earthquake;" ver. 18.) or in plain language, without prophetic
figure, a great national convulsion, from the struggles which the supporters of
corruption and tyranny made against the vindicators of the civil and religious
rights of mankind. "And the tenth part of the city fell." This for ages past
has been supposed to refer to France, the tenth part of the Antichristian city,
and events seem to verify the conjecture. This doubtless appears to point out
one of the ten Papal states or monarchies which had been the great supporter of
the persecution and oppressions of the whore of Babylon, and which was to fall
some little time before the founding of the seventh trumpet for the great and
desolating woe; and no one of them has been, all through, so conspicuous in her
cause as France.

"And in the earthquake" -- not at the moment of the falling of the tenth part
of the city, but in the earthquake which terminated in that event, "were slain
of men seven thousand;" or, of the names of men, as it should be read. This has
also, for near two centuries back, been supposed to be a prediction of the
abolition of titles in France, and of the perishing of those privileged orders
of men who have been the principal supporters of despotism, and the chief
actors in the persecutions which have raged against God's servants, as may be
seen more at largein the First Part of The Signs of the Times.

Immediately after the fall of this tenth part of the city, the third woe
commences, Ver. 14. "The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes
quickly. And the seventh angel founded, and there were great voices in heaven,
saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever." That is, those judgments now
commence, which are speedily to effect this happy change; but Babylon the Great
is to fall first, and this is to be accomplished by terrible things in
righteousness. Thenations are to be angry, (ver. 18.) and oppose the designs of
God; the consequence of which will be, he will gather them together, (chap.
xvi. 16. xix. 17 -- 21.) and pour upon them his wrath, and thus destroy those
(whether secular or ecclesiastical) who destroy the earth.

Let us now return to the seven thunders, and see whether our interpretation of
them agree with what is here predicted respecting the tenth part of the
Antichristian city, and the events which have taken place. The last thunder, or
period of war, as we have seen, began in 1788. just before the earthquake in
France commenced, and continued till 1791, or, if we exclude Russia and Turkey,
1790. It entered far into the period of the earthquake, and was a means, under
Providence, of forwarding the consequences of that convulsion. In this part of
the earthquake the names of men were Ilain, that is, the titles and
distinctions not only of the ecclesiastics, but of the secular nobility, were
abolished. The titles of these latter were abolished June 9. 1790. Their cries
for vengeance excited the sympathy and pity of the surrounding courts, but they
were at present in no condition to help them.

The thunder ceased. -- Aug. 25, 1791, several potentates and princes entered
into a treaty at Pilaitz, and agreed to prepare for the invasion of France, and
to unite their forces to restore the ancient despotism, and with it the invaded
rights of the nobility and priesthood. -- The affairs of France advance fast
toward a crisis. -- The angel swears by Him who lives for ever and ever, that
delay shall be no longer. -- Aug. 10, 1792, the monarchy falls. -- The seventh
angel founds. -- The nations are angry, and God's wrath is come.

Thus there hitherto appears to have been the most exact conformity between the
representations to John, and the events which we have been considering,
especially as to the rising and sinking of the Turkish power, and the periods
of war which have afflicted the Latin church, to these western parts of the
world, since the term nation of the violence or the second woe, and preparatory
to the third; as well as to the revolution in France, and the commotions of
nations which have followed the fall of the Papacy and monarchy in that
country. A correspondence this which is calculated to excite the most serious
alarm on account of our present situation, and of what we have to expect. But
it is happy to reflect that this is not all; it is calculated also to cheer the
hopes of all those who are waiting for the fulfillment of the promises of God,
for the morning comes as well as the night, and at evening time it shall be
light, (Zech. xiv. 7.) But would we escape the evil, and participate only in
the good? The likeliest means to insure this, is, without delay, to withdraw
from this unhappy and inauspicoius war, and apply ourselves to a universal
reformation.

THERE are also other signs of the times which very pointedly indicate what we
have to expect, but which we shall only briefly touch upon. From comparing what
Ezekiel says, (chap. xxvi. xxvii. and xxviii.) concerning the fall of Tyrus,
and the consequent calamities, from the failure of commerce, with what is said
respecting the fall of Babylon the Great, Rev. xviii. serious conclusions might
be deduced. As there might also, not only from that general indifference which
prevails as to every thing which concerns religion, but from comparing Rev.
xvi. 2, 13. with existing events. The union of Protestants and Papists, (though
it must be supposed that they do not in general mean this,) for the support of
that which heretofore they thought it their first duty to oppose, and for the
overthrow of which they pray i^ all their churches, is a singular phenomenon.
-- Yes, charity obliges us to hope that the majority of Protestants would
revolt at the idea of leaguing themselves with Papal tyrants, for the direct
purpose of supporting Popery. I believe that this is not the idea of the people
in this country, and I hope that none of our treaties will ever bind us to
fight through thick and thin for the perpetual safety of all the states of
Italy. For as the day (if God's word be true) will certainly come, and, it is
likely, very soon, when God's wrath will be poured out upon that seat of
spiritual tyranny, this would involve us in an awful situation indeed, to the
most distant hazard of which no wise Protestants would expose their king and
country. They who would do this, let them abuse the French infidels as much as
they will, are deeper in infidelity than they. No; the people of this country,
in general, think nothing about Popery, or of the policy of supporting it. This
is not esteemed even a secondary end of the war by them. But it is too evident,
that the violent advocates for religious hierarchies, tithes, etc. among
Protestants, although they might approve of some reformation in the Gallican
church, and would not have found themselves inclined to oppose any alteration
which might have brought it to a nearer conformity to their own several
systems, yet when the French reformers abolished tithes, and restored to the
people their ancient and natural right of choosing their own pastors, and
especially when they abolished all religious establishments in that extensive
country, and placed the different sects upon an equal footing, and made all the
ministers of religion dependent upon their several flocks for support, who
might reward them in proportion to their own ability, or according to the
opinion entertained of their deserts; this reduction of things to the original
state in which Christ and his apostles left them, was beyond bearance, and they
had rather that all the absurdities and oppressions of the old Papal
establishment should be restored, than such a dangerous example be set up in
the heart of Europe. This appears evidently to be the sentiment of those who
wail and howl so dreadfully about the contempt into which their "dear brethren
in Christ" (the Popish clergy, who can no longer show their mitred fronts in
Parliaments) have fallen, and for the overthrow of the holy altars of the
idolatrous whore of Babylon. But let us pass on.

When I read or hear the ravings of Mr. B -- ke, and of such like orators, who
are listened to with admiration and wonder, while they so feelingly describe
the merits of the Papal priesthood, the sanctity of all religious
establishments, and the enormous impiety of touching this ark of God; -- when I
hear right reverend prelates of a Protestant church, drawing the most invidious
comparisons between the priests of the bloody whore of Babylon and the
dissenting ministers of this country, (than whom, with the whole body of
Protestant dissenters, there are none who are more sincere in their loyalty to
the king, in their attachment to the constitution, or more uniform in their
obedience to the laws -- but enemies to corruption, and friends to civil and
religious liberty); -- when I hear them, before the most august assemblies,
breathing out nothing but brotherly love to the former, and nothing but wrath
and bitterness against the latter, and all because these differ from them in
opinion about tithes and religious establishments; -- while I hear them
exerting all their eloquence, not only to implore our protection and pity for
the exiled priests of France as fellow creatures, (for that would be
praiseworthy, for, if thine enemy hunger, feed him) but as our brethren,
members of Christ, and heirs of the promises; "more near and dear to us by far
than some who, affecting to be called our Protestant brethren, have no other
title to be called Protestant than a Jew or a Pagan, who, not being a
Christian, is for that reason only, not a Papist;" -- while I hear them
softening our renunciation of the Autichristian church of Rome, into an
estrangement, and her idolatry and blasphemous dogmas into "what we deem their
errors and corruptions;" -- whilst I hear them wail over the fallen altars and
violated riches of Papal idolatry and superstition, without one sentence which
may lead us to adore God, in the contemplation of those righteous and awful
judgment, by which he fulfils his word, and avenges the cause of the innocent;
-- I perceive in this unity of sentiment between such exalted Protestants and
the church of Rome a sign of the times which indicates no good to the friends
of civil and religious liberty. -- But I will leave such men to the mercy of
God, and the public to their own reflections. -- Rejoicing that the law
protects the innocent, I hope that such men will never be permitted to realize
their zeal in any thing beyond invective and wailing; and then, let them
inveigh, let them wall. -- Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but, who are these?
-- Not the genuine friends either of Protestantism, their country, the king, or
the constitution, which they make their theme.

The next signs of the times which I shall notice respects the Ottoman empire.
In Dan. xi. 40 -- 45. we have a prophecy of the calamities which the people of
the fourth monarchy, or rather of the Papal church, should suffer from the king
of the South, or the Saraceas; and from the king of the North, the Tarks, who
came originally from the north quarter. After enumerating the conquests of this
last enemy, the prophet says, ver. 44. "But tidings out of the east, and out of
the north, shall trouble him; therefore shall be go forth with great fury to
destroy, and utterly to make away many;" ver. 45. "yet he shall come to his
end, and none shall help him." "And at that time" (xii. 1.) "shall Michael
stand up, the great Prince, which stands for the children of thy people."
(the Jews,) "and there shall be a time of trouble, such as there never was
since there was a nation, even to that same time; and at that time, thy people"
(the Jews) "shall be delivered, every one that shall be written in the book."
Then follows a description of their political rising, after the manner of the
eastern slyle.

Enemies from the east, from toward Persia or Arabia, and from the north, are
to be the means of bringing the Turkish monster to an end, and this is to be
preparatory to the return of the Jews to their own country, which the Turks now
possess, and at which time such troubles will afflict the nations as have never
been known. -- One enemy is to come from the east, and another from the north;
and it is deserving the attention of those who would observe the progress of
things toward the accomplishment of God's purposes, that at the present time
the Ottoman empire is at once threatened from both these quarters. The new sect
of the Nchabis in Arabia, are said to become more formidable. These are
Mahomedan infidels, and their doctrine has nothing less in view than the
destruction of the whole system of Mahometanism, as a system of superstition,
oppression and bloodshed. The founder of the sect was the Shick Mahomed Jon
Abduhl Vehab. This doctrine has been brooding, it is said, near sixty years,
and its advocates now support their (...) ^^ion by force of arms. They have
adherents both secret and revealed among the Arabians in general. They are
reported to possess the greater part of the country from Medina to Bassora, on
the Euphrates, and beyond it, and 40,000 men have been found insufficient to
overpower them. The Port is pursuing measures for their reduction, and we must
wait the issue before we can form any certain opinion; but it is probable that
Mahometanism, as well as Popery, will owe its fall to the prevalence of
infidelity. -- The second great enemy which is to contribute to the destruction
of the Turkish empire, is to come from the north, and this seems at present the
most formidable. Ever since the time that we have supposed the rage of the
second woe to have terminated, (the latter end of the last century) the power
of the Russians has been getting a bead of that of the Ottomans, and at this
moment Constantinople trembles at the frown of the aspiring Catharine.

But here a difficulty presents itself. As the Turks came originally from the
neighborhood of Mount Caucasus, where the family of Gog was settled, and as
they have long been in possession of most of those countries mentioned by the
prophet Ezekiel, (chap. xxxviii. 2 -- 6.) as the invaders of Palestine, after
the Jews' restoration, it has therefore been thought that the Turks are the
people to whom the prophecy refers. But, if the Turkish empire is to be
overthrown to make way for the restoration of the seed of Abraham, how is this
to be reconciled with the prediction of the prophet, and the generally-received
opinion? Were I to enter into a labored consideration of this subject, it
would carry me far beyond the bounds I have prescribed myself. I shall
therefore but just touch upon it, and refer the reader for farther information
to Well's Geography of the Old Test. vol. 1. chap. 3. sect. 2.

Respecting Gog and his associates, mentioned by Ezekiel, it appears that Gog,
or Magog, the son of Japhet, settled himself about Mount Caucasus, and is
esteemed the farther of the Scythians, who dwelt on the east and north-east of
the Euxine or Black Sea; Gomer and his son Togarmah peopled the northern track
of the lesser Asia; Meshech settled to the eastward of Gomer, in part of
Cappadocia and Armenia, to the south and south-east of the Black sea; Tubal
settled still farther to the eastward, toward the Caspain Sea. These two
latter were the near neighbors of Gog. From a colony of Tubal sprung the
Russians; and the Muscovites owe their origin to a colony of Meshech. Dr.
Wells, (vol. 1. p. 158.) treating on the origin of the Muscovites and Russians,
says, "That the Moscovites or Muscovites in Europe were a colony originally of
Meshech or Mosoch, called by the Greeks Moschi, is very probable, not only on
account of likeness of names, but also of the respective situations of the
Asiatic and European Moschi one to the other. Add to his another consideration,
that whereas in our and some other translations the Hebrew text, Ezekiel. xxxviii.
2. is rendered thus: The chief prince, or (as it is in the margin of our
Bibles) the prince of the chief of Meshech and Tubal; in other translations,
and particularly in the Septuagint, it is thus rendered; The prince of Rosh
Moshech, and Tubal. The thing is, the Hebrew word Rosh, by some is taken to be
an appellative, by others a proper name. The learned Bochart has observed from
the Nubian geographer, that the river in Armenia, called by the Greeks Araxes,
is by the Arabians called Rosh. And hence he not only probably infers, from
other instances of the people that lived in the country about that river were
also denominated Rosh, but also proyes from J^sephus Bengorion, that there were
a people in those parts named Rhossi. Now the Moschi and Rossi being thus
neighbors in Asia, their colonies kept together in Europe, those of the Moschi
seating themselves in the province of Muscovy, properly so called, that is, the
parts about the city of Moscow: those of the Rosh seating themselves in the
parts adjoining on the south. For the learned Bochart has observed from
Tzetzes, that the people called Tauri, and from whom the Taurica Chersonesus
took its name, were, in the days of Tzetzes, better known by the name of Ros
than of Tauri. Upon the whole, therefore, it may be very probably believed,
that the Muscovites and Russians in Europe were colonies of Meshech, or else of
Meshech and Tubal jointly." Treating on the situation of Gog, as north of
Tubal, etc. he says, "This situation is confirmed by the scripture itself,
Ezekiel. xxxviii. 2. Set thy face against Gog. in, or of, the land of Magog, the
prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, etc. For hence we learn, that the land of
Magog must be near to that of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal; and it could be so only
on the north. The learned Mr. Mede has observed, that the rame Gog signifies
the very same with Magog, the letter mem being but an heemantick letter, i. e.
not a radical, but an additional letter to the radix or primitive word. And he
conceives that it pleased the Spirit of God to distinguish thus between the
land and the people of the land, by calling the people Gog, and the land the
Land of Magog."

Thus the Russians and Muscovites themselves appear to be included in the
enumeration of Ezekiel, and we may observe that they have already extended
their conquests into the neighborhood of the Black and Caspian Seas, and of
those parts originally settled by Gog and their ancestor Tubal. The probability
is, that they will extend their conquests still farther, and be distinguished
instruments in the overthrow of the Turkish Empire. And having effected this,
it is likely that, with the assistance of their newly acquired subjects or
allies from the Caspian to the Propontus, with the Persians, etc. (the people
enumerated by Ezekiel), they will be the invading multitude marked out by the
Spirit of Prophecy.

There is another sign of the times also, which ought not to be entirely
omitted. More than two thonsand five hundred years ago, the ten tribes of
Israel were carried captive into Assyria. About a hundred and fifteen years
after this Judah, and Benjamin also were carried away to Babylon. These
returned, and some few of the other tribes with them; but as a nation, Israel
was never restored. According to Esdr^s, (book 2. chap. xiii. 41 -- 50), they
took counsel among themselves, a^^ migrated into a distant country, where never
man dwelt; that the name of this country was Arsateth, at the distance of a
year and a half's journey, where they are to dwell till the latter time, when
God will bring them back with great wonders. The prophets abound with promises,
not only respecting the restoration of Judah, (the Jews), but of Israel also.
From these tribes not having been heard of for so many ages, and the
improbability of such a people escaping the notice of all travelers, the
generality have been induced to conclude that they no where exist, as a
distinct people, but have long ago been melted down among other nations, except
those that united themselves with Judah and Benjamin, at their return from
Babylon. That they should still exist, is certainly a very extraordinary
circumstance; and should Providence bring them forward by and by, to act a
conspicuous part in the great scene which is now opening, it will doubtless
excite great astonishment: but both the event and the surprise were foreseen
and predicted by the prophets. They foresaw that the reunion of Ephraim with
Judah would not take place till after the great dispersion, and their
resurrection from the long political death which they were to suffer for their
sins. Then are Ephraim and Judah to be one people again, (Ezekiel. xxxvii. 16. --
22.) And Judah shall say, "Who has brought up these? Behold I was lest alone,
these, where have they been?" (Is^. xlix. 21.)

Independent of the prophecies, there is reason to conclude that this people do
still exist distinct from other nations. The grounds for this conclusion may be
seen in the Asiatic Researches, vol. 2. That the reader may judge for himself,
I shall take the liberty of quoting the extract which we find in the Monthly
Review enlarged, vol. 10. p. 502. The account is whimsical enough; but
considering the number of ages since the carrying away Israel captive, their
corrupt slate at that time, their miserable condition since, their ignorance of
printing, etc. it affords as much proof as can be expected, at the first dawn
of their existence. When we are better acquainted with them, their MSS.
customs, etc. we may expect more light.

On the descent of the Afghans from the Jews.
"The Afghans call themselves the posterity of Melic Talut, or king Saul. --
The descent of the Asghans, according to their own tradition, is thus
whimsically traced:

"In a war which raged between the children of Israel and the Amalekites, the
latter being victorious, plundered the Jews, and obtained possession of the ark
of the covenant. Considering this the god of the Jews, they threw it into sire,
which did not effect it; they afterward erdeavoured to cleave it with axes,
but without success: every individual who treated it with indignity, was
punished for his temerity. They then placed it in their temple, but all their
idols bowed to it. At length they fastened it upon a cow, which they turned
loose in the wilderness.

"When the prophet Samuel arose, the children of Israel said to him, "We have
been totally subdued by the Amalekites, and have no king. Raise to us a king,
that we may be enabled to contend for the glory of God." Samuel said, "In case
you are led out to battle, are you determined to sight?" They answered, "What
has befallen us that we should not fight against infidels? That nation has
banished us from our country and children." At this time the angel Gabriel
descended, and delivering a wand, said, "It is the command of God, that the
person whose stature shall correspond with this wand, shall be king of Israel."

'Melic Talut was at that time a man of inferior condition, and performed the
humble employment of feeding the goats and cows of others. One day a cow under
his charge was accidentally lost. Being disappointed in his searches, he was
greatly distressed, and applied to Samael, saying, "I have lost a cow, and do
not possess the means of satisfying the owner. Pray for me, that I may be
executed from this difficulty." Samuel perceiving that he was a man of lofty
stature, asked his name. He answered, Talut. Samuel then said: "Measure Talut
with the wand which the angel Gabriel brought." His stature was equal to it.
Samuel then said "God has raised Talut to be your king." The children of Isreal
answered, "We are greater than our king. We are men of dignity, and he is of
inferior condition. How shall he be our king?" Samuel informed them, they
should know that God had constitu^ed Talut their king, by his restoring the ark
of the covenant. He accordingly restored it, and they acknowledged him their
sovereign.

'After Talut obtained the kingdom, he seized part of the territories of Jalut,
or Goliath, who assembled a large army, but was killed by David. Talut
afterward died a martyr in a war against the infidels; and God constituted
David king of the Jews.

'Melic Talut had two sons, one called Berkia, and the other Irmia, who served
David and were beloved by him. He sent them to sight against the infidels; and
by God's assistance they were victorious.

'The son of Berkia was called Afghan, and the son of Irmia was named Usbec.
These youths distinguished themselves in the reign of David, and were employed
by Solomon. Afghan was distinguished by his corporeal strength, which struck
terror into demons and genii. Usbec was eminent for his leraning.

'Afghan used frequently to make excursions to the mountains; where his
progency, after his death, established themselves, lived in a state of
independence, built forts, and exterminated the infidels.'

"To this account we shall subjoin a remark of the late Henry Vansittart, Esquire
He observes, that 'A very particular account of the Afghans has been written by
the late Ha Fiz Rahmat Khan, a chief of: e Rohillas, from which the curious
reader may derive much information. They are Mussalmen, partly of the Sunni,
and partly of the Shiah persuasion. They are great boasters of the antiquity of
their origin, and reputation of their tribe; but other Mussalmen entirely
reject their claim, and consider them of modern and even base extraction.
However their character may be collected from history. They have distinguished
themselves by their courage, both singly and unitedly, principals and
auxiliaries. They have conquered for their own princes and for foreigners, and
have always been considered the main strength of the army in which they have
served. As they have been applauded for virtues, they have also been reproached
for vices, having sometimes been guilty of treachery, and even acted the base
part of assassins."

A specimen of their language (the Pushto) is added; and the following note is
inserted by the President.

'This account of the Afghans may lead to a very interesting discovery. -- We
learn from Esdras, that the ten tribes, after a wandering journey, came to a
country called Arsareth, where we may suppose they settled. Now the Afghans are
said by the best Persian historians to be descended from the Jews; they have
traditions among themselves of such a descent; and it is even asserted, that
their families are distinguished by the names of Jewish tribes, although, since
their conversion to the Islam, they studiously conceal their origin. The Pushto
language, of which I have seen a dictionary, has a manifest resemblance to the
Chaldaic; and a considerable district under their dominion is called Hazarch,
or Hazaret, which might easily have been changed into the word used by Esdias.
I strongly recommend an inquiry into the literature and history of the Afghans.

That after the space of more than 2500 years the ten tribes of Israel should
be first restored to notice just at this period, when so many signs indicate
the approach of their restoration, may be designed as a hint to us to be ready
for what is coming. Let the trisling think what they may, I am sure that the
diligent student in the writings of the prophet will be far from esteeming this
singular circumstance unworthy of atten and especially as it appears in company
with so many others which press upon us, and urge us to watch.

Among other signs of the speedy gathering and restoration of Israel, this is
not the least, that we are threatened with troubles such as have not been since
there was a nation. Never did such animosity prevail in any war as has
manifested itself in this. And if we consider the slaughter of human beings in
this one campaign, beside the wretchedness to which thousands of unhappy
fugitives, who had long been used to all the accommodations and elegancies of
life, have been reduced, the prospect is melancholy indeed, and seems to
bespeak some visitation more than com^mon. It appears that a greater number of
men have perished in little more than one year, than in both the late wars
which raged in America and Europe for more than fourteen. Should the
destruction and calamity go on with an accelerating devastation, as we have
reason to expect, if it be that day of troubles which we are taught to look
for, who can calculate the quantum of human misery to be endured before the
cessation of this tempest in which we have so unhappily mingled!

CONCLUSION: BEING AN ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF GREAT BRITAIN.
THUS, my countrymen, we have considered some of those Signs of the Times,
which, at this season of general agitation, solicit our attention with singular
urgency: Signs which intimate nothing less than the general shaking and
renovation of things. It becomes us therefore to attend to them with peculiar
seriousness, that we may know the measures which we ought to pursue, and avoid
precipitating ourselves into the dreadful consequences of opposing the
providence of God, who in his word has forewarned us of his purposes, and by
his dispensations is indicating their speedy accomplishment; -- it becomes us
to observe them with devout attention, that we may hereby be excited to turn to
God by a sincere and general repentance, and thus be bid until tho indignation
be overpass: "For behold, the Lord comes out of his place to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity; the earth also shall disclose her
blood, and no longer cover her slain." Now therefore consider your ways.

I acknowledge that my apprehensions respecting our prospects are not so much
from the opinion I may entertain of the wisdom or folly, the justice or
injustice, the piety or impiety, of the present war, in a detached view, as
from the impression which the general appearance of things, compared with the
writings of the prophets, produce on my mind; for, did I believe the present
war (according to the general rule of estimating things to be beyond all doubt,
both politic and just, even this would not much lessen my apprehension of
danger. When we look back on ancient history, and trace the progress and fall
of those empires and states which Inspiration has noticed, we shall find that
the long threatened judgments which fell upon them were not for the blame of
those particular wars in which they perished, but for the accumulated guilt of
successive ages, and for the general corruption of their manners. Those wars
might be perfectly just, because defensive. If we examine the predictions of
the prophets which refer to the chastisement of the nations and the destruction
of Babylon the Great, in the latter days, we shall find that those dreadful
j^^^ments which are then to be inflicted, are to be for the sins of centuries
-- for blood which has never been avenged. The sovereigns and rulers of that
day may, perhaps, be among the most mild and just that have ever exercised
power; but we must be strangers to the history of nations, if we do not know
that this will be no certain security. To instance only the case of Israel:
Hoshea was the best prince that ever reigned over that people: -- the only one
that had any mixture of good; yet, in his days their ruin came. If the great
body of the nation be corrupt; if we approve the deeds of our fathers, and our
iniquity be full; it is not the piety, or virtue, or justice, of our princes
and rulers that can secure us.

But though this is the case, yet our obligations and our interest, as they
respect both the policy and the morality of the war, remain the same. And if it
be found that we are acting contrary to the principles both of policy and the
eternal obligations of morality, we are certainly precipitating our fate, and
aggravating our ruin. It becomes us then, with great seriousness, to consider
our ways: for it is not what the French are that ascertains the safety or
danger of our situation: they may be all that they are represented to be, and
yet our case be never the better: the worse they are, the more sit are they, in
some respects, to be the instruments of God's threatened judgments.

The wisdom or folly, the policy, or impolicy, of the present war, certainly
deserves the most serious consideration of all who desire the prosperity of
their country; but as so many have written so ably on these subjects, it seems
the less necessary for me to detain the reader for the investigation of them.
But there are two or three things which, though they may not so generally
strike the attention, at least not so as to produce any considerable
apprehension of danger, yet, if it be clear that they are connected with this
war, there is so much moral turpitude in them, that, to those who believe in
the all-superintending providence of the Creator, and the Divine inspiration of
the Scriptures, they must appear of a magnitude sufficient to excite the
extremest solicitude, and the most sincere concern.

It is impossible for any observing man who is at all conversant with what
passes about him, not to notice the unusual animosity which has manifested
itself in this contest, both against the French and against all those who
differ from the fashionable opinion. So high has it rage^ amongst a certain
class of people, that no words are equal to the description. -- "But this is a
war of religion. The French are a nation of infidels -- the enemies of all
religion; and therefore deserve to be extirpated from the earth." -- Admirable
imitators of Him who came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them! -- A war
of religion! O ye pious crufaders! Ye never need to sheathe your swords. There
are wicked nations enew to gratify your holy zeal with everlasting bloodshed.
-- But show us your commission. Is it a forgery, or is it derived from Him "who
makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and who sends rain on the
just and on the unjust; and desires not the death of a sinner?" -- But it is
possible that the accusation against our enemies may not be exactly just. Much
as we execrate wickedness, yet let us be impartial. Perhaps it should rather
be, "They are infidels -- the partisans of no sect." Nobody suspects them to
have much piety, yet, bad as they are, the freedom of every description of
worship is protected by all the force of the nation; but as it is likely the
majority of the representatives of ^he people have no religion themselves, they
have established none, but have left religion to take care of itself, and work
its own way by the native power of truth, just as it was forced to do for the
first three hundred years after Christ, without either emoluments or penal
statutes in its favor; but with this difference, that no man shall persecute
it, nor any one sect persecute another, but if Christianity be from God, that
it shall have free liberty to make its conquests. Be our opinion what it may of
the utility or mischief of religious establishments among Protestants, yet, is
not this preferable to the superstitions and horrors of Popery? And if God in
his providence sees fit, by these methods, to overthrow the abominations of
Rome, and thus to clear the way for undefiled religion, shall we be angry with
his dispensations, or dispute his wisdom? We are not disposed to palliate
crimes, but let us distinguished between the crimes of men and the justice of
Him who makes the madness of nations the instrument of effecting both his
avenging and benevolent purposes. We are imposed upon by names, and sounds, and
misrepresentations, and then, inspired with zeal without knowledge, set
ourselves up for the avengers of the cause of heaven. But let us be
dispassionate; -- let us examine ourselves as under the eye of God. If
necessity oblige us to maintain war, yet let us beware of harboring in our
bosoms the murderous and unchristian passions of rancour and ma levolence. If
we a attacked, we have a right to defend ourselves; and benevolence is to be
exercised even toward enemies; and if they hunger, what are we to do? We know
what the malignant spirit of party and worldly policy will say -- "Starve
them." -- But Christ says, "feed them." If we must maintain war, and justice
sanctify it, yet let it be on those principles of benevolence and magnanimity
worthy of a great and enlightened nation, and then there might be some
plausible ground to hope for the favor of providence. But malevolence would
stamp the justest war with guilt. And if this malevolence should be suffered to
take such possession of as as to inspire our devotions the guilt would be
increased.

But not w^ be enabled to form a rational judgment of the pros^^^^ before us,
as to success or ruin, let us consider the connection in which we stand, and
the motives by which we are actuated, whether they (...) are worthy of a free
and enlig^tened people.

W^ (...) to the continental powers, with some of them at least, (...) present
war was indisputably unjust. Is it not unjust for any one nation to interfere
with the internal regulations of another independent nation? An independent
nation (whether right or wrong, as to what concerns themselves, does not affect
the question) had long groan^ed under the real or supposed oppressions of
arbitrary princes, insolent nobles, and intolerant, debauched; atheistical, and
persecuting priests. They feel their wrongs, they perceive their rights, and
are determined to redress the one, and vindicate the other. They bring to
justice their oppressors; they disarm them of their power, strip them of their
disguise, overturn their old oppressive systems, and form such new ones as they
think most likely to insure security and happiness. In effecting all this
mighty work, folly is mixed with wisdom, and outrage miggles with justice. They
solemnly declare as a nation, that they will respect the rights and
independence of all other nations, but will vindicate their own. -- In such a
struggle for the general good, some must be supposed to suffer either real or
imaginary, wrongs. These plot against the nation; they assemble in neighboring
states; are encouraged; prepare for war, and invoke foreign aid.

On August 15, 1790, the neighboring princes and potentales held a meeting at
Pilnitz; a concert of crowned heads is formed, and it is agreed to invite the
other sovereigns of Europe to join the league, and make the cause of the king,
and of the other privileged orders of France, a common one. It is determined in
the meanwhile to increase their armies, and prepare for the invasion of France,
the first favorable opportunity, that by the overthrow of the new constitution,
and the reestablishment of the old despotism, and the former state of things in
the church, innovation may be smitten in the root, and in other countries, be
prevented. Thus did foreign courts assume to themselves dictatorial power over
an independent people, and formed a concert, not only for the purpose of
overturning the liberties of France, but as if the world were made for princes,
nobles, and priests only, to intimidate all other nations from daring, in
future, to attempt to meliorate their condition. -- They have sent forth the
most despotic and bloody manifestos that ever disgraced Europe. That of the
Duke of Brunswick is expressed in a style of such undisguised barbarity, that
even Attila, who boasted of himself as the scourge of God, and the terror of
men, would have blushed to have been the author of it. -- They have invaded
France; and the French in return have invaded them. Enormous crimes have been
committed on both sides; but we have not yet seen the end.

"But the concerns of the French are so interwoven with the concerns and
interests of other nations; that these have felt themselves injured, and their
language has been such as to alarm and provoke their neighbors; and we also
have been offended." This may be true. But have we acted according to those
excellent principles laid down by Jesus Christ, Matt. xvii. and Luke xvii. for
the putting an end to strife, and for the prevention of bloodshed? Have we
remonstrated and done all that negotiation could do to prevent the horrors of
war; or, has the flaming sword of destruction preceded the olive branch of
peace, and vengeance gone before remonstrance? Have we acted from sober
judgment and urgent necessity, or from the dictates of ambition, and the
workings of passion? Our innocence or guilt, respecting the blood which is
shed, and the sorrow which is occasioned, will depend much on the answer which
facts give to these inquiries. If this war on the people of France be for the
purpose of dictating to them a form of (...) that such an extensive republic in
the heart of Europe would operate as a dangerous example, it is unjust. If it
be on account of some of their foolish or unjust decrees, yet, if we have not
endeavored by negotiation to prevent the spilling of human blood, and the
accumulation of taxes, it is unjust; and if, instead of this, we have spurned
at concession, as though resolved on war at any rate, the injustice is
increased. If also it be a war to revenge the execution of the king, or for
their humbling the nobility, or despoiling the priesthood, it is unjust; for
who appointed us the universal judges and arbiters of nations?

"But it was necessary to the prevention of a revolution, and of anarchy in
this country." So say a certain description of men. But this is not proved, not
does it appear that it can be. Perhaps it would be more conformable to their
true sentiments to say, "We thought it necessary for the prevention of
reformation."

Let us then examine with dispassionate seriousness the principles of the war
in which we are engaged, that if it be unjust, we may repent, and do what we
legally can to wash our hands from the stain of innocent blood. Men under
despotic government may, perhaps, be silent and innocent; but Englishmen are
allowed to speak. Under a free government, silence is guilt. The nation called
for the war; if, after mature thought, they find themselves deceived, or
apprehend not only its impolicy, but its injustice, they are bound to signify
it, or innocent blood (that of our own people, at least, supposing the blood of
Fre^^hmen to be of no value in the eyes of the Father of all) will cry against
us.

Let us farther examine whether we are acting worthy of our character as
Protestants and Christians, who are enlightened into the true principles of the
religion of Christ. It is possible that our motives and aims may be dissimilar
to those who are engaged in the same quarrel; but who are they? The dragon and
the beast. Most of them have long been the scourges of the earth, the curses of
humanity, and their e^d is to perish for ever. It is possible to suppose that
we may mean well; but what are the intentions of the associates by whose side
we are fighting? To keep Popery from falling, to maintain the power and
influence of the clergy, and all that error and superstitio^^ by which they
fasten on the minds of mankind, and circuitously (...) their own despotic
power. But be the motives and aims of some what they may, every man's duty is
to judge himself, as in the sight of God, that he be not judged; and as it is
possible that that which is highly criminal may meet with the approbation of
the majority of a nation, and thus great national guilt be incurred, it becomes
us to examine ourselves on this important point.

Our religion teaches us, and our fathers, the reformers, were zealous in
impressing its dictates, that Rome is the whore of Babylon, the mother of
harlots, and no true church of Christ; that Popery is superstition and
idolatry; a religion at once at war against the kingdom of Christ and the
happiness of mankind; a religion tyrannical, blasphemous and diabolical, in
principle, and bloody in practice. Our religion teaches us, that this same
system of corruption and oppression, which impregnates all the governments
which receives it, and all the religious establishments which grow out of it,
with its own enslaving and corrupt principles, shall be brought to an end,
worthy of its enormities; it has determined and delineated the signs for the
accomplishment, and charged us to watch their appearance and to have no
alliance with them other of harlots, that we partake not of her sins, and
receive not of her plagues. If the signs of the times indicate the approach of
the threatened judgments, our part is to stand at a distance and contemplate
the progress of the awful ruin, and not rush into the conflict, to slop the
uplifted arm of God's vengeance; then might be fulfilled in our favor that
saying, (Psalm. xci. 7, 8.) "A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand
at thy right hand, but it shall not come nigh thee; only with thine eyes shall
thou behold and see the reward of the wicked." But, if we join issue with the
declared supporters of the whore of Babylon, and unite with them to arrest the
vengeance of Heaven, what fate have we to expect, but to share in their ruin? a
ruin as dreadful as it will be extensive!

Thus, my countrymen, I have endeavored to set before you, in the best manner
I am able, the signs of the times, and what they portend. I have endeavored to
rouse your attention to the consideration of your ways, and your true interest,
that you may take such measures as may be the most likely to secure us from the
desolations of that storm which already shakes the greater part of Europe -- a
storm, if our conceptions are just, which will speedily lay in ruins all the
nations which shall be found opposing the designs of God in the overthrow of
that Antichristian system, secular and ecclesiastical, which has so long
corrupted and destroyed the earth.

As it was in the days of Noe, before the flood, they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noe entered into the ark,
and knew not until the flood came and took them all away, so shall also the
coming of the Son of Man, in the execution of the divine judgments on the
wicked nations, be. Say not in your hearts then, "He delayeth his coming;" for
he has forewarned us that he will come as a thief in the night, at a time when
not expected.

Let us therefore watch and repent. Reformations in governments, if attainable
at any tolerable price, are very de^^rable; but we deceive ourselves, if we
imagine that this will be sufficient to ensure the general peace and happiness
of society. Unless the great mass of mankind are reformed and christianized,
every thing else will be insufficient. Whilst pride, ambition and corruption
predominate; whilst meanness and servelity on the one hand, and refratioriness
and contempt of authority on the other, prevail; whilst the moral sense of the
generality of mankind is corrupt; or, as our Lord expresses it, whilst the
light which is in them is darkness, and irreligion and vice triumph, it is in
vain to expect any great good. I own I am extremely desirous of seeing a peace
able reformation take place in the representation, and in the adminustration of
the affairs of this country, as that which might contribute much to the
bettering mankind, and which alone promises any hope of escaping the calamities
of a revolution, or of alleviating the other distresses which threaten us. But,
if this should be accomplished, and nothing but this, I confess my expectations
are not very sanguine as to the great and permanent good which would follow. As
a corrupt government diffuses its corruptions through the whole mass of
society, to, should a few wise and virtuous men effect a pure government, yet,
if the body of the nation remained uninformed, they would soon corrupt the best
institutions, and the administration of the best government that the human
intellect could devise, and nothing could still save us from the displeasure of
God. Let both these reformations, therefore, go hand in hand, and let them
speedily be commenced; For nothing short of instant reformation, and an instant
change of measures, can afford us any solid hope of salvation. Did God say,
respecting the profligate Jews, when the whole body politic was diseased from
the head to the foot, "Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?"
What have the nations under the Christian dispensation, to expect, if, like
them, they become universally diseased? Let us therefore examine ourselves and
repent.

What, in a general view, is our moral character as a nation? Has our virtue,
our moderation, our justice, our love of civil and religious liberty, and our
attachment to the principles of Protestanism, kept pace with our advancement in
the scale of nations? We are called by the name of Christ, and profess to be a
religious people; but, do we exemplify in our practice what we profess? Do we
do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with God; or, does infidelity and
profaneness, bribery and corruption, lewdness and debauchery, pride and
disspation, pervade all ranks of men, and threaten an universal dissolution?
Are the rights of conscience revered; or, is our fondness for the wine of the
whore of Babylon returning, and are we to judge of the temper of the nation,
from the flames which bigotry kindled at Birmingham in ninety-one? We are a
nation of professed Christians. The pastors which we approve, whether of the
established Church or otherwise, are they the meek and humble imitators of Him
whose servants they are called? Do the generality of them seek, not filthy
lucre, but the salvation of the souls of men? Are they faithful, to reprove and
warn; or, do they preach to us smooth things, and say, Peace, peace, when there
is no peace? Are they diligent in the discharge of their duties -- laboring to
instruct the ignorant, to reclaim the vicious, to comfort the afflicted, and to
unite men in the bonds of charity; or, are they proud and worldly; diligent
only after gain; idle shepherds, who care not for the stock, and who sow among
mankind the seeds of contention? Do they recommend and enforce the religion
which they profess by the holiness and purity, benevolence and piety of their
lives; or, are they lovers of pleasure, eating and drinking with the drunken,
whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their
shame; who mind earthly things? (Phil. iii. 19.) Are the great body of the
people content to have it thus, and moved only by what affects their worldly
interest? Should this, on examination, be found to be the case, it surely calls
for deep humiliation, and suggests that, without a repentance and reformation,
as general as sincere, some heavy calamity must burst upon us.

I am well aware that there are many who will turn my sentiments into ridicule,
and that more still will make light of them; for it is in all our hearts to
say, "All things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation; the
evil will not come in our days. Does the angel swear by him that lives for
ever and ever, that delay shall be no longer?" "Prepare to meet your God." Ye
corrupters of the holy and benevolent religion of Jesus, and ye oppressors of
mankind; ye proud biasphemers, and ye persecutors of the servants of God,
prepare for the day of reckoning; for behold, "The whirlwind of the Lord goes
forth with fury, a continuing whirlwind; it shall fall with pain upon the head
of the wicked. The fierce anger of the Lord shall not return until he have done
it, and until he have performed the intents of his heart. In the latter day ye
shall consider it." (Jer. xxv. 23, 24.) Ye who worship the mammon of
unrighteousness, and sacrifice nations for gain; who have carried desolation to
the utmost bounds of the earth, and, having enslaved mankind with filthy lucre,
are ingenious to invent apologies for your enormous crimes; Prepare to meet
your God. "Go to now, ye rich men, weep and howl for your miseries which shall
come upon you. -- Behold, the hire of your laborers; which is of you kept
back, cries against you." "O Tyrus, the mart of nations! thou have said, I am
of perfect beanty; I am God; I sit in the feat of God, in the midst of the
seas. Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters. In the time (if thou
repentest not) when thon shall be broken by the seas in the depth of the
waters, thy merchandise, and all thy company, in the midst of thee, shall fall."

Ye dozing watchmen of our Israel, who talk to the people of the follies of
enthusiasm, till their faith in the Divine predictions, which was intended to
have been a guard to their hearts against the surfeiting cares of the world,
and to keep them vigilant, has lost all its power, and they are lulled into a
security from which nothing can rouse them short of the voice of that trumpet
which will rend the heavens and the earth. Sleep on, and take your rest -- But
at midnight ye shall hear a great cry made -- "Behold, the Bridegroom comes,
go ye out to meet him." Ye hireling shepherds, especially, who have converted
the religion of Christ into a system of worldly traffic; who live in pleasure,
and, having fed yourselves with the fat, and clothed you with the wool, abuse,
instead of feeding, the slock; prepare to meet your God; for the time of his
judgments shall be no longer delayed, but they who have beaten their
fellow servants, and ate and drank with the drunken, he will cut them asunder,
and appoint them their portion with the hypocrites.

Let men of all descriptions and characters (revolving in their minds the signs
of the times) hear the awful declaration of the angel, and take warning. The
sins of the great whore who sits on many waters, and of the wrath of her
fornications, are come into remembrance. Come out of her, therefore, ye
Protestants, and all that fear God, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
receive not of her plagues.

What my readers may think of the agreement of events with prophecy, or how
they may be affected at the prospect in general, or at the situation^ and
prospects of this country in particular, I cannot tell; I know that the
inattentive Christian, as well as the cold Skeptic, will esteem it the illusion
of a heated brain, but I am free to acknowledge that the signs of the times
present to my mind a thousand images of horror, and afflict me with the
extremest anguish, for the part which my country is acting. Whilst I
contemplate the scene which Europe now presents, (a scene which blackens as it
expands) and observe the exact conformity of the several parts already
disclosed, with the pattern which Inspiration has drawn, I anticipate the
future, and seem to feel nothing but earth ju^k^s, to hear nothing but
thunders, to see nothing but slanghter; and I weep for the calamities of my
fellow creatures. -- For the glimpse of one pleasant prospect we must stretch
our eyes to years to come. -- Oh, my country! how am I pained at the
apprehension of thy fate! Thou might have dwelt in peace, and even turned to
thine own advantage the madness of other nations: -- but thou have been
deceived, and chosen war; thou have committed thy self to the horrors of a
tempest which threatens to lay in ruins all that is found within the circle of
its rage -- "Is there no blam in Gilead?" -- Are there no means left for the
salvation of my country? -- "Is there no physician there?" -- Is there not one
wise and patriotic statesman who loves his country, who loves truth and right
more than gain, and who may be able to conduct a retreat, and heal our wounds?
-- Must we stand or fall with Antichrist, and make the fate of Papal despots
our own? -- Has that warning no longer any validity, "Come out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues? -- O thou Father of mercies, and Disposer of all events, touch the
hearts of the rulers of the earth, and let a ray from Thee enlightened their
minds! Look with pity on the bleeding nations! -- Speedily accomplish thy
promises, and reveal thy mercy!

FINIS.

