THE FORESTERS, AN AMERICAN TALE; BEING A SEQUEL TO THE HISTORY OF JOHN BULL
the CLOTHIER.

In a SERIES of LETTERS to a FRIEND.

Published according to Act of Congress.

THE SECOND EDITION, REVISED AND CONSIDERABLY ENLARGED.

PRINTED at BOSTON, BY I. THOMAS AND E. T. ANDREWS, [PROPRIETORS of the WORK.]

Sold by them, J. White, D. W^s^, and E. Larkin, in Boston; by Thomas, Son and
Thomas, in Worcester; by Thomas, And^^^^ and (...), in Baltimore; and by
Thomas, Andrews and (...), in Albany. -- Nov. 1796.

CONTENTS.
LETTER I. Page 11. ORIGINAL State of the Forest. -- The Adventures of WALTER
PIPEWEED and CEC^^IUS PETERSON. LETTER II. Page 23. Sickness and Delirium of
Mr. BULL's Mother. -- Adventures of PEREGRINE PICKLE. -- JOHN CODLINE. --
HUMPHRY PLOUGHSHARE. -- ROGER CARRIER, and THEOPHILUS WHEATEAR. LETTER III.
Page 36. JOHN CODLINE quarrels with ROGER CARRIER, and turns him out of Doors.
-- CARRIER retires to another Part of the Forest. -- CODLINE surveys his Land;
takes ROBERT LUMBER under his Protection. -- Begins a Suit with the Fishermen
of LEWIS, which, with other Incidents, excites the Jealousy of Mr. BULL. LETTER
IV. Page 49. Attempt of NICHOLAS FROG and GUSTAVUS the Ironmonger* to intrude
into the Forest. -- Their Quarrel. -- Mr. BULL's Sickness and Delirium. -- His
Policy in paying his Debts. -- His Quarrel with FROG, and its Termination by
Compromise. -- Plantation of CART-RUT and BARE CLAY, called CAESAREA. -- Lease
to CHARLES INDIGO. LETTER V. Page 63. Mr. BULL's Project of taming wild
Animals. -- Its Execution by his Tenants. -- Their different Notions and
Conduct in this Matter. LETTER VI. Page 76. Adventures of CHARLES INDIGO and
PETER PITCH. -- Character of WILLIAM BROADBRIM. -- His Projects, Principles,
and a Specimen of his Harangues. LETTER VII. Page 89. Dissensions in
BROADBRIM's Family. -- His Aversion to Fire Arms, and its Consequence. Mr.
BULL's second Sickness, and second Marriage. -- His Project for making a new
Plantation. -- The Care of it committed to GEORGE TRUSTY. -- Trout Fishery
established at the Plantation of ALEXANDER SCOTUS. LETTER VIII. Page 101. Mr.
BULL's Quarrel and Lawsuit with LEWIS and Lord STRUT. -- He gains Possession
of the whole Forest. LETTER IX. Page 111. Mr. BULL gets into Debt, and by the
Advice of his new Wife and her gambling Companions, begins a Quarrel with his
Tenants. LETTER X. Page 122. Mr. BULL attempts a new Mode of Traffic, which
disgusts his Tenants. -- They refuse to receive his Presents. -- His singular
Resentment against JOHN CODLINE, and the Effects which it produced. LETTER XI.
Page 132. The Quarrel begins in earnest, and is carried into the Law. --
Conduct of the Managers on both Sides. -- The first Verdict in Favor of the
Foresters given at Saratoga Hall. LETTER XII. Page 144. The Foresters apply for
Help to Mr. LEWIS -- are first treated with Evasion -- afterward obtain their
Request. -- Alarm in Mr. BULL's Family. -- His Conference with his Wife. -- Her
Maneuvers upon the Occasion. -- Disappointed by the Inflexibility of the
Foresters. LETTER XIII. Page 155. Mrs. BULL's Rage, and its Effect on the
Neighbors. -- Several Families associate to defend their Right to the High
Way. -- Quarrel opens with Lord STRUT and Mr. FROG. -- The Foresters prosecute
their Controversy, and obtain a second Verdict. -- Mr. BULL's real Friends
interpose, and convince his Wife of her Error. -- She advises him to compromise
the Matter. -- He signs a Quit-Claim of the Forest. LETTER XIV. Page 169. The
Foresters form a Partnership. -- It proves deficient and ineffectual. -- Their
Clock out of Order. -- Their Strong*Box empty. -- Disturbances in some of the
Families. -- A Meeting is called to revise and amend the Partnership. LETTER
XV. Page 179. A new Plan of Partnership is proposed. -- Arguments pro and con.
-- It is established. -- A Chief Steward appointed, with inferior Officers. --
Hunting too much in Fashion. -- A new Species of Rats introduced. -- Two
Families added to the Number of Partners. LETTER XVI. Page 195. Present State
of Mr. Bull. -- His Wife and his Mother. -- Story of the everlasting Taper. --
Some Account of Mr. Lewis. -- His new Wife and cast off Mistress. --
Conclusion. LETTER XVII. Page 206. Jealousy between Lewis and his new Wife. --
His Divorce and Expulsion. -- Bull's Choler against the Family. -- Their
Assumption of a new Firm, THE FRANKS. -- Their Controversy with Bull, and the
Defection of his Friends. -- Whims, Projects and Innovations of the Franks. --
Remarks on the Plan of FRATERNIZATION. LETTER XVIII. Page 220. Mission of TENEG
from the Franks to the Foresters. -- Description of Mother Carey's Chickens. --
Bull's Jealousy and Choler. -- Prudence of the Foresters, and its Success. --
Impudent Attempt of the Chickens, and its Defeat. -- Bull's Message to Cang-hi,
and his sententious Answer. -- Peaceable Disposition of the Wild Beasts. --
Agreement with the Ishmaelites and Lord Strut. -- Increase of Rats.
CLAVIS ALLEGORICA.
JOHN BULL, The Kingdom of England. -- His MOTHER, The Church of England. --
His WIFE, The Parliament. -- His SISTER PEG, The Church of Scotland. -- His
BROTHER PATRICK, Ireland. LEWIS, The Kingdom of France. -- His MISTRESS, The
Old Constitution. -- His NEW WIFE, The National Representation. LORD STRUT, The
Kingdom of Spain. NICHOLAS FROG, The Dutch Republic. GUSTAVUS, The Kingdom of
Sweden. MADAM KATE, The Empire of Russia. LEOPOLD, The Empire of Germany.
FREDERICK, The Prussian Monarchy. FERDINAND, The Duchy of Brunswick. CANG-HI,
The Empire of China. THE FRANKS, The French Republic. THE FORESTERS, The United
States of America. ALEXANDER SCOTUS, Nova Scotia. ONONTIO, Canada. ROBERT
LUMBER, New Hampshire. JOHN CODLINE, Massachusetts. PEREGRINE PICKLE, The Old
Colony of Plymouth. THEOPHILUS WHEAT-EAR, The Old Col. of New Haven. HUMPHRY
PLOUGHSHARE, Connecticut. ROGER CARRIER, Rhode Island and Providence. PETER
BULL-FROG, New York. JULIUS CAESAR, New Jersey. CART-RUT and BARE-CLAY, Carteret
and Barclay. WILLIAM BROADBRIM, Pennsylvania. -- CASIMIR, Delaware. CECILIUS
MARYGOLD, Maryland. WALTER PIPEWEED, Virginia. -- His GRANDSON, GEORGE
WASHINGTON. PETER PITCH, North Carolina. CHARLES INDIGO, South Carolina. GEORGE
TRUSTY, Georgia. AUGUSTINE, Florida. ETHAN GREENWOOD, Vermont. HUNTER
LONGKNIFE, Kentucky. HIGHWAYMEN, Pirates and Privateers. HOUNDS AND HUNTSMEN,
Ships of War and Troops. BEARS AND WOLVES, Indians. BLACK CATTLE, Negro Slaves.
RATS, Speculators. MOTHER CAREY's CHICKENS, Jacobins. ORDURE, Convicts.
THE FORESTERS.
Letter I.
Original State of the Forest. -- The Adventures of WALTER PIPEWEED and
CECILIUS PETERSON.

DEAR SIR,
TO perform the promise which I made to you before I began my journey, I will
give you such an account of this, once forest, but now cultivated and pleasant
country, as I can collect from my conversation with its inhabitants, and from
the perusal of their old family papers, which they have kindly permitted me to
look into for my entertainment. By these means I have acquainted myself with
the story of their first planting, consequent improvements, and present state;
the recital of which will occupy the hours which I shall be able to spare from
business, company and sleep, during my residence among them.

IN reading the character of John Bull, which was committed to paper some years
ago by one who knew him well, you must have observed, that though "he was in
the main an honest, plain dealing fellow, yet he was choleric and inconstant,
and very apt to quarrel with his best friends." This observation you will find
fully verified in the course of the narrative; and as the opinions and manners
of superiors have a very great influence in forming the character of inferiors,
you need not be surprised if you find a family likeness prevailing among the
persons whose history I am about to recite, most of whom were formerly
residents in Mr. Bull's house, or apprentices in his shop.

THERE was among the appendages to John's estate, a pretty large tract of land,
which had been neglected by his ancestors, and which he never cared much about,
excepting that now and then some of his family went thither a hunting, and
brought home venison and furs. Indeed this was, as far as I can find, the best
pretense that John had to call the land his; for he had no legal title to it.
It was then a very woody country, in some parts rocky and hilly, in other parts
level; well watered with brooks and ponds, and the whole of it bordered on a
large lake, in which were plenty of fish, some of which were often served up at
John's table, on fast days.

THE stories told by one and another of these adventurers, had made a deep
impression on the mind of Walter Pipeweed, one of John's domestics, a fellow of
a roving and projecting disposition, and who had learned the art of surveying.
Walter having frequently listened to their chat, began to think within himself,
"If these fellows make so many pence by their excursions to this wild spot,
what might not I gain by sitting down upon it? There is plenty of game and fish
at hand, for a present supply; plenty of nuts and acorns to fatten pigs, and
with some small labor I may be able to raise corn and feed poultry, which will
fetch me a good price at market. -- I can carry biscuit enough in my pockets to
keep me alive till my first crop comes in, and my dog can live upon the offals
of the game that I shall kill. -- Besides, who knows what treasures the land
itself may contain -- perhaps some rich mines! -- then I am made for this world
-- I shall be as rich as Lord Strut!

FULL of this dream, Walter applied to his master one day for a lease of part
of the forest, as it was called. Bull at first laughed at the proposal, and put
him off; but Walter followed it up so close, and told what advantages might be
gained by settling there, and promised, if he should succeed, to turn all his
trade into his master's hand, and give him the refusal of whatever he might
bring to market, and withal showed him some drafts, which he had made with
chalk, from the reports of the huntsmen, that Bull began to think of the matter
in good earnest, and consulted his lawyer upon the subject, who, after due
consideration of the premises, and stroking his band, advised him as follows.
"Why yes, Mr. Bull, I don't see why you ought not to look about you as well as
your neighbors. You know that old Lord Peter lays claim to the whole country,
and has assumed to parcel it out among his devotees. He has given all the
western part of it, where this forest lies, to Lord Strut, and he has a large
manor adjoining to your forest, which, they say, yields him a fine rent, and
who knows but this may bring you in as much, or more? -- Then there is Lewis,
the cudgel player, and Nicholas Frog, the draper, who have, perhaps, (I say
perhaps, Mr. Bull, because there may be a little doubt on both sides, and in
that case, you know Sir, it would not become gentlemen of our cloth to speak
positively) as good a claim as your Honor to this land; but then it is a maxim,
you know, that possession is eleven points of the law, and if you once get your
foot upon it, they cannot oust you without a process, and your Honor knows that
your purse is as long as theirs, and you are as able to stand a suit with them
as they are with you. I therefore advise you to humor your man Walter, and
give him a lease, and a pretty large one -- you may find more advantages in it
than you are aware of -- but lease it, lease it, at any rate." Upon this he was
ordered to make out a lease; and Walter being thus invested with as good
authority as could be obtained, filled his pockets with bread and cheese, took
his gun, powder-flask, and shot of various kinds, with a parcel of
fishing-lines and hooks, his surveying instruments, and a bag of corn on his
shoulders, and off he trotted to his new paradise.

IT was some time before he could fix upon a spot to his liking, and he at
first met with some opposition from the bears and wolves, and was greatly
exposed to the weather, before he could build him a hut; once or twice the
savage animals had almost devoured him, but being made of good stuff, he stood
his ground, cleared a little spot, put his seed into the earth, and lived as
well as such adventurers can expect, poorly enough at first, but supported, as
all new planters are, by the hope of better times. After a while he began to
thrive, and his master Bull recommended a wife, The charter of Virginia.
whom he married, and by whom he had a number of children. Having found a new
sort of grain in the forest, and a certain plant of a narcotic quality, he
cultivated both, and having procured a number of black cattle, he went on
pretty gaily in the planting way, and brought his narcotic weed into great
repute, by sending a present of a quantity of it to his old master, who grew
excessively fond of it, and kept calling for more, till he got the whole trade
of it into his own hands, and sold it out of his own warehouse to Lewis, Frog,
and all the other tradesmen around him. In return, he supplied Walter with
cloths and stuffs for his family, and utensils for his husbandry; and as a
reward for being the first, who had courage to make a settlement in his forest,
he dignified his plantation with the name of the ancient dominion. Beside this
mark of respect, and in token of his high esteem of him as a customer, as well
as for certain other reasons, he made it a practice, every year, to present him
with a wagon load of Ordure, the sweepings of his back yard, the scrapings of
his dog kennel, and contents of his own water closet. This was a mark of
politeness which John valued himself much upon. "It may seem odd (said he one
day to a friend) that I make such a kind of compliment as this to my good
customer; but if you consider it aright, you will find it a piece of refined
policy; for by this means I get rid of a deal of trash and rubbish that is
necessarily made in such a family as mine; I get a cursed stink removed from
under my nose, and my good friend has the advantage of it upon his farm, to
manure his grounds, and make them produce more plentifully that precious weed
in which we all so much delight." Walter was often seen, on the arrival of
Bull's wagon, to clap his handkerchief to his nose; but as he knew his old
master was an odd sort of a fellow, and it was his interest to keep in with
him, he generally turned off the compliment with a laugh, saying,
good-naturedly enough, "Let him laugh that wins," without explaining his
meaning, though it might admit of a double entendre; then calling some of his
servants, he ordered them to shovel out the dung, and make his black cattle mix
theirs with it. When spread over the land, the air took out most of the scent,
and the salts were of some advantage to the soil.

AFTER Walter Pipeweed had got his affairs into tolerable order, he was visited
in his retirement by Cecilius Peterson, Lord Baltimore, who first settled
Maryland, was a Papist; his successors abjured Popery, and conformed to the
Church of England.
another of Bull's apprentices, who had taken a fancy to the same kind of life,
from a disgust to some things that had happened in the family. He had not been
long with Walter before he found it would not do for him to remain there.
Peterson was supposed to be a natural son of old Lord Peter, after whom he was
nicknamed. He had the same affected airs, and a tincture of the high-flying
notions of his reputed father. These made him rather disgustful to Walter, who
had learned his manners of Mr. Bull's mother, when she was in her sober senses,
and between her and Lord Peter there had been a long variance. When Peterson
perceived that his company was not desired, he had so much good sense as to
leave Walter's plantation, and, paddling across a creek, seated himself on a
point of land that ran out into the lake. Of this he obtained a lease of his
old master, and went to work in the same manner as Walter had done, who, liking
his company best at a distance, was willing to supply him with bread and meat
till he could scramble for himself. Here he took to husbandry raising corn and
the narcotic weed, and buying up black cattle, and after a while turned his
produce into his old master's warehouse, and received from him the annual
compliment of a wagon load of dung, excepting that when there had not been so
much as usual made, he and Walter were to share a load between them.

TO ingratiate himself still farther with his old master, he accepted of a girl
out of his family for a wife, (for John was always fond of his tenants marrying
for fear of their doing worse) he took as little notice as possible of his
reputed father, and dropping, or disowning his nickname of Peterson, he
assumed that of Marygold, which old Madam Bull understood as a compliment to
one of her daughters. He also made his court to the old lady by kneeling down
and kissing the golden fringe of her embroidered petticoat, as was the fashion
of that day. This ceremony, though a trifle in itself, helped much to recommend
him to Mr. Bull, who was a very dutiful son, and took his mother's advice in
most parts of his business. In short, Cecilius was too much of a politician to
suppose that filial affection ought to stand in the way of a man's interest,
and in this he judged as many other men would have done in the same
circumstances.

Letter II.
Sickness and Delirium of Mr. BULL's Mother. -- Adventures of PEREGRINE PICKLE.
-- JOHN CODLINE. -- HUMPHRY PLOUGHSHARE. -- ROGER CARRIER, and THEOPHILUS
WHEAT-EAR.

DEAR SIR,
ABOUT the time in which these first attempts were making, and the fame of them
had raised much jealousy among some, and much expectation among others, there
happened a sad quarrel in John Bull's family. His mother, poor woman, had been
seized with hysteric fits, which caused her at times to be delirious and full
of all sorts of whims. She had taken it into her head that every one of the
family must hold knife and fork and spoon exactly alike; that they must all
wash their hands and face precisely in the same manner; that they must sit,
stand, walk, kneel, bow, spit, blow their noses, and perform every other animal
function by the exact rule of uniformity, which she had drawn up with her own
hand, and from which they were not allowed to vary one hair's breadth. If any
one of the family complained of a lame ancle or stiff knee, or had the crick in
his neck, or happened to cut his finger, or was any other way so disabled as
not to perform his duty to a tittle, she was so far from making the least
allowance, that she would frown, and scold, and rave like a bedlamite; and John
was such an obedient son to his mother, that he would lend her his hand to box
their cars, or his foot to kick their backsides, for not complying with her
humors. This way of proceeding raised an uproar in the family; for though most
of them complied, either through affection for the old lady, or through fear,
or some other motive, yet others looked sour, and grumbled; some would openly
find fault and attempt to remonstrate, but they were answered with a kick or a
thump, or a cat-o'nine-tails, or shut up in a dark garret till they promised a
compliance. Such was the logic of the family in those days!

AMONG the number of the disaffected, was Peregrine Pickle, a pretty clever
sort of a fellow about his business, but a great lover of sour crout, and of an
humor that would not bear contradiction. However, as he knew it would be
fruitless to enter into a downright quarrel, and yet could not live there in
peace; he had so much prudence as to quit the house, which he did by getting
out of the window in the night. Not liking to be out of employment, he went to
the house of Nicholas Frog, his master's old friend and rival, told him the
story of his sufferings, and got leave to employ himself in one of his
workshops till the storm should be over. After he had been here a while, he
thought Nick's family were as much too loose in their manners as Bull's were
too strict; and having heard a rumor of the Forest, to which Nick had some
kind of claim, he packed up his little all, and hired one of Nick's servants
who had been there a hunting, to pilot him to that part of the Forest to which
Nick laid claim. But Frog had laid an anchor to windward of him; for as Pickle
had said nothing to him about a lease, he supposed that when Peregrine had got
into the Forest he would take a lease of his old master Bull, which would
strengthen his title, and weaken his own; he therefore bribed the pilot to show
Peregrine to a barren part of the Forest, instead of that fertile place
Hudson's River.
to which he had already sent his surveyors, and of which he was contriving to
get possession. Accordingly the pilot having conducted Pickle to a sandy point
which runs into the lake, Cape Cod.
it being the dusk of the evening, The month of December.
bade him good night, and walked off. Peregrine, who was fatigued with his
march, laid down and went to sleep, but waking in the morning, saw himself
alone in a very dreary situation, where he could get nothing to live upon but
clams, and a few acorns which the squirrels had left. In this piteous plight,
the poor fellow folded his arms, and walking along the sandy beach, fell into
such a soliloquy as this. "So much for traveling! Abused by Bull, cheated by
Frog, what am I at last come to? Here I am alone, no creatures but bears, and
wolves, and such vermin around me! Nothing in the shape of an human being that
I know of, nearer than Pipeweed's plantation, and with him I cannot agree; he
is so devoted to old Dame Bull that he and I cannot live together any more than
I could with the old woman. But, why should I despair? That is unmanly; there
is at least a possibility of my living here, and if I am disappointed in my
worldly prospects, it is but right, for I professed not to have any. My wish
was to have my own way without disturbance or contradiction, and surely I can
here enjoy my liberty. I have nobody here to curse me, or kick me, or cheat me.
If I have only clams to eat, I can cook them my own way, and say as long a
grace over them as I please. I can sit or stand, or kneel, or use any other
posture at my devotions, without any cross old woman to growl at me, or any
hectoring bully to cuff me for it. So that if I have lost in one way I have
gained in another. I had better therefore reconcile myself to my situation, and
make the best of a bad market. But company is good! A propos! I will write to
some of my fellow-apprentices; I know they were as discontented as myself in
old Bull's family, though they did not care to speak their minds as plainly as
I did. I Will tell them how much happiness I enjoy here in my solitude. I Will
point out to them the charms of liberty, and coax them to follow me into the
wilderness; and by and by, when we get all together, we shall make a brave hand
of it." Full of this resolution, he sat down on a wind-fallen tree, and pulling
out his inkhorn and paper; wrote a letter to John Codline, Humphry Ploughshare,
and Roger Carrier, three of his fellow-apprentices, informing them of the
extreme happiness he enjoyed in having liberty to eat his scanty meals in his
own way, and to lay his swelled ancles and stiff knee in whatever posture was
most easy to him; conjuring them by their former friendship, to come to join
him in carrying on the good work so happily begun, etc. etc. As soon as he had
finished the letter, (which had deeply engaged his attention) a huntsman
happened to come along in quest of game. This was a lucky circumstance indeed,
for Peregrine had not once thought of a conveyance for his letter; it proved
also favorable to him in another view, for the huntsman taking pity on his
forlorn situation, spared him some powder and shot, and a few biscuit which he
happened to have in his pocket; so taking charge of the letter, he delivered it
as it was directed.

THIS letter arrived in good season, for old Madam had grown much worse since
Pickle had left the family; her vapors had increased, and her longings and
aversions were much stronger. She had a strange lurch for embroidered
petticoats and high waving plumes; her Christmas pies must have double the
quantity of spice that was usual; the servants must make three bows where they
formerly made but one, and they must never come into her presence without
having curled and powdered their hair in the pink of the mode, for she had an
aversion to every thing plain, and a strong relish for every thing gaudy.
Besides, she had an high-mettled chaplain Archbishop Laud.
who was constantly at her elbow, and said prayers night and morning in a
brocaded cope with a gilded mitre on his head; and he exacted so many bows and
scrapes of every one in the family, that it would have puzzled a French
dancing master to have kept pace with him. Nor would he perform the service at
all, unless a verger stood by him all the while with a yard-wand in his hand;
and if any servant or apprentice missed one bow or scrape, or made it at the
wrong time, or dared to look off his book, or said Amen in the wrong place, rap
went the stick over his head and ears or knuckles. It was in vain to appeal
from the chaplain or the old Dame to their master, for he was so obedient a son
that he suffered them to govern him as they pleased; nay, though broad hints
were given that the chaplain was an emissary of lord Peter, and was taking
advantage of the old lady's hysterics to bring the whole family into his
interest, John gave no heed to any of these insinuations.

AS soon as the letter of Peregrine Pickle arrived, the apprentices, to whom it
was directed, held a consultation what they should do. They were heartily tired
of the conduct of the chaplain; they lamented the old lady's ill health, and
wished for a cure; but there was at present no hope of it, and they concluded
that it was best to follow Pickle's advice, and retire with him into the
Forest. Though they were infected with the spirit of adventure, yet they were a
set of wary fellows, and knew they could not with safety venture thither unless
they had a lease of the land. Happily, however, for them, Bull had a little
while before that put the affairs of the Forest into the hands of a gentleman
of the law, The Council of Plymouth in Devonshire.
with orders to see that the matter was properly managed, so as to yield him
some certain profit. To this sage they applied, and for the proper fees, which
they clubbed for between them, they obtained a lease, under hand and seal;
wherein, for "sundry causes him thereunto moving, the said Bull did grant and
convey unto John Codline and his associates, so many acres of his Forest,
bounded so and so, and which they were to have, hold, and enjoy for ever and
ever, yielding and paying so and so, and so forth." When this grand point was
gained by the assistance of the lawyer and his clerks, who knew how to manage
business, the adventurers sold all their superfluities to the pawn-brokers, and
got together what things they supposed they should want, and leaving behind
them a note on the compter, Letter written on board the Arabella, after the
embarkation of the Massachusetts settlers.
to tell their master where they were bound, and what were their designs; they
set off all together and got safe into a part of the Forest adjoining to
Pickle, who, hearing of their arrival, took his oaken staff in his hand, and
hobbled along as fast as his lame legs could carry him to see them, and a
joyful meeting indeed they had. Having laid their heads together, it was agreed
that Codline should send for a girl whom he had courted, The Massachusetts
charter.
and marry her, and that he should be considered as the lord of the manor, that
Pickle should have a lease of that part which he had pitched upon, and that
Ploughshare and Carrier should for the present be considered as members of
Codline's family. John had taken a great fancy to fishing, and thought he could
wholly or chiefly subsist by it; but Humphry had a mind for a farm; so after a
while they parted in friendship. Humphry, with a pack on his back and a spade
in his hand, traveled across the Forest till he found a wide meadow with a
large brook Connecticut River.
running through it, which he supposed to be within John's grant, and intended
still to consider himself as a distant member of the family. But as it fell out
otherwise, he was obliged to get a new lease, to which Mr. Frog made some
objections, but they were overruled; and soon after another old fellow
servant, THEOPHILUS WHEAT-EAR, came and sat down by him. They being so much
alike in their views and dispositions, agreed to live together as intimates,
though in two families, which they did till Wheat-ear's death, when Ploughshare
became his sole heir, and the estate has ever since been his. This Humphry was
always a very industrious, frugal, saving husband; and his wife, though a
formal strait-laced sort of a body, yet always minded her spinning and
knitting, and took excellent care of her dairy. She always clothed her
children in homespun garments, and scarcely ever spent a farthing for
outlandish trinkets. The family and all its concerns were under very exact
regulations: not one of them was suffered to peep out of doors after the sun
was set. It was never allowed to brew on Saturday, lest the beer should break
the Fourth Commandment by working on Sunday: and once, it is said, the stallion
was impounded a whole week for holding crim. con. with the mare while the Old
gentleman was at his devotions. Bating these peculiarities, (and every body has
some) Humphry was a very good sort of a man, a kind neighbor, very thriving,
and made a respectable figure. Though he lived a retired life, and did not much
follow the fashions, yet he raised a good estate, and brought up a large
family. His children and grandchildren have penetrated the interior parts of
the country, and seated themselves on the best soil, which they know how to
distinguish at first sight, and to cultivate to the greatest advantage.
Wherever you find them, you find good husbandmen.

Letter III.
JOHN CODLINE quarrels with ROGER CARRIER, and turns him out of Doors. CARRIER
retires to another Part of the Forest. CODLINE surveys his Land; takes ROBERT
LUMBER under his Protection -- Begins a Suit with the Fishermen of LEWIS,
which, with other Incidents, excites the Jealousy of Mr. BULL.

DEAR SIR,
AFTER Ploughshare's departure, John Codline with his family kept on their
fishing and planting, and sometimes went a hunting, so that they made out to
get a tolerable subsistence. John's family grew, and he settled his sons as
fast as they became of age, to live by themselves; and when any of his old
acquaintance came to see him, he bade them welcome, and was their very good
friend, as long as they continued to be of his mind, and no longer; for he was
a very pragmatical sort of a fellow, and loved to have his own way in every
thing. This was the cause of a quarrel between him and Roger Carrier, for it
happened that Roger had taken a fancy to dip his head into water, Anabaptists.
as the most effectual way of washing his face, and thought it could not be
made so clean in any other way. John, who used the common way of taking water
in his hand, to wash his face, was displeased with Roger's innovation, and
remonstrated against it. The remonstrance had no other effect, than to fix
Roger's opinion more firmly; and as a farther improvement on his new plan, he
pretended that no person ought to have his face washed till he was capable of
doing it himself, without any assistance from his parents. John was out of
patience with this addition, and plumply told him, that if he did not reform
his principles and practice, he would fine him, or flog him, or kick him out of
doors. These threats put Roger on inventing other odd and whimsical opinions.
He took offense at the letter X, and would have had it expunged from the
alphabet, because it was the shape of a cross, and had a tendency to introduce
Popery. Roger Williams's zeal against the sign of the cross.
He would not do his duty at a military muster, because there was an X in the
colors. After a while he began to scruple the lawfulness of bearing arms, and
killing wild beasts. But, poor fellow! the worst of all was, that being seized
with a shaking palsy, Quakers.
which affected every limb and joint of him, his speech was so altered that he
was unable to pronounce certain letters and syllables as he had been used to
do. These oddities and defects rendered him more and more disagreeable to his
old friend, who, however, kept his temper as well as he could, till one day, as
John was saying a long grace over his meat, Roger kept his hat on the whole
time. As soon as the ceremony was over, John took up a case-knife from the
table, and gave Roger a blow on the ear with the broad side of it, then with a
rising stroke turned off his hat. Roger said nothing, but taking up his hat put
it on again; at which John broke out into such a passionate speech as this --
"You impudent scoundrel! is it come to this? Have I not borne with your whims
and fidgets these many years, and yet they grow upon you? Have I not talked
with you time after time, and proved to you as plain as the nose in your face
that your notions are wrong? Have I not ordered you to leave them off, and
warned you of the consequence, and yet you have gone on from bad to worse? You
began with dipping your head into water, and would have all the family do the
same, pretending there was no other way of washing the face. You would have had
the children go dirty all their days, under pretense that they were not able to
wash their own faces, and so they must have been as filthy as the pigs till
they were grown up Then you would talk your own balderdash lingo, thee and
thou, and nan forsooth -- and now you must keep your hat on when I am at my
devotions, and I suppose would be glad to have the whole family do the same!
There is no bearing with you any longer -- so now, hear me, I give you fair
warning, if you don't mend your manners, and retract your errors, and promise
reformation, I Will kick you out of the house. I Will have no such refractory
fellows here: I came into this forest for reformation, and reformation I will
have."

"FRIEND John (said Roger) do not thou remember when thou and I lived
together in friend Bull's family, how hard thou did think it to be compelled
to look on thy book all the time that the hooded chaplain was reading the
prayers, and how many knocks and thumps thou and I had for offering to use our
liberty, which we thought we had a right to? Did thou not come hitherunto for
the sake of enjoying thy liberty, and did not I come to enjoy mine? Wherefore
then do thou assume to deprive me of the right which thou claimest for
thyself?"

"DON'T tell me (answered John) of right and of liberty -- you have as much
liberty as any man ought to have. You have liberty to do right, and no man
ought to have liberty to do wrong."

"WHO is to be judge (replied Roger) of what is right or what is wrong? Ought
not I to judge for myself? or, Think thou it is thy place to judge for me?"

"WHO is to be judge? (said John) why the book is to be judge; and I have
proved by the book over and over again that you are wrong, and therefore you
are wrong, and you have no liberty to do any thing but what is right."

"BUT friend John, (said Roger) who is to judge whether thou have proved my
opinions or conduct to be wrong -- thou or I?"

"COME, come, (said John) not so close neither; none of your idle distinctions:
I say you are in the wrong, I have proved it, and you know it; you have sinned
against your own conscience, and therefore you deserve to be cut off as an
incorrigible heretic."

"HOW do thou know (said Roger) that I have sinned against my own conscience?
Can thou search the heart?"

AT this John was so enraged that he gave him a smart kick on the posteriors,
and bade him be gone out of his house, and off his lands, and called after him
to tell him, that if ever he should catch him there again he would knock his
brains out. Roger, having experienced the logic of the foot, applied to the
seat of honor, walked off, with as much meekness as human nature is capable
of, on such occasions; and having traveled as far as he supposed to be out of
the limits of John's lease, laid himself down by the side of a clear rivulet,
which slowed down a hill; here he composed himself to sleep, and on his awaking
found several bears about him, but none offered him any insult. Upon which he
said, and minuted it down in his pocketbook, "Surely the beasts of the
wilderness are in friendship with me, and this is designed by Providence The
town of Providence was built by emigrants from Massachusetts, of whom Roger
Williams was head.
as my resting place; here, therefore, will I pitch my tabernacle, and here
shall I dwell more in peace, though surrounded by bears and wolves, than when
in the midst of those whom I counted my brethren."

On this spot he built an hut, and having taken possession, made a visit to his
old master Bull, who gave him a lease of the place, with an island or two in an
adjoining cove of the great lake, and recommended to him a wife, by whom he had
a few children; but his plantation was chiefly increased by the flocking of
strangers to him; for he was a very hospitable man, and made it a rule in his
family not to refuse any who should come, whether lame or blind, short or tall,
whether they had two eyes or one, whether they squinted, or stammered, or
limped, or had any other natural defect or impediment; it was another rule that
all should bear with the infirmities of their neighbors, and help them as they
were able. Once, as I was passing through Roger's plantation, I saw one man
carrying another on his shoulders, which, at first, I thought a very odd sight;
upon coming up to them, I perceived that the lower one was blind, and the upper
one was lame, so as they had but one pair of eyes and one pair of legs between
them, the lame man availed himself of the blind man's legs, and he of the
other's eyes, and both went along very well together. I remember also, that as
I passed along, the fences were in some places made of very crooked, knotty
rails; but the crooks and knots were made to say into each other so cleverly,
that the fences were as tight as if they had been made of stuff sawed ever so
even; a circumstance which convinced me that very crooked things might be put
together, to advantage, if proper pains were taken.

WHEN John Codline had settled the controversy with Roger, by kicking him out
of doors, he began to look about him to see what his neighbors were doing.
Having found a young fellow on his north-eastern limits, who had come thither
without his knowledge or permission, he took it into his head to survey the
extent of his grounds. The words of his lease were rather ambiguous, and by
virtue thereof, he thought it convenient to extend his claims over the lands on
which Robert Lumber (for that was the name of the young fellow) had settled. It
seems that Bob had been sent by some of John Bull's family to erect a fishing
stage on the borders of the lake, and the lawyer who had the care of the forest
not being acquainted so much as he ought to have been with the situation of the
lands, or having no knowledge of the art of surveying, had made out a lease
which lapped over Codline's; so that each of them had a claim upon the same
land. In some circumstances this might have been deemed unfortunate, but as it
happened it proved lucky for poor Bob. His employers had left him in the lurch,
and he would have starved to death if John had not taken him under his wing and
sent him provisions to keep him alive. He also lent him a hand to clear up the
bushes, and furnished him with materials to build a saw-mill. This set Bob on
his own legs, and he proved a sturdy faithful fellow. He was of great service
to John in killing bears and wolves that infested his plantation; and when he
himself was in danger, John lent him powder, shot, and flints, and sent hands
to help him; and in so doing he served himself as well as his neighbor, which
was no breach of morality. Thus they lived pretty peaceably together, till
after a while Bob's old owners found the land was grown good for something, and
then (without paying John for his assistance in making it so) appealed to Mr.
Bull, and got it away, and took a large slice of John's land into the bargain.
The settling the line between Massachusetts and New Hampshire.
This was a matter which stuck in John's throat a great while, and if I am
rightly informed he has hardly swallowed it yet. He did not think himself
fairly dealt by, though he had all Peregrine Pickle's land put into a new lease
which Bull gave him. To be short, John Codline and John Bull never heartily
loved one another; they were in their temper and disposition too much alike;
each was eternally jealous of the other; and this jealousy was kept alive by a
variety of incidents which it would be too tedious to enumerate. One of them,
however, was of so singular a nature that I think it deserves to be remembered.
It was this. Lewis had erected a fishing stage and warehouse Louisburg.
on the northeast, which interfered with Codline's favorite employment.
Without consulting his old Master Bull, or waiting for his advice or orders,
Jack sent a bailiff with a writ of intrusion to the fishermen, and began a suit
in law. Mr. Bull hearing of it, was glad to take advantage of the circumstance
and ^ee council in the cause, which finally went in his favor. But though the
issue of the cause was of so much advantage to him; yet he ever after looked
upon Codline as a forward, meddling fellow, for running on that errand before
he was sent; and there were not wanting persons who were continually buzzing in
his ear, to keep a good look out on that impudent jackanapes, or he would soon
begin to think himself as good a man as his master.

Letter IV.
Attempt of NICHOLAS FROG and GUSTAVUS the Ironmonger, to intrude into the
Forest. -- Their quarrel. -- Mr. BULL's Sickness and Delirium. -- His Policy in
paying his Debts. -- His Quarrel with FROG, and its Termination by Compromise.
-- Plantation of CART-RUT and BARE-CLAY, called CAESAREA. -- Lease to CHARLES
INDIGO.

DEAR SIR,
IN my last letter I had got a little too forward in my story, in point of
time; but as I write by piecemeal, and often in a hurry, you must excuse
chronological inaccuracy. I now go back to tell you, that between the lands
occupied by Marygold, and those on which Ploughshare had made his settlement,
was a large tract of waste, where none of Mr. Bull's family had ever been; but
the report of the plantations which one and another of them had made, drew the
attention of Bull's neighbors. Among these, Nicholas Frog was not an idle
spectator. He was as sly a fellow as you will meet with in a summer's day,
always attentive to his interest, and never let slip an opportunity to promote
it. Observing that Mr. Bull was rather careless of the Forest, and trusted his
lawyers and servants* with the management of it, and knowing there was a large
slice of it unoccupied, he clandestinely sent out some surveyors in the
disguise of hunters, to make a description of the country, and report to him at
their return. Another good neighbor, Gustavus the ironmonger, was gaping after
it, and gave out word among his journeymen, that if any of them would adventure
thither and set up their trade, he would uphold them in their pretensions, and
lend them any assistance in his power. Accordingly one of them, by the name of
Casimir, ventured to make a beginning on the shore of a navigable creek; The
Delaware.
but did not care to penetrate far into the country, on account of the wolves
and bears, which were very numerous thereabout. As soon as Frog heard of this,
he picked a quarrel with Gustavus, and insisted that the land was his, by
possession, because he had already sent surveyors thither. It happened,
however, that the place which Frog's people had pitched upon was at the mouth
of another creek, Hudson's river.
at a considerable distance; where they had built a hut, on a point of land,
and farther up the creek had erected a kind of lodge or hunting house, Albany.
for the convenience of collecting game. On this plantation Frog had placed
Peter Stiver, a one-legged fellow, as his overseer. As soon as Peter heard of
the quarrel between his master and Gustavus, he thought the quickest way of
ending it was the best; and therefore, without waiting for orders or ceremony,
he went and commanded Casimir off the ground; and with one of his crutches beat
his house to pieces about his ears. The poor fellow stared at this rough
treatment; but was glad to escape with whole bones, and humbly requested leave
to remain there with his tools, promising to follow his business quietly, and
become an obedient servant to Mr. Frog. Upon these conditions he was permitted
to remain, and the whole tract was reputed Frog's property.

WHILE these things were doing, John Bull was confined to his house with a
violent fever and delirium, which ended in the hypochondria, The civil wars in
England.
and his imagination was the seat of every wild freak and strange vagary. One
while he fancied himself an absolute monarch; then, a presbyterian clergyman;
then a general of horse; then a lord protector: His noddle was filled with a
jumble of polemic divinity, political disputes, and military arrangements, and
it was not till after much blood-letting, blistering, vomiting, purging,
cold-bathing, and horse-trotting, that he began to mend. Under this severe but
wholesome regimen, he at length grew cool and came to himself, but found on his
recovery that his affairs had gone behind hand during his sickness. Beside the
loss of business, he had physicians' and apothecaries' bills to pay, and those
who had attended upon him as nurses, watchers, porters, etc. all expected wages
or douceurs, and were continually haunting him with, "How does your honor do? I
am glad to see your honor so well as to be abroad." They were continually
putting themselves in his way; and if they did not directly dun him for
payment, their looks were so significant that a man of less penetration could
easily have guessed what was their meaning.

BULL was somewhat perplexed how to answer all their demands and expectations.
He was too far behind hand to be able to satisfy them, and withal too generous
to let them remain unpaid. At length he hit on this expedient: "These fellows,
said he to himself, have served me well, and may be of use to me again. There
is yet a considerable part of my forest unoccupied. I Will offer to lease them
tracts of land which cost me nothing, and if they will accept them at a low
rent, they may prove useful servants, and I shall be a gainer as well as they."
Having come to this resolution, he began to inquire into the affairs of his
forest, and found that his neighbors had intruded upon his claim. Lewis had
taken possession at one end; Canada, possessed by the French.
Lord Strut at the other; Florida, possessed by the Spaniards.
Nicholas Frog in the middle, New Amsterdam and the New Netherlands, by the
Dutch.
and his own tenants had heen quarrelling with their new neighbors, as well as
among themselves. "Hey-day! says John, this will never do; I must keep a good
look out upon these dogs, or they will get the advantage of me." Away he goes
to Frog, and begun to complain of the ill treatment which he had received.
Frog, who had no mind either to quarrel, or to cry peccavi, like a sly, evasive
whore-son as he was, shrugged up his shoulders, disowned what his servants had
done, and said, "he supposed they only meant to kill game, and did not intend
to hold possession." Bull was not to be put off so; his blood was up, and he
determined to treat Frog's servants as they had treated Casimir. So, calling a
trusty old stud out of his compting house, "Here Bob, Sir Robert Carr's
expedition against New Amsterdam, now New York.
said he, take one of my hunters with a pair of bloodhounds, and go to that
part of the forest where Peter Stiver has encroached, give him fair warning;
tell him the land is mine, and I will have it; if he gives up at once, treat
him well, and tell him I Will give him leave to remain there; but if he offers to
make any resistance, or hesitates about an answer, set your dogs at him and
drive him off; kill his cattle, and set his house on fire: Never fear, I Will
bear you out in it." Away goes Bob, and delivered his message. Peter at first
thought it a matter of amusement, and began to divert himself with it; but as
soon as the dogs opened upon him, he found his mistake, and rather than run the
risk of being driven off, he quietly submitted to the conditions proposed.
"Hang it, said he to himself, what care I who is my landlord? Gain is my
object; I have already been at great expense, and have a prospect of getting an
estate. To remove will ruin me; I Will therefore stay here, and make money under
Bull, or Frog, or any other master that will let me stay."

IN a subsequent quarrel which happened between Bull and Frog, the latter
seized upon this plantation again, and Peter recognized his old master; but
upon a compromise it was given up to Bull in exchange for a tract of swamp
Surrinam.
which lay far to the southward. Peter continued on the ground through all
these changes, and followed his business with great diligence, collecting game
and pelts, and vending them sometimes to Mr. Bull, and sometimes to Mr. Frog.
However, Bull thought it best, that in token of subjection, he should change
his name; to which he consented, and partly to please his new master, and
partly to retain the remembrance of his old one, he dropped the name of Stiver,
and assumed the name of Bullfrog.

THE whole tract which was thus gotten from Frog, was thought too large for one
plantation, and therefore Mr. Bull, in pursuance of the plan which he had
formed, appropriated the rents of the plantation, on which Bullfrog was seated,
to his brother, Duke of York.
and the other was leased to two of his servants, CART-RUT and BARE-CLAY, and
some time after another tract was set off to WILLIAM BROADBRIM, whose father
had been an assiduous rat-catcher in Bull's family; but more of this hereafter.

CART-RUT and Bare-clay agreed to divide their land into two farms, which they
called the east and west farms; but when they came to run the division line,
their compasses differed so much that they could not fix the boundary. This was
one cause of dissension. Another was the different humors and dispositions of
their families. Those on the east farm were brought up under Mr. Bull's sister
PEG, and as it is well known that she and her brother had long been at
variance, so their domestics had got tinctured with the notions and prejudices
of their respective families. The family on the west farm was made up of
persons who were subject to the epidemic ague or shaking palsy; The Quakers.
with some stragglers from Bullfrog's and Casimir's families. From this
diversity of constitutions and humors arose bickerings and quarrels, a
disinclination to work and submit to family government. These disorders
continued a long while, and business went on very slowly, till at length the
heads of both families agreed to give up their separate leases, and take a new
one of the whole, and let Mr. Bull appoint an overseer. By these means peace
was restored, and the new overseer, who was supposed to be a descendant of a
natural son of JULIUS CAESAR, gave the name of his ancestor to the farm, which
has ever since been called CAESAREA.

THERE was another portion of the forest, which lay southward of Walter
Pipeweed's plantation, and which no person had yet taken up, though some had
made attempts and had been driven off by the numberless musquetoes and
sand-flies, which abound in those places. Mr. Bull was still desirous to reward
his friends in the cheapest manner, and at the same time to keep his neighbors
from encroaching upon him, and secure the possession of the forest to himself.
In pursuance of his plan, and to make short work of it at once, he leased the
whole of this southern extremity to CHARLES INDIGO, who was expressly ordered
to take under his care and into his family all persons who had attended Mr.
Bull, in his late sickness, in quality of nurses, druggists, apothecaries,
laundresses, upholsters, porters, watchers, etc. etc. By this order Charles
found himself at once surrounded by a large body of retainers of various ranks
and qualities, and, being a speculator himself, he employed a speculative man,
Mr. Padlock, who had written a large treatise upon Ideas, to draw up some
rules, for the management of such a family, intending when he should build an
house, to paste it up in the parlour, as a directory to his wife. Accordingly
Mr. Padlock went to work, and with an exquisite mixture of political and
metaphysical knowledge, distinguished between the hall, the parlour, the
dressing room, the gallery, the music-room, the bed-chambers, the chapel, the
kitchen, the water-closet, etc. showing what was to be done in each, and the
proper subordination of one to the other, all which would have been of
excellent service in a palace, and among people who had got to a high degree of
refinement, but was ill suited to the circumstances of new adventurers in a
forest. They rather needed to be instructed in the method of felling trees,
draining swamps, digging clams, guarding against musquetoes, killing wolves and
bears, and erecting huts to keep off the weather. To these necessary affairs
they were obliged to attend, and Mr. Padlock's fine spun rules were laid by and
little thought of.

CHARLES had pitched upon a sandy point, between two brooks, for his mansion
house, and had made a small beginning, when his repose was disturbed by one
AUGUSTINE, a lubberly fellow, who had taken a lease of Lord Strut, and lived
farther southward. This Strut was the largest landholder in the country, and
was never satisfied with adding field to field. He had already got much mere
than he could manage, and had greatly impoverished his homestead by attending
to his extra territories. His tenants were infected with the same land fever,
and wished to have no neighbors within sight or call. With this envious
disposition, Augustine collected a rabble of lousy fellows, and was coming to
dispossess Charles, thinking him too weak to make a defense; but Charles was a
lad of too much spunk to be brow-beaten. He armed all his people with some
weapon or other, and advanced till he came within sight of the place where
Augustine was, who, on seeing him, took wit in his anger, and went back,
without attempting any mischief.

ANOTHER difficulty which Charles expected to encounter was from the wild
beasts; but luckily for him, these creatures got into a quarrel among
themselves, and fought with each other till they had thinned their numbers
considerably, so that Charles and his companions could venture into the woods,
where they caught some few and tamed them, as was the usual practice among all
Mr. Bull's tenants at that day. Of this practice a more particular account
shall be given in my next letter.

Letter V.
Mr. BULL's Project of taming wild Animals. -- Its Execution by his Tenants. --
Their different Notions and Conduct in this Matter.

DEAR SIR,
YOU must have remarked in your acquaintance with the life and character of Mr.
John Bull, that he is very whimsical, and as positive as whimsical. Among other
advantages which he expected from the settlement of his Forest, one was, that
the wild animals, whom nature had made ferocious and untractable in the highest
degree, would be rendered tame and serviceable, by receiving instruction and
education from the nurturing hand of humanity. He had conceived a notion that
every creature has certain latent principles and qualities which form a
foundation for improvement; and he thought it a great piece of injustice that
these qualities should be suffered to remain uncultivated: he had a mind that
experiments should be attempted to discover how far this kind of cultivation
was practicable, and what use could be made of the animal powers under the
direction and control of rational government. Full of this idea, he came to a
resolution, that it should be the duty of every one of his tenants to catch
wild beasts of various sorts, and discipline them so as to find out their
several properties and capacities, and use them accordingly; and this kind of
service was mentioned in their respective leases as one condition of the grants.

SOME of the tenants, particularly Peregrine Pickle, John Codline, and Humphry
Ploughshare, entered zealously into the measure from principle. They had,
during Mr. Bull's sickness and delirium, before spoken of, formed an
association for their mutual safety. The united colonies of New England, 1643.
The object of their union was two fold: first, to endeavor by all fair means
to tame and discipline the wild beasts; and secondly, in case of their proving
refractory, to defend themselves against their attacks. The other tenants did
something in the same way; some from one principle, and some from another.
Peter Bullfrog, who was as cunning as any of them, made use of those which he
had tamed, as his caterers, to provide game for his table, of which the
feathers and furs served him as articles of traffic, and brought him in a
profitable return.

THE principal consideration (setting aside interest) which induced the more
zealous of the Foresters to enter into this business, was an idea that these
animals were a degenerated part of the human species, and might be restored to
their proper rank and order, if due pains were taken. The grounds of this
opinion were these: Among the traditions of the ancient Druids there was a
story, that out of twelve families which inhabited a certain district by
themselves, ten had been lost, and no account could be given of them; and,
where, said they, is it more likely to find them than in this forest, in the
shape of some other creatures? especially, if the doctrine of TRANSMIGRATION,
which the Druids held, be true. Another tradition was, that one of Mr. Bull's
great-great-uncles, by the name of Madok, had many years ago disappeared, and
the last account which had been received of him was, that he had been seen
going toward this forest; hence it was concluded that his descendants must be
found here. In confirmation of this argument, it was alleged, that the sounds
which some of these creatures made in their howlings, resembled the language
spoken in that day: nay, some were positive that they had heard them pronounce
the word Madokawando; The name of a Sachem, at Penobscot.
and one hunter roundly swore that he had seen in the den of a bear, an old
book which he supposed to be a Bible written in the Celtic language, and this
book they concluded must have been left there by Madok, who could read and
speak no other language. Another very material circumstance was the discovery
of a rock by the side of a brook, The celebrated rock at Dighton, in
Massachusetts.
inscribed with some characters which bore no resemblance to any kind of
writing, ancient or modern; the conclusion from hence was, that it must be of
the remotest antiquity: this rock was deemed an unaccountable curiosity, till a
certain virtuoso took it into his noddle, first to imagine, and then to become
extremely positive that the characters were Punic; and finally this inscription
was translated, and affirmed to be nothing less than a treaty of alliance and
commerce between the Phenicians and the first inhabitants of this forest. From
all these premises it was inferred, with some plausibility, and more
positiveness, that one species at least of the savage animals was descended
from Madok, and that the others were the posterity of the long lost ten
families, who were well known to have had a commercial connection with the
Phenicians, and that these probably found out their haunt, and followed them
for the sake of their former friendship. -- What happy light do modern
discoveries and conjectures throw on the dark pages of antiquity.

FROM these principles, as well as from motives of humanity and of interest,
some of the Foresters entered with zeal on the consideration and practice of
the best methods to fulfill this condition of their grants, the disciplining of
the savage animals, and they certainly deserve praise for their honest
endeavors; but, others who pretended to the same zeal, it is to be lamented,
made use of this pretense to cover their vanity or their avarice. Had none but
gentle means been used, it is probable more good might, on the whole, have been
produced; but as it often happens that many a good project has been ruined for
want of prudence in the execution, so it fared with this; for while the new
comers were busy in putting up their huts, and preparing the land for
cultivation, both of which were necessary before they could attend to any other
business, some of the savage tribe would be a little impertinent, either by
peeping into the huts, or breaking up a nest where the poultry were hatching,
or carrying off a chick or a gosling. These impertinencies bred frequent
quarrels, and the poor creatures were sometimes driven off with bloody noses,
or obliged to hop on three legs, or even laid sprawling and slyly covered with
earth, no service or ceremony being said over the carcass, and no other
epitaph, than "Poh, they are nothing but brutes, and where is the harm of
killing them!" or in rhyme thus:

"Tit for tat, tit for tat,
"He stole my chick, and I broke his back."
WHATEVER plausible excuses might have been made for these proceedings, they
served to render the creatures jealous of their new neighbors; but instead of
abating their appetite for mischief, it sharpened their invention to take more
sly methods of accomplishing it. The more wary of them kept aloof in the day
time, and would not be enticed by the arts which were used to draw them in;
however, they were sometimes pinched for food, and the new inhabitants used to
throw crusts of bread, handfuls of corn, and other eatables, in their way,
which allured them by degrees to familiarity. After a while it was found that
nothing succeeded so well as molasses. It was therefore thought a capital
maneuver to drop a train of it on the ground, which the creatures would
follow, licking it, till they had insensibly got up to the doors of the houses,
where if any body held a bowl or a plate besmeared with the liquor, they would
come and put their noses into it, and then you might pat them on the back and
sides, or stroke them, saying, "Poor Bruin, poor Isgrim, poor Reynard, poor
Puss," and the like, and they would suffer themselves to be handled and fondled
till they dropped asleep. When they awaked, they would make a moan and wag
their tails, as if they were asking for more, and if it was denied them, they
would retire to the woods in disgust, till the scent of the molasses operating
on their depraved appetites, invited them to return where it was to be had.
This was, upon repeated trial, found to be the most effectual way of taming
them, as they might be taught to imitate any kind of tricks and gestures, if a
dish of molasses was held out as a reward.

THE Foresters knew that they could not ingratiate themselves better with their
old master Bull, than by humouring his itch for projects. They therefore took
care to raise reports and write letters from time to time concerning the
wonderful success which they had met with in civilizing the savage animals.
Bull was greatly pleased with these reports, and made a practice of sending
presents of trinkets to be distributed among them; such as collars, earrings,
and nose-jewels. Several times some of the most stately and best instructed of
them were carried to his house for a show, where he had them dressed up in
scarlet and gold trappings, and led through all his apartments for the
entertainment of his family, and feasted with every nick-nack which his cook
and confectioner could procure. He was so fond of being thought their patron
and protector, that he usually spoke of them as his red children, from the
color of their hides. It is not many years since one of them, after being led
through several families and plantations of the tenants, was carried by a
certain witty cur, to Mr. Bull's own house, dressed in the habit of a
clergyman, having been previously taught to lift his paws and roll his eyes, as
if in the act of devotion. This trick was so well carried on, that the managers
of it picked up a large pocket full of pence, by exhibiting him for a raree
show, and the money was applied toward building a menagerie, to which beasts of
all kinds might be brought and tamed. This project, like many such whims, has
made more noise than profit; for most of those who were supposed to be tamed
and domesticated, after they had been sent back to their native woods, with a
view to their being instrumental in taming their fellow savages, have returned
to their former ferocious habits, and some of them have proved greater rogues
than ever, and have done more mischief than they could otherwise have been
capable of.

MR. Bull himself was once so full of the project, that he got his chaplain and
some others to form themselves into a club; the professed object of which was,
to propagate knowledge among these savage creatures. After some trials, which
did not answer expectation, old Madam Bull conceived that the money which was
collected might as well be expended in teaching Mr. Bull's own tenants
themselves a little better manners; for some of them were rather awkward and
slovenly in their deportment, while others were decent and devout in their own
way. Madam, as we have before observed, was a great zealot in the cause of
uniformity, and had a vast influence over her son, by virtue of which, the
attention of the club was principally directed to the promoting of this grand
object. Accordingly, every one of the tenants was furnished with a Bible and a
Prayer Book, a clean napkin, basin, platter, and chalice, with a few devotional
tracts, and some young adventurers who had been educated in the family, were
recommended as chaplains; who had also by-orders to keep a look out toward the
savage animals, when they should fall in their way.

THE chaplains were tolerably well received in most of the families; but some,
particularly Codline and Ploughshare, who gloried in being able to say their
prayers without book, always looked sour upon them, and would frequently say to
them, "Go, take care of the savage objects of your mission, and don't come here
to teach us, till you have learned better yourselves." The chaplains in
disgust, and perhaps in revenge, (for they were but men of like passions) would
pout and swell and call schismatic and other canonical nicknames, of which
there is extant a large vocabulary, and would frequently write letters, much to
the disadvantage of their opponents. It is not many years since they, with the
club which sent them, were pretty severely handled by one of Codline's own
chaplains, Dr. M -- y -- w.
and it is supposed that they have ever since been more modest; certain it is,
that they are now on better terms with their neighbors than formerly; this
may, in part, be owing to Mr. Bull's deserting them and refusing to pay them
for their services ever since the time that he began to quarrel with his
tenants. On that occasion some of them removed their quarters; others kept
their old places, and have got along as well as they could without the help
which they formerly received.

Letter VI.
Adventures of CHARLES INDIGO and PETER PITCH. -- Character of WILLIAM
BROADBRIM. -- His Projects, Principles, and a Specimen of his Harangues.

DEAR SIR,
I HAVE observed in a former letter, that the lease which Mr. Bull gave to
Charles Indigo, obliged him to receive into his family all such persons as had
been attendants on Mr. Bull during his sickness, and for whom he had no other
means of providing. This general indulgence procured to Charles the reputation
of a very friendly, hospitable person, and induced great numbers of other
people of various characters, views, and interests, to seek an asylum within
his limits. About this time Mr. Lewis had grown sick and peevish, and had
severely cudgelled some of his apprentices, because they did not make their P's
and Q's exactly to his mind. Revocation of the edict of Nantz, by Lewis XIV.
168^.
The poor fellows, to prevent worse treatment, fled from his house, and took
refuge with Mr. Bull, who treated them civilly, and recommended them to the
Forest, where they dispersed themselves in the several families of his tenants,
and a large party of them took up their abode with Charles, to whom they proved
an industrious, profitable acquisition, though some of the family looked a
little sourly upon them.

THIS facility of admitting strangers produced an effect which had almost
proved fatal to the reputation of the family; for a number of highwaymen also
sought shelter there, and by means of their gold and silver, which they had in
plenty, made friends in the house, and were admitted by night at a back door.
After a while they grew more bold, and came in the day time, under the disguise
of pedlars, with packs on their shoulders. One of them actually took his stand
behind a corner of one of the fences, from whence he sallied out on travelers;
this corner obtained, from that circumstance, the name of Cape Fear; and as the
first names of places are not easily got rid of, it retains the name to this
day, and perhaps will ever retain it. Here the rascal intended to have built
himself a lodge, and taken up his quarters for life; but the matter was now
grown so public, that Charles, for the honor of his family, ordered all
stragglers to be seized, and this fellow in particular, after a severe
struggle, was apprehended and brought to justice.

THE same spot was afterward taken possession of by PETER PITCH, a poor fellow
who got his living as he did his name, from collecting the resmous juice of the
numerous pines which grew thereabout. He had to work hard and fare hard, and go
a great way for his victuals and clothes; but after he had lived alone for some
time, he picked up one or two acquaintances of his own stamp, and they formed a
family, which was at first rather disorderly. Farther discovery of the lands,
and the advantage of the water carriage, induced some other people to sit down
by him, and in process of time he became so respectable as to be noticed by Mr.
Bull, who, though he never gave him a lease in form, yet let him have cloth and
haberdashery upon credit, and took his pitch in payment as fast as he could
collect it. This kept him in a dependent state, and subjected him to
impositions from Bull's clerks and journeymen. About five and twenty years ago,
Bull sent him a tailor to try on a new coat, Insurrections in North Carolina,
1771.
which was so strait that it split in several places, and never could be
altered so as to fit him; but he was obliged to wear it, rather than quarrel
with his patron. This same tailor was remarkable for cabbaging, as Peter
Bullfrog and Humphry Ploughshare have since had large experience.

TO finish what relates to Charles Indigo, I shall observe, that the land on
which he began his plantation, was in general so wet and miry, that it was
unfavourable to the production of wheat, and it was for some time doubtful
whether he would be able to raise his own bread. Chance at length effected what
labor and ingenuity could not: a bird of passage having dropped some kernels
of rice in his dung, it was found to thrive exceedingly well; from whence the
hint was taken, and rice became the standard grain of the plantation. By the
cultivation of this, and of a weed which was useful to the dyers, he grew rich,
and made a sightly figure among his neighbors in point of dress and equipage;
though his countenance is rather sallow, and he is subject to frequent returns
of the intermittent fever.

BY the extensive lease given to Indigo and his associates, most of Mr. Bull's
dependants and attendants were provided for, and their services recompensed
with a show of generosity on his part, and of satisfaction on theirs. I have
before just hinted at a grant made to WILLIAM BROADBRIM, of which I shall now
give a more particular account.

HIS father had been an old servant of Mr. Bull, and had been employed in the
very laborious and necessary business of catching and killing rats. In this
employment he was so very dexterous and successful, that he recommended himself
highly to his master, who not only allowed him large wages, but promised him
farther recompense. During Mr. Bull's sickness, the care and diligence of this
faithful servant had been unremitted, and his merits were thereby increased, so
that Mr. Bull, on his recovery, found himself deeply indebted to him, and he
still continued his services* till, worn out with age and infirmity, he died
and had an honorable funeral.

HIS son William then became his heir, and solicited for payment of the arrears
due to his father, which Mr. Bull, according to the maxim he had laid down for
himself, and urged by the necessity of the occasion, proposed to discharge by a
lease of part of the Forest. This happened to fall in, exactly, with William's
views, which were of a singular nature.

ABOUT this time a nervous disorder appeared in Bull's family, which went by
the name of the shaking palsy. Quakerism.
We shall not pretend to trace the causes of it, as the origin of such things
is often obscure and impenetrable; but the effects were, a trembling of the
nerves, a stiffness in the neck and shoulders, and a hesitancy in the speech,
so that it was impossible for the patients to incline the head, or pronounce
certain words and syllables, such as Sir, Madam, your Honor, my Lord, etc. nor
could one of them raise his hand to take off his hat, or hold it on the book
when an oath was to be administered.

MR. Bull's choleric temper misinterpreted this natural infirmity into a sullen
disrespect. When he found a change in the behavior of these domestics; that
instead of bowing to him they stood upright as a may pole, and instead of Sir,
and your Honor, they could utter nothing but Friend, he grew angry, and made a
pretty free use of his fist; and when he found that they could not be cured by
such means, he thrust some of them into a dark closet, and shut them up till
they should, as he termed it, "learn better manners;" and it is supposed he
would have carried his resentment much further, but for this circumstance:
William Broadbrim, who had himself strong symptoms of the disorder, whispered
to Mr. Bull, that if he would give him time to ripen a project, which he had
conceived, he would rid him of all trouble with these people. William had a
plodding genius, and the scheme with which his head was pregnant at this time,
was nothing more or less than to make a settlement in the forest, and take all
these people with him. Bull, who was glad to get rid of them, and of the debt
which he owed to William, readily fell in with the project; and a grant was
made out under hand and seal, wherein William Broadbrim, and his heirs, were
invested with the right of soil, and all other privileges of proprietorship, in
a certain part of the forest, between the plantation of Marygold and that of
Cart-rut and Bare-clay, being in the neighborhood of the spot where Casimir
had rebuilt his hut, and lived in an ambiguous situation, not knowing who was
his landlord. With him William made a peaceable compromise, saying, "Friend, I
will do thee no violence, there is room enough for us both." Casimir was glad
of so good a neighbor, and he had reason to be, for he throve more rapidly
after this than before.

WILLIAM pitched upon a level piece of ground, where two large brooks met, for
the situation of his mansion house, and went to work to draw up rules for the
government of his family. One of which was, that no person should be refused
admittance into it, or disturbed in it, or cast out of it, on account of any
natural infirmity. Another was, that no arms nor ammunition should ever be made
use of, on any pretense whatever. The first of these rules gained William great
reputation among all sensible men; the latter was a notion which candor would
lead us to suppose proceeded from a love of peace, and the exercise of good
will toward his fellow creatures; though some were so ill-natured as to imagine
that it was an effect of the disorder in his nerves.

WHEN any of William's neighbors, who were of a different way of thinking,
spoke to him of the impolicy of this rule, and asked him how he expected to
defend himself and his family against the wild beasts, if they should attack
him; William, who was fond of harangue, would answer thus -- "There is in all
creatures a certain instinct, which disposes them to peace. This instinct is
so strong and fixed, that upon it, as upon a foundation, may be erected a
complete system of love and concord, which all the powers of anarchy shall not
be able to overthrow. To cultivate and improve this instinct, is the business
of every wise man, and he may reasonably expect that an example of this kind,
if steadily and regularly adhered to, will have a very extensive and beneficial
influence, on all sorts of creatures; even the wild beasts of the forest will
become tame as lambs, and birds of prey harmless as doves. Do thou not see,
friend, what influence my example has already had on those creatures which are
deemed savage? I go into their dens with safety, and they enter my habitation
without fear. When they are hungry I feed them, when they are thirsty I give
them drink, and they in return bear my burdens, and do such other kind offices
as they are capable of, end I require of them. I have even tamed some of them
so far, that they have sold me the land on which they live, and have
acknowledged the bargain by a mark made with their toe-nails on parchment. They
are certainly some of the best natured creatures in the world; their native
instinct leads them to love and peace, and sociability; and as long as I set
them a good example, I have no doubt they will follow it. When such is my
opinion and expectation, why should I be anxious about what may, and I trust
never will happen? Why should I put myself in a posture of defense against
those who may never attack me? or, why should I, by the appearance of jealousy
and distrust on my part, offend those who now put confidence in me? No, no, I
will not suppose that they will ever hurt me. I will not suffer the carnal
weapon to be seen in my house, nor shall one of my family ever learn the
detestable practice of pulling the trigger. I leave the instruments of
destruction to the offspring of Cain and the seed of the serpent; whilst I
meekly imitate the gentleness of the lamb, and the innocence of the dove."

WITH such harangues William would frequently entertain himself and his
friends, and he was so sanguine in his benevolent project, that instead of
having his own name, as was usual, written over his door, he had the words
BROTHERLY LOVE, translated into the Greek language, PHILADELPHIA, and inscribed
in golden characters, as a standing invitation to persons of all nations and
characters, to come and take shelter under his roof.

Letter VII.
Dissensions in BROADBRIM's Family. -- His Aversion to Firearms and its
Consequence. Mr. BULL's second Sickness, and second Marriage. -- His Project
for making a new Plantation. -- The Care of it committed to GEORGE TRUSTY. --
Trout Fishery established at the Plantation of ALEXANDER SCOTUS.

DEAR SIR,
THE general invitation which William Broadbrim had given to all persons who
were destitute of a home, to come and take shelter under his roof, and the
gentle, humane treatment which those who accepted the invitation met with,
spread his fame abroad, and brought him much company. His family was sometimes
compared to the Ark of Noah, because there was scarcely any kind of being, of
whatever shape, size, complexion, disposition, or language, but what might be
found there. He had also the art to keep them pretty well employed. Industry,
frugality, and temperance, were the leading principles of his family; and their
thriving was in a ratio compounded of these three forces. Nothing was wanting
to make them as happy a family as any in the world, but a disposition among
themselves, to live in peace. Unluckily, this desirable blessing, on account of
the variety of their humors and interests, was seldom found among them.
Ambition, jealousy, avarice, and party spirit, had frequent out-breakings, and
were with difficulty quelled. It is needless to enter into a very particular
discussion of the grounds or effects of these dissensions: family quarrels are
not very entertaining either at home or abroad, unless to such as delight in
scandal. But there was one cause of dissension which it would be improper not
to notice, because I have already hinted at the principle from which it
proceeded. William's aversion to firearms was so strong, that he would not
suffer any of his family to molest the wild inhabitants of the forest, though
they were ever so mischievous. While the family was small, the savage animals
who lived in the neighborhood, being well fed, were tolerably tame and civil,
but when the increased number of the family had penetrated farther into the
forest, the haunts of the natives were disturbed, and the straggling laborers
were sometimes surprised, and having nothing to defend themselves with, fell a
sacrifice to savage resentment. Remonstrances were presented to Mr. Broadbrim
one after another, but he always insisted on it that the sufferer must have
been the aggressor, and that "they who take the sword, must expect to perish by
the sword." At length the dead corpse of one of the laborers, mangled and torn
in a dreadful manner, was brought and laid at the door of William's parlour,
State house, 1755.
with a label affixed to the breast, on which were written these words, "Thou
thyself must be accounted my murderer, because thou did deny me the means of
defense." At sight of this horrid spectacle, Broadbrim turned pale! the eye of
his mind looked inward! Nature began to plead her own cause within him! he gave
way in some degree to her operations, though contrary to his pre-conceived
opinion, and with a trembling hand signed a permission for those to use the
carnal weapon, Militia act.
who could do it without scruple; and when they asked him for money to buy
guns, powder and ball, he gave them a certain sum to provide the necessaries of
life, leaving them to put their own construction on the words. By degrees his
squeamishness decreased, and though it is imagined he has still some remainder
of it, yet necessity has so often overcome it, that there is not much said on
the subject, unless it be very privately and among friends.

DURING the time of which we have been speaking, Mr. John Bull had undergone
another sickness, The Revolution, 1688.
not so long nor so violent as the former, but much more beneficial in its
effects. His new physicians had administered medicines which composed his
nerves; he ate, drank, and slept more regularly; and he was advised to marry
again, for his former wife had died of a consumption a little before this
sickness came on. By these means his vigor was renewed, but still his
whimsical disposition remained, and broke out on several occasions. When he
viewed his extensive forest, now planted and thriving, under the honest hand of
industry, he thought within himself that still greater advantages might be
derived from that territory. There was yet a part of it unsettled between the
plantation of Charles Indigo, and the dominions of Lord Strut; and Bull thought
it a pity to let so much remain a wilderness. The other plantations had been
made by discontented servants and needy adventurers, who, struggling with
hardships, by a steady perseverance had surmounted many difficulties, and
obtained a comfortable living. "Now, said Bull, if these fellows have done so
well, and got so far aforehand, without having any capital of their own to
begin with, what cannot be done by the force of my great capital? If they have
performed such wonders, what greater wonders may be brought into view by my own
exertions, with all the advantages which it is in my power to command? To it,
boys; I vow I Will have a farm of my own that shall beat you all!" -- Having hit
upon this project, his brains immediately became pregnant with ideas; but
according to the rule which he had lately prescribed to himself, he
communicated the matter to his wife. This good lady was not free from an
ambitious turn of mind. She was extremely fond of having it thought that she
had great influence over her husband, and would sometimes gratify his humor at
the expense of her own judgment, rather than not keep up this idea. His
expectations from his new project were very sanguine. The land on which he had
cast his eye was enough for a large farm; it had a southern exposure; it was
warm, rich and fertile in some parts, and in others boggy or sandy. He had
conversed with some foreigners, who told him that it was proper for the
cultivation of wine and silk, and he imagined that if he could but add these
articles to the list of his own productions, there would be a great saving in
the family. Mrs. Bull too was pleased with the idea of having her silk gowns
and ribbands of her own growth, and with the expectation of having the vaults
filled with wine, made on her own plantation; for these and other good reasons,
her thereunto moving, Madam gave her consent to the project. The person
appointed to carry it into execution was George Trusty, a sensible well bred
merchant, but one who had only speculated in the science of agriculture, and
knew nothing of it by experience. Having collected a number of poor people who
were out of employment, he sent them to the spot, with strict orders to work
six days in seven, to keep their tools free from rust, and their firearms in
readiness for their defense. Whatever they should earn was to be their own as
long as they lived, and after their death their possessions were to descend to
their sons, and in default of male issue to revert to the original grantor.
They were not allowed to use black cattle in the labor of the field; and were
expressly forbidden to drink grog. Their business was to cultivate vines and
mulberry trees, and to manufacture wine and silk. Upon this project another was
grafted by the very sagacious Doctor Squintum, who chose this new plantation as
the most convenient spot in the world for a charity school, where Orphans might
receive the best education, and be fitted to be the pillars of church and State.

BUT notwithstanding the sums which Bull so freely lavished out of his bags for
the support of the vine and mulberry plantations; and notwithstanding the
collections which Squintum made among his numerous devotees, these projects
were either so impracticable in themselves, or so ill conducted in the
execution, that neither of them answered the expectations of the projectors.
For want of black cattle, the soil could not be properly tilled; and for want
of grog, the laborers fainted at their work; the right of inheritance being
limited to the male line, women and girls were not fond of living there, and
the men could not well live without them; land, cattle, women and grog, were to
be had elsewhere, and who would be confined to such a place? The land, too, was
claimed by Lord Strut, who sent them writs of ejectment. As to the charity
school, it was on trial found that the cost was more than the profit, and the
building, which had swallowed up thousands of charity money, was finally
consumed by fire. Poor George Trusty was discouraged, and begged Mr. Bull to
take the plantation into his own hands; however, Bull continued to supply him
with cash, and he kept on making attempts. Alterations were made in the terms
of settlement, the restrictions were removed, cattle and grog were allowed,
Lord Strut was ousted, and possession held; the swamps were drained; rice and
indigo were cultivated instead of silk and wine; and upon the whole,
considerable improvements were made, though at such a vast expense, that Mr.
Bull never saw any adequate returns.

THE ill success of this adventure did not deter him from another project. He
was extremely fond of Trout, Cod fishery.
and thought if he could have them regularly catched and brought to his table,
he should exceed all his neighbors in delicate living; and now and then be
able to send a mess to his particular friends. Lord Peter's family, too, he
thought, would be glad to buy them, as they were very useful in the long lents,
and frequent meagre days observed by them. There was a part of the forest on
the north-east quarter, which was very conveniently situated for this
employment. It had been occupied by ALEXANDER SCOTUS, a purblind fellow, who
had straggled thither no one could tell how; and it was matter of doubt whether
he derived his right from Bull, or Lewis; for both of them laid claim to the
land, and their claims had not been fairly decided in law. To make sure of the
matter, Mr. Bull, by advice of his wife, sent a wagon to bring off the family
of Scotus, whom he distributed among the other families of his tenants; and in
their room sent thither 1749.
a parcel of naked, half starved people, who could live no where else, and
supported them for several years with provisions, furnished them with skiffs,
lines, hooks and other implements to carry on the fishery; but every trout
which they catched, cost him ten times as much as if he had bought it in the
common market; nor could he, after all, get half of what he wanted for his own
consumption. His trout fishery, and his mulberry plantation, rendered him the
laughing stock of his neighbors, nor could he ever gain even the interest of
the money which he had laid out upon them; while the foresters who had settled
at their own expense, grew rich and became respectable. He had indeed the
benefit of their trade, which kept his journeymen at work, and obliged him to
enlarge their number; for the foresters had a respect for their old master and
landlord, and when they had any thing to sell, they always let him have the
refusal of it, and bought all their goods of him. But though he called himself
their father, and his wife their mother, yet he began to abate of his parental
affection for them; and rather looked on them with a jealous eye, as if they
were aiming to deprive him of his claim, and set up for independence. Had he
been contented with the profits of their trade, as was certainly his interest,
they might have remained his tenants to this day; but ambition, avarice,
jealousy and choler, inflamed by bad counselors, have wrought such a
separation, that it is thought Mr. Bull will go mourning all the remainder of
his days, and his gray hairs will be brought down with sorrow to the grave.

Letter VIII.
Mr. BULL's Quarrel and Lawsuit with LEWIS and Lord STRUT. -- He gains
Possession of the whole Forest.

DEAR SIR,
IN my former letters I have endeavored to trace the several steps by which
the forest became cultivated and peopled. Mr. Bull had no less than fourteen
tenants who held under him, and were settled on lands which he claimed as his
own, and which he had granted to them in separate parcels. Their names, were as
follows: Alexander Scotus, Robert Lumber, John Codline, Roger Carrier, --
Casimir, William Broadbrim, Cecilius Marygold, Walter Pipeweed, Humphry
Ploughshare, Peter Bullfrog, Julius Caesar, Peter Pitch, Charles Indigo, George
Trusty.


IT was observed that of all the adventurers, those generally were the least
thriving, who received most assistance from their old master. I cannot tell
whether it was owing to their being employed in business to which they had not
served a regular apprenticeship, or to a natural indolence, and a disposition
to continue hangers-on where they had got a good hold; for it must be noted,
that Mr. Bull was very generous to some persons, and on some occasions where it
suited his fancy; and this disposition in him was so prevalent, that they who
kenned him, and would humor his whims, could work him out of any thing which
they had a mind to.

ON the other hand, those adventurers who came into the forest on their own
account, and had no assistance at all from their old master, nor any thing to
help themselves with, but their four limbs and five senses, proved to be the
most industrious and thriving, and after a while told up a good estate. They
all seemed to have an affection for Mr. Bull, and it was generally believed to
be sincere. His house was usually spoken of by them as their home. His
warehouse was the center of their traffic; and he had the address to engross
the profits of their labor, and draw their earnings into his own fob. To some
of them he would now and then make a present, to others he would lend a pack of
his hounds, when he was out of the humor of hunting; but they were generally
useless to them for the purpose of scouring the woods; those who could afford
it, kept dogs of their own, who were better trained to the game, and could
better scent the forest, being native curs, and not so spruce and delicate a
breed as Bull's greyhounds.

IT has been before observed, that each end of the forest was occupied by
Bull's rivals. His old neighbor Lewis had got the north end, and Lord Strut
the south. Bull's tenants had seated themselves chiefly on or near the shore of
the lake, and had not extended very far back, because of the beasts of prey;
but Lewis, like a cunning old fox, had formed a scheme to get footing in the
interior parts of the country, and prevent these planters from penetrating
beyond the limits which he intended to assign them. His emissaries had been
sent slily into the distant parts of the forest, under pretense of taming these
beasts of prey; but in fact they had halved the matter with them, and had
themselves become as savage as the beasts had become tame. They would run, leap
and climb with them, and crawl into their dens, imparting to them a lick of
molasses out of their calabash, and teaching them to scratch with their paws
the sign of a cross. They had built several hunting lodges on the most
convenient passes of the brooks and ponds, and though thus scattered in the
wood, were all united under one overseer, called ONONTIO, who lived in the
mansion house of St. Lewis's Hall.

IT was matter of wonder among Bull's tenants, for some time, what could be the
reason that the wild beasts had grown more surly and snappish of late than
formerly; but after a while, some hunters made a discovery of the new lodges,
which the emissaries of Onontio had erected, and the design of them being
apparent, a general alarm was raised in the plantations. On the first news,
Walter Pipeweed sent his grandson George, a smart, active, lively youth, across
the hills, with his compliments to the intruders, desiring them to move off,
and threatening them with a writ, in case of noncompliance. 1753.
This modest warning being ineffectual, it was thought that if an Union could
be formed among the tenants, they might make a stand against these
encroachments. A meeting was held at Orange Hall, Albany, 1754.
but no efficient plan could be hit on, without a previous application to their
landlord, who hearing of this meeting, conceived a jealousy with regard to this
union which seemed to be their object, and thought it was better to retain the
management of the matter in his own hands, and keep them divided among
themselves, but united in their dependence on him. He therefore sent them word
that "he had a very great affection for them, and would take care of their
interest, which was also his own; that he would not suffer Lewis to set his
half tamed wild beasts upon them, nor eject them from their possessions, but
that he would immediately take advice of his council, learned in the law,
conjuring them by the affection which they professed to bear toward him, to be
aiding and assisting in all ways in their power, toward bringing the
controversy to an issue.

AT this time, the steward, to whom Mr. Bull entrusted the care of his
^^siness, was not a person of that discernment and expedition which the
exigency of affairs required. He had committed diverse blunders in his accounts,
and it was suspected that he was a defaulter in more respects than one. It
cannot, therefore, be expected, that in conducting a controversy of this
magnitude, he should exactly hit on the right methods, nor employ the best
council which could be had. The first step taken was to send Broadoak Braddock,
1755.
the bailiff, with a writ of intrusion, which he was ordered to serve volens
nolens, upon one of the messuages or hunting-seats of Lewis. This bailiff,
proceeding rashly and against the best advice into the forest, not a step of
which he was acquainted with, found his progress impeded in a way wholly
unexpected. For Onontio had taken care to place a number of his half tamed
wild-cats and wolverenes on the boughs of trees, which hung over the path, and
as soon as the bailiff came within reach, having first wetted their tails with
their own urine, they whisked it into his eyes till they blinded him. This
maneuver put a stop to the process for that time.

SEVERAL other attempts of the like kind were made without success, and Lewis
at one time had almost got possession of Orange Hall 1757.
Not only the foresters themselves, but even Bull's own domestics, complained
bitterly of these ineffectual measures, and their clamors at last prevailed to
make him discharge his old steward, and put another into his place. The new
officer Pitt's administration.
soon changed the face of affairs; he employed no attorneys, nor bailiffs, but
those of tried and approved abilities, men of enterprise and resolution, by
whom the suit was prosecuted in good earnest. In every action Bull recovered
judgment, and got possession. When Lord Strut came in to the aid of Lewis, Bull
cast him also, and took away his manor of Augustine, which, with the whole
tract of land, where Onontio presided, was annexed to his estate. The agents
who had been employed in this arduous service, were not only well paid for
doing their duty, but, with the steward who employed them, were honored
according to the ancient but whimsical custom of Bull's family, by having their
effigies pourtrayed on sign-boards, pocket handkerchiefs, snuff-boxes, and
punch-bowls; so that while the fit lasted, you could not walk the streets, nor
blow your nose, nor take a pinch of snuff, nor a draught of punch, but you were
obliged to salute them.

WHENEVER Bull's steward called upon the foresters for their quotas of aid
toward carrying on this heavy lawsuit, they always readily afforded it; and
some of them were really almost exhausted by the efforts which they made, to do
more than their share. The steward was so sensible of their merit, that on due
consultation with Mr. Bull's wife, and her taking him in the right mood, he was
prevailed upon to reimburse the extra expense to them, and mutual complacency
reigned between the landlord and tenants all the time this steward remained in
office. But these times were too good to last long; there were some who envied
the steward his reputation, and raised stories to his disadvantage, which
highly affronted him. At this time Mr. Bull was so much off his guard, as to
give heed to these reports, and take a rash step in a hurry, which he had
occasion to repent of at his leisure. He accepted the resignation of this
trusty servant, and put one of his Bute's administration, 1761.
sister Peg's cast off footmen into his place; whereby he laid a foundation for
his own disgrace, and the dismemberment of his estate, of which I shall give
you a particular account hereafter.

ADIEU.

Letter IX.
Mr. BULL gets into Debt, and by the Advice of his new Wife and her gambling
Companions, begins a Quarrel with his Tenants.

DEAR SIR,
TO trace with precision all the causes, great and small, which operated to the
dismemberment of John Bull's estate, would be no easy task; some of them
perhaps, were secret, but of such as were open to observation, we shall
endeavor to sketch out the principal.

IT is well known that he was of a choleric habit, and that those who were
acquainted with his humor and passions, could manage and impose upon him at
their pleasure. Had he been let alone to pursue his own business himself, his
plain, natural good sense, and generosity of mind, would have kept him clear of
many difficulties; but he had his advisers, his hangers-on, his levee-hunters,
his toad-eaters, and sycophants, forever about him, who, like a parcel of
blood-suckers, could never have enough to glut their voracity.

WHEN the forest was first occupied by the tenants, Bull had a wife who minded
her own domestic business, and did not concern herself with his landed
interest. The leases and grants were made out in his name, and he was supposed
to be the owner or proprietor; but the lady whom he had married after his
second sickness, was very assuming, and insisted on having her hand in the
management of all his affairs. She visited the compting-house, and made the
clerks show her their books; she overhauled the steward's accounts, and
inspected his correspondence; she not only looked after the rents and incomes
of the forest, but even intruded into the household concerns of the tenants,
and affected to call herself their mother, because she had taken some care of
one or two of them in their first setting out, although most of them scarcely
ever had seen her face, or had any acquaintance with her, but by hearsay.

IT must be observed, also, that this woman had engaged Mr. Bull in some
expensive lawsuits and speculations, which had got him deeply into debt, and
he was obliged to hire money of usurers to carry her schemes into execution.
Had she, at the same time, introduced that frugality and economy into the
family, which her duty ought to have prompted her to, this debt might have been
kept down; but the swarm of harpies which were continually about her, and the
course of gambling which was carried on under her connivance and direction,
swallowed up all the profits of the trade, and incomes of the land; while the
luxury and dissipation of the family increased, in proportion as the means of
discharging the debt decreased. In short, Mr. Bull was reduced to that
humiliating condition, which, by whatever fashionable name it may now go, was
formerly called petticoat government.

DURING the lawsuit with Lewis and Lord Strut, War of 1756.
concerning the forest, there had been a great intercourse with the tenants.
Many of Bull's servants and retainers, who were employed as bailiffs and
attorneys, and their deputies, had been very conversant with them, and were
entertained at their houses, where they always found wholesome victuals, jolly
fire sides, and warm beds. They took much notice of every thing that passed,
asked many questions, and made many remarks on the goodness of the land, the
pleasant situation of the houses, the clean and thriving condition of the
children, who were always ready to wait on them, to clean their boots, hold
their stirrups, open and shut the gates for them, and the like little necessary
services, as well bred children in the country are wont. The remarks which
these persons made, when they got home, favored rather of envy, than of
gratitude or affection. Some of them would say: "Those fellows live too well in
the forest; they thrive too fast; the place is too good for them; they ought to
know who is their master; they can afford to pay more rent; they ought to pay
for the help they have had; if it had not been for Master Bull, and the
assistance which he has lent them, they would have been turned out of doors;
and now they are to reap the benefit of his exertions, while he, poor man, is
to pay the cost."

THERE were not wanting some, in the families of the Foresters themselves, who
had the meanness to crouch to these fellows, and supplicate their favor and
interest with Mr. Bull, to recommend them to some posts of profit, as
under-stewards, collectors of rent, clerks of receipts, and the like petty
offices. These beggarly curs would repeat the same language, and hold
correspondence with the bailiffs, attorneys, etc. after they had got home.
Whenever any trifling quarrel happened in the families of the tenants, they
would magnify it, and fill their letters with complaints of the licentiousness
of the people, and plead for a tighter hand to be held over them.

SUGH speeches as these were frequently made, and such letters read, in the
hearing of Mr. Bull's wife and steward. Their language grew by degrees to be
the current language of the family, and Bull himself listened to it. His choler
rose upon the occasion, and when his hangers-on observed it, they plied him
with stronger doses, till his jealousy and hatred were excited, and a complete
revolution in his temper, with regard to his tenants, took place, agreeably to
the most sanguine and malevolent wishes of his and their enemies.

THE first effect of this change was, that his clerks were ordered to charge
not only the prices of the goods, which the tenants should purchase, but to
make them pay for the paper Stamp act, 1765.
on which their bills of parcels and notes of hand were written, and that at a
very exorbitant rate. This was so intolerable an abuse, and withal so mean,
pitiful and beggarly an expedient to pick their pockets, that they held a
meeting among themselves, and resolved not to buy any more of his goods, as
long as this imposition lasted; and by way of contempt, they hanged and burned
the effigies of the steward, and other persons who were suspected of having
advised to these new measures.

THE resentment shown by the tenants on this occasion was quite unexpected. The
secret favorers, and real authors of the mischief, began to be afraid that
they had gone too far for the first attempt. Bull's journeymen were in an
uproar about it, lest, by the failure of his trade, they should be out of
bread; and to shorten the story, he was obliged to give up the point of making
them pay for the paper; though Madam had the singular modesty to make a
declaration, that it was a mere matter of expediency, and that she had power
and right "to bind them in all cases whatsoever," notwithstanding Mr. Bull's
most gracious concession at that time. Repeal of the stamp act, and declaratory
act, 1766.


THIS was considered by the tenants as a most impudent and barefaced
assumption; for whatever rights Mr. Bull might pretend to have as their old
master and landlord, yet they never had any idea of a mistress over them; and
though they very complaisantly returned him their thanks for his present
goodness, yet as they suspected that there was more mischief hatching, they
began to inquire more narrowly than ever into his right and title to the land
on which they lived. They looked over old parchments and memorandums, consulted
council learned in the law, and after due deliberation, they were fully
convinced, that their own title was at least as good as his, and that they had
a right to refuse him any rent or acknowledgment, if it were prudent for them
to exercise it.

MR. Bull's jealousy was now increased with regard to their intentions, and his
scribbling retainers frequently accused them of ingratitude and disobedience,
and a long premeditated design to set up for independence; a thing which they
had not yet thought of, and probably never would, if this abusive treatment had
not put it into their heads.

BUT though by those means they were led into an inquiry, and a train of
thinking, which were quite new to them; yet as old habits are not easily
broken, and their affection for their master was very strong, they endeavored,
with a candor which did them honor, to transfer the blame from him to his
wife and steward, to whose machinations they knew he was a dupe. These bad
counselors soon renewed their attempts in another shape, by raising the rent,
and putting an advanced price upon the goods; and by means of additional
clerks, packers, porters, watchmen, draymen, etc. who were continually in
waiting, and to all of whom fees were to be paid, the trade labored under
great embarrassments, and some of the foresters were quite discouraged, others
were vexed and impatient, while some of the better tempered of them,
endeavored to persuade the rest to keep up the communication as long as they
could. They were loath to quarrel with their old master, and yet could not
pocket the affronts and abuses to which they were daily exposed.

DURING this sullen interval, many letters passed, many books and precedents
were examined, and much ink was shed, in a controversy, which, however
incapable of a decision in this way, might have been compromised, if Mr. Bull's
first thoughts had been as good as his second; but he was so completely under
management, as not to see his true interest. It was a common saying among his
neighbors, "John Bull's wit comes afterward;" and in fact it did not come, in
this case, till too late, for when a cause once gets into the law, there are so
many quirks, evasions, demurs, and procrastinations, that it is impossible to
make a retreat, till one or both of the parties have severely smarted for their
temerity.

Letter X.
Mr. BULL attempts a new Mode of Traffic which disgusts his Tenants. -- They
refuse to receive his Presents. -- His singular Resentment against JOHN
CODLINE, and the Effects which it produced.

DEAR SIR,
I SUPPOSE you are by this time impatient for the story of the lawsuit; how it
began, and how it was carried on and ended. I will give it to you as briefly as
so long and intricate a matter will bear to be told; and I am apprehensive you
will think that Mr. Bull was so ill a politician, or so badly advised, as
actually to pick a quarrel with his best customers. But facts will speak for
themselves. Know then, that by the advice of his dear wife, and her gambling
junto, Mr. Bull was prevailed upon to send a dozen pounds of tea to each of his
tenants, as a present, in token of his extreme good will to them, and because
he knew that they loved it; and at the same time to order his clerks to charge
three pence for the paper and pack-thread in which each pound of this
exhilerating weed was wrapped. This trifling sum he expected would be paid on
demand, in acknowledgment of their good will to him as their kind and generous
landlord, who had protected and defended them against all opposers, and would
still continue to protect and defend them as his beloved children, and obedient
humble servants.

THE knowledge of his intention happened to come to them sooner than the
present, and they began to argue thus among themselves -- "Ha! how comes this?
What is freer than a gift? If Mr. Bull really intends the tea as a present, why
does he exact three pence? Had he offered it to us as an article of
merchandise, as usual, we might have taken it if we had liked the price, or
left it if we had not; but this is a new way of trading to which we have not
been accustomed. There is a design in this. If we receive this present and pay
the trifling acknowledgment of three pence, by and by we shall have a present
with six pence annexed, and another with a shilling, and so on. If we once
establish a precedent, there is no knowing where to stop, and by these presents
we may be gulled out of all our loose corns, and afterward our real estates
may be demanded! No, it is better to prevent an evil than to cure it. We will
have none of your presents, Mr. Bull, if this is to be the consequence. We have
paid our debts well -- you have had the exclusive benefit of our trade, and
have become rich by it, and now in your old age you are grown trickish. It is
time for us to be on our guard and keep a sharp look out; for if a man does not
take care of himself, who can he expect will take care of him?" Fortified with
these arguments, they waited for the approach of the messengers, who were on
the road with the presents.

ONE of them came to Charles Indigo's house, and with Mr. Bull's compliments
begged his acceptance of a package of tea. "Throw it into that cellar, said
Charles, and let it lie there till I have considered of the matter."

ANOTHER came to William Broadbrim -- but as the way to William's mansion was
through a long, crooked, miry lane, he had ordered the porter to stop him, and
give him liberty to return without delivering his message.

PETER BULLFROG did the same; but some part of the tea being smuggled into the
house, as soon as Peter knew it, he threw it into the gutter.

JOHN CODLINE had the greatest difficulty about Mr. Bull's present. He would
gladly have sent back the messenger, but unluckily for him, the gate which led
to his house was held fast by Bull's Under Steward, who constantly watched and
attended there, to observe who went in and out, which service he was more
particularly fond of, because he expected a douceur for opening and shutting
the gate. Having admitted the messenger and received his penny, he stiffly
refused to let him out again without having delivered the present. The fee was
tendered, but this could not prevail; the family were uneasy, they were loath to
affront Mr. Bull, and yet determined not to receive his present. They could not
account for the conduct of the under steward on any other principle than this,
that he expected to get a share of the three pence, and of all other profits
arising from future presents; and was afraid he should lose it if he let the
messenger return. The family was called together in the chapel, where they held
a long consultation, sent several messages to the under steward, who held fast
the gate, and finally refused to open it. They were driven at length to an
extremity, and threw the tea into the vault, where it perished, at the same
time protesting that the whole blame ought to be charged on the under steward,
as they had no intention of injuring Mr. Bull if they could have avoided it.

AS soon as this was known in Mr. Bull's family, his wife fell into a violent
hysteric fit, and in her raving phrenzy denounced all the vengeance which it
was in her power to execute, on these refractory, ungrateful tenants, who would
not accept a present when it was so freely offered to them. But when she came a
little to herself, she was persuaded by her gambling companions not to attempt
any thing against the whole body of the tenants, lest they should be driven by
necessity to form an union among themselves, which might defeat the plan; she
therefore proposed to Mr. Bull to single out one of the most refractory of
them, and show his resentment in a particular manner to him, hoping that the
others would be intimidated and let him suffer alone, and be glad to get off so
well themselves. The person singled out for the object of resentment was John
Codline, and the mode of resentment was as ridiculous as it was malicious, for
it was nothing more nor less than to send a bailiff, with a pack of
bloodhounds, to stand before the great gate that led to the front of his
house. Boston Port Act, 1774.
This, it was thought, would strengthen the authority of the under steward who
had the key of the gate, and would reduce the family to this dilemma, either to
receive no company and carry on no business, or else to submit to Mr. Bull's
new mode of trading.

THE reason assigned for this particular mode of revenge was, that Mr. Bull, as
lord of the manor, claimed a kind of sovereign right to the high way. He had
for a long time exacted an acknowledgment from all passengers; whenever they
happened to meet any of his horses or carriages on the road, whether he was
there himself or not, they were obliged to douse the hat, or they might be sure
of receiving a stroke of the whip, if not of being run down by his servants,
who had special orders not to let any omission of this nature pass unpunished.

IN consequence of this maneuver on the part of Mr. Bull, every person who had
any business to do with John Codline was stopped in the road, and ordered to go
back, or pass by, like the Priest and Levite, on the other side. However, those
who had a mind to see him, found means to climb over the fence, or to go up a
narrow lane, which, by the help of a style and a foot path, led them to
Codline's back door.

THIS species of punishment exposed Mr. Bull to the ridicule of all his
neighbors. It also proved quite ineffectual to the purpose for which he
designed it. Instead of hindering company from coming to Codline's house, it
brought more; and he received many letters from those who could not come in
person. But, what was of more service to him than letters or visits was this,
that many who were indebted to him came and made payment, and those who had at
various times received favors from him when they were in distress, sent him
presents, and encouraged him to keep up a good heart, promising to stand by him
to the last extremity, if he should be reduced to it.

IT has been observed, that one advantage which Mrs. Bull expected would arise
from this specimen of her refined policy was, that it would disunite the
tenants, and frighten some or perhaps all the others into a compliance with the
new mode of traffic. This expectation was grounded on one of the fables of
Esop, which relates, that a fox who had been caught in a trap, and disengaged
himself by the loss of his tail, whenever he appeared among the foxes, was the
object of their ridicule; upon which, he endeavored to persuade them that he
had been traveling to learn fashions, and that the newest fashion was for
foxes to cut off their tails as a useless and burdensome appendage, and boasted
how much more light and nimble he had become since he had parted with that
encumbrance; to which an old fox replied, that if he would do justice to his
argument, he ought to produce the shears with which he had cut off his tail,
for the conviction of his brethren.

THIS fable, and the moral couched under it, raised a great deal of vain
expectation and triumph in the family of Mr. Bull; but the foresters had
another of their own making, which was a match for it. A man meeting a serpent
in the field, struck at him with a stick, and there being but one in his view
he thought to kill him immediately; but the snake set up such a hiss as brought
a dozen more out of their holes, who attacked the proud murderer in front,
rear, and flank, and obliged him to take to his heels for safety. This fable
was so much admired among the foresters at that time, that they had an
engraving made on all their message cards, of a wounded serpent, with this
motto, Join or die.

ADIEU.

Letter XI.
The Quarrel begins in earnest and is carried into the Law. -- Conduct of the
Managers on both Sides. -- The first Verdict in favor of the Foresters given
at Saratoga Hall.

DEAR SIR,
THE insult which the foresters supposed to be put on them by the obstruction
of the road, as mentioned in my last, caused a serious alarm, and induced them
to call a meeting of the heads of the several families to consult for their own
safety. The result of this meeting was to endeavor, by all peaceable means in
their power, to effect an accommodation; but if that should fail, to prepare,
in the best manner they could, to assert and maintain their rights, possessions
and properties.

IN prosecution of the former part of their plan, they wrote letters to Mr.
Bull, and to several members of his family; and with respect to the latter
part, they came to a resolution to buy nothing more of him till he should
change his mode of conduct, and treat them as he had formerly done.

IN the letters which they wrote on this occasion, though they professed a
great deal of respect and affection for the old gentleman himself; they omitted
to send their compliments to his wife. This was more than Madam could bear. She
therefore, after consulting with her gambling companions, determined upon the
two following points; first, that no answer at all should be given to the
letter; and secondly, that an action at law should be entered, and the tenants
ejected from their possessions. She would not however have come to this latter
determination, if she had not been assured by persons who pretended thoroughly
to understand their family secrets, that the foresters would not dare to defend
their title in law; but on the first appearance of a legal process, would
submit to any terms of accommodation which her ladyship might think proper to
impose. Full of this idea, she roundly swore that she would see them prostrate
at her feet, before she would make up the matter with them on any terms
whatever.

INFLUENCED by her passions, Mr. Bull's choler rose to the highest pitch. As
lord of the manor, he placed bailiffs and bloodhounds in the high way, and
denied all passage to any persons without his license. He then called upon all
the counselors and attorneys to whom he had given a retaining fee, and who
were very numerous, to exert all their learning and eloquence in maintaining
his cause, promising them not only a regular payment of their fees, but a
generous allowance for disbursements and incidental charges, to be paid at
sight by a draught on his banker; and when the cause should be gained, that
each one should be entitled to a plantation in the forest.

THESE sagacious gentlemen, (many of whom were of Madam's own junto) finding
that they had a fat client, contrived to husband the job, and spin out the
cause secundum artem. They were old proficients in the science, and knew very
well how to take double receipts of their stationers, bailiffs, messengers, and
other retainers, i. e. one receipt for the exact sum paid, and another for
double the same sum; these latter were always produced as vouchers in the
settlement of accounts, and in the glorious uncertainty of the law were
admitted under the name of duplicates. It would divert you to see the
numberless items which they crowded into their bills of cost, and the various
pleas and pretenses which were formed for demurring and continuing the cause
from one session to another; while they were feeding their client with the hope
that in every next session it would be decided.

ON the other hand, the foresters finding that Mr. Bull had retained so many
learned counselors, sergeants and barristers in his service, and that he had
by far the longest purse, were obliged to use the greatest economy in
conducting their defense. On looking round to see who was the most prudent, the
most deliberate, and the most determined among them, and to whom they might
with safety commit their cause, they unanimously pitched upon Walter Pipeweed's
grandson George; who, being elected their chief attorney, modestly accepted the
office on this generous condition, that they should not insist on his receiving
any fee or reward, because he conceived that in serving them he was doing no
more than his duty. This instance of magnanimity was interpreted by them as a
sure omen of success.

GEORGE was a man of good understanding and true spunk; he had made
considerable progress in the study of the law for his own amusement, and had
practiced at the bar in the defense of his own family claims against the
encroachments of Lewis. His abilities were of such a nature as to rise and
shine with the opportunities which called them into action. This was also the
case with diverse other persons in the families of the foresters; who would,
perhaps, never have thought of engaging in the study of the law, had not this
controversy been agitated; but would have remained in the state which is thus
elegantly described by the poet.

"Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air."
THIS circumstance was predicted in the hearing of Mr. Bull's wife, by a very
learned and honest gentleman, who would have dissuaded her from giving her
husband such bad advice as to plunge himself into that deep ditch, the law, out
of which there is no coming till the last farthing be paid. "If there are any
seeds of genius," said this faithful adviser, "they are drawn into action by
public ferments and troubles; but might have remained in time of tranquillity
forever useless and unknown, perhaps at the plough, under a shed, or among the
lowest class of mechanics." Vide Debates in Parliament, March 16, 1775.
This sage hint was totally disregarded, because, as I before observed, too
much confidence was placed in a set of advisers, who pretended to know all the
family secrets of the foresters. But the prediction was fully verified when
this lawsuit brought to the bar one from his farm, and another from his
merchandise, one from his shed, and another from his shop, This circumstance
gave occasion to the following bagatelle, written, as is supposed, by some
disaffected or perhaps disappointed wag, in one of the families.

See folly on a lofty seat,
And humble wisdom at her feet!
On horseback see the beggar ride,
With princes walking by his side.
Pale Crispin has his last foregone,
To serve himself and save his town
And Snip the taylor's shears are lost,
Because he is got a higher post.
So have I seen the kitchen pot,
When set on coals profusely hot,
Throw up its sediment to scum,
While bubbles dance amidst the foam.

till in fact they became a match, in point of numbers at least, for the whole
host of Mr. Bull's attorneys.

THE first action was brought against John Codline, who was deemed the most
surly and refractory of the whole number. It was thought if he could be cast,
the others would of course submit. In this way of proceeding, Mr. Bull acted
like that species of dog which bears his name, and which is known to attack his
enemy by the head.

THE cause was learnedly argued at the Court of Bunker hall, and the arguments
in favor of the foresters made a very unexpected and very deep impression on
the managers for Mr. Bull. They found it a much more serious affair than they
had imagined, and thought it best to stop short and have the case hung up, that
they might consult their books over again, and prepare themselves by better
authorities and allegations at the next hearing. After a long time they
contrived to shift their ground, March, 1776.
and let John alone. They advised Mr. Bull to send for some lawyers out of
Germany, who had been more used to this kind of pleading, and to lay an
attachment on the estate of Peter Bullfrog* and the farm called Caesarea; where
they expected to gain some greater advantage, partly because the tenancy was
different, being founded on courtesy and not on lease, and partly because of
the dissentions which they heard were subsisting in these families. In this
interval also Madam Bull's resentment was raised so high, that she swore point
blank that not one of these refractory scoundrels should enter her husband's
doors, nor have the least connection with him, but that she would drive them off
from the land, and re-people the forest with another set of men.

WHEN they had heard of this resolution, the heads of all the families in one
of their consultations, came to a determination to publish an advertisement,
setting forth the various abuses and grievances which they had suffered from
Mr. Bull, his wife, and her junto; and declaring that they looked upon the
country as their own, and themselves free from any obligations to him, and at
liberty to look out for other markets, and invite other merchants to form
connexions with them. This transaction was so important an era in the
controversy, that the fourth of July, the day on which the advertisement was
dated, has ever since been celebrated as a day of festivity. The morning of
that anniversary is ushered in with a firing of guns and fluttering of pigeons.
At noon you may hear some young lad spouting a declamation in favor of free
trade; which is generally followed by a bowl of punch and a rump of beef, and
the day is concluded with a song and a dance.

IN the progress of the action, several points of law were argued at different
times with much skill and learning. On one of these occasions George was
reduced to a dilemma, and his opponents thought him absolutely silenced; but
suddenly recollecting himself, he rose superior to them, Trenton, 1776.
and compelled them again to move for a continuance. Thus the cause was kept
suspended till the third year was almost closed. At length a vaunting
braggadocio of a barrister on Mr. Bull's side, who thought to carry all before
him, was so completely answered and confuted in an obstinate argument, that a
verdict was given at Saratoga hall in favor of those plantations, which had
been sued for in the northern part of the manor. This verdict relieved the
foresters in some degree, and it was hoped would prove a good precedent for the
decision of the other suits which were meditating against their brethren in the
southern part.

THE unfortunate barrister was severely reflected on by Mr. Bull's wife, for
not doing his duty; and he was obliged to justify himself by producing his
instructions, and by telling a number of serious truths respecting the forest
and the foresters, which Mrs. Bull had often heard before but would not
believe. The relation of these truths was so very offensive that she influenced
her husband never more to employ him; and as he could get no other business in
the law, he afterward employed himself in writing plays and romances, in which
he was more successful.

Letter XII.
The Foresters apply for Help to Mr. LEWIS -- are first treated with Evasion --
afterward obtain their Request -- Alarm in Mr. BULL's Family -- His Conference
with his Wife -- Her Maneuvers upon the Occasion -- Disappointed by the
Inflexibility of the Foresters.

DEAR SIR,
YOU may well suppose that a three years lawsuit was a very expensive
undertaking on both sides; and you will wonder how the foresters, circumstanced
as they were, could struggle with such an antagonist; especially when the high
way was so obstructed that they could not carry their provisions to market to
procure them cash. The truth is, that though they were served gratis by their
prime counselor, yet they were obliged to give promissory notes to the
attorneys, scriveners, bailiffs, and messengers, whom they employed under him;
but as the prospect of payment was distant, the notes passed at a discount, and
the only remedy in their power was to issue more, which instead of lessening
increased the difficulty.

THEY had early foreseen this difficulty, and applied privately to Mr. Lewis,
Mr. Frog, and Lord Strut, to borrow money on interest. These old curmudgeons,
though each of them looked with an envious eye on Mr. Bull, and secretly wished
he might lose the cause, yet were induced by various considerations to evade
the question proposed to them by the foresters. "We must, said they, keep up
appearances with our old neighbor; we have accounts open with him, as well as
claims upon some portions of land, to which our title is no better than his; we
may draw ourselves into a scrape, and set our own tenants a bad example, for
who knows but the same arguments may avail with them to refuse their rents to
us? Besides, how do we know whether these fellows will ever be able to pay?
They offer to mortgage the manor to us, but the title is yet in dispute, and
how do we know whether it be their's or Mr. Bull's?" These were the secret
reasons which induced them to evade a direct answer to the messengers; and,
like true courtiers, "To squeeze their hands, and beg them come tomorrow."

BUT as soon as the verdict was given at Saratoga hall, they began to change
their mind, and wished not only to make them debtors, but even to enter into
contracts to a large amount.

MR. Lewis was the first to make advances, and meeting the messengers one day
on 'change, he accosted them thus: "Your servant, gentlemen -- I congratulate
you on your success; you are welcome to my house, and warehouse, and table. I
will lend you a few livres to help you to finish the controversy; and if Mr.
Frog will advance a few stivers, I will give him my bond for security. Besides,
I will consent that my own counselors, barristers, and attorneys, whom I have
retained, shall assist you at the next session, and I will see if I cannot open
the high way, that you may bring your produce to market. When you see Lord
Strut, give my compliments to him, and tell him what I have promised, and I
dare say he will, out of friendship to me, and for the sake of our old family
compact, give you some assistance; for look ye, gentlemen, I will be honest
with you, I mean to promote my own interest by serving you, and I am sure he
has the same meaning.

THIS change in the sentiments and language of Mr. Lewis, was immediately made
known to Mr. Bull, by means of some running footmen, who frequently carried
news from one house to the other. Consternation seized the whole family, and
Mrs. Bull herself began to think it a very serious matter, and that it was
necessary to do something immediately to prevent worse consequences. She
therefore held a curtain conference with Mr. Bull on the subject, thus --

Mrs. B. Well, my dear, what do you think of the conduct of your neighbor
Lewis?


Mr. B. Why I think he is a deceitful dog, and means to ruin me. If these
fellows get him for their friend, he will draw in Lord Strut and Nic Frog, and
I shall have them all to contend with at once; and therefore I think we had
better compromise the matter with the tenants, and let them take the land, if
they will, and go to the D-v-l; why should I keep on throwing away good money
after bad; I am over head and ears in debt now, and I wish to stop where I am,
without getting any deeper into the law.


Mrs. B. I agree with you, my dear, that he is a deceitful dog, and I wish the
tenants could know his true character: if they did, I am persuaded they would
not put any confidence in him. There is a number of very sensible persons among
them, and by the discourse which I have had with some who know their secrets, I
believe that means might yet be found to divide them, and to detach them from
the interest of Lewis; and if you will let me manage the matter, I have no
doubt that I shall be able to accomplish it.

POOR John fetched a deep sigh, and said inwardly -- Ah, I have let you manage
my matters so long, that you have almost brought me to ruin! Then raising his
voice and wiping his eyes, he replied, Well, my dear, I have told you my mind
plainly, but if you think you can do any thing to save me, pray be speedy; I
would gladly keep the tenants attached to me for the benefit of their trade,
which is a matter of more consequence than their rent, and if I should finally
lose the land, I wish to be again connected with them in business.


Mrs. B. Never fear, I do not doubt but we shall find means to keep the land
and have the trade too. I know how to sweeten them and bring them to good
humor again.


AS soon as this conference was ended, she wrote a billet in a very complaisant
style, but in a hand scarcely legible, 1778.
and was in such a hurry to send it, that she could not wait for one of the
clerks to copy it, presenting Mr. and Mrs. Bull's compliments to the gentlemen
tenants, informing them that it was not intended to trouble them any farther
for the payment of paper and pack-thread, which had been the occasion of the
controversy; but to settle all matters by a reference, and that suitable
persons should soon be deputed to confer with them, or any of them on the
premises. This billet was hurried away by an express, and actually arrived
before the foresters had heard of Mr. Lewis's intended kindness to them. But
they received it with contempt, and gave no other answer to it than this, "Let
Mr. Bull withdraw his action and clear the road, and we will talk with him; but
as to his wife, we will have nothing to do with her."

AFTER they had given this answer, word was brought them of the good will of
Mr. Lewis, which was received with the greatest joy imaginable. He was
accounted the finest gentleman in the whole country, and all the stories which
they had heard of him, through the medium of Bull's family, were set down as
lies. He was regarded as the protector of the injured, the helper of the
distressed, and the friend of the rights of mankind.

WHILE the praises of Lewis were thus echoed from house to house, the deputies
of Madam Bull arrived. They were instructed by her ladyship to enter into free
conversation with the foresters, or any of them, publicly or privately; to
tell them that they were greatly deceived if they took Mr. Lewis for their
friend; that he was an arch, sly, deceitful fellow, and that no trust ought to
be put in him; that Mr. and Mrs. Bull were very amicably disposed toward them,
and willing to forget and forgive all that was past, to renew the former
intercourse, to take off all the charges and burdens which had been complained
of; to help them to pay the debt which they had incurred by the lawsuit; and
as the greatest proof imaginable of Mrs. Bull's particular favor to them, she
would admit any of them to visit her in her own drawing room, and give them a
seat at her card-table. As a token of her sincerity in these professions, she
sent several presents to their wives and daughters, and gave the deputies a
large purse of money, to be distributed privately among the most influential
persons in the several families.

THE deputies had scarcely alighted, before they sent their footman to the door
of the house where the heads of the families were assembled, with a message of
compliments to announce their arrival, and ask permission to make a friendly
visit. The porter refused entrance to the footman, and he returned, without
having delivered his message. The deputies then wrote the purport of their
errand, and sent it to the porter, who delivered it, and the following answer
was returned -- "GENTLEMEN, we cannot hear any invectives against our good
friend Mr. Lewis. If your master is in earnest, tell him that he must withdraw
his action and clear the road. This is all from your humble servant,

In behalf of the Foresters, H. L. Chairman."




DISAPPOINTED and chagrined, but not wholly discouraged, the deputies attempted
privately to get into some of the houses; but they were refused entrance. They
wrote letters and threw them in at the windows, or put them into the key-holes,
but all to no purpose. The firmness and inflexibility of the foresters
astonished them, and they were obliged to return with aching hearts, and tell
their master and mistress that the forest was lost forever.

AND now was verified the old saying,

"Earth hat no curse like love to hatred turned;
"Hell has no fury like a woman scorned."
BUT Madam's fury and its consequences, will be the subject of my next.

ADIEU.

Letter XIII.
Mrs. BULL's Rage, and its Effect on the Neighbors. -- Several Families
associate to defend their Right to the High Way. -- Quarrel opens with Lord
STRUT and Mr. FROG. -- The Foresters prosecute their Controversy and obtain a
second Verdict. -- Mr. BULL's real Friends interpose, and convince his Wife of
her Error. -- She advises him to compromise the Matter. -- He signs a
Quit-Claim of the Forest.

DEAR SIR,
NOTHING could exceed the rage into which Mrs. Bull was thrown by this
disappointment. "O these cursed, stubborn, ungrateful, disobedient wretches, to
refuse all my invitations, and spurn at my offers of friendship and
reconciliation! What, not admit my deputies into their houses! Did ever any
woman suffer such disgrace? Well, faith, I will be revenged, and they shall
feel the power of my vengeance. I will prosecute them, to the utmost extremity
of the law; ay, and beyond law too, for I will set their houses on fire over
their heads, and drive them off the land! And as to that deceitful dog of a
Lewis, I will raise such a hornet's nest about his ears, that he shall repent
his bargain! If Lord Strut attempts to help him, I Will lay an attachment upon
his richest farms. And as for Nic Frog, if he lends them money, I will break up
his warehouse, and fell all his goods by auction. I will satiate my vengeance
on the whole pack of them, and if I fall myself among the general wreck, I
shall have the glory of dying like Samson in the ruin of my enemies."

THE rage which Mrs. Bull indulged on this occasion, and the noise which she
made in her raving fits, raised a great alarm in the family, and as hysterics
are said to be catching, so the distemper spread into the two next families,
viz. into those of sister Peg and brother Patrick. The former imagined that it
was Mr. Bull's intention to call in Lord Peter to his aid, because he had been
of late somewhat complaisant to those of his natural children, who resided in
the family; and the latter expected that he should be treated in the same
manner as the foresters, because he had complained of some restraints and
impositions from his brother John Bull, in respect to his trade and business,
which was that of a linen-draper. Old jealousies and grudges were revived on
this occasion, and the whole neighborhood was in confusion. The dogs in Peg's
family kept a constant howling and barking, and were answered by those of Mr.
Bull. Several of them actually ran mad, Protestant association, 1779 and 1780.
and Bull was obliged to place guards at his doors and gates, who attacked the
curs with clubs, and killed several on the spot. In the midst of this hurly
burly, his house was set on fire, and was actually seen blazing in thirty-six
places at once; Lord G. Gordon's mob.
the fire even penetrated Madam's drawing room, and her card party were obliged
to hand buckets and pump the engine; and it was not without the greatest
exertions that the whole mansion was saved from utter destruction.

A DIFFICULTY also arose from another quarter, where it was little expected.
The measure which Mr. Bull had adopted of stopping the high way, and searching
all carriages, provoked all the neighbors, who thought it a great infringement
of their common rights; but as he was a person of so much wealth and power,
they were afraid openly to contest that point with him. At length an elderly
widow lady, of large property, with whom he had always lived on friendly terms,
and who generally went by the name of Madam Kate, took the liberty to tell him,
that she could no longer suffer her neighbors and herself to be so imposed
upon; that the high way was common to all; that he had no right to stop
passengers and examine them, but that every body ought to go about their lawful
business without let or hindrance, and that she was determined to form a
combination Armed neutrality formed by the Empress of Russia, etc.
with Mr. Frog, Mr. Lewis, Lord Strut, and all the other neighbors, to remove
the encumbrances which Mr. Bull had thrown in the way, and clear the passage.

THIS combination extended to other objects, besides clearing the high way.
They were all disposed to help the foresters against Mr. Bull, though in
different ways. Lewis had already lent them money and feed lawyers to plead for
them. Lord Strut, though rich in landed interest, yet generally anticipated his
revenues, (or as the vulgar phrase is, ate the calf in the cow's belly) he
therefore had no money to spare; but to oblige his friend Lewis, he laid an
attachment on a southerly corner of the forest, which formerly belonged to him,
and which from the numerous flowers with which it abounds, had got the name of
Terra Florida. At the same time he attached one of Mr. Bull's favorite
hunting-seats, Gibraltar.
which commanded an extensive prospect, and was situate extremely convenient
for hunting, fowling, and fishing. It had formerly belonged to Strut, but he
had foolishly lost it by staking it in a game of whilst, which he played with
Mr. Bull. It was a doubt in law whether real estate could be held by such
tenure, but Bull had possession, and that you know is eleven points of the law.
At any rate, it would oblige Bull to defend; and that would cost him money, and
divert some at least of his lawyers from the business of the forest.

A SECRET correspondence had for some time been carried on between the
foresters and Mr. Frog, for a loan of cash, and a mercantile contract. Bull had
suspected it, but could not prove it, till one night, his myrmidons caught a
messenger from the forest and searched his pockets, Capture of Mr. Laurens.
in which were found certain letters and other papers, which were supposed to
amount to full evidence.

UPON this occasion an advertisement was published, according to fashion,
justifying the measures about to be taken, and deploring the evils which were
connected with them. However small a share of credit these publications obtain,
it is generally as much as they deserve.

TO make short work with Frog, Mr. Bull got a search-warrant, and sent a
bailiff to his richest warehouse, St. Eustatius.
who entered it, per fas aut nefas, tumbled over the merchandise, under
pretense of searching for stolen goods; and having taken away as many as he
pleased, by a writ of venditioni exponas, he put them up at auction, and it is
said, made a fortune by this job. Mr. Lewis was so exasperated at the outrage
thus committed on his friend Frog, that by a writ of scire facias, he laid
claim to the warehouse and its contents, and brought in Bull for damages.

In short, Mr. Bull now found himself soused over head and ears in that deep
ditch, the law. Like Ishmael of old, his hand was against every man, and every
man's hand against him. Look which way soever he would, he found enemies, and
his own family were continually buzzing in his ears, that he would bring his
affairs to ruin.

BY the assistance derived from the loans which they had negociated with Lewis
and Frog, and the additional counselors and attorneys which Lewis employed for
them, the foresters pursued the controversy with as much vigor as the forms,
delays and uncertainty of the law would permit. No less than four years longer
were consumed in this expensive quarrel, and Mr. Bull's numerous retinue of
lawyers were employing themselves in the various chicanery and tergiversations
of their profession, all the while fattening on the profits of the suit; whilst
his debt was growing at such a rate, that he was at his wit's end to keep the
interest from accumulating as well as the principal. At length, by a capital
maneuver of Pipeweed's grandson George, aided by the counselors of Lewis, the
cause was brought to a hearing at York court, and the arguments were of such
efficacy, that a second verdict was given in favor of the foresters, with
large damages. This verdict came so near to a final decision, that all Mr.
Bull's friends were convinced he could no longer maintain an action against the
foresters; and some trusty old servants ventured to whisper in Madam's ear that
it was high time to end the controversy, for that it could not possibly be
carried any farther, without bringing the family and the trade to total ruin.

"LOOK ye, Madam, (said they) how all the schemes which you have laid, have
been uniformly defeated; you have professed to know the family secrets of these
foresters; but those fellows who pretended to give you this information have
deceived you. In fact, they have no such secrets as your ladyship imagines.
What has been openly told you all along, is the truth, and you ought long ago
to have believed it. Now the conviction has forced itself upon you, and you can
no longer withstand it. The foresters have been defending their title in the
law, and they have made it appear so plainly, that no jury in the world will
ever give a verdict against them. All who are acquainted with new lands, know
that the labor attending the improvement of them, is worth ten times more than
the land; and in fact gives the best title to it. If our master will now end
the matter by a compromise, he may yet save some part of the manor at the
northward, where is the best of hunting and fishing; but if he pursues the
matter any farther, he will lose it all."

THESE faithful remonstrances, enforced by the necessity of the case, began to
have some effect on the turbulent mind of Madam. She saw that it was in vain to
contend against the opinions of all mankind, and therefore in her next curtain
lecture she held a short dialogue with Mr. Bull, thus --

Mrs. B. My dear, I have been thinking whether it would not be best for you to
come to a settlement of this long controversy.


Mr. B. (groaning inwardly) So then you have changed your mind, have you?


Mrs. B. Yes, my dear, I find I have been deceived with false information, or I
would never have advised you to prosecute the matter so far.


Mr. B. Well, but how like a fool shall I appear to the world, if, after I have
threatened and hectored these fellows, and spent so much money to recover my
right, I should give it up at this time of day?


Mrs. B. Why you know, my dear, that you have formerly made concessions to
them, because I judged it expedient.


Mr. B. Ay, then I retained my claim of right; but that will not do now.


Mrs. B. True, my dear, you must give up your right and title to about
two-thirds of the forest; but you may still hold the other third, and I dare
say nobody will contest your right to that. And as for that part which you give
up, you may say by it as Lewis did of that which you once took from him --
"Hang it, it is not worth the keeping; it has always been a bill of cost to
me," and the like.


Mr. B. I wish, my dear, you had given me this advice some years sooner, I
should have saved my money and my credit too.


Mrs. B. Why, my dear, I tell you I was deceived; I am as sorry as you are for
the loss of the money and of the forest, but as the case is now circumstanced,
I think a compromise would be best.


Mr. B. Well, I will consider of it.


WHEN Mr. Bull had taken the matter into consideration, he thought it best to
wait the issue of the suit with Lord Strut about the hunting-seat, for he was
loath to lose that; and happily for him, when that cause came to trial, it was
argued so forcibly by his lawyers, that Strut was obliged to give it up. As
soon as Bull heard of that, he cried out, "Now is the moment of victory -- now
is the time for peace." So calling one of his clerks, "Here, says he, go and
settle the matter with the foresters, or their deputies, on the best terms that
you can." The deputies and the clerk soon came to an agreement, and a
quit-claim deed was drawn, describing the butts and bounds of the forest, and
distinguishing what he gave up to them from what he retained. This quit-claim
being properly engrossed, he with a trembling hand and aching heart subscribed
it, while Madam, standing behind him, could not help shedding a tear at the
sight of a transaction to which she would never have consented but from dire
necessity.

Letter XIV.
The Foresters form a Partnership. -- It proves deficient and ineffectual. --
Their Clock out of Order. -- Their Strong-Box empty. -- Disturbances in some of
the Families. -- A Meeting is called to revise and amend the Partnership.

DEAR SIR,
I WAS loath to break the thread of my narration in my former letters, and you
know that we prattling folks love to tell our stories in our own way, which we
are under great advantage to do when we are writing letters. But I will now go
back to tell you something of the manner in which the foresters managed their
domestic affairs during the controversy with Mr. Bull, and for some time after
it was closed.

WHEN they had broken their connection with him, it was uncertain what
connexions they might form abroad, but it was judged expedient for them to be
united among themselves, that no one family should connect itself in trade with
any merchant or factor, without the consent of the others. In short, it became
necessary for them to enter into a partnership for their mutual interest and
convenience. To do this was a nice point, and required much delicacy. It was to
them a new subject, and they had an untrodden path before them. After much
consultation and inquiry, their ingenuity suggested to them the idea of an
original social compact. "Why should we (said they) look abroad for precedents,
when we have enough among ourselves? See the beavers in our own brooks and
meadows, how they work in complete partnership, each family has its own cell,
and a number of cells are placed in one pond. They carry on their operations
with peace and unanimity, without even the appearance of a master. Here is a
perfect republic, a complete equality, a striking example of order without
subordination, of liberty without jealousy, of industry without coercion, of
economy without parsimony, of sagacity without overbearing influence. Every one
knows his own business and does it, their labor goes on with regularity and
decency; their united efforts serve the common cause, and the interest of every
one is involved in that of the whole. Let us go and do likewise." The hint
took, and a plan of CONFEDERATION, as it was called, was drawn up on principles
of the purest equality; each family retaining the entire control of its own
domestic concerns, without any interference of the others, and agreeing to
contribute voluntarily its proportion of labor and money to support the common
interest.

THIS was, in theory, a very pretty device, exactly suited to a set of people
who thought themselves completely virtuous. But as it often happens that great
ingenuity exists without much judgment or policy, so it proved here. These
foresters did not consider that their intellects were not, like those of the
beavers, confined to a few particular objects; that they were not, like the
beavers, void of passions and prejudices, void of ambition, jealousy, avarice
and self-interest. With all the infirmities of humanity, they were expecting to
establish a community on a plan similar to that in which no such deformities
can possibly find admittance.

THOUGH for a while, and during the period of the lawsuit, when common danger
impelled them to keep themselves close together, this plan answered the end
better than none; yet in fact the notion of independence had so intoxicated
their minds, that having cast off their dependence on Mr. Bull, they thought
themselves independent of all the world beside. When they had got entirely
clear of the controversy with him, they were in the condition of a young heir
just come of age, who feels proud of his freedom, and thinks he has a right to
act without control. Each family felt its own importance, and expected a degree
of respect from the others, in proportion to its numbers, its property, its
exertions, its antiquity, and other trifling considerations, which ought never
to have had any place in a partnership of complete equality; and in consequence
of this intoxicating idea of independence, each family claimed the right of
giving or withholding its consent to what was proposed by any or all of the
others.

IN the club room, among a number of ingenious devices, there was a clock, of a
most curious and intricate construction, by which all the common concerns of
the partnership were to be regulated. It had one bell, on which thirteen
distinct hammers struck the hours. Each hammer was moved by independent wheels
and weights, each set of wheels and weights was enclosed in a separate case,
the key of which was kept, not as it ought to have been, by the person who
represented the family at club, but in each mansion house; and every family
claimed a right either to keep the key at home or send it to club, when and by
whom they pleased. Now as this clock, like all other automatons, needed
frequently to be wound up, to be oiled and cleaned, a very nice and particular
adjustment of circumstances was necessary to preserve the regularity of its
motions, and make the hammers perform their functions with propriety. Sometimes
one or two of the hammers would be out of order, and when it came to the turn
of one to strike it would be silent; then there must be a running or sending
home for the key, and the houses being at a considerable distance, much time
was spent in waiting. Sometimes* the messenger arrived at an unseasonable hour,
when the family was asleep, or abroad in the fields, and it would take up a
considerable time to collect them, and lay the case before them, that they
might deliberate and determine whether the key should be sent or not; and
before this could be done, the clock would get more out of order. By this
means, the club was frequently perplexed; they knew neither the hour of the
day, nor the day of the month; they could not date their letters, nor adjust
their books, nor do business with any regularity.

BESIDES this, there was another inconvenience. For though they had a
strong-box, yet it was filled with nothing but bills of parcels, and accounts
presented for payment, contracts of loans, and indentures for services. No
money could be had from any of the families, but by their own voluntary
consent; and to gain this consent there was great difficulty. Some had advanced
what they supposed to be more than their proportion; others had paid less. The
former would give no more, till the latter had made up their quotas, and there
was no authority which could call any one to account, or make him do his duty.
Their whole estates were mortgaged for the money which they had borrowed of Mr.
Lewis and Mr. Frog; and yet they could carry on no business in partnership. In
fact they had formed such an unheard of kind of partnership, that though they
could run themselves in debt, yet they could not oblige one another to raise
any money to discharge their debts.

EACH family, however, carried on a separate trade, and they contrived to
undersell each other, both at home and at market. Each family also had a
separate debt, which some were providing means to discharge, and others
neglected. In one or two of the families they went to loggerheads among
themselves. John Codline's family was, for several days, a scene of confusion
and disorder; nothing was seen or heard, but cursing and calling names, kicking
shins and pulling noses. John at first tried to silence them by gentle means,
but finding these ineffectual, he at length drew his hanger, and swore he would
cut off the ears of the first that should dare to make any more noise. This
threatening drove two or three turbulent fellows out of doors, after which the
house was tolerably quiet. Something of the same kind happened in Robert
Lumber's family, but he made so good a use of his fist as quelled the
disturbance at once.

IN the family of Roger Carrier there seemed to be a predominant lurch for
knavery, for he publicly advertised that he was ready to pay his debts by
notes of hand, subject to a discount, the amount of which was indefinite,
because continually increasing; and that whoever did not take his pay, when
thus offered, might go without. The other families were alarmed at his conduct;
but had no power to oblige him to deal honestly, and he carried his roguery so
far, as to bid them all defiance.

IN this state of debility and distraction, it became necessary to consult on
some measures for a better plan of union. They began to be convinced that they
were not beavers, nor capable of subsisting in such a state of society as had
been adopted from them. Something more energetic was wanted to compel the lazy,
to check the knavish, to direct the industrious, and to keep the honest from
being imposed upon. It had been often in contemplation to amend the mode of
partnership; but now the disorders in some of the families became so alarming,
that though they had been quelled for the present, it was uncertain whether
they would not break out again, especially as one whole family seemed
determined openly to patronize roguery. These considerations served to hasten
the change which had been contemplated. It was accordingly moved in the club,
that each family should appoint one or more persons to meet together, and
consult upon some alterations and improvements in the partnership. This meeting
was accordingly held, and the result of it shall be the subject of my next
letter.

ADIEU.

Letter XV.
A new Plan of Partnership is proposed. -- Arguments pro and con. -- It is
established. -- A Chief Steward appointed, with inferior Officers. -- Hunting
too much in Fashion. -- A new Species of Rats introduced. -- Two Families added
to the Number of Partners.

DEAR SIR,
IT is not in my power to give you a particular detail of the whole proceedings
of the meeting, which was held to reform the plan of partnership, in the manner
of your parliamentary journalists, who make speeches for the members, perhaps
better than some of them make for themselves; but I will endeavor to give you
a summary of the principles on which they proceeded.

THE professed design of the meeting was to reform and amend the plan; but in
fact when they came to examine it, they found themselves obliged to pass the
same sentence on it that was once delivered concerning the famous poet
Alexander Pope, whose usual ejaculation was God mend me! "Mend you," said a
hackney coachman, (looking with contempt on his dwarfish form and hump back)
"it would not be half so much trouble to make a new one."

A NEW one was accordingly entered upon, and the fundamental principle of it
was, not to suppose men as good as they ought to be, but to take them as they
are. "It is true" said they, "that all men are naturally free and equal; it is
a very good idea, and ought to be understood in every contract and partnership
which can be formed; it may serve as a check upon ambition and other human
passions, and put people in mind that they may some time or other be called to
account by their equals. But it is as true that this equality is destroyed by a
thousand causes which exist in nature and in society. It is true that all
beasts, birds, and fishes are naturally free and equal in some respects, but
yet we find them unequal in other respects, and one becomes the prey of
another. There is, and always will be, a superiority and an inferiority, in
spite of all the systems of metaphysics that ever existed. How can you prevent
one man from being stronger, or wiser, or richer than another? and will not the
strong overcome the weak? will not the cunning circumvent the foolish? and will
not the borrower become servant to the lender? Is not this noble, free and
independent creature man, necessarily subject to lords of his own species in
every stage of his existence? When a child, is he not under the command of his
parents? Send him to school, place him out as an apprentice, put him on board a
ship, enrol him in a company of militia, must he not be subject to a master?
Place him in any kind of society whatever, and he has wants to be supplied, and
passions to be subdued; his active powers need to be directed, and his
extravagances to be controlled, and if he will not do it himself, somebody must
do it for him. Self government is indeed the most perfect form of government in
the world; but if men will not govern themselves, they must have some governors
appointed over them, who will keep them in order, and make them do their duty.
Now if there is in fact such an inequality existing among us, why should we act
as if no such thing existed? We have tried the beaver scheme of partnership
long enough, and find it will not do. Let us then adopt the practice of another
kind of industrious animals which we have among us -- Let us imitate the bees,
who are governed by one supreme head, and, under that direction, conduct their
whole economy with perfect order and regularity."

ON this principle they drew up an entire new plan, in which there was one
chief steward, who was to manage their united interest, and be responsible to
the whole for his conduct. He was to have a kind of council to advise and
direct him, and several inferior officers to assist him, as there might be
occasion; and a certain contribution was to be levied on the trade, or on the
estates of the whole, which was to make a common stock for the support of the
common interest; and they were to erect a tribunal among themselves, which
should decide and determine all differences. If nine of the families should
agree to this plan, it was to take place; and the others might or might not
adopt it; but if any one should finally refuse, or if any should adopt it and
afterward fall from it, he was to be looked upon as an outcast, and no person
was to have any connection with him.

THE meeting having continued a long time, every body became extremely anxious
to know what they were about; the doors were kept shut, and no person whatever
was let into the secret till the whole was completed. A copy was then sent to
each family, for them to consider at their leisure.

THOUGH curiosity was now gratified, yet anxiety was not relaxed. The new plan
of partnership went by the name of the fiddle; those who were in favor of it
called themselves fiddlers, and those who opposed it were styled antifiddlers.
The former said it was the best plan that human wisdom had ever contrived. The
latter imagined it "pregnant with mischief." The former compared it to a strong
fence about a rich field of wheat. The latter compared it to the whale that
swallowed up Jonah.

IN each family a consultation was held on the question, Whether it should be
adopted or not? and liberty was given for every one to speak his mind with the
utmost freedom. The objections, answers, replies, rejoinders, and rebutters,
which were produced on this occasion, would make a curious collection, and form
an important page in the history of man. The fiddlers were extremely fond of
having it examined, because they said it was like a rich piece of plate, which
the more it be rubbed shines the brighter. The antifiddlers said it was like a
worm-eaten bottom of a ship, the defects of which would more evidently appear,
the more it was ripped to pieces; they were therefore for rejecting it at once,
without any examination at all.

WHEN they were urged to point out its defects, they would say, "It is
dangerous to put so much power into the hands of any man, or set of men, lest
they should abuse it. Our liberty and property will be safe whilst we keep them
ourselves, but when we have once parted with them, we may never be able to get
them back again."

IF the plan was compared to a house, then the objection would be made against
building it too high, lest the wind should blow it down. How shall we guard it
against fire? how shall we secure it against robbers? and how shall we keep out
rats and mice?

IF it was likened to a ship, then it would be asked, how shall we guard it
against leaking? how shall we prevent it from running on the rocks and
quicksands?

SOMETIMES it would be compared to a clock, then the question was, how shall we
secure the pendulum, the wheels and the balance from rust? who shall keep the
key, and who shall we trust to wind it up?

SOMETIMES it was represented by a purse, and then it was said to be dangerous
to let any one hold the strings. Money is a tempting object, and the best men
are liable to be corrupted.

IN short, the whole of the arguments against it might be summed up in one word
-- JEALOUSY; which is well known to be the highest degree of republican virtue.

TO show the futility of these arguments, it was observed by the opposite
party, that it was impossible to put it into any man's power to do you good,
without at the same time putting it into his power to do you hurt. If you trust
a barber to shave your beard, you put it into his power to cut your throat. If
you trust a baker to make your bread, or a cook to dress your meat, you put it
into the power of each to poison you; nay, if you venture to lie in the same
bed with your wife, you put it into her power to choke you when you are asleep.
Shall we therefore let our beards grow till they are long enough to put into
our pockets, because we are afraid of the barber? shall we starve ourselves
because the baker and the cook may poison us? and shall we be afraid to go to
bed with our wives? Fie, fie, gentlemen, do not indulge such whims: Be careful
in the choice of your barbers, your bakers, your cooks, and your wives; pay
them well, and treat them well, and make it their interest to treat you well,
and you need not fear them.

AFTER much debate and discussion, some of the families adopted it without
exception, but in others, the opposition was so strong that it could not be
made to pass, but by the help of certain amendments, which were proposed; and
of these amendments every family which thought proper to make any, made as many
as they pleased. The new plan with its appendage of amendments, cut such a
grotesque figure, that a certain wag in one of the families, like Jotham the
son of Gideon, ridiculed it in the following fable.

"A CERTAIN man hired a tailor to make him a pair of small clothes; the tailor
measured him and made the garment. When he had brought it home, the man turned
and twisted and viewed it on all sides; it is too small here, said he, and
wants to be let out; it is too big here, and wants to be taken in; I am afraid
there will be a hole here, and you must put on a patch; this button is not
strong enough, you must set on another. He was going on in this manner, when
his wife overhearing him, said, have you put on the small clothes, my dear? No,
said he. How then, replied she, can you possibly tell whether they will fit you
or not? If I had made such objections to a gown or a pair of stays before I had
put them on, how would you have laughed at my female wisdom? The man took his
wife's advice, and saved the tailor a deal of trouble."

IN like manner, the new plan of partnership was tried on, and was found to fit
very well. The amendments were thrown by, for future consideration; some of
them have been since adopted, but they are so few and so trifling, as to make
no essential difference.

AS soon as a sufficient number of the families had adopted the plan, they
began to set it in operation; and unanimously chose for their High Steward and
manager, GEORGE, the grandson of Walter Pipeweed. He had served them so
faithfully and generously in conducting the lawsuit against Mr. Bull, that no
person was higher in their confidence. As he would take no reward for his
former services; so he began this new business with a declaration of the same
kind, and a protestation that nothing could have induced him to quit the sweets
of retirement for the toils of public business, but a disposition to oblige his
numerous friends who had united their suffrages in his favor. Every one who
knows him is fully convinced of the sincerity of his declarations, and he has
perhaps as large a share of the esteem and affection of the people in these
families, as any person ever could expect from a course of faithful and
friendly offices.

BESIDES him there is an under steward, a council of advice, a chief clerk, a
cashier, and a master of the hounds. The under steward is a person of a grave
deportment, much reading and strict integrity; he has written a large and
valuable treatise on family government, and was largely concerned in effecting
the compromise with Mr. Bull. The council of advice are chosen from the several
families, and consist of persons of the best education, abilities, and
popularity. The chief clerk has the care of the most important papers, and the
cashier keeps the key of the strong-box, which now has something in it besides
paper. By his advice the debts of the company are put into a fair way of being
paid, though some grumbling still subsists among those who were obliged to sell
their notes at a discount. The master of the hounds is an officer, who it was
at first thought would have very little business; but as the wild beasts of the
forest have of late grown very troublesome, it is supposed that he will have
his hands full. There is too much of a lurch for hunting among many of the
foresters; and some have not been ashamed to express their wishes that the
whole race of wild creatures was exterminated from the face of the earth. There
are others who still continue of the mind, that these animals are a degenerated
part of the human species, and might yet be recovered if propper methods were
used to tame them; but it is greatly feared, that while the rage for hunting
continues, all such benevolent projects will fail in the execution.

IN some late hunting matches, these wild animals discovered so much art and
courage, that several of the hunters were laid to sleep in the bed of honor;
and the rest were obliged to take to their heels, that they might "live to hunt
another day." Some persons are of the mind that it is not best to seek these
beasts in their dens, but rather to guard the fields and take care of the
poultry at home. Others are for pursuing them to the thickest shades of the
forest, and this seems at present to be the prevailing opinion. What the
success of it will be, time must determine.

SINCE the new partnership has been established, husbandry and trade have been
carried on briskly; the houses are full of good things, and the children are
well clad and healthy; but there is one inconvenience which usually attends a
full house, and that is, that rats are very numerous, and a new species of them
have lately found their way thither. Some of them are very fat and sleek, and
are not afraid to appear in open day light; though it is supposed they burrow
under ground, and have subterraneous communications from house to house. This
is an inconvenience against which no remedy has yet been found; though some
people, from their apparent voracity, are of the mind that they will either
prey upon one another, or else eat till they burst.

I HAD almost forgot to tell you that two new families have lately been added
to the number of partners. One is that of Ethan Greenwood, a stout, lusty
fellow, born in the family of Robert Lumber, but married into that of Peter
Bullfrog, from whom, after a long dispute, he has got a good tract of land,
which originally belonged to his own father, but was surreptitiously taken
possession of by his father-in-law. The other is Hunter Longknife; he was bred
in the family of Walter Pipeweed, and has a large share of his spirit of
adventure. Having taken up his residence in the outskirts of the forest, he has
had many a scuffle with the wild beasts, who are extremely fond of his green
corn and young chickens, whenever they can get a taste of them.

Letter XVI.
Present State of Mr. Bull. -- His Wife and his Mother. -- Story of the
everlasting Taper. -- Some Account of Mr. Lewis. -- His new Wife and cast off
Mistress. -- Conclusion.

DEAR SIR,
AFTER giving you such a long detail of the affairs of these foresters, I will
close my correspondence, for the present, with a brief account of the situation
of the principal persons with whom they are or have been connected, and whom I
have had occasion to mention in my other letters.

TO begin with Mr. Bull. Though he has given a quit-claim of that part of the
forest where his old servants and best customers have possession, yet he
retains the northern part, together with some hunting-seats which he promised
to give up to the foresters. The chief produce of this northern territory is
the furs, which are brought to his warehouse and wrought up by his tradesmen.
Notwithstanding the loss of his title to the lands of the foresters, they have
not wholly forsaken him as a trader. He keeps his fulling-mills at work, and
supplies them with cloths of various kinds, but they feel themselves at liberty
either to purchase of him or his neighbors, or to manufacture for themselves.
He is rather more complaisant to them in his own shop, than his factors are in
some of his distant warehouses, where they are not allowed to carry their
produce to market, nor to receive coffee, cotton, and sugar, as formerly.
However, they have found out other places where they can buy these commodities
without asking his permission. And as for that capital article TEA, which was
the occasion of beginning the controversy, they now fetch it directly from the
original warehouse of old Cang-hi, where it is manufactured. They purchase
their silks and muslins of the first makers and dealers, and get their wines
directly from the vineyards.

I HAVE before told you that Mr. Bull formerly used to send the ordure made in
his family to enrich the plantations of the foresters; but since his quarrel
with them, he has been somewhat at a loss how to dispose of it. At first he
threw it into the gutter Convicts employed in lighters on the Thames.
before his door. But there was such a large quantity of it, and the stench
which it caused was so offensive, that this expedient would not answer the end.
He then thought of sending it to a place where some of his family had been
employed in botanizing, Botany Bay, in New Holland.
in hope that by adding to the fertility of the soil, they would find more
encouragement to prosecute their inquiries, and that he should in time receive
some rent or recompense. This scheme, like some others, the product of his
fruitful brain, has been hitherto attended with more cost than profit; yet it
is still persisted in, and great expectations are still indulged.

AS to his domestic affairs, his wife still rules him according to her usual
maxims, and keeps up her gaming club, where she wins and loses alternately; but
between the shop and the drawing room, there is enough gained to pay the
interest of his debt, though it is not imagined he will ever be able to pay the
principal. This, like a millstone about his neck, must finally sink him.

YOU may possibly be curious to know what is become of his mother, whom I have
formerly mentioned to you as having had some sway in his family. The truth is,
that since he married his present wife, the old lady found her influence
decreasing and retired to her chamber, where she has been for many years
confined, and is now wholly bedridden. Mr. and Mrs. Bull, indeed treat the old
lady with much decency, and suffer none to intrude upon her, but such company
as she is fond of. Old Madam has all the infirmities of age about her. She will
not suffer herself to be touched nor turned in her bed; nor the room to be
aired, nor her linen shifted. She keeps her window-shutters closed, and will
not admit the least ray of light in her apartment, but what proceeds from her
own candle, which having been once dipped in consecrated water, is supposed to
possess all the virtues of an everlasting taper.

NOW I have spoken of Madam's taper, perhaps you will be amused with some
account of it. It is a wax candle of a common size, set in an old-fashioned
silver candlestick richly embossed and gilt; but the rust and dust of it are so
sacred, that it is never permitted to be scoured. The tradition is, that this
candlestick formerly belonged to St. Peter, and the candle first placed in it,
is supposed to have been lighted at the SUN, and by a mysterious kind of
uninterrupted succession, has been kept burning ever since. By the light of
this taper, old Madam reads her bible and books of devotion, which always lie
on a table by her bedside.

SOME persons of an incredulous turn of mind, have pretended to call in
question this mystery; but it is still held sacred by the old lady, and by most
of Mr. Bull's own family. There are some even among the foresters of the same
opinion; and such is the liberality in these families, that no one is molested
in the indulgence of any innocent whim, which does not affect the peace of the
families, nor the interest of the partnership. It was not long after the
re-establishment of harmony between them and Mr. Bull, that these persons sent
two candles in one lantern, and one in another, to be lighted at this venerable
taper, and dipped in the consecrated water. Two of them were actually lighted in
old Madam Bull's presence, and to her great satisfaction. The third was lighted
at a taper supposed to be derived from the same original, but "hid under a
bushel" in one of sister Peg's outhouses, it not being permitted to burn
publicly in her family, where the only candles allowed, are of the manufacture
of Geneva.

THERE has been as long a controversy between different opinionists on this
subject, as between the sectaries in Liliput, about breaking the egg at the big
or little end. But it is easy enough to accommodate the matter by granting that
St. Peter's candle, as well as those from Geneva, were originally lighted at
the SUN; that the same source of light is open to all; and that it is of no
consequence of what materials tapers are made, nor in what kind of candlesticks
they are placed, nor by whose hands they are lighted, provided they give so
clear a light as to answer the purposes of vision.

IT remains only that I give you some account of Mr. Lewis. The adventures in
his family have been very singular. I formerly told you that he feed lawyers to
plead the cause of the foresters. These subtle practitioners soon found that
the same arguments which they were obliged to use in favor of the foresters,
would apply with equal propriety to the case of Mr. Lewis's own family. He had
long been a widower, and the family was governed by a succession of kept
mistresses, who (...) only their pleasures and the enriching of their own
relations and dependants. The tenants were abused, the mansion house was dirty
and out of repair, and though the rents were paid into the hands of the
steward, yet much oppression and embezzlement, and little economy, were the
constant topics of complaint.

AFTER the alteration, produced by the assistance of Lewis's lawyers in the
forest, they began to think it was high time to do something of the same kind
at home. The only peaceable remedy which they could imagine, was to persuade
Mr. Lewis to marry a reputable woman, who would be agreeable to the family.
After much argument he was at length brought to see the necessity of the case;
and, to prevent a lawsuit, with which they threatened him, he consented to
take the wife which they recommended. She is a lady of good sense and polite
manners, and treats him with the greatest deference and propriety. She has had
the mansion thoroughly repaired, the floors and windows cleaned, and the walls
whitewashed, and is not afraid to let her inmost apartments be visited by the
sun and air. The building is now commodious, wholesome and pleasant, and the
dirty dog-kennel, Bastile, 1789.
which stood near the door, is demolished.

IT is suspected by some that Lewis still has a hankering after his old
connexions, but he professes love to his new wife in the strongest terms
imaginable. His cast off mistress has had the audacity to insult the newly
married lady, and tell her that she has no business to occupy her apartments;
that all Mr. Lewis's professions are insincere, and that she still possesses
his heart. If these ladies should go to pulling caps, Mr. Lewis will be in a
critical situation, as indeed every man is when two women are contending for
him. It is said that some of the neighboring gentlemen, who prefer concubinage
to matrimony, have taken the part of the late mistress, and insist on her
restoration to bed and board; but how this matter will terminate, can be
decided only by futurity.

HE has also been very unfortunate in some of his distant plantations and
factories. His black cattle have caught the horn distemper; some of his farm
houses have been burnt, and it is thought that several years will intervene
before his affairs will be set to rights.

THUS, my friend, I have endeavored to fulfill my promise by giving you such an
account as I have been able to procure of the foresters and their connexions. I
assure you I am extremely delighted with the country and its improvements,
which exceed by far the expectations of every person who travels this way, and
has formed what he may think a just idea of the country, by staying at home and
hearing the reports of others. There is no possibility of conceiving what a
fine country it is without actually seeing it; I therefore recommend to you a
journey hither, for a twofold purpose, viz. to cure you of the spleen, and to
convince you how much human industry and ingenuity can perform in a short time,
when nature has already done her part toward making a good country and a happy
people.

Yours, etc.

[The preceding Letters were written 1792.]

Letter XVII.
Jealousy between Lewis and his new Wife. -- His Divorce and Expulsion. --
Bull's Choler against the Family. -- Their Assumption of a new Firm, THE
FRANKS. -- Their Controversy with Bull, and the Defection of his Friends. --
Whims, Projects and Innovations of the Franks. -- Remarks on the Plan of
FRATERNIZATION.

DEAR SIR,
BEING assured that my former letters have afforded some entertainment to you
and your friends, I shall with pleasure resume my pen agreeable to your
request, and continue my account of the Foresters and their connexions.

MY last gave you the latest information which could then be had, relative to
the families of Mr. Bull and Mr. Lewis; and it is proper for me to begin where
I left off, because the circumstances of those two eternal rivals have had some
influence, and I fear will always have too much on the sentiments and
transactions of my favorite foresters. For, notwithstanding all that dignity
and independence of character which really exist among them, and which ought to
prevail over every inferior principle, yet there are persons in all these
families, who, from local and commercial attachments, or from natural and
political connexions, are strongly inclined to imitate the manners and adopt
the principles of one or the other of those ancient rivals.

I HAVE told you, that there was a suspicion of a hankering which Lewis
indulged toward his cast off mistress; and that the neighboring gentlemen
favored the intrigue. This suspicion has been sadly verified, and a long and
bitter controversy has ensued between Lewis and the new wife who had been
imposed on him. Her jealousy was raised to a monstrous pitch, and the proofs of
his infidelity became so flagrant, that nothing would satisfy her but a
divorce, not barely a mensa et thoro but a vinculo matrimonii. After a long and
solemn hearing, the sentence was pronounced in due form, and approved by the
major part of the family; who, in consequence, turned him out of doors. The
minor part, who adhered to him, were so roughly handled by the majority, that
such of them as could, were glad to escape, leaving the rest maimed and wounded
on the floors; which were so stained with blood, that they looked as if the
famous Doctor Sangrado See the Adventures of Gil Blas.
, and all his imps had been fully employed in their favorite operation.

SUCH was the noise and uproar on this occasion, that all the neighbors, and
especially those who favored Lewis's intrigue* were alarmed. Mr. Bull, whose
choler you know is very easily raised, took this opportunity to swear the peace
against the whole family of which Lewis was lately at the head. Not content
with this, which might have passed merely for a defensive measure, he entered a
complaint to the grand jury, and had a bill found against them "for riotous,
routous and disorderly behavior," and determined to prosecute them with the
utmost rigor of the law. For, said he, within himself, "If these fellows are
suffered to go on at this rate, they will set a fine example to their
neighbors, and turn every thing upside down. If the conduct of masters does
not happen to hit the humors of servants, we shall all be turned out of doors
as well as Lewis. Poor devil! I once hated him as heartily as any body; but now
he is in distress, I pity him, and can say as Ahab did to Benhadad, he is my
brother. If such principles and conduct should pass unpunished, no master can
be sure of his property, or power; all family government is at an end, and a
strong-box is no security. It is evidently my duty to bestir myself; and
besides, what a fine opportunity is now presented to revenge the conduct of
this officious family, who meddled in my controversy with the foresters! Now I
will pay them double and round."

TO carry this resolve into execution, he entered into articles of agreement
with Lord Strut and Nicholas Frog to stand by him; and gave large fees to the
most able pleaders, particularly to Ferdinand, Frederic and Leopold, who
professed to have an interest of their own in supporting his cause. These
crafty brethren of the long robe, after making a formal parade of their
eloquence at the bar, contrived by various pretenses and stratagems, well known
in their profession, to spin out the cause, and require additional sums of
money; which Mr. Bull generously, and even profusely advanced. For it is a
settled maxim with him, never to spoil any piece of work for fear of expense.
This being well known to those whom he employs, they are never in a hurry to
finish a job; and why should they, when they have so able and ready a
play master.

WHAT became of Mr. Lewis after his divorce and expulsion, is uncertain. A
letter Manifesto of Louis XVIII.
has appeared, pretending to have been written by him, which speaks in strong
terms of the ill treatment he has received, and contains a strange compound of
severity and lenity toward the family. Some are still of opinion that he may be
restored; but it is generally thought that he will not be able very soon to
show his head again among his old neighbors.

THE changes which took place in the family after his expulsion, were numerous
and rapid. The new wife did not long preserve her dignity, but was frequently
tousled and tumbled by the rude hand of every frolicksome fellow in the house.
The name of Lewis was expunged from the sign-board, and in its place was
substituted the name of some remote ancestors of the family who were called The
Franks, and by this firm the house is now known. Various devices were proposed
for a new coat of arms; one was a wheel within a wheel, with the word Jacobina
for a motto. Another was a bloody robe mounted on a spear, with the motto, in
terrorem. But it seems to be at length determined, that three plain stripes of
white, red and blue, shall be the device, with the motto une et indivisible.
Had there been but one color, the motto would have been more intelligible.

NOTWITHSTANDING all their intestine divisions, and their daily and nightly
broils among themselves; yet the Franks have had the address to show a bold
face to their adversaries, and to defend their cause in the law with a
resolution truly honorable. Their resources are supposed to be considerable.
Those who quitted the family were not permitted to carry off their clothes and
trunks, some of which contained a valuable booty. The old family plate and
jewels, and the ornaments of the devotional closet, have been sold at auction.
The real estate is in effect mortgaged, by promissory notes, issued on its
credit, which, though they have greatly depreciated in the market, by reason of
forgeries carried on in Mr. Bull's family, and by his connivance, yet will
probably be redeemed at some rate of discount at present unknown.

THE Franks have also found means to silence Mr. Bull's most powerful pleaders,
notwithstanding the large fees they received from him. They have even detached
Nicholas Frog from his connexions with Bull, and taken him into partnership
with themselves; though it is whispered that Nicholas is not over and above
pleased with the new mode of fraternization, as it has brought him into a
lawsuit with Bull, who at once laid attachments on all his silks and spices.
Lord Strut has also disengaged himself from the concern; Bull grins horribly at
him for his insincerity, and threatens to sieze all his plate and bullion, (of
which he has an immense quantity) to make good the damage.

HAVING introduced the word fraternization, I must tell you that this is one
specimen, and there are many others, of that liberty which the Franks have
assumed, of coining words. It has been the practice of the family for a long
time, and they have been flattered by the frequent adoption and use of their
new words in other families, who always regarded them as the most polite and
plausible, if not the most deeply learned in the whole neighborhood. When
words have a real and definite meaning, it is of no consequence who is the
original coiner of them, nor by whom they are brought into use; but every one
is fond of the productions of his own brain, and every one has a right to claim
and enjoy the honor (if there is any) belonging to such productions. Never was
a word better adapted to any particular purpose than this. To fraternize, in
the sense of the Franks, is to make brethren; to coax, or bribe, or compel, or
use means of any kind whatever with other people to make them brethren.

AFTER the divorce and expulsion of Mr. Lewis, the majority, who assumed to
govern the family, were so intoxicated with the idea of the liberty which they
enjoyed in being free from their master, in tousling and handling their
mistress, in picking the locks and searching the trunks of the deserters, and
breaking up the old family hordes, that they began to think this was a kind of
liberty which all families had a right to enjoy as well as themselves. They
came therefore to a resolution, to endeavor as far as in them lay, to extend
the blessings of this liberty to their neighbors, beginning with the nearest.
They made offers of service, either secretly or openly, to bring on revolutions
among them, or as they metaphorically expressed it, "to plant the tree of
liberty in their gardens." This was what they meant by fraternization. All who
favored their ideas in other men's families were called democrats, and those
who were not fond of the fraternizing plan were termed aristocrats, words also
of their own coining. To show their contempt of all titular distinctions, they
disused the appellations of Sir, Monsieur, your Honor, and the like, and
substituted the name of citizen, which was supposed to be equally applicable to
all. But to express their own most modest opinion of themselves, in the lowest
of all possible terms, they affected the name of Sans-culotte, which in plain
English signifies bare-****; a word, before this time applied only to those
most contemptible of the species who were too lazy to earn enough to buy a pair
of small-clothes. To such ridiculous lengths will people go, when they suffer
their enthusiastic imagination to get the better of their judgment! But the
wisest have their foibles; and, who is there that cannot recollect, in the
course of his life, some instances of indiscretion?

I SHOULD not have detained your attention so long to this article, had there
not been a very absurd attempt made to extend the plan of fraternization to the
Foresters; who were already the elder brethren of the Franks, both in principle
and conduct, and heartily wished well to their cause -- But of this you shall
hear more in my next.

I WILL only further observe, at this time, that there has appeared in the
family of the Franks, a strange kind of zeal on the subject of religion. Before
these changes took place, Mr. Lewis, and the family in general, entertained a
decent, though partial respect for Lord Peter, and were fond of buying those
devotional books and trinkets, in which you know he is a large dealer; but
since the expulsion of Lewis, no notice has been taken of the old gentleman,
except to insult him, by burning all those books and trinkets which they could
find in the family, and thus turning his whole trade into ridicule and
contempt. To show how totally they disregarded all their former received
opinions, both true and false, they have contrived a new almanac, from which
all the old red-letter days are expunged, and even the dominical letter is
omitted. They have also revised their vocabulary, and erased the words
revelation, resurrection and sundry others; and by a new inscription on the
family tomb, they have declared their disbelief of immortality. "Sum eternel."
Yet by an unaccountable inconsistency, they have dug up several corpses, which
were very offensive; Funeral honors of Voltaire, Rousseau, and Mirabeau.
and exhibited them publicly, in the same manner as the Romans performed what
they called the apotheosis of their Emperors. This idle attempt to annihilate
souls and to deify carcasses, has not gained them any credit among men of
reflection, because neither one nor the other is supposed, by sober people, to
be within the reach of human power.

IT is said, and I hope it is true, that the most considerate among them are
disposed to throw a veil over these transactions, and not to make themselves
any more ridiculous, by opposing opinions which at least are innocent, and whch
have some claims to respect from their antiquity.

ADIEU.

Letter XVIII.
Mission of TENEG from the Franks to the Foresters. -- Description of Mother
Carey's Chickens. -- Bull's Jealousy and Choler. -- Prudence of the Foresters,
and its Success. -- Impudent Attempt of the Chickens, and its Defeat. -- Bull's
Message to Cang-hi, and his sententious Answer. -- Peaceable Disposition of the
Wild Beasts. -- Agreement with the Ishmaelites and Lord Strut. -- Increase of
Rats.

DEAR SIR,
I HAVE already given you some idea of the fraternizing scheme of the Franks; I
shall now inform you of the means by which they attempted to introduce it among
the foresters.

MANY of the Franks had been in the forest, and had visited the plantations and
families there, not only during the lawsuit with Bull, but after the dispute
had been terminated. They had kept journals and made remarks on manners,
economy, husbandry, manufactures, literature, and other things worthy of
notice. After they had effected the expulsion of their master, these travelers
were very fond of introducing the same family economy which they had observed
among the Foresters, and of extending the blessings of fraternity to them, by
drawing them into the controversy in which they were engaged. "Why should not
these foresters (said they) bear a part of our burden, as we did of their's. We
involved ourselves in their quarrel with Bull, and helped them to terminate it
in their favor. One good turn deserves another; and it is now time for them to
enter into our controversy, and help us in the same way."

TO execute this plan, they dispatched a plausible, prattling, insinuating
petit-maitre, by the name of TENEG, who had been employed in fraternizing the
family of CALVINO, a famous distiller of gin, Gin is an abbreviation of Geneva
and had there been very successful.

ARTIFICES of the same kind will not succeed on all sorts of persons; but a
variation must be observed, according to the variety of humors, interests and
prejudices. The foresters were well known to be a wary and discerning, as well
as ingenious kind of people, and fond of novelties. To hit their ruling
passion, and thereby influence or deceive their judgment, Teneg was furnished
with a basket of birds' eggs, of a new species, which had recently appeared in
the gardens of the Franks. Of these birds, I cannot give you the name and
description, nor do I know whether they are included in any of the classes
found by naturalists; but to speak in the vulgar phrase they are known, in some
places, by the name of war-hawks; rather improperly, I think, because the hawk
though a ferocious is yet a silent bird; whereas these are so very noisy that
they seem to belong to the pettrel tribe, and have been not improperly called
Mother Carey's Chickens, from their resemblance to a bird of that name, which
is well known to chirp and whistle at the approach and during the height of a
storm.

THESE birds have some peculiarities, which must be considered as
characteristic of the species. One is, that they vary their note according to
the instruction of their keepers; in this respect they resemble the magpye and
the mock-bird. Their usual sound, when not under any particular direction, is a
dull monotony, an eternal repetition of jaco, jaco, jaco; but they have been
taught to sound other words which terminate with a vowel, or a liquid
consonant; such as, war, war, war; -- whisky, whisky, whisky, -- ja, ja, ja,
etc. If they chance to hear the whetting of a knife, or the snapping of a
trigger, or any noise which seems to be a preparation for mischief, they will
readily imitate it, and the sound will catch from one to another like a
feu-de-joye. It is surprising to see how easily they can be trained and
disciplined. Teneg, with a bird-call, which he carried in his mouth, could
bring them by dozens to light on his head and shoulders, and even dive into his
pocket, to pick the grains which he carried there to feed them. He could make
them flutter about him in all directions, and imitate any noise which he was
pleased to make. It is said, that he has imparted this secret to some choice
spirits, his associates.

ANOTHER peculiarity of these birds is, that they seem to have an aversion to
some particular days, and a predilection for others. On the twenty-second of
February they are scarcely ever seen on the wing, and are remarkably silent;
but on the tenth of August, and the twenty-second of September, they appear in
great numbers, and are heard to whistle through the whole day. The cause of
this peculiarity is one of the secrets of nature, which, it is hoped, the
learned will in time be able to penetrate. The vulgar supposition is, that
their hilarity in the months of August and September is owing to the great
quantity of the seeds of water-melons, which are then to be found, and of which
they are said to be remarkably fond. But this is altogether a vague conjecture,
and unworthy of a philosophic mind.

YOU will now be ready to ask, how were these eggs to be hatched? and what use
could be made of the birds if they should be hatched? To the first, I answer --
Teneg was well informed that there were certain old hens in the forest, who
would readily perform the office of incubation. To the second -- By a due
management of the birds, and principally by the force of their notes, it was
expected that they would excite in the foresters, and their children, the same
disposition to mischief, with which themselves were possessed, and thus prepare
the way for a complete fraternization.

TENEG arrived first in the plantation of Charles Indigo; where he placed some
of his eggs under an old hen, and scattered the seeds of a particular species
of grain, on which the chickens were to subsist till they could pick for
themselves. So prolific was the brooding warmth of the old hen, that the eggs
were soon hatched, and the chicks began their natural cry, jaco, jaco, jaco;
but were soon taught the note war, war, war. The effect was so surprising, that
several of Mr. Indigo's domestics immediately roared out the war-whoop,
equipped themselves in the habit of highwaymen, and took to the road, with a
view to rob any of Mr. Bull's family, or plunder any of his wagons, which they
might chance to meet in an unguarded and defenseless state.

TENEG was so slushed with this success, that he hasted to the other
plantations, distributing the eggs with his own hands, or sending them by
trusty messengers, who were well acquainted with the nests of the old hens. A
brood was soon hatched in each of the plantations, who began their cackling as
soon as they were out of the shell. The effect was not so great in all parts,
as it was in Indigo's plantation; for though the music excited several persons
to kick up a war-dance, and become knights of the highway; yet the number was
far greater who saw through the artifice, and combined to defeat it. Still,
however, the noise of the chickens was continued, and the highwaymen became so
impudent, that when Mr. Bull heard what was doing, he began to swell with
choler against the foresters. "Curse these fellows, (said he) do they intend to
aid the Franks against me? I Will begin with them betimes. The highway is mine;
I Will seize their wagons, and ruin their carrying trade; and if they have a
mind for another lawsuit, I am their match." Accordingly, as lord of the
manor, he sent out his huntsmen and hounds, seized several of their wagons and
drove them into enclosures, where they might be secured till a court-manor
could be holden for adjudication upon them.

THE most considerate among the foresters were greatly incensed, on account of
the plots thus formed against them. Though they respected the family of the
Franks, and rejoiced at their emancipation from the old absurd system of family
government, under which they had long groaned; though they made no scruple
publicly to own them as friends and brethren; yet they could not approve all
the whims and innovations, which had crept into the family; nor did they relish
the plan of fraternization, as the Franks intended to carry it on. They hated
the cackling of the chickens, and wished they had perished in the shell: but
they were loath to quarrel with the whole family for the folly and vanity of
their servant; especially as those who had the principal hand in sending him
were in disgrace, and another set had got the direction of the house. They had
at the same time a high resentment against Bull for seizing their wagons, but
thought the best way of getting them back again was by remonstrance and
persuasion. In these circumstances, a consultation was held by the council of
advice, at which presided their trusty High Steward, GEORGE, the grandson of
Walter Pipeweed, than whom there is not, perhaps, a man who carries more wisdom
in his head, more goodness in his heart, or more vigor in his nerves. George
has had enough of lawsuits; and though he will suffer no man to wrong him with
impunity, yet he had rather compromise difficulties than inflame them by
opposition. The result of the consultation was, that a letter be written to the
Franks, in a very friendly style, complaining of Teneg, and requesting that a
better man might be sent in his place; that a special messenger be sent to
Bull, to demand satisfaction for the damage they had sustained from his
huntsmen; at the same time disclaiming the conduct of the highwaymen; and
declaring that they did not intend to meddle with the quarrel between Mr. Bull
and the Franks; but to be in friendship with both, and trade with both as usual.

NO sooner was this determination known, than those who had the direction of
the chickens, set them on raising a terrible cry, of war, war, war -- ja, ja,
ja. This was very troublesome and provoking; but it was thought most prudent to
bear with their impertinent vociferation for a while, in hope that they would
soon quit the plantations. For as they had come in all at once, it was not
known but that they were birds of passage, and might disappear at the season of
migration; but even if they should continue, there was an expectation that
means might be found to tame and silence them, and perhaps render them in some
degree useful.

AN experiment of this kind was actually made. A flock of these chickens, under
the direction of a mischievous old hen, once got into a field of William
Broadbrim, on the western side of his plantation, and set up a cry of whisky,
whisky, whisky. The noise was so very loud, and their number was so large, that
it was feared they would devour the crop, then almost ripe for the sickle. A
company of archers was therefore sent out, with orders to try the effect of
some particular sounds, before they should discharge their arrows. They crept
along, making several kinds of noise, to no purpose, till they had got very
near, when they set up a loud cry of Wash, Wash, Wash, which entirely drowned
the noise of whisky, and was so formidable to the chickens, that they slew away
with precipitation, and became remarkably silent. They have not only made no
more disturbance in that quarter, but some of them have since been observed
hovering about the barn-yards, and mixing with the common poultry.

THE letter sent to the Franks was well received, and produced the desired
effect. Teneg was disqualified and superseded; but he did not think it proper
to return, lest he should lose his ears. He has since married a girl of the
family of Peter Bullfrog, and taken up his abode in the forest; and, such is
the good-natured policy of these people, that he is permitted to reside among
them, and to enjoy what he has earned, without any inquiry how he came by it;
provided that he pays his taxes and lives peaceably.

THE messenger who went to Mr. Bull, was a long time in consultation with his
clerk, before all matters could be adjusted to mutual satisfaction. The result,
however, was a tolerable compromise; in which Bull engaged to give up the
hunting-seats which he had so long withheld, on condition that the whole body
of the foresters should become bound to pay the balance of an old account, due
to him from the southern planters. He also promised to let the disputed limits
be adjusted by a committee; to expedite the manor-courts, in which the
trespasses should be fairly tried; and to pay damages if awarded. Other matters
which had been in dispute were adjusted; but one clause was inserted, which
prohibited them from trading at his sugar warehouse, unless they should carry
their produce in wagons of no larger size than a wheelbarrow* This article was
so singular and ridiculous, that the council of foresters rejected it. The
other parts of the agreement met the approbation of twenty out of thirty, which
made the instrument valid, and it was signed, sealed, published and declared in
due form.

AS soon as this transaction was known, and even before the instrument was
executed, those choice spirits whom Teneg had instructed, as aforesaid, in the
use of the bird-call, set all the chickens a crying ja, ja, ja -- treaty,
treaty, treaty. The sound rang through the forest, and was reverberated from
house to house, and from tree to tree, in such a surprising manner, that no
other noise could, for a while, be heard. Some very sober people were actually
deafened; others were vexed with the clamor. But considering from what cause
it proceeded, they determined to let the chickens cry till they were weary; and
then calmly and coolly to examine the reasons which influenced their keepers
thus to set them a cackling. This examination has been done in a very masterly
manner; and the people in general are pretty well satisfied with the
compromise. They see, that though it is not altogether to their wishes, yet it
is the best bargain that could be made. They see that it has prevented a long
lawsuit, the issue of which must have been uncertain; and they had rather
enjoy the blessings of cultivation and of sending their produce to market, than
spend their money in paying council, attorneys, solicitors, scriveners and
bailiffs; of which kind of drudgery they have already done enough to make the
present generation sick of such business.

THERE remained one effort more, which the disciples of Teneg were determined
to make, to prevent the agreement from being carried into effect. It was
necessary that a sum of money should be allowed for traveling charges, clerks'
fees, and other incidental expenses. When this matter came to be debated in the
council of advice, a flock of the chickens, who had been trained for the
purpose, flew into the hall, perched on the table and chairs, and began to
cackle with a new note in addition to their former vociferations. Papers,
papers, papers. Two of them had the impudence to alight on the shoulders of the
High Steward, as he sat musing in his elbow-chair, and, putting their bills
into his ears to squall this harsh note. GEORGE bore it a while calmly, and
continued his contemplations; till, at length, with his deep-grum voice, and
with a determined air and manner, he pronounced the monosyllable No, so
forcibly, that the cackling ceased, and the chickens retired to their managers,
for farther instruction. Their invention was ready, and some pains were taken
to teach them the same monosyllable No, with the addition of the word supply.
This was the most difficult task which had yet been attempted; and it took them
so long to learn it, that the neighbors, who observed what was going on, had
time to blow the horn, to call the people together, and put an end to the
insults of this noisy brood. At the sound of the horn, the chickens were
frightened; some to save their necks from being wrung, flew off in various
directions; others hid themselves and remained silent; till the council had
finished their deliberation, and voted the money. The only ill consequence of
this disturbance, was a little delay in the execution of the agreement, which
all good men had the candor to impute to the true cause.

NOTWITHSTANDING all the appearance of good will on the part of Mr. Bull, there
are many who think he still looks with an envious eye on the Foresters, and is
jealous of their enterprizing spirit, and of their extensive and growing
commerce. Their agents and factors are seen in all those warehouses, from
which he had been used to fetch commodities by wholesale, and dispose of them
by retail at very advanced prices. There is no place to which they cannot find
as ready access as himself, and where they cannot trade on equal terms. It is
not long since he sent a very pompous messenger to old Cang-hi, the tea
manufacturer, with his compliments, requesting that he might have some
exclusive advantages in trade, at his warehouse; and to ingratiate himself the
better, this messenger carried a number of valuable presents, which, it was
thought would be highly acceptable. The old gentleman received the messenger,
and some of the presents, with his usual politeness; but observing the
supercilious air of the messenger, he quickly dismissed him with this
sententious reply. "My ancestors have taught wisdom to their descendants. Their
pictures and their maxims are delineated in this book, which I present to thy
master. Tell him there is no friendship in trade. My doors are open to all
customers, and every man is welcome for his money."

WHEN the Foresters heard of this sagacious reply, they could not help laughing
in their sleeves, at the mortification which old Bull must have received from
it.

YOU will wish to know on what terms these people are with the wild beasts on
their western border. Since I wrote to you concerning them, a strong hunting
party has been sent out, who have driven them from their old haunts, and have
erected lodges in the most convenient places, where future huntsmen may reside.
But as the creatures appear to be less formidable, and their ferocity is
evidently in the wane, it has been thought best to entice them to peace, and
admit them to familiarity. The old practice is revived of setting molasses for
them to lick, and furnishing them with collars and nose-jewels. But above all,
a line has been drawn, beyond which no person is permitted to make any
plantation. This precaution is one of the best which could be invented, and it
is hoped will have so good an effect, as to keep the neighbors out of fear of
being devoured.

BESIDES the compromise with Bull, the Foresters have concluded an agreement
with two of the Arabian rovers, Muley Morocco.
and Hassan, Algiers.
which stipulates that they may go about their business without molestation, on
the payment of a certain sum down, and an annual acknowledgment besides. This
is a cheaper way of dealing with such old rogues, than to let them rob and
plunder at their own pleasure. For they are the genuine children of Ishmael,
whose "hand was against every man, and every man's hand against him."

AN advantageous agreement has also been made between the Foresters and Lord
Strut, adjusting the limits of his forest and theirs, and opening a road
between them, which is to be free to both parties. Mr. Bull has quietly and
honorably given up the hunting-seats, according to the agreement, and the
Foresters are in peaceable possession of them. This will enable them to extend
their plantations and cultivate their country to the greatest advantage. They
are continually making improvements by bridges and canals; and if they should
continue at peace among themselves, uninfluenced by the quarrels, and untainted
by the dissipation and folly of their neighbors, they will be as happy a set
of people as any on the globe.

ADIEU.

POSTSCRIPT.
IN one of my former Letters I told you of a new species of rats, which had
appeared in the forest. I am sorry to say that they not only remain, but are
very numerous and mischievous. They are so sly and evasive, that they elude all
the arts of common rat-catchers; and at the same time are so bold and impudent
as to make their appearance in open daylight, in the houses, roads and fields.
Not long since, a large number of them were seen in the dining room of George
Trusty; first sitting under the table, and catching every crumb which fell;
then leaping on the table, whilst the family were at dinner, and snatching the
meat out of their plates. George professed great indignation at this degree of
impudence, and swore that he would permit no such thing in his house; but some
people are so uncharitable as to suppose this to be only a finesse, and that he
secretly favors them, for some occult purposes. Should this imagination prove
to be well founded, it is thought that his name will be changed; and that
instead of being called Trusty, he will have a name as long as those used in
Oliver Cromwell's time; Better known than trusted.


