CHURCH HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND. Extending from 1783 to 1796. CONTAINING AN
ACCOUNT OF THE RELIGIOUS AFFAIRS OF THE COUNTRY, AND OF OPPRESSIONS THEREIN ON
RELIGIOUS ACCOUNTS; WITH A PARTICULAR HISTORY OF THE BAPTIST CHURCHES IN THE
FIVE STATES OF NEW ENGLAND. VOL. III.

BY ISAAC BACKUS, PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN MIDDLEBOROUGH.

Go through, go through the gates; prepare ye the way of the people; cast up,
cast up the highway; gather out the stones; lift up a standard for the people.

ISAIAH lxii. 10. Boston: Printed by MANNING and LORING. Sold by S. HALL, No.
53, Cornhill, and by MANNING and LORING, in Spring Lane. 1796.

PREFACE.
THE former Volumes of our History were published under great disadvantages.
The first of them came out in the height of our war, when all the power of
Britain was exerted to compel America to give up her most essential rights;
while one sect here were as earnest to compel all others to submit to their
power in religious matters. How difficult then was it for a very imperfect man
to give a just view of these affairs! And the many mistakes of the printers
rendered the work still more obscure. And though the Second Volume was better
composed, and more correctly printed, yet the last part of it was hurried
through the press, so as to prevent its being finished as I intended. Yet I
know not of any public dispute about the truth of facts in the History. Many
have privately discovered their dislike of the publication of them, because
their own schemes of power and gain were exposed thereby.

For the capital scheme of policy, for two centuries past, both in Europe and
America, has been to maintain a balance of power among the nations, and among
religious sects, so as to compel all to submit to government. And a man of
great knowledge in Pennsylvania, when he read my First Volume, in 1779, said in
a letter to me "I think it needs not a spirit of prophecy to predict, that
America is to be stained with the blood of the saints. I am afraid there is a
foundation laid for it already. I wish it may not be with particular design.
Formerly there was a proper balance of power between Episcopalians and
Dissenters, taken in England and America together; but now that balance is
lost. Formerly there was a check on the licentiousness of power in America, by
an appeal to the crown; but where shall the persecuted Americans appeal now?
Not to Congress, not to the united force of America: they disclaim any such
right: they will be judges of no such matters. They can then only appeal to
their oppressors and accusers." And he had the following reasons for his fears:
The American war began between Episcopalians and Congregationalists, and the
Presbyterians joined with the latter, and they were the uppermost party in
Pennsylvania through the war. And when the Warren Association sent an agent to
Philadelphia, while the first Congress was setting there, in 1774, the members
of it from the Massachusetts plainly manifested that they would sooner yield to
the power of Britain, than they would give up their power of supporting
Congregational ministers by tax and compulsion. And Boston, where the war
began, was the only place in America where they had hanged men for religion.
And an eminent man in Virginia says, "Several acts of the Virginia Assembly, of
1659, 1662 and 1693, had made it penal in parents to refuse to have their
children baptized; had prohibited the unlawful assembling of Quakers; had made
it penal for any master of a vessel to bring a Quaker into the State; had
ordered those already here, and such as should come thereafter, to be
imprisoned till they should abjure the country; provided a milder punishment
for the first and second return, but death for their third. -- If no capital
executions took place here, as did in New England, it was not owing to the
moderation of the church, or spirit of the legislature, as may be inferred from
the law itself; but to historical circumstances which have not been handed down
to us." Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, p. 167.
Though the following things may alter his mind.

1. The light of revelation has ever enlarged the capacities of men beyond any
other means in the world, so that wars among such have been the most
destructive of any upon earth. Half a million of men were slain in one day, in
a battle between Judah and Israel. 2 Chronicles. xiii. 17. And we have no record of
such a slaughter in any other day since Adam fell. And the Quakers were so
fierce against the teachers and rulers of the Massachusetts, that they did not
see how they could possibly keep up their religious government, without hanging
some of them. Our first volume, p. 322 -- 331. But the government of Virginia
was in no such danger from them.

2. The first of those laws in Virginia was made but just before Charles the
Second came to the throne, who put a stop to those bloody executions here; and
no man has been hanged since for religion, in England or America.

3. The Quakers hold that their children are born in their church, which, by a
secret policy, has been upheld as one great body in Europe and America; and
they held so much with Britain in the late war, that two of them were hanged,
and others were banished, by the government of Pennsylvania, as enemies to
their country. But as the Baptists hold all religion to be personal, between
God and individuals, and that all church power is in each particular church, it
is impossible for them ever to form any great body, that can be dangerous to
any civil government. The Baptists and Quakers have therefore been unjustly
ranked together, when their principles are opposite to each other. And when the
church of Christ shall come to be governed wholly by his laws, independent of
all the inventions of men, all sectarian distinctions will cease, and wars will
come to an end. Though Europe and America are now so far from this, that
sectarian distinctions are often begun with capitals, while those important
names, Christian and Christianity, are begun with small letters.

And as I have met with some high claims of sectarian power in 1783, that I had
not seen when our Second Volume was published, I begin this in that year; and
through the whole have compared actions and events with the word of God,
according to the best light I could gain from every quarter. For as the
Massachusetts have now determined not to revise their constitution of
government, and they, with three other States, are constantly oppressing the
Baptists, while they are using all their arts to entice all into the use of
force to support religious ministers, there appears to be great need of holding
up light against these evils.

The list of Baptist churches in our southern States, and of some in
New England, I have taken from Mr. John Asplund's Register, for 1794; but the
most of them in New England are taken from later accounts. As he was at Boston
when my list was printed, he prevailed with my friends there to insert some
names that I did not intend to have mentioned.

This Volume was written with an expectation of closing it with 1795, but as it
was not finished till June, 1796, some things are added in this year. All the
dates are set in old style, until the new took place, in 1752.

CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION Page 9 High Claims of Power Page 10 Remarks thereon Page 11, 107
The true Way of Dignity Page 13 A false Charge Page 14 An unjust Law Page 15
Remarks thereon Page 17 How Ministers here obtain their Power Page 18 The Use
they made of it Page 19, 85, 89, How a Bishop came here Page 21 And two to the
Southward Page 22, 251 Methodism described Page 23, 240 And Universal Doctrine
Page 26, 90, 152 Cruel Oppression Page 28 An Insurrection followed Page 30 A
new Plan of Government Page 33 Without any Religious Test Page 35, 41 Bribery
exposed Page 36 The Warren Association described Page 38, 113, 117 Liberty to
the Southward Page 40 Christian Baptism opposed Page 43 Another unjust Law Page
45 College at Providence Page 47, 222 President Manning faithful in it Page 48,
219 Public Faith violated Page 49 Oppression at Barnstable Page 51 And at
Rehoboth Page 52, 155, 302 Corruption at Taunton Page 54 And through the
country Page 56 Laying on of hands considered Page 57 Congregational Principles
described Page 59, 84 The Baptists compared to Balaam Page 63 Abraham's
Covenant considered Page 64, 72 And Balaam's Error Page 67 Church and State
distinguished Page 70, 77, 288 Division at Providence Page 74, 252 And at
Rochester Page 75 Mourners in Zion Page 80 Marks of Deceivers Page 81, 91 Fiery
Trials give Light Page 83 The Nations are shaking Page 87 For they have denied
Christ Page 89 A List of Baptist Churches Page 93 Of Sects in America Page 107
Of the true Church Page 111 Of Associations Page 112, 119
History of particular Baptist Churches.
In Boston Page 121 Norfolk County Page 133 Middleborough Page 135 Bridgwater
and Marshfield Page 140, 141 Carver and Swansea Page 142, 143 Rehoboth Page 147
Taunton Page 159 Attleborough Page 161 Dighton and Freetown Page 162 Dartmouth
Page 164 Raynham Page 165 Harwich Page 165, 302 Barnstable Page 167 Tisbury
Page 167 Haverhill Page 169 Rowley and Danvers Page 170 Chelmsford and Newton
Page 171 Cambridge and Weston Page 172 Leicester Page 173 Sturbridge Page 175
Charlton and Sutton Page 176 Hardwick and Royalstone Page 178 Harvard Page 178
Ashburnham Page 182 Templeton Page 182 Grafton, etc. Page 183 South-Brimfield
Page 184 Well-Springfield Page 185 Ashfield Page 186 Leverett and Wilbraham
Page 187 New-Salem Page 188 Shutesbury Page 189 Westfield and others Page 190
Cheshire Page 190 Pittsfield Page 194 Hancock Page 195, 198 Washington and
Sandisfield Page 196 Bullocksgrant Page 197 Kittery Page 201 York County Page
202 Cumberland County Page 204 Lincoln County Page 205 Hancock County Page 213
Providence Page 215 Newport Page 227 Tiverton and Warren Page 235, 236
Washington County Page 237 North-Kingston Page 239 Hopkinton Page 241 Exeter
Page 243 Westerly Page 247 South-Kingston Page 247 Richmond Page 248 Warwick
Page 248 Coventry Page 249 West-Greenwich Page 250 General Remarks Page 251
Connecticut and Groton Page 253 New London Page 256 Stonington Page 257 Lyme
and Colchester Page 260 Thompson Page 261 Ashford Page 262 Woodstock Page 263
Hampton Page 265 Killingly and Plainfield Page 266 Farmington and Suffield Page
267 Hartford Page 268 Wallingford Page 269 Stratfield and Stamford Page 270,
271 Litchfield County Page 272 Middlesex County Page 273 Tolland County Page
2^^ New Hampshire Page 277 Newtown Page 279 Brentwood Page 280 Salem Page 281
Northwood Page 282 Gilmantown Page 282 Hillsborough County Page 283 New London
Page 284 Salisbury Page 285 Richmond Page 286 Westmoreland, etc. Page 286
Grafton County Page 288 Vermont Page 294 Shaftsbury Page 295 Pownal and
Woodstock Page 297 Woodstock Association Page 298 Windsor Sufferings Page 299
And many other Page 300 General Observations. Antichrist and the Church of
Christ described Page 305 And the two Witnesses Page 309 The Spirit of Christ
essential to Christianity Page 310 And the Baptist Churches have been increased
thereby Page 312 The Evil of confounding Church and World together Page 314 The
Glory of having them distinct Page 316 All Men should act by the Golden Rule
Page 318 The Gates of Hell cannot prevail against such Page 320 For they stand
on the Sea of Glass Page 321 Of the Slaying of the Witnesses Page 323 And their
Resurrection Page 325 Of Mystery Babylon Page 328 Of Heresy Page 331 Men are
known by their Fruits Page 333
A CHURCH HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND.
CHAP. I.
I. Introduction. II. An Election Sermon. III. Remark thereon. IV. The true Way
of Dignity and Holiness. V. A false Charge. VI. An unjust Law. VII. Remarks
upon it. VIII. How Ministers came by their Power in New England. IX. The bad
Use they made of it. X. How a Bishop came here. XI. And two to the southward.
XII. Methodism described. XIII. And Universal Doctrine. XIV. Cruel Oppression.
XV. An Insurrection followed.

1. WHEN peace was restored to America, she entered upon such a new state of
political existence as no people were ever in before. All the governments among
men that ever were before formed, were forced upon the people by a few powerful
leaders, or else were given by immediate inspiration from God. But the people
in this land have framed their own governments, and elected their own rulers,
without inspiration from Heaven, or violence from men. Though in doing these
things, they have gone through great changes, which have discovered many of the
corruptions of men, and of the infinite perfections of God. And a plain record
thereof in New England, especially as to religious affairs, may be very
serviceable to mankind. Instructive and useful histories of (...) military,
civil and political concerns, have been already published; but the state of our
churches since the war, has been but slightly touched. Therefore an account of
the state of religion, and of the government of our churches, is here
attempted. And as Connecticut has ever elected her own rulers, and made her
own laws, they have framed no new constitution of government since the
revolution, but only altered their laws as they thought proper.

II. And to prepare the way for a new system of laws, the president of their
university said to their legislature, "Dominion is founded in property; and
resides where that is, whether in the hands of the few or many." And he held
that the power of religious ministers is derived by an external succession from
the apostles, through the churches of Rome and England; and said of
New England, "The induction of the ministers of the first churches was
performed by lay brethren, and this was called ordination, but should be
considered what in reality it was, only induction or instalment of those who
were vested with official power. These were all ordained before by the bishops
in England." And he encouraged them to go on in supporting such ministers by
force, by saying, "God be thanked, the senatorial Assembly of this happiest of
all the United States, still embosoms so many Phinehases and Zerubbabels, so
many religious patriots, the friends of Jesus and his holy religion: And that
the Messiah's cause is here accompanied with civil government and the
priesthood; allusively the two olive trees upon the right of the candlestick
(the churches) and upon the left; the two golden branches, which through the
two golden pipes, Moses and Aaron, empty the golden oil out of themselves, and
diffuse their salutary influence of order and happiness through the community.
Zech. iv. 11. As to nominal Christianity, I have no doubt but that it will be
uphold for ages in these States. Through the liberty enjoyed here, all
religious sects will grow up into large and respectable bodies. But the
Congregational and Presbyterian denomination, however hitherto despised, will,
by the blessing of Heaven, continue to hold the greatest figure in America,
and, notwithstanding all the fruitless labors and exertions to proselyte us to
other communions, become more numerous than the whole collective body of our
fellow protestants in Europe. The whole proselytism of New England in
particular for sixty or seventy years past, has not exceeded eight or ten
thousand, while our augment in that term, by natural increase, has been half a
million." Election Sermon at Hartford, May 8, 1783. By Ezra Styles, D. D.
President of Yale College, p. 8, 61, 73.


III. These things were published by the highest authority in Connecticut, just
after the news of peace arrived, and many were pleased therewith. But we would
now desire to ask a few questions. And first, as it is easier for a camel to go
through the eye of a needle, than it is for any who trust in riches to enter
into the kingdom of God, how can dominion be founded in property? Mark x. 24,
25. Yea, as all our American governments are founded in covenants, and not in
riches, how dangerous is the above teaching? And as our rulers have solemnly
sworn to renounce all foreign jurisdiction over us, how can they compel any to
support teachers who hold their power of office by succession from Europe? And
as persons who are born again, are the only holy priesthood that God has under
heaven, how can the priesthood be conveyed by an external laying on of hands? 1
Peter i. 23. ii. 5, 9. And as the golden oil is the Spirit and grace of God,
how can it be diffused through a community by the laws of men enforced by the
sword? Zech. iv. 6 -- 12. For our Lord warns us to beware of the leaven of
hypocrisy, which is caused by covetousness; to avoid which he refused to be
concerned in dividing of estates. Luke xii. 1 -- 15. Neither could Peter give
any countenance to the distinction between Jews by nature, and sinners of the
Gentiles, without dissimulation; and a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump.
Gal. ii. 12 -- 15. v. 9. The covenant of circumcision made natural birth the
first door into the church of Israel; and how can natural increase make any
better churches now, than it did of the seed of Abraham, who were a generation
of vipers, and had no right to baptism without personal repentance? Mat. iii. 6
-- 10. And God says, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of
his. Romans viii. 9. How then can any man be a minister of Christ without his
Spirit, let him be ordained by whom he may? God was the only lawgiver to the
church of Israel; and Phine has and Zerubbabel were no more than executors of
the laws of God in that church. And he never allowed any to use force in the
collection of the support of his ministers therein; but every man was to bring
in the tithes and offerings which he required of them, as they would desire his
blessing, and to escape his awful curse. Mal. iii. 7 -- 12. Even so has the
Lord ordained, that they who preach the gospel should live of the gospel. 1
Cor. ix. 14. And how great is the difference between the gospel of Christ, and
the laws of men enforced by the sword? Each man in Israel was to bring in all
the offerings which God required, so as to be able to say to him, I have not
transgressed thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them. And upon this
Moses said, Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in
his ways, and to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments,
and to hearken unto his voice. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be
his peculiar people as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all
his commandments: and to make thee high above all nations which he has made,
in praise, and in name, and in honor, and that thou may be an holy people
unto the Lord thy God, as he has spoken. Deuteronomy. xxvi. 13, 17 -- 19.

IV. A willing obedience to all the revealed will of God, and about his house
and worship in particular, was the way in which he made them high above all
other nations, especially in the days of David and Solomon; and they were no
otherwise a holy people, than as they obeyed all his commandments, and as the
visible presence of God was among them, in his tabernacle and temple. Yet the
above president of the second university in America, took the last of these
verses for his text, and applied that promise of God to Israel, which they
could only enjoy in obedience to his laws, unto the people of America, and
especially to those of the Congregational and Presbyterian denomination, who
support their ministers by the laws of men, enforced by the sword. Yea, and the
rulers who make and enforce those laws, received their power from the people,
who can take it away again at the next election, while said ministers hold
their power by succession from Europe, and that no men can ordain ministers but
ministers who hold to such a power; and when they have ordained them over a
particular society, that society must be forced to support them, until
ministers will release them therefrom. But if the people have given never so
much for the settlement of a minister, he can leave them when he pleases, if
other ministers will approve of it, and the people can have no recompense. Thus
partiality is established by law; and the root of it is the yoke which
ministers have laid upon children in their infancy. And to those who loose
themselves from that yoke, a noted minister in Connecticut said,

V. "When you re-baptize those in adult years, which we have baptized in their
infancy, you and they jointly renounce that Father, Son and Holy Ghost, whom we
adore and worship, as the only living and true God, and on whom we depend for
all our salvation." An address to his anabaptist brethren. By Joseph
Huntington, D. D. 1783, p. 23.
And what greater evil can any men be accused of in this world? For they who
secretly enticed any away from the service of the true God, were to die without
mercy. Deuteronomy. xiii. 6 -- 11. But they who were sprinkled in infancy answered no
conscience toward God at all, neither did it produce any change in them, as
all experience who have any right to baptism. For all who have a right to that
ordinance, are first made dead to sin, and alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into death; that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. Romans vi. 2 -- 11. For as many of you as have
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Gal. iii. 27. And this is done
by the obedience of faith, and in no other way; and in vain do any accuse such
of renouncing the only living and true God. But having such teaching from their
ministers, a new law-book was published in Connecticut, in 1784, wherein, by
one law, they gave all the societies that were before constituted, all their
meeting houses and ministerial lands, with power to support their ministers by
tax and compulsion. And then they made another law, which says,

VI. "An act for securing the rights of conscience in matters of religion, to
Christians of every denomination in this State.

"As the happiness of a people, and the good order of civil society,
essentially depend upon piety, religion and morality, it is the duty of the
civil authority to provide for the support and encouragement thereof; so as
that Christians of every denomination, demeaning themselves peaceably, and as
good subjects of the State, may be equally under the protection of the law: And
as the people of this State have in general been of one profession in matters
of faith, religious worship, and the mode of settling and supporting the
ministry of the gospel, they have by law been formed into ecclesiastical
societies, for the more convenient support of their worship and ministry: And
to the end that other denominations of Christians who dissent from the worship
and ministry so established and supported, may enjoy free liberty of conscience
in the matters aforesaid;

"Be it enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives, in General Court
assembled, and by the authority of the same, That no persons in this State,
professing the Christian religion, who soberly and conscientiously dissent from
the worship and ministry by law established in the society wherein they dwell,
and attend public worship by themselves, shall incur any penalty for not
attending the worship and ministry so established, on the Lord's-days, or on
account of their meeting together by themselves on said day, for public worship
agreeable to their consciences.

"And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all denominations
of Christians differing in their religious sentiments from the people of the
established societies in this State, whether of the Episcopal church, or those
Congregationalists called Separates, or the people called Baptists, or Quakers,
or any other denomination who shall have formed themselves into distinct
churches or congregations, and attend public worship, and support the gospel
ministry in a way agreeable to their consciences and respective professions;
and all persons who adhere to any of them, and dwell so near to any place of
their worship that they can and do ordinarily attend the same on the Sabbath,
and contribute their due proportion to the support of the worship and ministry
where they so attend, whether such place of worship be within this, or any
adjoining State, and produce a certificate thereof from such church or
congregation, signed by their order, by the minister or other officer thereof,
and lodge the same with the clerk of the society wherein such person or persons
dwell, every such person shall be exempted from being taxed for the support of
the worship and ministry of said society, so long as he or they shall continue
so to attend and support public worship with a different church or congregation
as aforesaid.

"And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all such
protestant churches and congregations as dissent from the worship and ministry
established as aforesaid, and who maintain and attend public worship by
themselves, shall have liberty and authority to use and exercise the same
powers and privileges for maintaining and supporting their respective
ministers, and building and repairing their meeting houses for the public
worship of God, as the ecclesiastical societies constituted by act of the
general assembly of this State by law have and do exercise and enjoy; and in
the same manner may commence and hold their meetings, and transact their
affairs, as occasion may require for the purpose aforesaid.

"And all persons shall be taxed for the support of the ministry and other
charges of the society wherein they dwell, who do not attend and help support
any other public worship; any thing in this act notwithstanding.

"And every person claiming the benefit of this act, shall be disqualified to
vote in any society meeting, save only for granting taxes for the support of
schools, and for the establishment of rules and regulations for schools, and
the education of children in them."

VII. The wisdom of this world is here remarkably discovered. And a minister
who was born in Connecticut, has lately said of their religion, "The best in
the world, perhaps, for a republican government. As to the mode of exercising
church government and discipline, it might not improperly be called a
republican religion." Morse's Geography, third edition, 1791, p. 109.
Yet it may be serviceable to review the way by which it was introduced, and by
which it grew up to its present height. Our fathers who planted Plymouth
colony, held that the church of Christ was to be governed by his laws,
independent of all the laws of men; and they never would support religious
ministers by force so long as governor Bradford lived, which was thirty-seven
years after they came to Plymouth. But, the next year after they came into the
use of force for that purpose, two Quakers were hanged at Boston. The
congregational name was invented by the Massachusetts, who held that the church
ought to govern the world, and to force all to submit to their power. And when
that power was in great danger, partly by the increase of the Baptists among
them, one of their greatest ministers said, "It is made by learned and
judicious writers, one of the undoubted rights of sovereignty to determine what
religion shall be publicly professed and exercised within their dominions. Why
else do we in New England that profess the doctrine of Calvin, yet practice the
discipline of them called Independent, or Congregational churches, but because
the authority of the country is persuaded that it is most agreeable to the mind
of God?" Hubbard's Election Sermon at Boston, May 3, 1676, p. 35.
But their charter was taken away eight years after, and in 1692 their second
charter took place, which gave the world a power above the church about
religious ministers; though this was so odious in the eyes of many fathers in
Boston, that they procured a special act, the next winter, to exempt Boston
from the cruel yoke that has been laid upon the country ever since.

VIII. The Presbyterian and Congregational ministers in England had formed a
connection together a little before, and the like was tried for in the
Massachusetts soon after; but the writings of Mr. John Wise prevented it. But
in the close of 1707, a minister who came from the Massachusetts, was elected
governor of Connecticut, and he prevailed to carry that scheme. And it was done
by bringing a bill into their legislature, who met May 13, 1708, which said,
"This assembly, from their own observation, and from the complaint of others,
being sensible of the defects of the discipline of the churches of this
government, arising from the want of a more explicit asserting the rules given
for that end in the holy scriptures, from which would arise a firm
establishment amongst ourselves, a good and regular issue in cases subject to
ecclesiastical discipline, glory to Christ our head, and edification to his
members, has seen fit to ordain and require, and it is by the authority of the
same ordained and required, that the ministers of the churches in the several
counties of this government, shall meet together at their respective county
towns, with such messengers as the churches to which they belong shall see
cause to send with them, on the last Monday in June next, there to consider and
agree upon those methods and rules for the management of ecclesiastical
discipline which by them shall be judged agreeable and conformable to the word
of God; and shall at the same meeting appoint two or more of their number to be
their delegates, who shall all meet together at Saybrook at the next
commencement to be held there, where they shall compare the results of the
ministers of the several counties, and out of, and from them draw a form of
ecclesiastical discipline." Their college was then at Saybrook, which was
afterward removed to New Haven. The ministers met according to appointment,
and drew up their scheme of discipline, which the legislature, who met October
14, 1708, established by law. It allows each church to elect her own officers,
and to discipline her members; but if any person thinks that he is unjustly
censured, he may appeal from the sentence of the church to a consociation in
each county, whose sentence is to be final and decisive, if the majority of the
ministers present are in the vote, and not without. Neither can any man obtain
a meeting of the consociation to hear his case, unless an association of
ministers advise them to meet. At the same time the ministers in each county
meet in association when they please, without any act of their churches, and
claim the whole power of licensing candidates for the ministry, and of advising
churches whom to call to preach to them. And the ministers in each county
choose delegates out of their number, to meet once a year in a general
association from each county in their government, to consult about their
affairs, and to complain to their legislature against any society or person as
they think proper.

IX. And when the Lord poured out his Spirit in a most glorious manner in 1741,
under the ministry of traveling preachers, they complained of it to their
legislature in October, who ordered a special consociation to meet upon it in
November, and they declared it to be very disorderly for any minister to preach
in a parish where another was settled without his consent. And in May, 1742, an
act was passed by their legislature, to exclude all their settled ministers
from any benefit of their laws for his support, who should preach in any other
parish without the consent of the parish minister. And if any man who was not a
settled minister, should preach or exhort in matters of religion, in any parish
against the consent of the parish minister, he should be imprisoned until he
would give a bond of one hundred pounds not to do so any more; and if any
minister from other colonies should come and preach without such consent, he
was to be carried by authority out of Connecticut government. And because one
of their settled ministers preached two sermons in a Baptist church, against
the consent of a Presbyterian minister in the town, other ministers persecuted
him for five years, until they declared him to be deposed from his office, and
excluded from the communion of their churches, and said they did it, "In the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ, according to the word of God, and the powers
invested in this consociation, by the ecclesiastical constitution of this
government." Our second volume, p. 35, 36, 136 -- 141, 181. Thus they held that
the Lord Jesus Christ was the head of the government of Connecticut, and that
his laws and theirs were blended together; and is not this a part of mystery
Babylon? And they now say, "All persons shall be taxed for the support of the
ministry and other charges of the society wherein they dwell, who do not attend
and help support any other worship." And is not this a mark of the beast? for
he is of a scarlet color, and is very changeable. He was, and is not, and yet
is. Rev. xiii. 17. xvii. 3, 5, 8. Blood has ever followed the support of
worship by the sword of the magistrate. But where the children of God and the
children of the devil dwell in the field of the world, and appear to be such by
their fruits, our Lord says, Let both grow together until the harvest. Mat.
xiii. 30, 38. But in the church we are commanded to turn away from all men who
have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, while we are required to
hold fast the form of sound words, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
And this he explains by saying, All scripture is given by inspiration of God,
and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works. 2 Timothy i. 13. iii. 5, 16, 17. The only reason why he allows the men
of the world to make laws, and to enforce them with the sword, is because they
will not obey the laws of God, nor refrain from injuring their neighbors,
without such forcible restraints. And it is readily granted, that piety,
religion and morality, are essentially necessary for the good order of civil
society, and so are the showers and shines of heaven. But what a figure would
any body of men make, if they should enact laws to determine when the sun
should shine, and how often the showers should fall! For the Lord God is a sun
and shield: the Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withhold
from them that walk uprightly. Psalm lxxxiv. 11. For it is time to seek the
Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon us. Hosea x. 12. Every good
gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the Father of
lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Of his own
will begat he us with the word of truth. -- Pure religion and undefiled, before
God and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world. James i. 17 -- 27.
The beast is as spotted as a leopard, as cruel as a bear, and as terrible as a
lion. Rev. xiii. 2. And how can any man keep himself unspotted from the world,
if he forces the world to support his worship?

X. As Congregational and Presbyterian ministers have done this, and hold to a
successive power to do it, which came through the church of Rome, a minister
who was born in Connecticut, obtained the title of bishop of Connecticut, in a
more direct line than our ministers have done. For he was ordained bishop of
Connecticut, by three bishops in Scotland, November 14, 1784, who derived their
succession from three bishops in England, who refused to swear allegiance to
king William, after he had driven the popish king James from the throne. So
that his line came directly from the church of Rome, without any connection with
the government in Great Britain for an hundred years past. And this bishop
holds that his authority came from Christ, as much as any can, and says, "A
church in which Christ has no authority, cannot be his church: It may be the
Pope's church, or Luther's church, or Calvin's church, or Wesley's church --
but Christ's church it cannot be, unless it be founded on his authority and
governed by his commission. The apostles being divinely inspired, and acting
under the immediate direction of the Holy Ghost, in all things necessary to the
establishment of the church according to the will of Christ, none of their
successors could have authority to change the government they had established,
unless they could plead the authority of Christ for the change, with as much
certainty as the first apostles could for the original establishment, and could
give the same proof of divine inspiration as those apostles had given." Bishop
Seabury's Ordination Sermon at Portsmouth, New-Hamp^^^ 1791, p. 14, 15.


XI. This is a most important truth; and where can we find that the apostles
called any ministers priests, in distinction from other brethren of the church?
Until such a word can be found in their writings, we may boldly reject all
pretenses to the Christian priesthood, in all men who give no evidence of their
being born again of the Spirit of God. And as soon as this man assumed the
character of bishop of Connecticut, it caused great concern in the church of
Eng land; and a gentleman of great note therein, wrote a letter to a Baptist
minister in New England, to inform him that those bishops in Scotland had not
good authority to consecrate others, and also that the people of Connecticut
ought to elect their bishop, before he could lawfully act as such; and he
desired that some proper men might be sent over to be ordained by bishops in
England. This letter was shown to many Episcopalians, and one of them in
New York took a copy of it, to lay before a convention of their ministers, who
were to meet at Philadelphia in September. But this affair lay so heavy upon
the mind of the said gentleman in England, that he wrote to Dr. Franklin upon
it, October 29, 1785, and informed him that those bishops in Scotland had
admitted "prayers for the dead, and extreme unction among them." Historical
Collections at Boston, vol. 111. p. 162. In February, 1795, bishop Seabury
published a letter to his brethren, in the Connecticut papers, in which he
styles himself "Samuel, by divine permission, bishop of Connecticut and
Rhode Island." Though he has but about thirty societies in Connecticut, and
four in the State of Rhode Island. And there are between three and four hundred
religious societies in those two States, of other denominations. What then
could be expected from such men, if their power was equal to their inclinations?
And one minister from New York, and another from Philadelphia, were sent over,
and were consecrated by bishops in England; and each of them have been
chaplains to our senators in Congress, with a salary of five hundred dollars a
year. But as our rulers have solemnly sworn to renounce all foreign
jurisdiction over America, how can they have a right to give public money to
any who hold a commission from Europe? Can any man wonder at the confusion
which is now in our country, while promises and oaths are so little regarded?

XII. And as little of it appears among a new sect which is now formed in
America. For Mr. John Wesley, who was ordained a presbyter of the church of
England, with a solemn oath to obey and teach her articles of faith, and forms
of worship; and yet he published a sermon in 1739, against several of those
articles, and he preached against them in England, Scotland and Ireland, for
above forty years, and then he and his followers, seeing how the American war
ended, reduced their thirty-nine articles to twenty-four, with new forms of
worship and order, and published them in London in 1784, and called them, The
Sunday Service in North America. Three orders of ordained officers are
prescribed therein, besides preachers who are not ordained. And when they
ordained the lowest of the three, they say, "Will you reverently obey them to
whom the charge and government over you is committed, following with a glad
mind and will their godly admonitions! Answer, I will endeavor so to do, the
Lord being my helper." Sunday Service, p. 283.
And many of his followers met a Baltimore in Maryland, December 27, 1784, and
drew up a pamphlet, entitled, "A Form of Discipline for the Ministers,
Preachers, and Members of the Methodist Episcopal Church in America." They
allow no man to be a preacher in their church, but such as profess a belief
that perfection is attainable in this life. They date the beginning of their
societies in America, from the labors of some preachers who came over from
Ireland about the year 1764; and they say, "What may we reasonably believe to
be God's design in raising up the preachers called Methodists? Answer, To
reform the continent, and spread scripture holiness over these lands. As a
proof here of, we have seen in the course of fifteen years a great work of God,
from New York through the Jerseys, Pennsylvania, Maryland. Virginia, North and
South Carolina, even to Georgia." And they say, "We are thoroughly convinced,
that the church of England, to which we have been united, is deficient in
several of the most important parts of Christian discipline; and that (a few
ministers and members excepted) it has lost the life and power of religion. We
are not ignorant of the spirit and designs it has ever discovered in Europe, of
rising to pre-eminence and worldly dignities by virtue of a national
establishment, and by the most servile devotion to the will of temporal
governors: and we fear, the same spirit will lead the same church in these
United States (though altered in name) to similar designs and attempts, if the
number and strength of its members will ever afford a probability of success;
and particularly to obtain a national establishment, which we cordially abhor
as the bane of truth and holiness, the greatest impediment in the world to the
progress of vital Christianity. For these reasons, we have thought it our duty
to form ourselves into an independent church. And as the most excellent mode of
church government, according to our maturest judgment, is that of a moderate
episcopacy; and as we are persuaded, that the uninterrupted succession of
bishops from the apostles, can be proved neither from scripture nor antiquity;
we therefore have constituted ourselves into an episcopal church, under the
direction of bishops, elders, deacons, and preachers, according to the forms of
ordination annexed to our prayer book, and the regulations laid down in this
form of discipline." Methodist Form of Discipline, printed at New York, 1787,
p. 1 -- 6, 13, 30.
Thus they undertook to be lawgivers for all North America, and to form a
church therein that never had any existence until the year 1784. And their
teachers have taken great pains to draw off people from all other religious
communities in our land, by confounding works and grace together. Mr. Wesley
held that Christ died equally for all mankind, but that men are saved by their
own faith and obedience, which yet they may fall from and perish forever. And
he says, "Unconditional election cannot appear, without the cloven foot of
reprobation. I believe election means, a divine appointment of some men to
eternal happiness. But I believe this election to be conditional, as well as
the reprobation opposite thereto. I believe the eternal decree concerning both,
is expressed in those words, He that believes shall be saved; he that
believes not shall be damned. And this decree without doubt God will not
change, and man cannot resist. According to this, all true believers are in
scripture termed elect; as all who continue in unbelief, are so long properly
reprobates, that is, unapproved of God, and without discernment touching the
things of the Spirit." Wesley on Predestination, fifth edition, p. 9, 10.
But all men may know that there is no such decree in the word of God, and also
that he never set reprobation in opposition to election. For he says, The
election has obtained it, and the rest were blinded. Romans xi. 7. In whom the
god of this world has blinded the minds of them who believe not, lest the
light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine
unto them. 2 Cor. iv. 4. As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these
also resist the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. 2 Timothy iii. 8. Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates. 2 Cor. xiii. 5.
And is it not blasphemy, for any to say, that God cannot elect, sanctify and
save a part of mankind, without putting unbelief, blindness and corruption into
all the rest? Yet Wesley and his followers insist upon this with daring
boldness. And he also says, "One who is a true believer, or, in other words,
one who is holy or righteous in the judgment of God himself, may nevertheless
finally fall from grace." Ibid. p. 49.
But the Son of God says, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and
him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. John vi. 37. He that
believes not God, has made him a liar. 1 John v. 10. And how awful is their
case!

XIII. Yet a minister in Boston, who had published the most, for forty years,
of any man in America, to keep up the Congregational establishment, published a
book in 1784, to prove that Christ not only died for all men, but also that he
will finally save them all from hell. And he denied that there was any word in
the bible, that we could know by it that it meant without end, without other
considerations than the word itself. And he says, "In what point of light
soever we take a view of sin, it is certainly, in its nature, a finite evil. --
And the consideration of hell as a purging fire, is that only which can make
the matter sit easy upon one's mind." Chauncy on Salvation for all Men, p. 319,
324. Dr. Jonathan Edwards published a full answer to him in 1790.
But if the holy scriptures have no word in them to distinguish certainly
between a limited time, and endless continuance, it is the most imperfect book
upon earth. And the fire of God's wrath in a future state, is so far from being
a purging fire, that he says, Behold, the day comes that shall burn as an
oven; and all the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble and
the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of hosts, that it shall
leave them neither root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name shall the
Sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth,
and grow up as calves of the stall. And ye shall tread down the wicked; for
they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do
this, says the Lord of hosts. Mal. iv. 1 -- 3. Again he says, The hand of the
Lord shall be known toward his servants, and his indignation toward his
enemies. For, behold, the Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like
a whirlwind, to render his anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire.
For by fire and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh: and the slain
of the Lord shall be many. And afterward great numbers shall be converted,
from all nations; and God says, As the new heavens, and the new earth, which I
will make, shall remain before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and your
name remain. Isaiah lxvi. 14 -- 22. And if we compare these prophecies with the
four last chapters in the Revelation, have we not reason to conclude, that the
awful destructions among the nations, which God is now making by fire and
sword, are to usher in the latter day glory? Yea, are not these the burnings
which shall introduce the new heavens and new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness? 2 Pet. iii. 12, 13. For the scoffers, walking after their own
lusts, were never so open and daring against all religion before, in any age or
country, as they are now in Europe and America. But the unlearned and unstable,
wrest the scriptures unto their own destruction. 2 Pet. iii. 3, 4, 16. And one
way in which this is done, is by putting earthly universities in the place of
the teaching of the Spirit of God, calling them rivers, the streams whereof
shall make glad the city of God. For he says, Blessed is the man that walks
not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor
sits in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in the law of the Lord,
and in his law does he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season;
and his leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper. Psalm
i. 1 -- 3 xvi. 4. And Jesus said, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water. John vii. 37, 38. But how often have men put
human learning in the place of saving faith in the Son of God!

XIV. The first university in America is in Cambridge, where an early example
of oppression appeared after the war. A Baptist church was constituted in that
town in 1781, and they had a pastor ordained in 1783; yet they were all taxed
for the support of Congregational ministers, and three men were imprisoned
therefore in 1784. Therefore they sued the assessors who taxed them, and their
case was carried through their inferior and superior courts in 1785, and was
turned against the Baptists, which cost them more than an hundred dollars. The
constitution of our government restrained our rulers from making any
certificate law, as they did in Connecticut, whereby dissenters from the ruling
party might be exempted from taxes to their worship; and if any persons might
draw off from them without acknowledging that they had power to bind and loose
in such affairs, the use of force to support religious ministers would come to
an end. Therefore a great lawyer informed those oppressed people, that if they
would give in certificates to the ruling sect, that they belonged to said
Baptist society, and would have their money go to the minister thereof, he
might sue the money out of the hands of those who took it. This advice he
founded upon the words in our constitution which say, "All moneys paid by the
subject to the support of public worship, and of the public teachers aforesaid,
shall, if he require it, be uniformly applied to the support of the public
teacher or teachers of his own religious sect or denomination, provided there
be any on whose instructions he attends; otherwise it may be paid toward the
support of the teacher or teachers of the parish or precinct in which said
moneys are raised." This article was drawn by another great lawyer; and men of
that profession are interested in supporting religious teachers by force as
really as any men in the world; for a great part of their gains come by
controversies about religion; and when teachers and lawyers are in confederacy
together, they will make words to mean any thing which they please. And in the
above article, they construed the word he to mean the teacher who was to
receive the money, and not the man who paid it. And, rather than to suffer
continually, those Baptists in Cambridge complied with the advice of the
lawyers, and their minister sued the money out of the hands of their
oppressors, from time to time, until they lest off collecting such money; and
the like was done in various parts of the country. Our constitution says, "All
men are born free and equal, and have certain natural, essential, and
unalienable rights." And the right to receive and support faithful teachers,
and to refuse to support those who are unfaithful, is one of the most essential
rights of conscience that can be named; yet this right is daily violated by all
men who support their teachers by tax and compulsion. Again, the Massachusetts
constitution says, "No subordination of any one sect or denomination to
another, shall ever be established by law." Yet the Congregational denomination
have constantly violated this article also. Though to hide it, they made a law
in March, 1786, which confounded ministerial and civil taxes together, and
empowered every man in each town who pays two thirds more in one tax than a
poll tax, to vote in such affairs. And the act says, "The freeholders, and
other inhabitants of each respective town, qualified as aforesaid, at the
annual meeting, for the choice of town officers, or at any other town meeting
regularly warned, may grant and vote such sums of money as they shall judge
necessary, for the settlement, maintenance and support of the ministry,
schools, the poor, and other necessary charges arising within the same town; to
be assessed upon the polls and property within the same, as by law provided."

XV. Here is not the least regard paid to the church of Christ; but
fornicators, drunkards, railers and extortioners, have equal votes with the
best men in the land, to determine who shall be guide for their souls, and how
they shall be supported. And God says of antichristian teachers, They are of
the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them. 1
John iv. 5. But how terrible were the effects of such things? For the love of
the world had induced many to run into debt, and it made others now fierce for
calling in their debts, and collectors to get their taxes, which caused much
business in courts, and a great increase of lawyers; therefore a man in Boston
began to publish essays in their papers against lawyers, the same month in
which the above law was made, which essays were collected into a pamphlet in
July. And the people felt themselves so much distressed, that, in August and
September, they arose in arms against their courts, in the counties of
Hampshire, Berkshire, Worcester, Middlesex, and Bristol. Hereupon the town of
Boston wrote to all the towns in the Massachusetts, requesting them to bring in
accounts of their grievances, and promising to use their influence in their
favor. And the legislature was called together, and heard many complaints, and
they published an address to the people, November 14, 1786, in which they said,
"We feel in common with our neighbors the scarcity of money; but is not this
scarcity owing to our own folly? At the close of the war, there was no
complaint of it: since that time, our fields have yielded their increase, and
Heaven has showered its blessings on us, in uncommon abundance. But are we not
constrained to allow, that immense sums have been expended for what is of no
value, for the gewgaws imported from Europe, and the more pernicious produce of
the West Indies; and the dread of a paper currency impedes the circulation of
what remains? -- the difficulty in paying debts increased, As a disregard to
honesty, justice and good faith, See Matt. xxiii. 23.
in public and private transactions, became more manifest. Some persons have
artfully affected to make a distinction between the government and the people,
as though their interests were different and even opposite; but we presume, the
good sense of our constituents will discern the deceit and falsity of these
insinuations. Within a few months the authority delegated to us will cease, and
all citizens will be equally candidates in a future election." But all their
reasoning could not quiet those people; therefore an army was sent up and
subdued them by force. Though in the next election, the governor and above half
the legislature were left out of office, and fourteen men, who had been
condemned to be hanged for rebellion, were all pardoned. And how came religious
ministers to have a higher power over the people, to force away money from
them, than our governors or legislators have? Yea, higher than the kings of
Great Britain? For the ministers who were formerly supported in the name of
those kings, and since in the name of this State, still hold a power above them
all. And are they not ministers of the great city which reigns over the kings
of the earth? And the voice from heaven says, Come out of her, my people, that
ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Rev.
xvii. 18. xviii. 4.

CHAP. II.
I. A new Plan of Government. II. No religious Tests therein. III. Bribery
exposed. IV. A concise View of the Warren Association. V. Southern Labors for
religious Liberty. VI. Opposition to Christian Baptism. VII. Another
Connecticut Law. VIII. A View of the College at Providence. IX. Dr. Manning
faithful therein. X. Public Faith universally violated. XI. Oppression at
Barnstable and elsewhere. XII. Evils at Rehoboth described. XIII. And at
Taunton and Pomfret. XIV. Also among the Ministers in general. XV. The Doctrine
of Laying on of Hands opened. XVI. And the first Principles of Congregational
Churches.

I. AS long as the fear of foreign dangers prevailed, our Congress was
wonderfully obeyed; but as that fear abated, the love of the honors, riches
and pleasures of this world weakened their authority, until they could not
govern this great country. For while some States made laws to regulate trade,
and to guard against foreign encroachments, other States took advantage to
enrich themselves. These things were very distressing in these northern parts,
while the people to the southward were not benefited thereby. For Virginia had
long received their religious teachers from Europe, as well as many civil
merchants; and Baptist ministers had often been imprisoned for preaching the
gospel without license from Episcopalians, until the war put a stop to it. And
after the war they tried hard to revive that power again. But the Baptists and
others prevailed, in the beginning of 1786, to have a law made, which says,
"That no man shall be compelled to frequent or support any religious worship,
place or ministry whatsoever, nor shall be enforced, restrained, molested, or
burdened in his body or goods, nor shall otherwise suffer on account of his
religious opinions or belief; but that all men shall be free to profess, and by
argument to maintain, their opinions in matters of religion, and that the same
shall in no wife diminish, enlarge, or affect their civil capacities."
Jefferson's Notes on Virginia, p. 243.
Yet their houses for worship, and their large tracts of ministerial lands,
were still held by Episcopalians; and the frequent addresses of the Baptists to
their legislature, for to have those lands sold for public uses, or that they
and their houses for worship might be free for all such ministers as the people
chose, were disregarded. So hard is it for men to give up any worldly advantage
which they have obtained under the mask of religion. The beast had feet like a
bear. Rev. xiii. 2. And no bear ever grasped harder to hold his prey, than men
now do to hold the power and gain which religious pretenses have given them.
Yet by a motion from Virginia, the Congress recommended it to all these States,
to elect delegates to meet at Philadelphia, in order to form a better plan of
government than they then enjoyed. Accordingly twelve States met there by
delegation, and labored upon it for about four months, until they finished a
new constitution of government on September 17, 1787, and sent it out to all
these States, and some of them adopted it soon, while others did not receive it
in two years. And if men find it to be so hard a matter to agree about the
affairs of time, why should they pretend to force all to unite in the great
concerns of eternity? If they differ so much about perishing things which are
visible, how can they unite in the service of the invisible Jehovah, who is
beloved by his children, and is hated by the world? For every one that does
evil, hates the light; and Jesus says, I am the light of the world; but they
hated me without a cause. John iii. 20. viii. 12. xv. 25. And though this
hatred has been covered, in every age, under the name of religion or
government, yet the feast of the gospel, in the church of Christ, will destroy
the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is spread over
all nations. Isa. xxv. 6, 7. The Christian nations have laid bands upon
children, before they could choose for themselves, and have forced them to
support the national worship all their days. But God says to his people, Loose
thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. For thus says
the Lord, Ye have sold yourselves for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without
money. -- Thy God reigns. This is the gospel of peace. Isa. lii. 2, 3, 7.
Romans x. 15. And as surely as he reigns above, no men below can have any right
to make laws to bind any in religious affairs. But how hardly are men brought
to give up this power over the consciences of others! For on January 9, 1788, a
convention of delegates from all parts of the Massachusetts met at Boston, and
debated long upon the new constitution of government which was formed in
Philadelphia, until they, with great difficulty, adopted it on February 6, by a
majority of 187 votes, against 168.

II. One of the greatest objections that was made against it, was, that no
religious test was required therein, of any of the officers of government. But
after much had been said upon it, a Congregational minister arose and said,
"The great object of religion being God supreme, and the seat of religion in
man being the heart or conscience, that is, the reason God has given us,
employed on our moral actions, in their most important consequences, as related
to the tribunal of God, hence I infer, that God alone is the God of the
conscience, and consequently, attempts to erect human tribunals for the
consciences of men, are impious encroachments upon the prerogatives of God."
But as this did not silence their objections on that head, a Baptist minister
arose five days after, and said, "Nothing is more evident, both in reason, and
in the holy scriptures, than that religion is ever a matter between God and
individuals; and therefore no man or men can impose any religious test, without
invading the essential prerogatives of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ministers first
assumed this power under the Christian name; and then Constantine approved of
the practice, when he adopted the profession of Christianity as an engine of
State policy. And let the history of all nations be searched, from that day to
this, and it will appear that the imposing of religious tests has been the
greatest engine of tyranny in the world. -- The covenant of circumcision gave
the seed of Abraham a right to destroy the inhabitants of Canaan, and to take
their houses, vineyards, and all their estates as their own; and also to buy
and hold others as servants. And as Christian privileges are much greater than
those of the Hebrews were, many have imagined that they had a right to seize
upon the lands of the heathen, and to destroy or enslave them as far as they
could extend their power. And from thence the mystery of iniquity carried many
into the practice of making merchandise of slaves and souls of men." But this
was not suffered to be printed in the same paper in Boston, in which the speech
of the Congregational minister was printed. Though the wisdom which is from
above, is without partiality, and without hypocrisy.

III. But men often carry these evils farther under the name of religion and
government, than they can do in any other way. For if any are dishonest in
their private dealings, and refuse to perform their promises, others can avoid
having any further trading with them; but promises and oaths are frequently
violated in public affairs, when the most upright cannot bring the guilty to
justice, nor escape from being injured by such men. A notable instance hereof
now appeared in the State of Rhode Island. A number of men therein artfully
represented to the people, that if a large bank of paper money was made, they
might easily pay off their public and private debts; and they were accordingly
elected into their legislature in 1786, and made such a bank. Some religious
teachers were active in this scheme, by which the widow and the fatherless,
with many others, were amazingly defrauded and oppressed. And in March, 1787,
the men who were guilty of these evils, passed an act to cut off every man in
the State from voting in their next election of rulers, until they had taken a
new oath against bribery. By such means they were elected again into office,
and they would never allow a convention to be called in that State, to consider
of the new constitution of government for these United States, until the year
1790; It was adopted there, May 29, 1790.
since which those deceitful men have been left out of office, and as great
harmony is restored there as in other places. But in all parts of America the
public promises of government are still violated, beyond what men in private
stations can possibly do to each other, and yet continue in power and credit.
And no men have suffered more in these times, than religious ministers who have
conscientiously refused the use of force for their support. And as our Lord
says, My kingdom is not of this world, how can his ministers have a right to
force the world to support them? How can they exhort rulers and people to
venture their eternal all upon the truth of Christianity, if themselves refuse
to trust it for their temporal living? Can any wonder that carelessness and
infidelity prevail under such conduct? But as long as rulers can force away
money from the people, for the support of religious teachers, it bribes them to
exert all their influence in their favor; and this bribes rulers to continue
in that practice; and God says, A gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and
pervert the words of the righteous. Deuteronomy. xvi. 19. From whence we may learn the
cause, why so many wise and righteous men are ensnared in these ways. At the
same time, if men can save their money by renouncing the use of force to
support religious ministers, many will use their liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, and as a cloak of maliciousness, which serves to prejudice others
against the liberty of the gospel.

IV. The churches who formed the Warren Association, presented many addresses
to our rulers, and publications to the world, against oppression, and for
religious liberty, from their first formation in 1767, to the close of the war
in 1783; and as long as the fear of suffering from others was powerful, it
moved them to unite against their oppressors; but as that fear abated, the love
of self and of earthly things, has in some instances prevailed against solemn
promises and obligations. So our Lord says, Woe unto the world because of
offenses; for it must needs be that offenses come, but woe to that man by whom
the offense comes. And he requires us to give each brother two opportunities
to speak for himself, before the offense is told to the church, whose sentence
is to decide the case. Matt. xviii. 7 -- 18. But where teachers are supported
by force, all are accounted offenders who refuse to have fellowship with that
way. And many offenses will arise among churches who have no such exercise of
power, which require more discretion and patience in dealing with offenders
according to the laws of Christ, than most Christians have attained unto. And
when they have crowded matters into the church, without a due regard to his
laws, they want a higher power to appeal to, than a particular church of
Christ. To call in advice, where the accuser and accused may be heard face to
face, and suitable counsel be given for the church to act upon, is a practice
which is warranted by scripture and reason; but a power in councils above
particular churches, has no foundation in scripture, and is an endless source
of confusion among Christians. Of this we have had much experience. When the
Warren Association met at Middleborough, Sept. 7, 1784, a minister who had
censured some of his brethren, and refused to let them call in advice from
other churches, came with a complaint against some who had gone to hear them
without his consent; but he was reproved therefore. Yet when the Association met
at Wrentham, Sept. 13, 1785, he came with some queries which pointed to the
same thing. And a man who had been excluded from another church, then came with
an earnest request that the Association would interpose their influence in his
favor; and because they refused to do it, he published a bitter complaint in a
Boston news-paper. When they met at Newton, Sept. 12, 1786, a complaint of a
division in another church caused a considerable labor, and then a vote to
leave them out of the Association, which is the farthest that they have a right
to go in such cases. Their meeting at Chelmsford, Sept. 11, 1787, was not
interrupted with such things. Yet when they met at Sturbridge, Sept. 9, 1788, a
complaint was brought against the majority of another church, who had withdrawn
from their minister and a part of their brethren, and the majority were left
out of the Association, and the minister with the minority were recommended as
the church. But as this was going too far, so the effects have been very
unhappy ever since. And when the Association met again at Sturbridge, Sept. 8,
1789, another minister made hard attempts to crowd a complaint against a church
into it; but it was kept out, though with difficulty, and he has been since
disowned by all our churches. And all experience has shown, that a particular
church of Christ is the highest judicature that he has established upon earth
to carry his laws into execution in his name. And he says, Where two or three
are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. Matt. xvii.
20. In all earthly governments, the laws are executed in the name of the
supreme authority of it, which cannot see but a little of what is done in their
name. But the Son of God is present in every church, as well as through the
world, by his universal knowledge and power; and if any of his churches leave
their first love, and will not repent, he removes the candlestick out of his
place. Rev. ii. 1 -- 5.

V. Wise measures were now taken to the southward, to secure religious liberty.
A general committee of the Baptist churches in Virginia, presented an address
^o the excellent Washington, upon his being chosen President of these United
States, dated August 8, 1789, in which they said; "When the constitution first
made its appearance in Virginia, we, as a society, had unusual struggles of
mind, fearing that the liberty of conscience (dearer to us than property or
life) was not sufficiently secured. Perhaps our jealousies were heightened, on
account of the usage we received in Virginia, under the regal government, when
mobs, bonds, fines and prisons, were our frequent repast." President Washington
returned them an answer, wherein he said, "If I could have entertained the
slightest apprehension that the constitution framed in the convention where I
had the honor to preside, might possibly endanger the religious rights of any
ecclesiastical society, certainly I would never have placed my signature to
it." And he said to those Baptists, "While I recollect with satisfaction, that
the religious society of which you are members, have been, throughout America,
uniformly and almost unanimously the firm friends of civil liberty, and the
persevering promoters of our glorious revolution, I cannot hesitate to believe,
that they will be the faithful supporters of a free, yet efficient general
government." Leland's Virginia Chronicle, p. 47, 48.
And the next month the Congress proposed a number of amendments to our federal
constitution, one of which says, "Congress shall make no law, establishing
articles of faith, or a mode of worship, or prohibiting the free exercise of
religion, or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of
the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition to the government for a
redress of grievances." This was dated Sept. 23, 1789; but the Massachusetts
legislature were so far from adopting of it, that we cannot find any record of
any debates upon it. When this State was since sued, before the federal court
at Philadelphia, our legislature was called together upon it, who instructed
our members in Congress to use all their influence to procure an amendment of
the constitution in that respect, and it was effected, and the amendment was
readily adopted by the Massachusetts legislature; but the amendment about
liberty of conscience is kept out of sight. But in vain do they think to hide
their iniquity from the eternal God, who is no respecter of persons, but will
reward every man according to his works. And the above testimony in favor of
the Baptists in general, is confirmed by experience, and by the nature of
things. For where no person can be made a member of the church, without his own
consent, and each one can withdraw from it when he will, all cruel oppression
is excluded. And such churches are not accountable for any over whom they have
no power. Yet all the Baptists in Europe and America, have often been
reproached with the madness of Munster, in 1533, where they tried to support
their religion with the sword. Though the parliament of England revolted from
the Pope the same year, and set up their king as the head of the church. And
all men who love the wages of unrighteousness, are guilty of madness. 2. Peter
ii. 15, 16. But they who are guilty of it, are commonly false accusers of all
who soberly refuse to have fellowship with them therein. And the prophecy is
fulfilled, which says, I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth, and
he had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke as a dragon, and he exercises all
the power of the first beast before him, and causes the earth, and them which
dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. Rev.
xiii. 11, 12. The two horns are, undoubtedly, the officers of church and state,
uniting their influence in schemes of power and gain, under the name of
religion and government. The sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
gave the first beast a deadly wound, when the pure doctrine of salvation by
grace was proclaimed in the reformation. But that doctrine, and the government
of the church of Christ by his holy laws, are as much opposed now by
Protestants, as ever they were by the church of Rome. And how little do the
people of New England now act according to the high opinion that others have
entertained of them? For an excellent author in South Carolina, speaking of the
beginning of the war in 1775, says, "It was a fortunate circumstance for the
colonies that the royal army was posted in New England. The people of that
northern country have their passions more under the command of reason and
interest than in the southern latitudes, where a warmer sun excites a greater
degree of irascibility. One rash offensive action, against the royal forces at
that early period, though successful, might have done great mischief to the
cause of America. It would have lost them European friends, and weakened the
disposition of the other colonies to assist them. The patient and the politic
New England men, ful^y sensible of their situation, submitted to many insults,
and bridled their resentment." And he also says, "It was one of the
peculiarities of these new forms of government, that all religious
establishments were abolished." Ramsay's History of the American Revolution,
vol. I. p. 186, 355.
They were so in the southern States, but this is obstinately refused in
New England, to their unspeakable shame in foreign parts. Yea, the example of
our Lord and Savior is here openly rejected, lest their darling traditions
should come down.

VI. For in January, 1790, a book was published in Boston, entitled, "The
Baptism of Jesus Christ not to be imitated by Christians." It was written by
two ministers in the county of Worcester. Their argument is, that John was a
priest in the church of Israel, and that when he baptized Jesus, he initiated
him into the office of the priesthood, to make atonement for sin, which none
can do but the Son of God. And they say, "It will not be denied by any, that
the words washing and baptism are of like import. -- The baptism of Christ then
must be considered as the fulfillment of the law of priestly consecration." Yet
as Aaron and his sons were to wash their hands and feet, these men say, "Is it
not almost certain that Christ was not plunged all over in water?" Essay of
Fish and Crane, p. 8.20
Answer, Moses was to bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle,
and to wash them with water. This was done once by Moses, at their
consecration. But Aaron and his sons were to wash their own hands and feet,
from time to time. Exodus xxix. 4. xxx. 19, 21. Lev. viii. 6. In the first case
there is no mention of hands and feet. Moses washed them all over. But if
washing their hands and feet was baptism, then Aaron and his sons were
anabaptists. Yea, and they baptized themselves too, which is opposite to all
ideas of gospel baptism. Neither had John any right by the law of Moses to
consecrate Jesus as a priest in the Hebrew church. For it is evident that our
Lord sprang out of Judah, of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning
priesthood. And it is yet far more evident; for that after the similitude of
Melchizedek there arises another priest, who is made, not after the law of a
carnal commandment, but after the power of an endless life. Yea, he is of an
order above Abraham; and the priesthood of Aaron is disannulled. Heb. vii. 5 --
19. And his children say joyfully to him, Thou art worthy to take the book, and
to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by
thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation; and have
made us unto our God kings and priests, and we shall reign on the earth. Rev.
v. 9, 10. So Peter says to all who are born again, Ye are a chosen generation,
a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people. 1 Pet. ii. 9. By the
death of Christ he disannulled all claims to power by natural birth, and united
the great offices of priests and kings in his church, in those who are born of
the Spirit. Jesus is the only lawgiver for his church, and his children are
the only executors thereof in his name. And God says, Beware lest any man spoil
you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. For in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily; and ye are complete in him, who is the HEAD of
all principality and power. In whom also ye are circumcised with the
circumcision made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, by the circumcision of Christ; buried with him in baptism, wherein also
ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has
raised him from the dead. Col. ii. 8 -- 12. Yet philosophy and vain deceit has
prevailed so long, that it is now denied that Christians should imitate the
baptism of Christ, because the ceremonial law was not abolished until his
death. But the same men hold infant baptism from the covenant of circumcision,
which was the foundation of the national church of Israel. Yea, Mr. Fish, one
of the authors of this book, published one before, in 1772, which he called
Japheth dwelling in the tents of Shem, from Genesis ix. 27; in which he went back
ten generations before Abraham, for a warrant for infant baptism. And their
essay now, to prove that the baptism of Christ is not to be imitated by
Christians, has been so pleasing to the world, that it has passed three
editions.

VII. And the folly of men in other respects is daily exposed. For the law in
Connecticut, called, "An act for securing the rights of conscience in matters
of religion, to Christians of every denomination in this State," proved to be
so ineffectual to their purpose, that they made an addition thereto in May,
1791. By this addition no certificate could be legal, until it was approbated
by two justices of the peace, or only by one if there was no more in the town
where the dissenter lived. Thus the civil authority in the uppermost religious
party in their State, were to judge the consciences of all men who dissented
from their worship. And when they had done it, the act says, "Which
certificate, upon being lodged with the clerk of the ecclesiastical society in
which such dissenter dwells, shall thereafter, so long as he shall attend the
public worship of the church or congregation to which he has joined himself,
and shall continue to pay such his proportion, toward the support of the
public worship and ministry thereof, exempt him from all civil obligation to
the society from which he dissents, excepting taxes granted before the time
such certificate is lodged with the clerk of said society as aforesaid." And
this is a plain imitation of the British parliament, who resolved in 1775, that
they would not tax any colony in America, who should raise as much money among
themselves for the support of government, as the parliament judged that they
ought to, as long as they did so, and no longer. But as God has delivered us
from that tyranny, how can any submit to a like tyranny over the consciences of
men? For a freehold rated at fifty shillings, or forty pounds in the common
list, gives every inhabitant in Connecticut the power of voting for their
legislature, and of being elected into it. And all the privilege that their
churches have, in the choice and support of their ministers, is that
communicants may vote with the rest of the congregation in these affairs, if
they have not so much estate as is required of voters for rulers, and are
twenty-one years of age. But a great part of their ministers and churches
readily receive persons into their communion, without any evidence of their
being born again. And for one party of such men to assume the power of judging
the consciences of all who dissented from their worship, alarmed many in all
parts of the government, and they drew up a remonstrance and petition, in which
they said, "We cannot find that Jesus Christ or his apostles ever gave orders
to civil rulers to establish the Christian religion at large, much less one
distinguished denomination, who profess it, and use the civil law to support
its doctrines, forms or preachers; or that the subjects of Christ's kingdom
(which is not of this world) should acknowledge any ruler but Christ alone, in
religious concerns. And we long to see religion left entirely in the hands of
Christ, to be governed alone by his laws; that the grand controversy may be
decided, whether religion is such an adjective that it cannot stand of itself,
or so important that it will support itself upon its own merits, and all who
trust in it." This produced a repeal of said law, in October, 1791; though they
then made another, to allow every man to give in his own certificate, if he
dissented from the ruling sect.

VIII. The uppermost party among Christians have ever had the command of all
colleges, to educate religious teachers, as well as other men of superior
learning, until very lately. Even in 1780, no ministers but Congregational
ministers were allowed to be overseers of the university at Cambridge, by the
Massachusetts constitution of government. And great sums have been given to
that university by the government, from time to time, ever since it began in
1638. But as Providence and Rhode Island colony was planted by men who were
banished from the Massachusetts, because they conscientiously dissented from
the use of force in religious affairs, and that colony suffered amazingly from
neighbor colonies for more than an hundred years, the people therein have
grown up with great prejudices against colleges, and against obeying the laws
of Christ for the support of his ministers. But as a minister died this year,
who has done much toward removing those prejudices, I shall give a concise
account of the affair. Mr. Isaac Eaton, who was pastor of the Baptist church at
Hopewell in New Jersey, from 1748 to 1772, set up a school for the education of
youth for the ministry, as well as for other callings, in 1756, and kept it for
eleven years. One of his scholars was Mr. James Manning, who went from his
school to the college at Princeton, where he took his first degree in
September, 1762. And as the Philadelphia Association were for erecting a
college in Rhode Island government, they fixed their eyes upon him as a proper
leader in the affair. He therefore called in at Newport, on his voyage to
Halifax, in July, 1763, and proposed the matter to a number of Baptist
gentlemen, who readily concurred therewith; and as they had a high opinion of a
learned Congregational minister among them, they desired him to make a draught
of a charter for a college in that government, It was proposed to take in some
members of the several denominations among them, but that the Baptists should
always be the majority of the corporation. He drew a charter which appeared to
be upon this plan, and it was introduced into their legislature; but a Baptist
gentleman discerned that there was a door left open for the Congregational
denomination to become the majority hereafter. Therefore the charter was not
then passed into a law; and when their legislature met again, the charter was
not to be found. When this was heard of at Philadelphia, two gentlemen were
sent from thence, who assisted in drawing a new charter, which was established
by the legislature of Rhode Island in February, 1764; and Mr. Manning removed
to Warren in the summer following, to preach to a Baptist church newly formed
there, and to begin the school.

IX. In September, 1765, he was chosen president of the college, and diligently
attended to the duties thereof, until seven young gentlemen took their first
degree there, September 7, 1769. One of them was afterward a member of
Congress, and then a general in the American army, and lastly a judge of the
courts in our western territory, where he died. Three of them are now useful
Baptist ministers. In February, 1770, the corporation concluded to remove the
college to Providence, where a large brick house was erected for the purpose,
entirely by personal generosity; and education was well carried on there, until
the British troops came to Newport in December, 1776, and our army came to
Providence to oppose them, and used the college edifice as a barrack. After
these obstructions were removed, president Manning engaged again in the work of
education for a little while, and then said edifice was seized, by the order of
a council of war, for a French hospital, on Lord's day, June 25, 1780, while
Dr. Manning was gone to preach in town, and they held it till May 27, 1782. And
although no government upon earth ever gave any thing toward that building,
yet no recompense has ever been obtained for the great damages which were done
to it by government. Though there is some hope of it soon from Congress.
However, president Manning, being encouraged by the friends of the college,
heartily engaged again in his public work, and learning flourished under his
administrations, and the Baptist church in Providence enjoyed many blessings
under his ministry, until he was suddenly called out of our world, July 29,
1791, in the 53d year of his age. He was so well esteemed in the government,
that he was elected a delegate to Congress in the spring of 1786, which office
he accepted for six months, in hopes of obtaining a grant from thence to
indemnify the college at Providence. But though he was highly esteemed in that
honorable body, yet it was then out of their power to do justice in this case,
as well as many others. Neither could president Manning obtain the whole of his
salary for many years, which was to be paid out of the interest of money that
was collected elsewhere, and was lent to Rhode Island government. His
perseverance, therefore, in the midst of so many difficulties, and his rising
above them all in faithfulness and kindness, will endear his memory to the
latest posterity. And these things demonstrate to all men, that the principles
of believers' baptism, and of equal liberty of conscience, are more friendly to
true learning and knowledge, than any party schemes of religion ever were, or
ever can be. For all loving of self above God and our neighbors, though
covered with a mask of religion or government, can never make the subjects of
it willing to have their real character seen.

X. And how is this love of self now exposed in our country? For the first
Congress upon our new constitution met in March, 1789, and made laws to
regulate the trade of America, which revived public credit, and the merchandise
of this country was carried round the world. Also the creditors of government
were encouraged to bring in their notes to the loan offices that were appointed
in each State, where the interest of said notes was cast up to the close of
1791; after which new notes were given out, of three denominations. The first
were to carry the interest which was formerly promised, the second but half so
much, and the third were to pay no interest at all for ten years. But who would
trust any single man in the world, if he should act in this manner? Surely no
man upon earth could obtain credit and esteem in such a way. And our Lord Jesus
Christ, who requires the gospel ministry to be committed to faithful men, says,
If we be dead with him, we shall also live with him; if we suffer, we shall
also reign with him: if we deny him, he also will deny us: if we believe not,
yet he abides faithful; he cannot deny himself. 2 Timothy ii. 2 -- 13. This is
the only line of succession for his ministers. But deceitful men in every
station imagine that the security of a whole government is so much stronger
than the promises of individuals, that they say, Cast in thy lot among us, let
us all have one purse. -- Their feet run to evil, and make haste to shed blood.
This God says of all the world. Prove. i. 14, 16. Romans iii. 15, 19. How vain
then are all the arguments which are advanced against the universal depravity
of mankind? Yea, or against the power of God in changing the heart, who says,
Turn ye at my reproof; behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, and will make
known my words unto you? But all men who hate knowledge, and will not choose
the fear of the Lord in this life, will cry in vain for mercy, when destruction
comes as a whirlwind. Prove. i. 23 -- 29. The several s^nding systems
established by government, as well as supporting religious teachers by
compulsion, have been productive of oppression and injustice; and Jehovah says,
Hear ye that are far off what I have done; and ye that are near, acknowledge my
might. The sinners in Zion are afraid, fearfulness has surprised the
hypocrites: who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? who among us
shall dwell with everlasting burnings? He that walks righteously, and
speaks uprightly, he that despises the gain of oppressions, that shakes his
hands from holding of bribes, that stops his ears from hearing of blood, and
shuts his eyes from seeing evil. Isaiah xxxiii. 13 -- 15. This is the only
way of safety and happiness. But how opposite hereto were the following actions?

XI. A Baptist church was formed in Barnstable in June, 1771, and when they had
given in certificates to the ruling sect, they were generally exempted from
taxes to their ministers for ten years. But a fresh revival of religion came on
among them in the beginning of 1781, and increased their church and society,
until they built a convenient meeting house, and then ordained a pastor,
December 4, 1788. He had preached to them for four years before he was
ordained, yet in that time, with three years after, above an hundred and fifty
dollars were extorted from that society, for the Congregational ministers of
the first parishes in Barnstable and Yarmouth. In January, 1790, a collector in
Barnstable took away a good horse from one of the committee of that Baptist
society, for a ministerial tax of less than two dollars; and though he offered
to return a small part of the value of the horse, yet the Baptist gentleman
refused to receive it, and so to have fellowship with their works of darkness.
But those cruel oppressions were pursued, until the committee of the Warren
Association met at Boston, January 24, 1791, and wrote to the officers of those
two parishes in such a manner, that they have generally refrained from taxing
the Baptists to Congregational ministers since, though they have not returned
the money which they had before unjustly taken from them. The west parish in
Barnstable, and many others through the country, have not made distress upon
the Baptists for the support of parish ministers, as these have done. And our
rulers give Baptist ministers the same power to marry people, and to be
exempted from civil taxes, that they do to other ministers. But they have not
yet gone so far as a king of Persia did, who gave liberally for the house of
God out of his own treasures, and exempted the ministers of the sanctuary from
civil taxes, without imposing any ministerial tax upon the people. Ezra vii. 11
-- 24. And we have no evidence that God ever allowed any rulers in Israel to
use any secular force for the support of his priests in their church; but when
two priests sent their servants to the people with this language, Thou shall
give it now; and if not, I will take it by force, they were both slain in one
day, and their father's neck was broke. For God had said, Them that honor me,
I will honor, and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Samuel ii.
16, 30. iv. 11, 18. And how far are teachers from honoring our Lord Jesus
Christ, if they refuse to be content with all the good things that his laws and
influence will give them!

XII. Imprisonments and spoiling of goods, for the support of Congregational
ministers in Rehoboth, for thirty years, had brought that sect to be the minor
part of the inhabitants of the town; therefore they obtained liberty to sell
their ministerial lands, and an act of our legislature in 1762, to incorporate
the committee who should be annually elected in each parish, to manage that
fund of money, and what should be added to it by subscription, so that the
interest thereof might support their ministers. And it was supposed that as
long as this act continued in force, they had no right to tax all the
inhabitants to them, as they had before done. And this appeared the more
necessary, because Mr. Samuel Peck was ordained the pastor of a Congregational
church in Rehoboth, October 8, 1751, who refused to have any fellowship with
those who used tax and compulsion in that affair; and he ministered to them
until he died, November 26, 1788, Aet. 82. But the sinking of our public
credit, and other means, brought their fund of money in the first parish in
Rehoboth down to less than six hundred pounds; and as Mr. John Ellis was
installed their minister in March, 1785, with a promise of a salary of an
hundred pounds a year, they ventured to tax all the inhabitants to pay it,
though he was not elected by a third part of them. And as they paid but little
more than the salary of one year in five, he sued the parish for the rest, and
recovered judgment against them in March, 1791. But they appealed to the
superior court in October following; and they called a parish meeting in
September, and offered the use of their meeting house, and of their fund of
money to Mr. Ellis's party, as long as he continued their minister, if they
would pay off that debt, and support him, without taxing any who did not choose
him; and adjourned for three weeks. But as this offer was not accepted at their
next meeting, fifty voters against fourteen voted to shut him out of their
meeting house, and chose a special committee to get Baptist ministers to preach
therein. And as they had not got any Baptist minister to preach in it the first
Lord's day after he was shut out, he came and demanded it to be opened before
two justices of the peace; and because it was not opened, they published an
account of it in the Providence newspapers, and called the men insurgents A
name given to those who resisted our courts in 1786.
who shut him out. The next Lord's day, while a Baptist minister was in the
pulpit, he came and interrupted the public worship of God; but he was brought
before a justice of peace therefore, and bound to his good behavior till the
next March court, and Baptist ministers preached in said house all that time.
In March he, with difficulty, obtained a release from those bonds, though he
could not recover his former place of worship. Therefore his party applied to
our legislature in June, 1792, and obtained a repeal of the act of 1762, which
invested their parish committee with power to manage their fund of money, and
an act to incorporate his party as the Congregational society in the first
precinct in Rehoboth. But as they did not obtain the meeting house nor fund of
money thereby, they called a special court for that purpose, August 30, 1792;
yet judgment was th^^ given against them, which they were so far from yielding
to, that they rushed into the meeting house the next Lord's day, and some of
them continued in it night and day for a fortnight; though others also stayed
there and prevented their getting possession of the house. Afterward Ellis's
party called another special court, who gave them possession of said house.

XIII. Now can any man believe, that such proceedings as these have any
tendency to promote piety, religion or morality? Yea, are they not as contrary
thereto as darkness is to light? And these are the natural effects of
supporting religious ministers by force. Neither would that little party at
Rehoboth have been able to go so far as they have done, if rulers and ministers
in general had not viewed it as their own cause. For if one congregation can
shut their minister out of their meeting house when they think proper, another
may also, and supporting worship by force will be excluded from our land. And
though many have reflected on the Baptists, because that society in Rehoboth
called them in to assist in their worship, and to exclude oppressors; yet the
first parishes in Rochester and Wrentham have shut their ministers also out of
their meeting houses, without any concern with the Baptists therein. And it
daily appears, that the ruling party in our land, as well as through the world,
are trying to grasp the honors and profits of religion to themselves, while
they deny the power of godliness. And the doctrines of grace, and the order of
the first churches in New England, are trampled upon through the country. Of
this we have a notable instance in the town of Taunton, the capital of Bristol
county. As a number of leading men in that town disliked the preaching of their
minister, they informed the parish that they had no right to vote him any
salary, because they were the minor part of the inhabitants of the town; and,
after several meetings, a council was called, and he was dismissed, near the
close of 1790. After which they obtained an incorporation as the Congregational
society in Taunton, with power to settle and support ministers by tax and
compulsion; only if any man therein desired to withdraw from them, he might go
to their clerk at the end of the year, and get his name out of the list, and be
free from them for the future. But any number of men can form a stronger
society than this, without putting our government to such vast costs as have
been laid upon us in such affairs. And it soon appeared, that said society and
the first Congregational church in Taunton could not agree in calling another
minister; therefore another church was formed, in open separation from the
first church in Taunton, and they called a minister who was so disagreeable to
the first church, that they went and built another meeting house, and called
another minister to preach to them. But the new party sent for two ministers
out of Boston, and obtained ten more from various parts of the country, to give
a sanction to their proceedings. And in a Boston paper of May 25. 1792, it was
said, "Wednesday, the 16th instant, the Rev. John Foster was installed to the
pastoral care of the first Congregational church and society in Taunton." And
the same was declared in a Providence paper; though the church in which he was
installed was constituted that year, and the society the year before. And was
not this lying in religious affairs? And in the winter following a church was
formed in Pomfret in Connecticut, and a minister was ordained therein, in open
separation from the first church in that town.

XIV. Yet in the Election Sermon at Boston, May 30, 1792, the ministers in
general, who are supported by law in our country, are called, "The Christian
priesthood." Tappan's Sermon, p. 9.
And a book was published there this year, the whole labor whereof was to
prove that all the children of professors of Christianity are born in the
church, and ought to come to the Lord's supper, if they are not openly
scandalous, whether they are satisfied that they are born again, or not. And
the author says, "It is the will of God that many be admitted into the church
who are not in heart friends to him. And if the greater part be of this
character, can we imagine that the true interests of Christ's kingdom are in
any danger, while Christ has his enemies as much in his power as any, and can
use them as his instruments, or restrain them, or make them his willing people,
or cut them off, whenever he pleases?" Hemmenway's Discourse concerning the
church, p. 50.
It is readily granted that Christ has all the world under his power, but his
revealed will requires a profession of saving faith of all who are received
into his church; and they who imagine that he allows his enemies to come into
it, implicitly put him beneath all rational men. For all such men, be they
never so deceitful themselves, yet endeavor to guard against enemies in their
own families and societies. And Jesus says, I am the door: by me if any man
enter in, he shall be saved. But he assures us, that they who climb up some
other way are thieves and robbers. John x. 1 -- 9. And he requires us to
contend earnestly for the faith, against men who creep in unawares, and turn
the grace of our God into lasciviousness. Jude 3, 4. Yet another book, which
had six editions in about two years, received the sixth edition at Boston, in
the beginning of 1793, which represents all ministers among us as wolves in
sheep's clothing, who were not ordained by ministers who received their office
power by succession from Europe. And the author says, "It is by no means
necessary, that, by historical deduction, we should prove an uninterrupted
succession; we have a right to presume it until evidence appears to the
contrary. If any say, the succession has failed, the burden of proof must lie
wholly on them. -- It is well known, that the first ministers in the country
were ordained in England by men whose authority is not controverted." Lathrop's
Discourses on Matt. vii. 15, 16. p. 56, 63.
Thus he builds his scheme upon negatives; but God says, Who has required this
at your hand to tread my courts? -- Your hands are full of blood. Isaiah i. 12,
15. And how much has this been the character of all national churches? And can
bloody hands convey the Holy Ghost to others? An eminent author who lately
lived in Italy, the head of the church of Rome, says, "To the art of printing
it is owing, that the atrocious crimes of our ancestors, who were alternately
slaves and tyrants, are become less frequent. -- They may contemplate the
effects of what was so improperly called ancient simplicity and good faith;
humanity groaning under implacable superstition, the avarice and ambition of a
few staining with human blood the thrones and palaces of kings, secret treasons
and public massacres, every noble a tyrant over the people, and the ministers
of Christ bathing their hands in blood, in the name of the God of all mercy."
The marquis Beccaria on Crimes and Punishments, p. 25, 26. Yet an external
succession of ministerial power, through all that blood and wickedness, is
still held fast by many in Europe and America.


XV. After the Babylonian captivity, the priests who could not show a register
of their lawful descent from Aaron, were, as polluted, put from the priesthood,
until a Priest stood up with Urim and Thummim. Ezra ii. 62, 63. The words
signify light and perfection, which is found only in the Son of God, who is the
Author of eternal salvation unto all them who obey him. And to such it is said,
Therefore leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and
of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms, and of laying on of hands,
and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. Heb. v. 5 -- 9. vi.
1, 2. Now the principles of repentance from dead works, of faith in the Son of
God, of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment, were never known by
men but by pure revelation from God; and the same is true of regeneration, and
of justification by our sins being laid upon Christ our sacrifice. For God
saves us by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which
he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior. Titus iii. 5, 6. And
the word baptisms, here in the sixth chapter, is rendered washings in the
ninth, which speaks of a more perfect tabernacle, in which Christ, through the
eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, to purge the conscience
from dead works to serve the living God. For by one offering he has perfected
forever them that are sanctified. Heb. ix. 10 -- 14. x. 14. God required the
laying on of hands upon offerings for sin, not less than nine times in the law
of Moses. Levit. i. 4. iii. 2, 8, 13. iv. 4, 15, 29. xvi. 21. Numb. viii. 12.
And an inspired prophet says, All we like sheep have gone astray; we have
turned every one to his own way, and the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us
all. Isaiah liii. 6. And Jesus said, I lay down my life for the sheep. John x.
15. And Peter says, His own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree. 1
Peter ii. 24. And this foundation is never to be laid again. The gospel
ordinance of baptism is always in the singular number, but the washings under
the law were many. And God says to his children, There is one body, and one
Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one faith,
one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and
in you all. Ephesians. iv^^ -- 6. But the holding to an external laying on of hands
upon officers, as a foundation point in ministerial authority, has made them
lords over God's heritage, in every age, and in every country where the
Christian name has been known. And holding to the laying on of hands upon
every member, after baptism, has caused great divisions among the Baptists,
which should put all upon examination of this point. Laying on of hands upon
officers in ordination, is no more than a solemn swearing of them to be
faithful in their work, and civil rulers are also inducted into their offices
by an oath, after the people have given them their power, which they can take
away again at appointed times. And this was the original plan of the
Congregational churches in New England; only none were allowed to give
ministers their power, but those who were judged to be real Christians.

XVI. The first church in Dorchester, with Mr. Wareham their minister, removed
up to Windsor, and began the colony of Connecticut, in 1635, in which year Mr.
Richard Mather came over to Dorchester. And on April 11, 1636, a meeting was
held there for the purpose of gathering a new church; but it was not then done,
because the rulers and ministers present were not satisfied with the
experiences of the most of the persons who were to be of the church. "Most of
them had burdened their comfort of salvation upon unsound grounds, viz. Some
upon dreams and ravishes of spirit by fits; others upon the reformation of
their lives; others upon duties and performances, etc. wherein they discovered
three special errors. 1. That they had not come to hate sin because it was
filthy, but only left it because it was hurtful. 2. That by reason of this they
had never truly closed with Christ (or rather Christ with them) but had made
use of him only to help the imperfection of their sanctification and duties,
and not made him their sanctification, wisdom, etc. 3. They expected to believe
by some power of their own, and not only and wholly from Christ." And in 1639,
their legislature punished a minister and some people at Weymouth severely, for
attempting to gather a church there, in which "all baptized ones might
communicate without any farther trial of them." Winthrop's Journal, p. 98, 171.
This account was given by governor Winthrop, one of the greatest and best men
then in New England. And as no men had a vote in the choice of ministers but
communicants in their churches, so they held the power of ordination to be in
each church. Mr. Cotton said, "The power of the ministerial calling is derived
chiefly from Christ, furnishing his servants with gifts fit for the calling;
and nextly from the church (or congregation) who, observing such whom the Lord
has gifted, do elect and call them forth to come and help them." Again he
says, "Though it be our manner (and as we believe according to the word) that
every church chooses and calls their own ministers, and ordains them by
the presbytery of the same church; yet if the presbytery of other churches
commend a minister to a vacant church, and upon the acceptance of the church,
if the presbyters of those churches do ordain him, with the consent of the
church, we do not profess that this is no calling of Christ, or that these are
no ministers of Christ." Answer to Williams, part second, 1647, p. 82, 131.
And the next year they said in the Cambridge platform, "In such churches where
there are elders, imposition of hands in ordination is to be performed by those
elders. In such churches where there are no elders, imposition of hands may be
performed by some of the brethren orderly chosen by the church thereunto. --
Nevertheless, in such churches where there are no elders, and the church so
desire, we see not why imposition of hands may not be performed by the elders
of other churches." They also say, "In case an elder offend incorrigibly, the
matter so requiring, as the church had power to call him to office, so they
have power according to order (the council of other churches, where it may be
had, directing thereto) to remove him from his office." Platform, chapters ix,
x.
Now it is a known rule in grammar, that though a parenthesis is useful in its
place, yet the sense is complete without it. But in our day, most of those who
are called Congregational ministers, deny the church's power to ordain or
dismiss them, unless a mutual council direct thereto. Thus they have gone off
from the first principles of Congregational churches, while they hold the name
for worldly ends. But Mr. William Hubbard, in his manuscript history, written
in 1680, says, "There is no jurisdiction, to which as such particular churches
are or ought to be subject (be it placed in classes or synod) by way of
authoritative censure, nor any church power, extrinsical to the said churches,
which they ought to have dependence upon any other sort of men for the exercise
of." And Mr. Jonathan Mitchel of Cambridge had before said, "The over enlarging
of full communion, or admission of persons thereto, upon slight qualifications,
without insisting upon the practical and spiritual part of religion, will not
only lose the power of godliness, but in a little time bring in profaneness,
and ruin the churches, these two ways. 1. Election of ministers will soon be
carried by a formal looser sort. 2. The exercise of discipline will by this
means be rendered impossible. Discipline falling, profaneness rises like a
flood. For the major part, wanting zeal against sin, will softer
licentiousness. It is not setting down good rules and directions, that will
salve it; for the specification of government is from men, not from laws. Let
never so good a form of government be agreed upon, it will soon degenerate, if
the instruments who manage it be not good." Dedication of Mitchel's Life, p.
17, 18.
Mr. Mitchel died in 1668, when he had no idea of their admitting any men to a
governing vote for pastors of churches, but communicants therein; and he gave
these weighty reasons against receiving any to communion without good evidence
of their being godly persons; and Dr. Increase Mather dedicated these things to
the college at Cambridge in 1697, of which he was then president. And how can
any men reasonably complain of the Baptists for their holding fast the good
principles of our fathers, and renouncing their mistakes? Especially the laying
of bands upon children before they could choose for themselves, and forcing all
to support such worship? Had it not been for these two evils, the characters of
the fathers of New England would outshine almost any men who have lived in
latter ages. Indeed the fathers of Plymouth colony renounced all the use of
force to support their ministers.

CHAP. III.
I. They who deny Infant Baptism are compared to Balaam. II. Evidence that the
Covenant of Circumcision is repealed. III. The Error of Balaam described. IV.
Mistakes of good Men corrected. V. The Covenant with Abraham opened. VI.
Corruptions at Providence exposed. VII. And also at Rochester. VIII. The
Importance of having the Government of Church and State distinct. IX.
Tyrannical Power grows weaker in our Land. X. Marks of false Teachers
considered. XI. Extracts from Williams and Cotton. XII. And from Mather, about
Congregational Churches. XIII. A concise View of the present State of
Government and Religion. XIV. Many practically deny that Christ is come.

I. HAVING described the first principles of Congregational churches, let us
see how they are now held by eminent men. A book was published in Boston in the
beginning of 1793, which has had a most rapid sale, wherein are the following
things. The author says, "The apostles, when they first began to administer
Christian baptism, and form a church, baptized none but such who gladly
received the word. Acts ii. 41. When the eunuch desired to be baptized, Philip
said, If thou believe with all thine heart, thou may. Acts viii. 37. This
implies that he was not qualified for baptism, or a ^it subject of that
ordinance, unless he were a true believer in Christ; and that he could not
baptize him, unless he professed and appeared to be such a believer." The
System of Doctrines, contained in divine revelation, explained and defended. By
Samuel Hopkins, D. D. Pastor of the first Congregational church in Newport.
Vol. II. p. 306.
But in order to find a warrant for infant baptism, he goes back to the
covenant of circumcision which God made with Abraham, and holds that it never
was repealed. And, after much labor to prove this point, he says, "They who
are expecting and demanding, that Christ or his apostles should expressly renew
and enjoin on Christians, the appointment and command of God, to apply to the
infants of believers the initiating seal of the covenant, in order to warrant
men to do it; refusing to acquiesce in the decision of this point, which God
had already made; if the argument above be conclusive, are imitating Balaam,
who did not rest satisfied with the decision which God had once made,
respecting his going to curse Israel, but expected and required that God should
speak again, if he did really forbid his doing it." Ibid. p. 318, margin.
These are the words of a minister who has made such additions to Calvinism
that his plan is called Hopkintonianism through America. And if his argument is
conclusive, the Baptists are some of the worst men upon earth, as Balaam was
such an one. But if he is entirely mistaken, and God has disannulled the
national covenant which he made with Abraham, it is very hurtful for any to
hold the contrary. It is therefore of great importance for all to have right
ideas of this subject. And the following considerations are offered for that
end.

II. First, Abraham had no right to circumcise any stranger, until he had
bought him as a servant for money. Genesis xvii. 12, 13. But God says to his
children, Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men. 1 Cor.
vii. 23. And he says to his ministers, Feed the church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. Acts xx. 28. He also says, Ye have sold
yourselves for naught, and ye shall be redeemed without money. And this is the
gospel of peace. Isaiah lii. 3, 7. Romans x. 15. Thus do the apostles explain the
prophets. Secondly, The children of Israel had no right to receive strangers
into the church by households, until the day in which they came out of Egypt,
when the passover was instituted. And then God said, Every man's servant that
is bought for money, when thou have circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof.
Exodus xii. 44 -- 48. Circumcision and the passover were as binding upon
servants as children; and both ordinances pointed to the blood of Christ, which
he was to shed for his people. And, in reference to that, God said, Behold, the
days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the house of
Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to the covenant that I made
with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand, to bring them out
of the land of Egypt. Jer. xxxi. 31, 32. And an inspired apostle says, In that
he says, A new covenant, he has made the first old. Now that which decays
and waxes old is ready to vanish away. He takes away the first, that he may
establish the second. Heb. viii. 7 -- 13. x. 9. And can old and new, first and
second, mean but one covenant? Surely no. Thirdly, Circumcision is the name
which God gave to his covenant with Abraham. Acts vii. 8. And though Jews and
Mahometans are still zealous for it, yet all Christians allow that circumcision
is repealed. But after the apostolic age, men took away the name which God gave
to that covenant, and added the name grace to it; and they held that dominion
is founded in grace. And from thence the nations have made merchandise of all
the vanities of time, and of slaves and souls of men. But the plagues of
Babylon will come upon all men who add to the word of God, and take away from
the words of his book, if they refuse to come out of that practice. Rev. xviii.
4 -- 13. xxii. 18, 19. And there is not a word in all the bible for bringing
any child to baptism without his own profession of faith in Christ, nor for
forcing any man to support any religious minister; and all national churches
are built upon these two superstitions. Fourthly, Circumcision was the shedding
of human blood; and when Abraham received it, it was a seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he before had in Christ, in whom believers are
justified by his blood. Romans iv. 11, 23. v. 9. Gal. iii. 16. Genesis xv. 6. xvii.
24. It was a seal to him; but neither circumcision nor baptism are ever called
seals to any other person in all the bible. But God says to true believers in
Christ, In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy
Spirit of promise. And he also says, Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby
ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. Ephesians. i. 13. iv. 30. After believing
in Christ, the Holy Spirit seals the merits of his death, and the promises of
his grace to the soul. And all believers from the beginning, looked through the
bloody ordinances which God appointed, to the blood of Christ for
justification. And after the beast arose out of the bottomless pit, God said,
All that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in
the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Rev. xiii.
8. Force and cruelty is the general character of the beast; but Jesus, who is
the root and offspring of David, will cause all evil beasts to cease out of the
land. Ezekiel. xxxiv. 4 -- 25. Rev. xxii. 16. Fifthly, The believing Jews were
suffered to go on in circumcision for a number of years after the death of
Christ, and then God said to them, If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit
you nothing. -- Whosoever of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen from
grace. Gal. v. 2 -- 4. So far was the covenant of circumcision from being the
covenant of grace. That bloody sign not only pointed to the death of Christ,
but also to the death of all true believers in him. Therefore Paul says, I
through the law am dead to the law, that I might live unto God. I am crucified
with Christ, nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the
life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who
loved me, and gave himself for me. -- The fruit of the Spirit is love, joy,
peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance:
against such there is no law. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts. Gal. ii. 19, 20. v. 22 -- 24. Adam and
Christ are the only two public heads of mankind, as to the great affairs of the
soul and eternity. For as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners; so
by the obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. Romans v. 19. For parents
to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, is of
infinite importance; but we can find no warrant for any to bring them to
baptism without a personal profession of faith in Christ.

III. Let us now inquire what was the error of Balaam? When God took the nation
of Israel to be his church, he was an husband unto them. Jer. xxxi. 32. And
Moses said unto him, If thy presence go not with us, carry us not up hence. For
wherein shall it be known here, that I and thy people have found grace in thy
sight? is it not in that thou go with us? So shall we be separated, I and
thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth. Exodus
xxxiii. 15, 16. But Balaam, for an earthly reward, taught Balak how to destroy
that separation. And it was done by the Midianites, among whom Balaam dwelt,
who enticed Israel into adultery and idolatry; and those Midianites were of the
posterity of Abraham. Numb. xxv. 6. xxxi. 8, 16. Genesis xxv. 4. And how many
children of believers are now guilty of this iniquity? For covetousness is
idolatry. Col. iii. 5. And many make a god of their belly. Phil. iii. 19. And
idolatry is also adultery in the sight of God, who said of the church of
Israel, Their mother has played the harlot; she that conceived them has done
shamefully; for she said, I will go after my lovers, that gave ^e my bread and
my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil and my drink. Hosea ii. 5. All lawful
things, but they were sought in an unlawful way. So one apostle says of many
teachers and professors, An heart they have exercised with covetous practices,
cursed children; who have forsaken the right way, and are gone astray,
following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor, who loved the wages of
unrighteousness; but was rebuked for his iniquity: the dumb ass, speaking with
man's voice, forbad the madness of the prophet. 2 Peter ii. 14, 15, 16. Another
says, Woe unto them; for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core.
Jude 11. And Christ says by a third, I have a few things against thee, because
thou have there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast
a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed unto
idols, and to commit fornication. Rev. ii. 14. Now, since covetousness and
luxury are idolatry in the sight of God, and idolatry is also adultery, how
many are there in the world who entice Christians into these evils, in order to
grasp the honors and profits of religion to themselves! Yea, and who go out
from the ways of God to gratify their love of the world! 1 John ii. 15, 19.
These be they who separate themselves, sensual, having not the Spirit. Jude 19.
Mystery Babylon is the mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth. Rev.
xvii. 5. And it is generally held that these things were spoken against heathen
idolatry, and against the abominations of the church of Rome. But have
ministers in our land come out of those abominations? For we have before proved
that Dr. Styles and Dr. Lathrop hold to a successive power of office through
the church of Rome, and Dr. Hopkins does the same, notwithstanding his great
difference from many about the doctrines of grace, and the power of godliness.
For he says, "A visible church may be very corrupt, and yet be a visible church
of Christ, and the public administrations and acts of the officers of it,
authentic and valid. And who can prove, that the Pope, and his adherents, were
visibly antichrist, and that the church of Rome was visibly not the church of
Christ, but a false church, and was really and properly renounced and
excommunicated, by the true church of Christ, before the time of the
reformation from popery?" Hopkins's System, Vol. II. p. 273.
Thus he allows that the church of Rome was a visible church of Christ, until
the Protestants renounced her power, and set up national churches, who have now
carried blood and slavery round the world, in galleys and gallant ships, as far
as the Papists ever did. So God says of the second beast, He causes all, both
small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand, or in their foreheads; and that no man might buy or sell save he that had
the mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name. Here is wisdom.
Let him that has understanding count the number of the beast, for it is the
number of a man; and his number is 666. Rev. xiii. 16 -- 18. God gave his
people rest, on the seventh day, in the seventh month, and the seventh year.
But the inventions of men give no rest, in hundreds, in tens, nor in units. The
wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest. Isaiah lvii. 20. Raging
waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame. Jude 13. They have no rest day
nor night, who worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receives the
mark of his name. Rev. xiv. 11. But our Lord says, Come unto me, all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Matt. xi. 28. For we
which have believed do enter into rest. Heb. iv. 3. And how clearly do these
things discover the difference between all the believers in Christ, and all
other men in the world! For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies
themselves being judges. For they who think to purchase the gift of God with
money, are in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. Deuteronomy. xxxii.
31 -- 33. Acts viii. 20 -- 23. All the governments of this world are supported
by force and money, but the church of Christ is purchased with his own blood,
and is governed by his word and Spirit; and believing in him, and obeying the
revealed will of God by the assistance of his Spirit, is the only way of
ministerial succession that he has appointed. Yea,

IV. Our author says, "The church is not a worldly society; and is not ruled or
regulated by civil laws, or the rulers of political, worldly societies: such
rulers have no more authority in the church than any other members of it. The
visible church is called in scripture, The kingdom of heaven; the kingdom of
God, and of Christ, who says, My kingdom is not of this world." Hopkins, Vol.
II. p. 262.
How then can any national churches be churches of Christ? For he says,
Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not
enter therein. Mark x. 15. Except ye be converted, and become as this little
child, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Matt. xviii. 3. And the
Father says to the Redeemer, This is my covenant with them, says the Lord, My
Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed's seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and forever. Isa. lix. 20,
21. Which prophecy is applied to future times, when there shall be life from
the dead. Romans xi. 15 -- 27. But our author applies it to each believing head
of a family. Ibid. p. 336, 337.
And in the same place he recites part of another prophecy, which might rectify
his mistake in this. Even the place where God says, I will pour water upon him
that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy
seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: and they shall spring up as among
the grass, as willows by the watercourse. One shall say, I am the Lord's; and
another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe
with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of Israel. Isaiah
xliv. 3 -- 5. So when God poured out his Spirit, after the ascension of Christ,
They who gladly received his word, were baptized. And again he says, Believers
were the more added to the Lord, multitudes both men and women. Acts ii. 41. v.
14. Circumcision was only for the males, but females are equally the subjects
of baptism, which proves and essential change of the covenant. And our Lord
gave the gospel commission to the eleven, who were all born again; and he said
to them, Go teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things,
whatsosoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with you always, even unto the
end of the world. Amen. Matt. xxviii. 16 -- 20. This promise is only to his
children, in the way of obedience to all his commandments. And as the covenant
of circumcision gave Israel a right to buy the heathen for servants, and
circumcision was only for the males, the gospel says to believers, Ye are all
the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there
is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye are all one
in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to the promise. Gal. iii. 26 -- 29. Abraham was an eminent type of
Christ, and none are his spiritual seed but believers in Christ. How great then
is the mistake of all who put themselves in the place of Abraham! Our author
was so far from believing that the Baptists sinned against the light of their
consciences, as Balaam did, that he says, "There is reason to believe, that
most, if not all, who believe in the baptism of children, and practice it, are
more guilty and offensive to Christ, in their treatment of this institution,
than the Antipedobaptists are." Ibid. p. 398.


V. And another minister of his sentiments has given further light in this
matter, in an answer to Dr. Hemmenway. He observes that the covenant of grace
is always the same, under every dispensation thereof, and that a peculiar
design of God's promise to Abraham was, "To keep up the visible church, and
maintain a constant succession of pious men, in his family, until the
appearance of the promised Messiah." Emmons against Hemmenway, 1793, p. 27.
This is undoubtedly true, and a most important truth; for God said of Abraham,
I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him, and
they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment; that the Lord
may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him. Genesis xviii. 19. He
will, and they shall, was the language of God's covenant with Abraham; but I
will, and they shall, is the language of the new covenant, since the death of
Christ. Heb. viii. 10. x. 9. It was the will of God that the visible church
should continue in the line of Abraham's posterity, until Christ came and died
for his people, and then the Holy Spirit was given, and believing Jews and
Gentiles were united in his church. And they never were called Christians,
until believing Gentiles were received into the church without circumcision.
Acts xi. 26. Yet, as our author says, "Dr. Hemmenway has followed other writers
in arguing from the former dispensations of the covenant of grace to the
present, and endeavored to prove what the peculiar duties of believers are
under the present dispensation of the covenant of grace, from what they were
under its former dispensations. But this mode of reasoning is by no means
conclusive. It was the duty of believers under former dispensations of the
covenant of grace to offer sacrifices; but can we hence infer, that it is their
duty now? It was the duty of believers under former dispensations of the
covenant of grace, to circumcise their children and attend the passover; but
does it hence follow, that those duties are still binding? or can we justly
conclude, that it is the duty of believers now to circumcise their children, or
even to baptize them, because it was once their duty to circumcise them? The
truth is, we must learn the peculiar duties of believers under the present
dispensation of the convenant of grace, from the dispensation itself, which
enjoins all the peculiar duties which belong to it. -- The Christian
dispensation, which is allowed to be the freest from types and figures, plainly
speaks for itself. And we ought to look into the clear dispensation of the
gospel, in order to discover the peculiar duties of believers at this day."
Ibid. p. 43, 44.
Yea, and how happy should we soon be, if the gospel light was followed by all,
without trying to draw the vail of the law over it? As long as the death of
Christ was a future event, the bloody ordinances of the law, and circumcision
in particular, were given to many who did not know him; but since his death he
says, All shall know me, from the least to the greatest. Heb. viii. 11. And in
baptism and the holy supper, all the lawful subjects thereof openly manifest
their faith in the death of Christ as a past event, and their engagement to
love and live to him all their days. And if it were fully allowed that God has
disannulled the covenant of circumcision which he made with Abraham, as well as
the rest of the law of typical ceremonies, and has built his church upon a
better covenant, established upon better promises, the effects would be very
glorious, and silence many controversies. But the holding that the children of
believers are born in the covenant of grace, or that baptism can bring them
into it, without their own knowledge or choice, is such a confounding of grace
and works together as holds multitudes in blindness and bondage. And this
appears in the following instance.

VI. Mr. Joseph Snow, of Providence, met with a happy change, in the glorious
revival of religion in 1741; and he was soon called to preach the gospel, and a
Congregational church was formed under his ministry, and he was ordained their
pastor, Feb. 12, 1747. A meeting house was built for them, which was afterward
enlarged, and they became a numerous and honorable society, His excellency
Nicholas Cook, a member of that church, was chosen governor of the State of
Rhode Island in 1775, and was continued in that office to 1779. He died
September 14, 1782. He was a Baptist himself though in communion with a
Congregational church.
and collected a fund of money for the support of their ministers. And as Mr.
Snow was advanced in years, and a young minister arrived there from Ireland in
the spring of 1791, he was called to assist him in preaching for two years. But
in that time he drew off the majority of the church and congregation from the
doctrine of sovereign grace, to the way of confounding works and grace
together. And as Mr. Snow tried to get him dismissed from them, a majority of
the church drew up a number of accusations against Mr. Snow, and attempted to
silence him from preaching. But he and his brethren called a council, who fully
cleared him from those accusations. And as said teacher was of the Methodist
denomination, he could not have a legal right to the property of that
Congregational society; therefore he changed his name to that of
Congregational; and a majority of the church sent to four churches in the
Massachusetts, and to two in the State of Rhode Island, for assistance in
ordaining said minister in their church. Upon which Mr. Snow, and many of his
brethren, sent for another council, to meet at the same time; and they advised
Mr. Snow, and those who held with him, to persevere in their former faith and
conduct, and to withdraw their hand of fellowship from all their brethren who
had gone off from the same, and refused to return. And this advice was taken,
and Mr. Snow and those who held with him warned the other council not to ordain
the young minister in their meeting house. Yet in the face of all this, they
went into said house, on October 17, 1793, and ordained him as a colleague
pastor in that church. A number of that part of the church who were so resolute
for the young minister, were Baptists, who had communed with others who were
only sprinkled in infancy. But as they could then dispense with one plain law
of Christ, so they now could with another, in the manner above described. And
in the summer of 1794; Mr. Snow and his brethren were entirely shut out of
their meeting house, because they would not join with a minister whom they
viewed as one who perverted the gospel of Christ, Gal. i. 7. In 1795, a new
meeting house was built for Mr. Snow, by the help of generous persons of
various denominations.
At the same time, the ministers in the Massachusetts were for holding fast
their power to the last extremity.

VII. The first parish in Rochester settled a minister in 1768, with a promise
of two hundred pounds settlement, and eighty pounds a year salary, as long as
his pastoral relation to them continued. But his loose principles carried him
into such, evils, that a mutual council was called there in September, 1791,
who judged him to be guilty of gross immoralities; and another council was
called by the church in December following, who advised them to dismiss him,
which they did, and the parish shut him out of their meeting house. Yet he held
worship with a minor part of the people elsewhere, for two years and an half,
and then sued the whole parish for his salary all that time. But as he was cast
at the inferior court, he appealed to the supreme judicial court, who met at
Plymouth, May 20, 1794; and after the hearing of a whole day, the judges gave
their opinion in his favor, but the jury turned the case against him. The
judges allowed several Rochester men to be witnesses for said minister, but
refused to admit any man from that town as a witness against him, because they
said they were interested persons. So in two former cases, when the Baptists
sued for their rights, noted men of their denomination were not admitted as
witnesses of plain facts. Our second volume, p. 241, 262. But God says, With
what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and with what measure ye mete, it
shall be measured to you again. Matt. vii. 2. And how is he fulfilling his
word! For taxes to support religious ministers, is taxing men where they are
not represented, as no man can answer for another to God in such cases. Yet
America has been full of this wickedness; and all the blood that was shed in
the American war turned upon this point. And how full is our land now of
complaints against our chief rulers, because their property has been taken away
by the British powers, and they must sue for it again in British courts? Though
those powers are no more interested against America, than every hireling
teacher is, against all who refuse to support him. For they bite with their
teeth, and cry, Peace; and he that puts not into their mouths, they even
prepare war against him. Micah iii. 5. And how much is this cry now heard in
Europe and America? And one of the principles of Congregational churches is,
that no church act can be consummated without the consent of both elders and
brethren. Cambridge Platform, chap. x. sect. 11.
Which is giving ministers such a power over the church, as our supreme judges
have not over the jury. And said minister in Rochester was settled in the name
of the king of Great Britain, and he has been supported lately by the carcass
of that authority. But God says, Let them put away their whoredom, and the
carcasses of their kings far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them
forever. -- This is the law of the house; upon the top of the mountain, the
whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy: behold, this is the law of
the house. Ezekiel. xliii. 9, 12. But false men say, Stand by thyself, come not
near to me, for I am holier than thou. Isaiah lxv. 5. Teachers claim a holy
power of office, above the church of God; and in every nation, the ruling sect
imagine themselves to be holier than those who have not the power of the
magistrate to support their worship. Though God says to his children, This ye
know, that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man who is an
idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no man
deceive you with vain words; for because of these things comes the wrath of
God upon the children of disobedience. Be not ye therefore partakers with them.
Ephesians. v. 5 -- 7. But how can any church avoid partaking with whoremongers,
unclean persons, and covetous men who are idolaters, if they have any
fellowship with worship and ministers that are supported by force? For such men
have equal votes in government with the most pious men in the land.

VIII. And our Lord and his apos^^^ useh ^ere very careful to keep the church
from interfering with civil government. For when a man desired Jesus to
interpose his influence in dividing of an inheritance, he said unto him, Man,
who made me a judge, or a divider over you? And he plainly holds forth, that
the leaven of hypocrisy is promoted by confounding the government of church and
state together. Luke xii, 1, 14, 15. And in order to purge the old leaven from
the church, Paul says, I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any man
that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat. For
what have I to do to judge them also that are without? Do not ye judge them
that are within? But them that are without, God judges. Therefore put away
from among yourselves that wicked person. 1 Cor. v. 7 -- 13. Covetousness is
here put before idolatry, for it is the root of all evil. I Tim. vi. 10. And it
is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to
enter into the kingdom of God. But blind guides strain at a gnat, and swallow a
camel. Matt. xix. 24. xxiii. 24. And who can tell how many blind guides there
are in our day? And the confounding the constitutions of the Hebrew and the
Christian churches together, is the way in which they yoke Christians with the
world. But God says to his church, Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers; for what fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and
what communion has light with darkness? and what concord has Christ with
Belial? or what part has he that believes with an infidel? and what agreement
has the temple of God with idols? For ye are the temple of the living God; as
God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God,
and they shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye
separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive
you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters,
says the Lord Almighty. 2 Cor. vi. 14 -- 18. And this call is not of a local,
but of a spiritual nature. It is not from civil commerce with unbelievers, but
from being yoked with them in communion in the church, which is the temple of
the living God, and is to be governed wholly by his revealed will, under the
influence of his Spirit. But where worldly force is used to support religious
ministers, it will be conscientiously opposed by the faithful, and villains
will hide behind such opposition, and so the government both of church and
state are injured. Whereas if all were protected impartially, they who act from
heavenly motives would strengthen the hands of civil rulers, and hold up light
to draw others out of evil ways, and to guard against all iniquity. And it will
yet be said, Look upon Zion the city of our solemnities: thine eyes shall see
Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not
one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords
thereof be broken. But there the glorious Lord will be unto us a place of broad
rivers and streams, wherein shall go no galley with oars, neither shall gallant
ships pass thereby. For the Lord is our judge, the Lord is our lawgiver the
Lord is our king; he will save us. Isaiah xxxiii. 20 -- 22. Now if we consider,
that galleys and gallant ships are the greatest engines of war and slavery in
all the world, and that they are upheld by national churches, how loud is the
call from Heaven to come out and be separate from all such churches!

IX. Indeed Dr. Lathrop, in order to keep up the power of ministers which he
pleads for, says, "A Christian church is compared to a household, and to a
city, in respect of the order and government, the peace and unity, that ought
to be preserved in it. But if every man might assume the office of a teacher at
pleasure, where would be the order and unity? There would be the same confusion
and distraction, as in a State where every one claimed a right to exercise the
powers of magistracy." Discourses on Matthew vii. 15, 16. p. 10, 11.
But in all the States of New England, the people can leave their governors,
and all their legislators out of office every year, if they please, while all
the ministers, who are supported by tax and compulsion, deny the people any
such liberty concerning themselves. When the people have elected their rulers,
some men are appointed to give them an oath, to be faithful in their offices;
and when the church of Christ has chosen her ministers, she has a right to
call other ministers to ordain them, and to give them a solemn charge to be
faithful to God and to his people. But ever since ministers have claimed a
power of office above all other men in the world, the government of the
churches, the cities of God, has lain waste, to the grief of all pious people.
Though the time is coming when our Lord will give such comfort and strength to
them who mourn in Zion, that he says, They shall build the old wastes, they
shall raise up the former desolations, they shall repair the waste cities, the
desolations of many generations. Isaiah lxi. 1 -- 4. This our Lord applies to
the blessings of his Spirit under the gospel. Luke iv. 18, 19. Every church of
Christ is a holy city, which has a right to censure and exclude all members and
officers who break his laws, and refuse to manifest repentance therefore. And
when they shall come to exercise this power faithfully, independent of all the
powers of the world, such peace will be enjoyed as never has yet been upon
earth. And the power of one sect in our land, to compel all others to bow to
them in religious affairs, is daily consuming, by the light and power of the
gospel. One evidence of this lately appeared in Medfield. A Baptist church was
constituted there in 1776; and they built them a convenient house for worship,
and another for the ministry, and they have maintained regular worship among
them ever since. Yet all the Baptists in Medfield were lately taxed to the
Congregational minister of that town; and one of their committee was seized for
that tax, and was imprisoned at Boston, July 2, 1794. But it caused such an
alarm in Boston, and the news from thence which reached to Medfield the next
Saturday, caused such an alarm there, that two men were sent twenty miles on
the Lord's day, who released the prisoner, without his paying the tax, or any
costs about it. And very few now in our country will dare to make distress upon
any for ministerial taxes.

X. And if the marks of false teachers, which the above author has published,
were rightly applied, the church of Christ would soon have such deliverance
from their power as she has not yet enjoyed. For he says, "Another mark of
false teachers is an implacable malignity against the standing, regular
ministers of the gospel." And again he says, "This sort of teachers are guided
by no line, and confined to no measure; but run from place to place, enter into
other men's labors, and build on other men's foundation." Ibid. p. 29, 31.
Very true; and the word of Christ is daily fulfilled, who said to false
teachers among the Jews, Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte, and
when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell than yourselves.
Matthew xxiii. 15. And we may see at this day, that the Jews have a fixed
regard for the law of Moses, and for the land of Canaan; but proselytes to
revealed religion, who are not born again, have no fixed rule of conduct, nor
any country that can set any bounds to their love of riches, honors or
pleasures. Some deceitful men in the church of Corinth, accused Paul of going
beyond his authority in what he had written to that church. Therefore he said,
The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the
pulling down of strong holds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ; and having in a readiness to revenge
all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled. -- For we stretch not
ourselves beyond our measure, as though we reached not unto you; for we are
come as far as to you also, in preaching the gospel of Christ: not boasting of
things without our measure, that is, of other men's labors; but having hope,
when your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you according to our
rule abundantly, to preach the gospel in the region beyond you, and not to
boast in another man's line, of things made ready to our hand. But he that
glories, let him glory in the Lord. For not he that commends himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commends. 2 Cor. x. 4, 5, 14 -- 18. The line and
measure which he spoke of was drawn by God himself, and not by any worldly
powers. So the same apostle said to another church, I will not dare to speak of
any of those things, which Christ has not wrought by me, to make the Gentiles
obedient, by word or deed, through mighty signs and wonders, by the power of
the Spirit of God; so that from Jerusalem and round about unto Illyricum, I
have fully preached the gospel of Christ. Yea, so have I strived to preach the
gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's
foundation. Romans xv. 18 -- 20. And can any man believe that the words, measure,
line, and foundation, as Paul used them, can justify the use of carnal weapons
in forcing all people within lines which men have drawn, to support teachers
who stand upon worldly establishments? For other foundation can no man lay than
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Now if any man build upon this
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble: every man's work
shall be made manifest. For the day shall declare it, because it shall be
revealed by fire; and the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is,
1 Cor. iii. 11 -- 13.

XI. And the fiery trials of the present day may afford much clearer light than
our fathers enjoyed. For they banished Mr. Roger Williams, because he testified
against any use of the sword in religious affairs, and against their receiving
the grant of American lands from the kings of England. One of his reasons
against such things, was what our Lord says of the tares of the field, which
Williams held to be the world, and not the church. Williams on the Bloody
Tenet, 1644. p. 44.
But Mr. Cotton said, "It is not the will of Christ, that antichristianity
should be tolerated in the world, until the end of the world. For God will put
it into the hearts of faithful princes (as they have given their kingdoms to
the beast, so) in fullness of time to hate the whore, and to leave her desolate
and naked, and to burn her flesh with fire. Rev. xvii. 16, 17." Cotton on the
Bloody Tenet Washed, 1647. p. 42, 43.
Williams had before said, "This hating and desolating and making naked and
burning, shall not arise by way of an ordinance warranted by the institution of
Christ Jesus; but by way of providence, when (as it uses to be with whores and
their lovers) the church of Rome and her great lovers shall fall out; and, by
the righteous vengeance of God upon her, drunk with the blood of the saints,
these mighty fornicators shall turn their love into hatred, which shall make
her a poor naked whore, torn and consumed." Williams, p. 246.
But Cotton made no reply to this; and how have the nations of Europe now
fallen out, and have taken the riches of the national churches, to support war
and vengeance against their cruel oppressors! And is not this eating her flesh,
and burning her with fire? But the fathers of that day were so much afraid of
the tyranny of European powers, that Cotton said, "The Lord keep us from being
bewitched with the whore's cup, lest while we seem to detest and reject her
with open face of profession, we do not bring her in by a back door of
toleration." Bloody Tenet Washed, p. 192.
And Dr. Increase Mather quoted this passage thirty years afterward, and then
said, "I believe that antichrist has not at this day a more probable way to
advance his kingdom of darkness, than by a tol^^ation of all religions and
persuasions." Election Sermon at Boston, May 23, 1677; reprinted 168.
This was reprinted in Boston the year after their charter was taken away. But
Mather and his brethren were so cruelly persecuted by the ruling powers here,
that he went over to England three years after, and thanked the Popish king
James, for his declaration for liberty of conscience. After which he believed
that our Lord meant the world, when he said, Let both grow together until the
harvest. Increase Mather's Life, p. 58, 110.
Let all men be equally protected, and no worship be established by human laws,
nor ministers supported thereby, and the danger they feared is at an end. Naked
Popery is weak in our land. For Mr. John Thayer, who was born in Boston, went
to Rome, and joined to their church in May, 1783, from whence he returned
through Maryland, and arrived at Boston in January, 1790; and he has preached
up the infallibility of the church of Rome, prayers for the dead, and other
opinions of theirs, with very little success. But our greatest danger is from
the power of the world over the church of Christ.

XII. Dr. Increase Mather said to the churches of New England, "If we espouse
such principles as these, namely, That churches are not to inquire into the
regeneration of those whom they admit unto their communion: that admission to
sacraments is to be left wholly to the prudence and conscience of the minister:
that explicit covenanting with God and with the church is needless: that
persons not qualified for communion in special ordinances shall elect pastors
of churches: that all professed Christians have a right to baptism: that
brethren are to have no voice in ecclesiastical councils: that the essence of a
minister's call is not in the election of the people, but in the ceremony of
imposing hands: that persons may be established in the pastoral office without
the approbation of neighboring churches or elders; we then give away the whole
Congregational cause at once, and a great part of the Presbyterian discipline
also." Vindication of Gospel Order, 1700. p. 8.
But declension prevailed for forty years longer, until the churches and the
world were much alike; and then God poured out his Holy Spirit, in the most
extensive manner that was ever known in America; and great numbers flocked into
the churches, where ministers favored the work. Though as a new piece of cloth
when put into an old garment will make the rent worse, and new wine will burst
old bottles, ^ven so was it with old churches, in which the doings of men were
blended with the perfect righteousness of Christ for justification, and the
inventions of men with his laws for their government. For by the year 1744, all
the ministers in New England who were supported by the laws of men, were afraid
to preach in any parish where another minister was settled against his consent;
which was making ministers lords over God's heritage, to gratify their love of
filthy lucre. 1 Peter v. 2, 3. And separations from such ministers and churches
took place from that time, until many embraced believers' baptism, in and after
1749. And a great change has also taken place in many old Baptist churches.
And now loud complaints are made against the Baptists, because they dare not
commune in the ordinance of the supper, with those who were only sprinkled in
their infancy. But how unreasonable are these complaints! For our apostle says,
We, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise. But as then, he that
was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so
it is now. Nevertheless, what says the scripture? Cast out the bond woman and
her son; for the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with the son of the
free woman. So then, brethren, we are not the children of the bond woman, but
of the free. Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty where with Christ has made
us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Gal. iv. 28 --
31. v. 1. And how can we obey this law of Christ, if we commune with any in the
holy supper who were only sprinkled in their infancy? And a late instance may
help to show the evil of such covenants. A man in one of the Congregational
churches was convinced that he was not born again, and therefore refrained from
coming to the ordinance of the supper. And after he obtained relief in his own
mind, he viewed such evils in the church, and his wife also, that they thought
they could not in conscience come to communion therein, and refrained from it.
The church sent a committee to labor with them, and they requested a
dismission from the church; but instead of it, a censure was sent to them,
which said, "With grief of heart we inform you, that we are greatly stumbled at
your conduct, in breaking a solemn and sacred covenant with us, in which you
bound yourselves, in the presence of the great God, to walk in communion with
us. By thus breaking communion with us, you are guilty of the worst kind of
perjury. By refusing to attend communion, or even public worship with us, you
have unchristianized the whole church, and have really excommunicated us." And
after trying to prove this from scripture, and reciting the law of Christ about
the power of binding and loosing, they say, "We accordingly have met in the
name of Jesus, and in his name we bind you under the censure of its first
admonition." This was dated November 28, 1794. The minister who sent them this
censure has been a noted advocate for supporting their way by law in our
country. But how great must be the bondage of any people, who must come to
communion in a society where church and world are bound together, or be accused
of the worst kind of perjury? However, the said man and his wife renounced
those ways, and were baptized this year, and joined to a Baptist church. And
how great is the privilege which we enjoy, to answer a good conscience toward
God, in the midst of all the confusions of the world!

XIII. Europe is full of confusion and blood; and America is become so wanton
and extravagant, that it cost above a million of dollars, and an army of
fifteen thousand men last year, to compel a few counties in Pennsylvania to
submit to the taxing power of our government. And the victory over them was
accounted so great a favor, that a day of thanksgiving therefore was kept
through all these United States, February 19, 1795. But the whole country has
been full of controversy about our public affairs ever since. And are not these
the shakings among the nations which God will pursue, until the Desire of all
Nations shall come? Hag. ii. 7. All men desire safety and happiness; and this
can only be enjoyed under the government of the Son of God, of whom it is said,
In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely; and this is
his name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. -- I am
against the prophets, says the Lord, that steal my words every one from his
neighbor. Behold, I am against the prophets, says the Lord, that use their
tongues, and say, He says. Behold, I am against them that prophesy false
dreams, says the Lord, and do tell them, and cause my people to err by their
lies, and by their lightness; yet I sent them not, nor commanded them;
therefore they shall not profit this people at all, says the Lord. Jer. xxiii.
6, 30 -- 32. The precepts and promises of God are ever connected together; and
no man has any more right to any promise which Christ has made to his
ministers, who does not love and obey him with all his heart, than thieves and
robbers have to the property of honest men. John x. 1 -- 9. And how much
stealing of his words is there in our land? The Congregational scheme of church
government, came a^near the gospel plan, as any plan ever did which was upheld
by the sword. But a zealous advocate for it lately said, "It is difficult to
say what is the present ecclesiastical constitution of the Congregational
churches." And as to their faith, he says, "The body of them are Calvinists; a
respectable proportion are what may be denominated Hopkinsian Calvinists;
beside these, some are Arminians, some Arians, a few Socinians, and a number
who have adopted Dr. Chauncy's scheme of the final salvation of all men."
Morse's Geography, 1793, first part. p. 252, 253.
This account is doubtless true in general, though it is questionable whether
there are not more Arminians in the churches who are supported by law in this
country, than there are of Calvinists. And vast pains have been taken, both in
Europe and America, to persuade the people, that all the wars and tyranny that
have ever taken place under the Christian name, have proceeded from the
doctrines of Calvinism. For it is well known that Augustine, and other fathers
of the church in the third and fourth century, held to the same doctrines which
Calvin embraced in the time of the reformation from popery. But God says, Woe
be to the shepherds of Israel, that feed themselves: should not the shepherds
feed the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe you with the wool, ye kill them
that are fed, but ye feed not the flock. The diseased have ye not strengthened,
neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither have ye bound up that which
was broken, neither have ye brought again that which was driven away, neither
have ye sought that which was lost; but with force and with cruelty have ye
ruled them. -- And as for you, O my flock, thus says the Lord God, Behold, I
judge between cattle and cattle, between the rams and the he-goats. Seems it
a small thing unto you, to have eaten up the good pasture, but ye must tread
down with your feet the residue of your pastures? and to have drunk of the deep
waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet? Ezekiel. xxxiv. 2 -- 18. This
is an exact description of the behavior of false teachers and professors, in
every age and country, where revelation has been known. The love of self, and
of earthly power and gain, with ignorance of the infinite perfections of God,
and a going about to establish a righteousness of their own, has caused all
the oppressions and cruel persecutions that ever were upon earth. And men have
trampled upon the precious doctrines of the gospel, and have defiled the deep
waters of revelation, as wantonly and as cruelly as wanton cattle ever did,
against the weak or the diseased. But if men in general were willing to be
taught of God, and to obey the pure voice of his holy word, such peace and
happiness would soon be enjoyed, as they will not now believe to be possible in
this world.

XIV. Arians and Socinians, both deny that Jesus Christ is God by nature, and
the latter hold him to be no more than man. But there is no such faith as
theirs in heaven, nor in hell, nor in heathen darkness. For all the angels of
heaven worship Jesus as the Son of God. Heb. i. 6. Luke ii. 9 -- 14. And the
devils said, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? art thou come
hither to torment us before the time? Matt. viii. 29. And the great
philosophers at Athens, the greatest seat of learning in the heathen world, got
no further than to erect an altar to the unknown God, in the midst of many
idols. Acts xvii. 23. So that all men who profess to worship but One God, and
yet deny that Jesus Christ is truly God, have corrupted their minds more than
the devils ever could do, and have carried philosophy and vain deceit beyond
what the old heathens ever did. And God says, These speak evil of those things
which they know not; but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those
things they corrupt themselves. Jude 10. It is impossible to harden brute
beasts against fear of danger, to the degree that many men harden themselves
against the fear of God's wrath in a future world. The cause why earthly
governments have no right to admit sureties in capital cases, is because the
children of men cannot justly lay crimes upon any innocent person, nor raise a
dead one to life, nor change the heart of a criminal. But it is as certain as
any truth in the bible, that the Son of God freely gave himself to die for our
sins, and that he arose again for our justification, and that he gives the Holy
Spirit to change the heart of the chief of sinners, and to guide them in the
way of holiness to eternal happiness. And it is not more certain from the word
of God, that the righteous will have everlasting life, than it is that all men
who die in their sins will have everlasting misery in hell. And all men who
hold the contrary, destroy the influence of promises and oaths, more than they
do in the church of Rome, where they hold that some men will have their sins
purged away after death, by the help of the prayers of the living. Therefore
the Congregational churches in New England, have more pernicious errors held up
among them, than there are in the church of Rome. And the apostle John says,
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God;
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the
Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God. And every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist,
whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even now already is it in the
world. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them; because greater
is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They are of the world,
therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them. 1 John iv. 1 --
5. And worldly property is the only qualification for voters in our
governments, for rulers and ministers; and yet each parish in Connecticut, is
called an ecclesiastical society in the laws by which they support their
ministers. That is, they are worldly churches. And though the Massachusetts do
not call each parish a church, yet they put the whole power of taxation for
religious teachers into the hands of the world, without the least regard to the
church of Christ in that respect. In another law, which was made in 1786, the
deacons of each church are empowered to receive donations for religious
purposes, which they are to manage according to the design of the donors, for
the good of the church. And this opens a door for leading a quiet and peaceable
life in all godliness and honesty. But the compelling of any man to support any
religious teacher whom he does not choose, is a denial of the authority of
Christ. For he says, As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise. -- For every tree is known by his own fruit; for of thorns men do not
gather figs, nor of a bramble-bush gather they grapes. A good man out of the
good treasure of his heart brings forth that which is good; and an evil man
out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is evil; for of
the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks. And why call ye me Lord, Lord,
and do not the things which I say? Luke vi. 31, 44 -- 46. How do all men
practically deny Jesus Christ to be Lord, who refuse to believe and obey him?
For unto the pure all things are pure; but unto them that are defiled and
unbelieving, is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled.
They profess that they know God, but in woks they deny him, being abominable,
and disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate. Titus i. 15, 16. And all
men allow that actions speak louder than words, and also that injuries from
professed friends, are more grievous than from open enemies. How full then is
the world of the iniquity of denying that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh?
And this is according to the prophecy which says, There are certain men crept
in unawares, who were before of old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men,
turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. Jude 4. All men who indulge themselves in sin
because God is infinitely gracious, are more or less guilty of these evils. And
though the national church of Israel was constituted by God himself, yet all
orders among them became so corrupt that he said, The best of them is as a
brier, the most upright is sharper than a thorn-hedge. Micah vii. 4. And if it
was so with a church which God formed, how much more destructive are churches
that are formed by the laws of men, enforced by the sword? How do all men
practically deny Jesus Christ to be Lord, who refuse to obey his laws for the
government of his church? But how have the churches increased in our land, who
hold him to be their only lawgiver?

CHAP. IV.
A LIST of the Baptist Churches in the Five States of New England, for the year
1795.

The first column contains the year in which the church was constituted, as far
as it is known; the second the name of the town; the third its distance from
Boston; the fourth, the name of their minister, if they have any; the fifth the
number of members in each church where it could be obtained.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS.
County of Suffolk. Year. Town. Miles. Ministers. No. 1665 Boston Samuel
Stillman, D. D. 267 1743 Thomas Baldwin, A. M. 158 County of Norfolk. 1750
Bellingham 34 Noah Alden 51 1769 Wrentham 30 William Williams, A. M. 40 1776
Medfield 20 Edward Clarke Those in Italic are not ordained ministers.
42 1780 Randolph 16 Joel Briggs, A. M. 58 County of Plymouth. 1756
Middleborough 33 Isaac Backus 91 1757 42 Ebenezer Hinds 29 1761 43 Samuel
Nelson 107 1785 Bridgwater 25 George Robinson 53 1788 Marshfield 33 26 1791
Carver 50 John Tripp 52 County of Bristol. 1663 Swansea 52 Charles Thompson, A.
M. 150 1693 55 Russel Mason 346 1753 Rehoboth 51 Thomas Seamans 45 1762 48 John
Hicks 40 1772 48 Jacob Hicks 130 1777 40 Jeremiah Irons 56 1780 45 15 1789 42
Aaron Wheeler 36 1794 44 John Pierce Jones 31 1761 Taunton 37 Ebenezer Nelson
55 1769 Attleboro' 32 Laban Thurber 68 1781 38 Elisha Carpenter 49 1772 Dighton
50 Enoch Goff 250 1774 Freetown 48 John Lawrance 20 1781 50 Philip Hathway 50
1774 Ne. Bedford 53 Zaccheus Tobey 18 1781 Dartmouth 58 Daniel Hicks 347 1780
Raynham 37 14 County of Barnstable. 1757 Harwich 84 Abner Lewis 72 1771
Barnstable 74 Enoch Eldridge 58 Dukes County. 1693 Chilmark 99 16 1780 Tisbury
97 David Leonard, A. B. 45 County of Essex. 1765 Haverhill 33 Hezekiah Smith,
A. M. 176 Almsbury 50 Moses Chase 1785 Rowley 26 50 1793 Danvers 18 Thomas
Green 30 County of Middlesex. 1771 Chelmsford 25 John Peckens 95 1780 Newton 9
Joseph Grafton 94 1781 Cambridge and Woburn 7 Shubael Lovell 84 1781 Cambridge
and Woburn 10 Shubael Lovell 84 1789 Weston 14 18 County of Worcester 1738
Leicester 58 Nathan Dana 45 1749 Sturbridge 65 Zenas L. Leonard, A. B. 96 1762
Charlton 60 David Rathbun 113 1765 Sutton 47 Samuel Waters 52 1786 46 37 1792
41 William Batcheller 57 1768 Hardwich 70 40 1770 Royalstone 80 Moses Kenney
155 1776 Harvard 35 Isaiah Parker 129 1779 Ashburnham 60 57 1780 Northbridge 40
John Cooper 47 1782 Templeton 60 97 1791 Upton 45 Simeon Snow County of
Hampshire. 1736 S. Brimfield 80 Elijah Codding 155 1789 W. Springfield 100
Jesse Wightman Mr. Wightman is the present pastor of this church.
34 1789 W. Springfield 100 Edward Upham, A. M. 34 1761 Ashfield 117 Ebenezer
Smith 26 1788 117 Enos Smith 92 1765 Leverett 95 59 1768 Wilbraham 83 Seth
Clark 228 1793 85 34 1772 New-Salem 85 Josiah Orcott 45 1780 Shutesbury 88
Joseph Smellage 57 1780 Leyden 112 Joseph Green 64 1780 Chesterfield 106
Ebenezer Vining 45 1780 Colerain 116 52 1789 116 Edmund Littlefield 19 1784
Westfield 105 85 1785 Russell 111 Ebenezer Stow 45 1786 Shelburne 112 David
Long 1788 Conway 110 82 1789 Whateley 107 Asa Todd 45 1789 Buckland 120 26 1789
Bernardston 112 Levi Hodge 50 1789 Granville 120 28 1790 Charlemont 123 31 1793
Monson 80 Samuel Webster 1795 Belcherton 85 Samuel Bigelow 18 1795 Granby 85
Silas Palk 15 County of Berkshire. 1769 Cheshire 140 Peter Werden 155 1771 142
35 1791 144 John Leland 173 1772 Pittsfield 140 Valentine Rathbun 31 1772
Hancock 150 Clark Rogers. 54 1777 Washington 135 John Nichols 68 1779
Sandisfield 126 88 1788 Benjamin Baldwin 60 1788 Bullocksgrant 135 Nathan
Haskins 55 1789 Great-Barrington 140 Jeduthan Gray 76 1790 Stockbridge and W.
Stockb. 150 Samuel Whelpley, A. M. 86 1791 Middlefield 20 1794 Williamston 135
16 County of York. 1768 Berwick 86 William Hooper 93 1772 Sanford 98 34 1780
Wells 88 Nathaniel Lord 63 1781 Shapleigh 108 Tozer Lord 40 1785 Nehemiah Davis
55 1782 Coxhall 108 Simon Lock 57 1795 Limerick Levi Chadbourn 50 1782
Personfield Samuel Weeks 13 1791 Waterborough 110 Pelatiah Tingley, A. M. 30
1791 110 Henry Smith 28 1791 Fryeburgh 160 Zebadiah Richardson 25 1792 Cornish
47 County of Cumberland. 1768 Goreham 130 James M'Corson 28 1785 Harpswell 162
Samuel Woodward 53 1791 Hebron 162 Samuel Flagg 39 1791 Buckfield 165 32 1791
Paris 170 James Hooper 34 1793 Livermore Elisha Williams, A. M. 60 1795 Ne.
Gloucester 146 Nathan Merrill 16 1782 1st. do. 10 1794 Raymondstown Zechariah
Leach 40 County of Lincoln. 1784 Bowdoinham 172 Job Macomber 40 1784 Thomaston
215 Elisha Snow 90 1784 Edgecomb Daniel Hebbard 100 1788 Bowdoin 166 James
Potter 37 1791 William Stinson 54 1794 24 1788 Vassalborough 203 Nehemiah Gould
39 1789 Ballston 195 Joshua Young 23 1791 Sidney Asa Wilbur 53 1791 Cushing 216
Ephraim Hall 49 1792 Sterling Eliphalet Smith 51 1792 Readfield 190 Isaac Case
80 1792 Lewiston 58 1793 Muscongus 205 Andrew Fuller 31 1793 Green 51 1793
Nobleborough 192 15 1794 N. Sandwich Lemuel Jackson 18 1795 Canaan Mephibosheth
Cain 30 1795 Barrettstown 18 1794 N. Vineyard 20 1790 Sandy-River Edward Lock
100 County of Hancock. 1791 Islesborough 260 Thomas Eames 30 8463 Churches.
Ministers. 136 105

STATE OF RHODE ISLAND.
County of Providence. Year. Town. Miles. Ministers. No. 1639 Providence 45
Stephen Gano 210 1706 Smithfield 55 John Winsor 150 1725 Situate 56 62 1766
John Westcoat 1732 Cumberland 34 Abner Ballou 48 1762 36 36 1749 Gloucester 60
Joseph Winsor 1778 William Bowen 58 1790 Stephen Place 60 1771 Johnston 48
Samuel Winsor 50 1766 Foster 63 John Williams 107 1789 John Hammond 91 1765
Nor. Providence 48 Rufus Tefft 170 County of Newport. 1644 Newport 72 Michael
Eddy 90 1656 Gardner Thurston 225 1671 William Bliss 54 1788 Caleb Green 30
1685 Tiverton 70 Peleg Buroughs 122 1781 62 James Boomer 24 1772 New Shoreham
85 Thomas Dodge 45 County of Bristol. 1764 Warren 53 Luther Baker 52 County of
Washington. 1708 Hopkinton 90 John Burdick 462 Asa Coon 1770 John Gardner 52
1710 North Kingston 67 Nathan Hill 70 1767 66 Philip Jenkins 77 1788 70 William
Northup 127 1750 Exeter 70 John Tillinghast 249 1750 Westerly 95 123 1770 301
1778 South Kingston 75 Benjamin Weight 36 1794 51 1772 Richmond 75 Henry Joslin
116 1774 Benjamin Barber 66 1774 37 County of Kent. 1725 Warwick 58 Samuel
Littlefield 40 1791 54 35 1743 East Greenwich 60 Thomas Manchester 50 1752
Coventry 58 Thomas Manchester 124 1774 66 John Benson 100 1780 West Greenwich
67 Elisha Green 50 3850 Churches. Ministers. 40 34

STATE OF CONNECTICUT.
County of New London. Year. Town. Miles. Ministers. No. 1705 Groton 113
Timothy Wightman 182 1765 117 Silas Burris 81 1743 Stonington 100 Peleg Randal
145 1765 104 Simeon Brown 194 1775 110 Valentine W. Rathbun 46 1793 Samuel
Northup 46 1767 New London 115 Zadock Darrow 268 1786 118 Davis Rogers 24 1743
Colchester 105 Abel Palmer 90 1784 100 Christopher Palmer 58 1752 Lyme 120
Jason Lee 264 1786 Montville 110 Reuben Palmer 52 1786 Preston 85 60 County of
Windham. 1750 Thompson 57 John Martin 100 1766 Woodstock 66 73 1792 68 Amos
Wells 76 1774 Ashford 74 Dyer Stark 90 1776 72 John Rathbun 54 1792 69 38 1794
67 Daniel Bolton 1776 Killingly 65 1776 Hampton 70 Peter Rogers 63 1792
Plainfield 72 Nathaniel Cole 87 County of Hartford. 1739 Farmington 127 Calvin
Hulbert 40 1775 Suffield 107 John Hastings 103 1780 Bristol 115 70 1786
Wintonbury 112 Ashbel Gillet 50 1789 Hartford 106 50 Windsor 110 1789 East
Hartford 101 Stephen Shepard 47 1790 Summers 104 Seth Parsons 20 1792 Enfield
100 Christopher Minor 15 1793 Symsbury 7 County of New Haven. 1787 Wallingford
130 33 1792 29 County of Fairfield. 1751 Stratfield 166 Stephen Royce 119 1773
Stamford 194 Ebenezer Ferris 25 1773 Greenwich 204 Nathaniel Finch 45 1785
Danbury Elijah Wheeler 40 1790 48 1789 Ridgfield Elias Lee 27 1794 Newtown John
Sherman 21 County of Litchfield. 1786 Warren 30 1788 Torrington 50 1789 Canaan
27 1789 Litchfield Amos Tuttle 23 1790 New Hartford Epaphras Thompson 75 1790
Roxbury 31 1791 Watertown Daniel Wildman 25 1791 New Milford 38 1793 Colebrook
Rufus Babcock 31 1793 Sharon 44 County of Middlesex. 1760 Saybrook 136
Eliphalet Lester 30 1788 William Hill 1778 Chatham 127 Solomon Wheat 63 1783 72
1790 East Haddam 118 Simeon Dickinson 47 County of Tolland. 1780 Willington 81
David Lillibridge 48 1780 Coventry 92 10 1786 Stafford 87 24 3547 Churches.
Ministers. 60 40

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
Year. Town. Miles. Ministers. No. County of Rockingham. 1771 Brentwood 53
Samuel Shepard 456 1780 Northwood Edmund Pilsbury 104 1780 Salem 46 57 1796
Newtown 40 John Peak County of Strafford. 1772 Gilmanton Walter Powers 67 1780
Meredith Nicholas Folsom 64 1780 Sandbornton John Crocket 61 1793 Sandwich
Jocob Jewel 112 County of Hillsborough. 1782 Sutton Samuel Ambrose 87 1782
Temple 43 1783 Wear Amos Wood, A. B. 40 1786 Mason William Elliot 36 1787
Hopkinton Elisha Andrews 75 1787 Amherst 30 1788 New London Job Seamans 113
1791 Hollis 31 1793 Salisbury Elias Smith 134 County of Cheshire. 1770 Richmond
Isaac Kenney 145 1771 Westmoreland Ebenezer Bailey 39 1791 Nathaniel Wilbore 18
1777 Marlow Eleazer Beckwith 131 1778 Newport Biel Ledoyt 89 1781 Wendal
Nehemiah Woodward 25 1785 Dublin Elijah Willard 33 1787 Cornish Jedidiah
Hebbard 28 1790 Fitzwilliam 1791 Alstead Jeremiah Higbie 54 1792 Swansea 18
1792 Hanover 130 Abel Bridgman 1792 Plainfield 126 Jonathan Cram 36 County of
Grafton. 1780 New Holderness Jeremiah Ward 32 1780 Rumney Cotton Hains 78 1783
Canaan 120 Uriah Smith 34 1785 Grafton 110 16 1788 Landaff Isaiah Stone 101
1790 Dartmouth Daniel Brainard 20 1792 Cockermouth 32 1793 Dorchester 50 1793
Wentworth Samuel Currier 38 1794 L^me 135 15 1794 Alexandria 15 2562 Churches.
Ministers. 41 30

STATE OF VERMONT. The distances of the towns in Vermont from Boston are so
little known that they are omitted.

County of Bennington. Year. Town. Miles. Ministers. No. 1768 Shaftsbury 24
1780 30 1788 Caleb Blood 160 1773 Pownal Caleb Nichols 165 1781 Manchester
Joseph Cornel 39 1784 Halifax Abner Bemis 14 1791 Somerset 27 County of
Addison. 1786 Leicester 1787 Orwell 108 1788 Brandon Calvin Chamberlain 65 1793
Georgia 20 1794 Shoreham 30 County of Rutland. 1780 Wallingford Henry Green 88
1782 Middletown Silvanus Hains 43 1782 Ira 49 1783 Pittsford Elisha Rich 45
1784 Clarendon Isaac Beals 46 1785 Pultney 1787 Hubbardston 23 1790 Powlet 24
County of Windham. 1780 Guilford 102 1782 Peleg Hicks 1791 Whitman Jacobs 53
1782 Westminster 32 1783 Dummerston Rufus Freeman 171 1783 Athens 25 1786
Putney 63 1789 Rockingham 40 1790 Jameca 26 1792 Wardsboro' Simeon Coombs 29
County of Chittenden. 1793 Fairfax Roswell Meers 22 1793 Cambridge Joseph Call
1794 Alburgh 13 1793 Monktown 20 1794 Bolton 15 1794 Richmond 25 County of
Windsor. 1780 Woodstock Elisha Ransom 144 1782 Bridgwater 101 1784 Windsor
Roswel Smith 57 1784 Royalton John Hebbard 51 1788 Reading 31 1789 Chester
Aaron Leland 67 1789 Hartford John Drew 45 1789 Thetford 13 1789 Sharon 16 1792
Norwich Robert Low 43 1794 Hartland 30 County of Orange. 1783 Corinth Thomas
West 88 1788 Danville Isaac Roots 28 2480 Churches. Ministers. 48 23

The whole number of Baptist churches, ministers, and members, in these States,
are as follow.

Churches. Ministers. Members. Massachusetts 136 105 8463 Rhode Island 40 34
3850 Connecticut 60 40 3547 New Hampshire 41 30 2562 Vermont 48 23 2480 In all
New England 325 232 20902 Churches. Ministers. Members. New York 84 111 5263
New Jersey 30 30 2177 Pennsylvania 31 35 1368 Delaware 8 10 390 Maryland 17 920
Virginia 227 272 22793 Kentuckey 57 67 3483 North Carolina 112 172 8017 South
Carolina 76 98 4554 Georgia 61 79 3227 North-West Territory 18 25 1336 1152
1125 73767

The account of the churches, ministers and members south of New England is
taken from Asplund's Register for 1794, as some are in New England; though the
most of these are from later accounts. He has numbered all licensed preachers,
but I reckon only those who are ordained.

CHAP. V. A CONCISE VIEW OF THE SECTS IN AMERICA, AND OF THEIR DIFFERENT
ASSOCIATIONS.
I. Religious Liberty is not the Cause of Sects and Parties among Christians.
II. A View of our Southern States. III. Each Church of Christ should act as one
united Body. IV. An Account of the Warren Association. V. And of those of
Stonington, New Hampshire, Shaftsbury, Woodstock, Bowdoinham, Vermont,
Meredith, Danbury and Leyden. VI. The Nature of these Associations described.
VII. And of three others, with general Observations upon the universal Rule of
Equity.

1. WHAT shall we think of the prophecy in the beginning of this volume? For it
says, "Through the liberty enjoyed here, all religious sects will grow up into
large and respectable bodies. But the Congregational and Presbyterian
denomination, however hitherto despised, will, by the blessing of Heaven,
continue to hold the greatest figure in America; and, notwithstanding all the
fruitless labors and exertions to proselyte us to other communions, become
more numerous than the whole collective body of our fellow Protestants in
Europe. The whole proselytism of New England in particular, for sixty or
seventy years past, has not exceeded eight or ten thousand, while our augment
in that term, by natural increase, has been half a million." In the first place
there was a great mistake, in supposing that religious liberty would favor the
growth of religious sects. For cruel oppression was the cause of the increase
of sects in England, as it was of the flight of our fathers into America. And
the hanging of four Quakers in Boston, greatly promoted their sect in this
country; and the light and liberty which has been enjoyed in latter years has
been far from increasing their number. The sect which John Rogers began at
New London in 1677, owed its increase to the severity of Connecticut government
against them; and since that has ceased, their society has nearly dissolved.
And although the Sandemanians made a great noise in New England, from 1764 to
1775, yet, having no oppression to complain of, they have hardly a name now
left among us. The followers of Jemima Wilkinson, also, who made their
appearance October, 1776, and continued for some years after, are now all gone
from among us. And though the Shakers were a large body when the above prophecy
was published, yet we seldom hear of them now, unless it be by way of observing
that the power which then actuated them is gone; and their attention is much
fixed upon worldly schemes of gain. Episcopalians received vast sums of money
from England to support their ministers, from 1701 to 1775, and those who
turned to them were exempted from taxes to Congregational ministers; and as
oppression was greater in Connecticut, than in other governments in
New England, they increased the most there; but since the independence of
America, they do not increase in most parts of the country; and in the whole of
the old colony of Plymouth they have but one minister, and he has but a few
hearers. And if the Congregational and Presbyterian ministers in the
Massachusetts, Connecticut, New Hampshire and Vermont, had not the sword of the
magistrate to support them, no one can tell how small their number would soon
be.

II. And as the above prophecy refers to all America, we are called to look
into our southern States. After our independence was established, the
Presbyterians in those parts entered upon measures to unite all their societies
under one head; to promote which, a book was published in North Carolina in
1788, wherein the author says, "I have often thought, that the popular
Congregational government of the Independents, joined to the Presbyterial
judicatures, as a final resort, would form the most perfect model of church
government that the state of things on earth will admit of." But this model
has been tried in Connecticut, with the sword of the magistrate to help it,
ever since 1708, and how far is it now from perfection? In the same page, the
author says of the Baptists in those parts, "Considering that they have no
written standard of orthodoxy, and that their preachers are men without a
liberal education, I have often sat with wonder and pleasure to hear them so
sound in doctrine as they really are. In church government, the Baptists have
adopted the independent plan; the inconveniency of which they often experience,
as it provides no final and decisive judge of controversy, nor tribunal to
pronounce on heresy or false doctrine. But the distinguishing characteristic of
the Baptist profession is their excluding infant, and practicing only adult
baptism, and making it their great term of communion, excluding all other
Christians from the Lord's table among them, and not suffering their members to
communicate with other churches. How they can acknowledge any other people to
be a church of Christ, and yet continue this bar of separation, is not to be
accounted for." Pattillo's Sermons, p. 48, 49.
But if the holy scriptures are not a perfect standard of orthodoxy, and if
each particular church of Christ has not power from him to receive all members
and officers who are described therein, and also to exclude all officers and
members who break his laws and refuse to manifest repentance therefore, we know
not where to go for any rule of faith and conduct; nor for power to govern us
in religious affairs. And as to his last difficulty, it may be observed, that
circumcision was as necessary in a member of the church of Israel, as baptism
can be in the church of Christ: yet Moses, that eminent servant of God, did not
circumcise his children while he was in Midian; but when he was going to lead
Israel out of their bondage in Egypt, he was constrained to have them
circumcised, even at the peril of his own life. Exodus iv. 24, 25. And the
nation of Israel were the church of God in the wilderness, and yet they did not
circumcise their children for forty years; though they were not suffered to
neglect it in the promised land. Joshua v. 2 -- 5. And the church of Christ
has been in Egyptian bondage, and in a great and terrible wilderness, ever
since the beast arose out of the bottomless pit. Rev. xi. 2, 8. xii. 14. xiii.
5. The cause why many Christians were for continuing circumcision, after it was
out of date, was the fear of persecution for the cross of Christ. But Paul
said, God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. For in
Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a
new creature. Gal. vi. 12 -- 15. But infant baptism binds the church and world
together, instead of crucifying any one to the world, and the world to him. Yet
our author says of the Baptists, "They made their appearance in Germany soon
after the reformation began. But the present race of Baptists are happily very
unlike the furious and blood-thirsty bigots who wore the name at that time."
Ibid. p. 47.
As if Christ and his disciples had not been Baptists near fifteen hundred
years before the reformation in Germany. And has any man ever been able to
produce a mention of infant baptism before the third century? And in the next
century, Constantine brought the sword into the church to punish heretics, and
to support religious ministers; and blood and slavery, deceit and cruelty, have
followed those superstitions ever since, though many good men have been
ensnared in those ways. In the year 1789 many Presbyterians met at
Philadelphia, and formed a tribunal which they called, "The General Assembly of
the Presbyterian Church, in the United States of America." And they opened a
correspondence with the General Association in Connecticut; and a delegate from
thence to the Presbyterian assembly at Philadelphia in May, 1793, said in a
letter to England the fall after, "There are nearly as many ministers of our
order in Connecticut, as there are Presbyterians in all the States to the
southward of Connecticut." Rippon's Register, Vol. II, p. 131.
That is, in ten States, in which are nearly three million of people, they have
but about two hundred Presbyterian ministers. How far then is the
Congregational and Presbyterian denomination in America from rising above all
other Protestants, both here and in Europe?

III. And if we search the scriptures, we shall find, that a being born again
by the power of the Spirit of God, and a receiving special gifts from him for
the ministry, is the only way that he has revealed, for any to come into the
church, and into the work of preaching the gospel as they ought, let their
education be what it may. Hence the first apostle says, As every man has
received the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards
of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of
God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives;
that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ. -- The elders
which are among you I exhort, who am also an elder, and a witness of the
sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed;
feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither
as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the flock. And when
the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fades
not away. Likewise, ye younger, submit yourselves unto the elder; yea, all of
you be subject one to another, and be clothed with humility; for God resists
the proud, and gives grace to the humble. I. Pet. iv. 10, 11. v. 1 -- 5.
Lordship is of the Gentiles, and they tread the holy city under foot forty and
two months, or for a time, and times, and half a time, while the church is in
the wilderness. Mark x. 42. Rev. xi. 2. xii. 14. Men trample upon the holy
government, which Christ has appointed in his church, as long as the power of
the beast continues. And they say, Who is like unto the beast? who is able to
make war with him? -- They that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose names
are not written in the book of life from the foundation of the world) when they
behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is. Rev. xiii. 4. xvii. 8.
Deceit and cruelty, under a mask of religion and government, have changed into
all shapes that can be conceived of; and who has been like the present scheme?
or who is able to war with the governing powers? are the great reasons for
complying with the established worship, or at least for not boldly appearing to
renounce all the laws and inventions of men in the worship of God, and in the
government of his church.

IV. The Congregational ministers in the Massachusetts meet in associations
when they please, without any act of their churches; and they act many things
in private, and claim the whole power of licensing candidates for the ministry;
and in Connecticut they also advise to the calling a consociation in each
county, when they think proper, to revoke acts of particular churches, or to
censure such ministers or churches as they judge to be guilty. They likewise
choose delegates in each county, to meet once a year in a general association
of ministers by themselves, from all parts of that State. But the Baptists had
suffered so much from these measures, that they could not be persuaded to meet
in associations for many years, though upon quite a different plan. Yet in
September, 1766, a number of elders and brethren agreed to send an invitation
to their churches, to appoint a meeting the next year, to confer upon these
things. And on September 8, 1767, ten churches met by delegation at Warren,
with three ministers from the Philadelphia Association, and a letter from
thence on the subject. Most of those who met thought they were not prepared to
proceed then, but four churches were ready, and them formed an association, and
named it from the town where they met; namely, the churches of Warren,
Haverhill, Bellingham, and the second in Middleborough. And as the annual
commencement at our college is on the first Wednesday in September, and some
who come to it from a distance would desire to attend the association also, it
was appointed to be on the Tuesday after the commencement. They accordingly met
at Warren, September 13, 1768, when four churches joined to this Association,
as four more did at Warren, September 12, 1769. Their next meeting was at
Bellingham, September 11, 1770, and they met again at Sutton, September 10,
1771, when they had increased to twenty churches, and 837 members; and they
then began to print minutes of their proceedings, which they have done ever
since. And the churches in the foregoing list who are now in the Warren
Association, are the two in Boston, those in Bellingham, Haverhill, Warren,
Middleborough, Charlton, Royalstone, Wrentham, South-Brimfield, the first in
Attleborough, Wilbraham, Woodstock, and Freetown, those in Chelmsford, Harwich,
Barnstable, New-Salem, Leicester, Medfield, Harvard, Newton, Salem in
New Hampshire, Cambridge, Northbridge, Providence, Gloucester, Sturbridge,
Ashburnham, Templeton, Rowley, Weston, Bridgwater, Randolph, Marshfield,
Carver, Hollis, Hardwick, and Belcherton; extending over all the old colonies
of Plymouth and the Massachusetts, excepting what is west of Connecticut river,
and into three adjoining States. This Association have begun to collect a fund
for the purpose of assisting pious young men in obtaining human learning, with
a view to the gospel ministry. Thirteen men were chosen by this Association,
and were incorporated by the legislature of the Massachusetts in February,
1794, to manage a fund for this purpose. This Association are to fill up
vacancies, when any happen, as long as the Association continues; and if it
should ever be dissolved, the corporation are then to elect their own members,
in perpetual succession. They are invested with all necessary powers for
receiving estates, real or personal, until the income thereof shall amount to a
thousand pounds; and to use and improve the income of the fund for the
assistance of such young persons in their education for the Baptist ministry,
as the majority of the trustees shall determine to be subjects thereof. A small
fund for this purpose is already collected, and all their generous friends are
solicited to increase it, to promote such a useful institution.

V. The benefits of the Warren Association soon became so evident, that others
were formed in many parts of the country. The Stonington Association began in
1772, which now includes three Baptist churches in Stonington, the first in
Groton, New London, and Saybrook, those in Colchester, Montville, Chatham,
East-Haddam, second and third in Ashford, the second in Woodstock, those of
Hampton, Plainfield, Exeter, West-Greenwich, and two in Richmond, in the States
of Connecticut and Rhode Island. Their annual meeting is on the third Tuesday
of October. The New Hampshire Association began in 1776, and now includes the
Baptist churches of Brentwood, Northwood, Gilmantown, Salisbury, Madbury and
Berwick, Sanford, Wells, Coxhall, one in Shapleigh, and Waterborough, Cornish,
and Fryeburgh, extending across the east part of New Hampshire, and over the
country of York in the Massachusetts. Their annual meeting is on the second
Wednesday in June. The Shaftsbury Association began in 1781, in which are now
three churches in Shaftsbury, two in Cheshire, those of Pownal, Pittsfield,
Chesterfield, Hancock, Bullocksgrant, Stockbridge, Washington, first in
Sandisfield and Great-Barrington, with Williamston, in Vermont and the
Massachusetts, and twenty-five churches in the State of New York. Their yearly
meeting is on the first Wednesday in June. The Woodstock Association began in
1783, in which are now the churches of Woodstock, Canaan, Bridgwater, Windsor,
Hartford, Royalton, Sharon, Thatford, Norwich, Cambridge, Alburgh, Chester,
Rockingham, Westminster, Wardsburgh, Westmoreland, Marlow, Mason, Temple,
Dublin, Newport, Alstead, Cornish, Wendal, Plainfield, Sutton, New London,
Hopkinton, and Grafton, in New Hampshire and Vermont, and one in Canada.
Another connection of churches was formed in those parts in 1795, called, The
Richmond Convention, of whom I have not obtained a particular account. The
annual meeting of the Woodstock Association is on the last Wednesday of
September. The Bowdoinham Association began in 1787, and it now contains the
Baptist churches of Bowdoinham, Harpswell, Bowdoin, Hebron, Buckfield, Paris,
Thomaston, Vassalborough, Ballston, Sidney, Readfield, Sterling, Muscongus,
Cushing, Lewiston, Nobleborough, Green and New-Sandwich, in the counties of
Cumberland and Lincoln, in the district of Maine. Their annual meeting is on
the third Wednesday in August. The Vermont Association began also in 1787, and
it contains the churches of Clarendon, Manchester, Middletown, Hubbardton, Ira,
Wallingford, Orwell, Pittsford, Brandon, Powlet, Shoreham and Georgia, in
Vermont, with three in the State of New York. Their annual meeting is on the
first Wednesday of October. The Meredith Association began in 1789, and it
includes the churches of Meredith, Sandwich, Holderness, Rumney, Landaff and
Bradford, Dartmouth, Wentworth, Cockermouth, Sandburnton, Corinth and Vershire,
and Danville, in New Hampshire and Vermont. Their annual meeting is on the
second Wednesday in September. The Danbury Association began in 1790, and it
includes the churches of Danbury, Suffield, Westfield, Canaan, Wallingford,
Farmington, Roxbury, Warren, Watertown, New-Hartfond, New-Milford, Sharon, one
in Sandisfield, Colebrook, East-Hartford, Newtown, Litchfield, Stratfield, and
three in the State of New York. It extends from the south borders of the
Massachusetts west of the great river across Connecticut to the sea. The
churches of Ridgefield, Stamford and Greenwich, belong to Warwick Association
in the State of New York. The annual meeting of the Danbury Association is on
the third Wednesday of September. The Leyden Association began in 1793, in
which are the churches of Leyden, Bernardston, Richmond, Leverett, two in
Guilford, Colerain, Putney, Somerset, Dummerston, Halifax, Buckland and
Ashfield, on the north side of the Massachusetts, and on the corners of Vermont
and New Hampshire. Their annual meeting is on the second Wednesday of October.
As I failed of obtaining the last minutes of the Vermont, Meredith, and Leyden
Associations, their numbers stand as they were in 1794, the others as they were
in 1795. If any mistakes are discovered, and any man will point them out, the
author would account it a favor, and take the best way he can to correct them.

VI. These associations refuse to hear and judge of any personal controversy in
any church, or to intermeddle with the affairs of any church which has not
joined with them. When any church would join to any association, they send a
letter and messengers thereto, informing when their church was constituted, the
faith and order of it, and their number of members. If satisfaction is
obtained, they are received by a vote of the association, and the moderator
gives the messengers the right hand of fellowship. And each church sends a
letter and messengers, or a letter at least, to the association every year, to
give an account of the state of the church, and how many have been added,
dismissed, died, or have been excluded in the year past. If these things are
neglected for a number of years, or if the church departs from her former faith
or order, she is left out of the association. By these means, mutual
acquaintance and communion has been begotten and promoted; the weak and
oppressed have been relieved; errors in doctrine and practice have been exposed
and guarded against; false teachers have been exposed, and warnings against
them have been published; destitute flocks have been occasionally supplied;
many have been animated and encouraged in preaching the gospel through the
land, and in our new plantations in the wilderness. And it is hoped that these
duties will yet be more attended to, and that greater blessings will hereafter
be granted. For our Lord said to his disciples, I have yet many things to say
unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. Howbeit, when he the Spirit of truth is
come he shall guide you into all truth. He had just before said, The time
comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God service. John
xvi. 2, 12, 13. And what is there that is harder to bear than to hear of being
killed for Christ's fake? Reviling and lying on the one hand, and worldly
enticements and flatteries on the other, are much harder to stand boldly
against than open violence, torture and death. For the earth helped the woman,
when she was enduring bloody persecution, and the people forced her persecutors
to desist from their cruel measures. But it is very hard to make the people
believe, that we are suffering for the cause of Christ, when we refuse to call
in the power of the magistrate to support religious ministers, or to punish any
who injure us on religious accounts. Yet God says, Avenge not yourselves, but
rather give place unto wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will
repay, says the Lord. Romans xii. 19. Deceit and cruelty has ever prevailed
more in the world, under the mask of religion and government, than they
possibly could in any other way. Therefore our Lord requires his ministers to
depart out of every city or house where they refuse to receive his gospel, and
he says, Freely ye have received, freely give. Mat. x. 8, 15. But this command
has ever been violated, where teachers have been supported by the sword of the
magistrate. And the combination of teachers and rulers, in schemes of power and
gain, under the name of Christianity, has filled the world with blood and
slavery. And I believe that this combination is the beast and the false
prophet, who will be cast into the burning lake. Rev. xix. 11 -- 21. For where
ministers are supported by the sword, deceitful men are armed against the
children of God. And where that power is renounced, many will require the
ministers of Christ to go a warfare at their own charges, because he says,
Freely ye have received, freely give. As if freedom belonged only to ministers,
while the people are slaves to their lusts. For God says, To whom ye yield
yourselves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey; whether of
sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness. Romans vi. 16.

VII. But our associations appeared to be so helpful to guard against these
evils, and to promote real religion, that the churches who held to mixed
communion began a yearly meeting in 1785, under the name of, The Groton
Conference. And it now includes the Baptist churches of Dartmouth, New-Bedford,
two in Rehoboth, two in North-Kingston, one in South-Kingston, New-Shoreham,
two in Westerly, and one in each of the towns of Groton, Stonington, Lyme,
Saybrook, Sutton, Preston and Canterbury, extending over part of three States.
The church in Dighton, second in Attleborough, and some others, have given up
communion in the ordinance of the supper with any who were only sprinkled in
infancy, and the rest of those churches appear inclined to do the same, and to
come into fellowship with our associated churches. The old Baptist churches
have revived their associations, since the year 1774, though the second
churches in Swansea and Newport do not attend them, nor the first in
Cumberland. But the churches of Johnston, Smithfield, two in Rehoboth, two in
Situate, two in Gloucester, two in Warwick, the first in the towns of Foster,
Coventry, North-Kingston, and Richmond, one in East-Greenwich, the second in
Cheshire, and the third in Shaftsbury, are in that connection. The Baptist
churches who hold the seventh day of the week as the Sabbath, have also their
annual meetings. Of these are the third church in Newport, the first in
Hopkinton, the second in New London, and the church in Bristol in Connecticut.
There are a number more of Baptist churches in various parts of our land who
have not joined to any association, but they are coming into them from year to
year, while many others are formed. I have also heard of a few Baptist churches
upon our eastern coasts, who do not hold with other churches there about the
doctrines of grace; but I have not obtained so distinct account of their
affairs and connexions as may be serviceable to the public. The world is so
full of controversy, that all our powers ought to be engaged to promote truth
and peace among all men. And for this end God says, Charge them that are rich
in this world, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but
in the living God, who gives us richly all things to enjoy; that they do good,
that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate;
laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come,
that they may lay hold on eternal life. For perverse disputings, profane and
vain babblings, and oppositions of science, falsely so called, all proceed from
the love of money, which is the root of all evil. 1 Timothy vi. 5, 10, 17 -- 20.
The knowledge of the truth is ever the same, in every age, and every country;
but the opposition of false notions of knowledge, has filled the world with
controversy and confusion. Further evidence of this will appear in the
following history of particular churches, and of the oppressions which many
have endured.

CHAP. VI.
I. The first Principles of New England about Baptism. II. The History of the
First Baptist Church in Boston for fifty Years. III. And to this Time. IV. Of
Mr. Roots. V. The beginning of their Second Church. VI. Their History for
twenty Years. VII. And to the present Time. VIII. Of the Publications of their
Ministers. IX. Of the Baptist Churches in the County of Norsolk. X. Of the
First in Middleborough. XI. Of their History to this Time. XII. Of the Second
in Middleborough. XIII. Of the Third. XIV. Of Bridgwater. XV. Of Marshfield.
XVI. And Carver.

I. OUR fathers fled to America for religious purity and liberty, with a
persuasion that each believer stands in the same relation to his children, as
Abraham did to his in the covenant of circumcision. But soon after they came to
Boston, a difficulty arose about their children, who were grown up so as to
have families, and yet were not true believers themselves, so as to bring their
children upon their own faith to baptism. The church in Dorchester wrote to the
church in Boston, to inquire whether a grandfather might not bring such
infants? Mr. Cotton and his church concluded that he might, only with two
cautions. "1. That the grandchild, baptized by right of the grandfather's
covenant, be committed to the grandfather's education. 2. That the parents of
the child, do not thereby take occasion to neglect the due and seasonable
preparation of themselves for entrance into covenant with God and his church."
This was dated December 16, 1634, about four years after Boston was planted.
And on October 11, 1648, Mr. Cotton wrote to a friend in England, and said,
"Though they be not fit to make such a profession of visible faith as to admit
them to the Lord's table, yet they may make profession full enough to receive
them to baptism, or to the same state Ishmael stood in after circumcision."
Increase Mather on the first principles of New England about baptism, 1675. p.
2, 3, 6.
But Ishmael and Esau were both excluded from the covenant of circumcision long
before the passover was instituted, of which servants were obliged to partake,
as well as all the children of Israel. And Mr. Henry Dunstar, the first
president of Cambridge college, saw their mistake in these things so clearly,
that he boldly preached against infant baptism, and for believers' baptism, in
the pulpit at Cambridge in 1653, the year after Messrs. Clarke, Holmes and
Crandal were imprisoned at Boston, only for worshipping God by themselves,
without leave from the ruling powers in the Massachusetts. But those powers
compelled Mr. Dunstar to resign his office in college; and he removed out of
their jurisdiction, and spent the rest of his days, even five years, at
Situate in Plymouth colony.

II. In the year 1655, Thomas Gould, of Charlestown, was so fully convinced
that infants had no right to baptism, that he refused to bring his child
thereto; but for this he was censured in the church and prosecuted in their
courts, until some Baptists came to him out of England, and they formed a
Baptist church there, May 28, 1665, and Gould became their pastor. But the
leaders of this church were fined and imprisoned, from time to time, until a
sentence of banishment was passed against Thomas Gould, William Turner, and
John Farnum; and because they would not banish themselves, they were imprisoned
at Boston, in July, 1668, where they were confined about a year. But in the
Indian war, seven years after, a company of those Baptist were sent out against
the enemy, and Turner was their captain, and sacrificed his life for the
government by whom he had been persecuted. And in January, 1678, this church
had increased so much, that they concluded to build them a meeting house in
Boston, though with so much caution as not to let the ruling powers know what
it was designed for, until they met in it, February 15, 1679. But in May
following a law was made, to forbid all persons to erect or make use of any
house for public worship, without license from the ruling powers, upon penalty
of forfeiting the house and land, and all private ways leading to it. And a
synod was called in September, who gave it as their opinion, that suffering
those Baptists to meet for worship by themselves, was a cause of the judgments
of God upon the land; therefore their meeting house was nailed up by order of
court in March, 1680, and Dr. Increase Mather published a book against them the
same month, in which he said, "Antipedobaptism is a blasted error." Divine
Right of Infant Baptism, p. 20.
But he and his brethrein met with such cruel oppression soon after, as moved
them to procure a special act, to exempt Boston from any compulsive power for
the support of any religious ministers. And he and his son Cotton Mather, with
Mr. John Webb, went into the house which their party had nailed up, and
assisted in ordaining a Baptist minister, as a pastor of that Baptist church.
Mr. Gould was a pastor of that church, from its beginning until his death about
1676; and he was such an example of meekness, faith and patience as is seldom
found. Mr. Isaac Hull was called to the pastoral office in that church in the
time of their sufferings, and continued therein till 1689, and how much longer
their records do not discover. Mr. John Russell, who suffered imprisonment for
the cause of conscience, was ordained a pastor of that church, July 28, 1679,
and he wrote a defense of their cause in 1680, which was printed in London,
with a preface by six noted ministers there. But he was taken away by death,
December 21, 1680, much lamented by his people; and his posterity are numerous
and respectable in these parts to this day. Their next minister was Mr. John
Emblen, from England, who ministered to them from 1684, to 1699, or
thereabouts. He appears to have been well esteemed among them, as far as I
could obtain any information. After his death the church wrote again to England
for a minister, but obtained only a respectful letter from thence. They wrote
also to Mr. William Screven in South-Corolina, who had been of this church, but
he could not leave his flock there. Therefore in 1708, they called Mr. Ellis
Callender to be their minister, who had been a member of their church ever
since 1669, and he continued in high esteem among them until 1726.

III. His son, Mr. Elisha Callender, was wrought upon by divine grace very
early, and joined to that church on August 10, 1713; and he was educated in the
university at Cambridge, and was ordained a pastor of that church, May 21,
1718, by the help of three Congregational ministers in Boston, before named.
And this transaction, with his correspondence with friends in England, and
other information, moved Thomas Hollis, esquire, of London, to become the
greatest benefactor to the university at Cambridge of any one man in the world.
Mr. Elisha Callender was a very faithful and successful minister of the gospel,
until he fell asleep in Jesus, March 31, 1738. Mr. Jeremy Condy was educated in
the college at Cambridge, where he took his first degree in 1726; after which
he went over to England, from whence he was called by this church, and was
ordained their pastor, February 14, 1739. But he had quite other sentiments,
concerning the nature and power of the gospel, than those of his predecessors;
and he opposed the powerful work which came on in Boston the year after he was
ordained, and another church was formed in a way of separation from him; and
the first Baptist church in Boston was in a declining condition, until they
called and settled Mr. Samuel Stillman as their pastor, January 9, 1765, when
Mr. Condy resigned his office, and lived a retired life, well esteemed among
his acquaintance, until he died, August 9, 1768, aged 59. A revival of religion
began in that church in 1769, which caused the addition of eighty members in
three years, to a church which had not seventy members before. The
Congregational ministers of Boston were much alarmed at this increase of the
Baptists, and published several things to guard against them, and to draw young
people into their own communion. One of them had published a book against the
work of God in 1743, when many were drawing off from unconverted ministers, and
then he said, "No man becomes a minister, or a communicant in our churches,
until he has been severely examined about his regeneration, as well as
conversation." But he published another book in 1772, to guard against the
Baptists, in which he said, "The divinely appointed way, in which persons
become members of the visible church of Christ, is utterly inconsistent with
the supposition, that, in order to their being so, they must be the subjects of
saving faith, or judged to be so." Our second vol. p. 153, 269. Thus do men
condemn themselves. When the American war began in Boston, this church was much
scattered, and their pastor removed to Philadelphia; and after his return and
his brethren, earthly mindedness greatly prevailed, until the year 1785, when
religion was again revived, which added fifty members more in three years. In
1790, a happy work of the Spirit of God was again granted in Boston, and above
seventy members were received into the first Baptist church there, in about two
years, and their present number is 267, besides all that have died, have been
dismissed, or excluded.

IV. Another minister, who is a member of this church, is not to be forgotten.
Mr. Peter Philanthropos Roots, A. M. was born at Symsbury in Connecticut, where
his father was minister, Mr. Benaiah Roots.
March 27, 1765. But as many of the people disliked his father's searching
preaching, he requested a dismission, which was granted, and he went and
settled at Rutland in Vermont, where a happy work of grace was granted in 1783,
when his son experienced a change of heart; and he was educated in Dartmouth
college, after which he was licensed to preach in the Congregational way, in
March, 1790. He had many scruples about infant baptism while he was at college,
and they followed him afterward, until he made them known to the most able
ministers of his own denomination, desiring them to show him a divine warrant
for that practice, if they could, as he had no desire to become a Baptist, if
he could avoid it with a clear conscience. But as they could not satisfy him,
and he obtained full conviction, that a credible profession of saving faith was
a necessary qualification for baptism, he came to Boston, and was baptized and
joined to the first Baptist church there, June 3, 1792. And the church being
satisfied with his qualifications for an itinerant minister, called others to
assist in his ordination at Providence, September 4, 1792, the day before the
commencement at the university there; and in the winter following he traveled
and preached the gospel through all the States as far as Georgia. And Mr. Roots
has devoted himself to the work ever since, often preaching to destitute
churches in various parts of our country, and he has been received to preach
in the pulpits of many Congregational ministers, as well as in places where no
steady worship had been maintained; and as inquiry was often made, why he
embraced the Baptist principles, he published a book to give the reasons
thereof near the close of 1794.

V. As the second Baptist church in Boston began in a way of separation from
the first, they gave them the following reasons for it. "1. We have for a
considerable time been dissatisfied with Mr. Condy's doctrine, being of
opinion, from many discourses which we have heard him deliver from the pulpit,
and from conversation with him at several times, that he is what we call an
Arminian, in that we apprehend he holds general redemption, is a free-willer,
holds to falling from grace, and denies original sin. We mean by his denying
original sin, that he softens, moderates and explains away the guilt,
malignity, corruption and depravity of human nature exactly as the high
Arminian clergy forever do. 2. We conceive that he denies the doctrines of
election and predestination. If Mr. Condy does not deny these doctrines, we
freely confess that we do not understand the scope or design of his sermons,
nor of his conversation when we have heard him discourse on these points of our
faith. He publicly owned at a church meeting, that he never had preached
election, and believed he never should; alleging as a reason for it, that if he
should preach up election, he should offend the greater part of his church.
This excuse we look upon to be no sufficient reason for his declining to
instruct his people in this important doctrine, but it rather ought to have
animated him, if he believed this doctrine himself, to set his church right in
an article of such importance. We hope we need not take up your time nor our
own in proving, that it is the indispensable duty of a faithful minister of
Christ, to declare to his church the whole counsel of God, let who will be
offended thereat; so that we conclude that Mr. Condy does not believe the
doctrine of election himself. 3. We are enough dissatisfied with his way of
thinking on that great, that most solemn doctrine of regeneration. Whenever we
have heard him discourse on the new birth, his sermons were so ill grounded, so
intermixed with man's freewill agency, and so widely different from what our
Lord taught and intended thereby, that we cannot avoid questioning whether he
ever experienced the saving operation of that most important doctrine in his
own soul. 4. We were sufficiently affrighted at a declaration in one of his
sermons, That Christians cannot know or distinguish the operation of the Spirit
of God upon their souls, from the operations of their own minds. This assertion
we look upon to be of the most dangerous tendency; a striking at the root and
main evidence of the Christian consolation and hope. -- We are now willing to
return to our former places with you, if we can find that your principles and
practices are the same with those on which, by the grace of God, our church was
first founded. But if your articles of faith are in fact contrary to those on
which this church was first established, you cannot, we think, justly blame us
for separating from you, and uniting with others who are like minded with
ourselves. The Lord give you understanding in all things, and may your hearts
be directed into the love of God, and to be ready always to give an account of
the hope that is in you, with meekness and fear. The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all.
James Bound, John Dabney, Thomas Boucher, John Procter."

Boston, Sept. 29, 1742.



VI. The two first of these men came formerly from England, the third from
Wales, and the fourth was a school master in Boston. Mr. Ephraim Bound, son to
James, met with a happy change in those times, and was baptized by elder
Moulton, of Brimfield, and he began to preach the gospel in this new society.
And as they obtained no satisfaction from the old church, James Bound, John
Procter, Ephraim Bosworth, John Dabney, Thomas Boucher, Ephraim Bound, and
Thomas Lewis, formed a new church in Boston, July 27, 1743, and elected Ephraim
Bound as their pastor. His human learning was not great, but his powers of
mind, and his spiritual teaching, made him an excellent teacher and minister of
the gospel. But as most of the old Baptist ministers and churches in our
country were prejudiced against the late revival of religion therein, these
people found it difficult to obtain help in the ordination of their minister.
Elder Wightman, of Groton in Connecticut, was clear in that work, but he was
advanced in years, and could not well travel so far as Boston; therefore this
church sent some of their members to meet him in Warwick, where Mr. Bound was
ordained, September 7, 1743, by the help of elder Wightman, and elder Green,
of Leicester. And many subjects of the late work of grace in the land, joined
to this church in Boston, from Newton, Needham, Medfield, and other places.
Deacon Ephraim Bosworth, of the town of Hull, having no children, gave this
church a good estate, which they still enjoy. Also in the month of February,
1749, this church received the following generous donation from England; viz.
From the Rev. John Gill, D. D. for the communion table, one large cup, four
smaller ones, two dishes and two plates, also one large rich damask table
cloth. Also seven complete sets of baptismal garments, namely, one for the
minister, and three for men and three for women; also books to the amount of
about fifty dollars. At the same time they received a further gift of forty
eight volumes of the late Rev. Mr. Hill's Sermons; (an Independent minister in
London, successor to Dr. Ridgley) Mr. Hill's sermons were sent by his father,
the editor, to be given away at the discretion of the church. And after the
great earthquake in 1755, Mr. Bound set up a weekly lecture, which was attended
by many from all parts of the town; "and many owned him to be the instrument of
their conversion, who yet joined to Pedobaptist churches; and he was greatly
respected by people of various denominations, and especially by his own
society. But in the midst of his usefulness, it pleased God to seize him with a
paralytic disorder, in the morning of December 17, 1762, from which he never
recovered, though he revived so as to preach a few sermons." Mr. Bound died,
much lamented, though with great comfort in his own soul, June 18, 1765. This
church had increased under his ministry to about 120 members; and as soon as he
was taken ill, they not only obtained occasional supplies from sister churches,
but also sent for Mr. (now Dr.) Samuel Stillman, from New Jersey. He was born
in Pennsylvania, and educated in South Carolina, where he was ordained; but the
climate not suiting his constitution, he came and preached for some time at
Bordentown in the Jersey, from whence he came to Boston, and ministered a year
to this church, and then, in September, 1764, he went to the first Baptist
church in Boston, in which he has been a successful minister to this day.

VII. The second Baptist church in Boston being again left destitute, sought
and obtained some help from sister churches, and looked out for another pastor,
but could not obtain one in many years. Many of their old brethren were dead,
and others were scattered into different parts of the land, so that they feared
a dissolution of their church. Such is the changing state of things in this
world, both as to our temporal and spiritual concerns; and happy are they who
humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt them in due
time. Mr. John Davis paid this church a visit in the fall of 1769, and at their
request, he removed there from the State of Delaware in May, and was ordained
their pastor September 9, 1770. He was educated in the college at Philadelphia,
and was a man of great powers of mind, which he exerted in a noble manner, in
the cause of religious liberty, and for the welfare of our churches, until his
health failed, which led him to ask a dismission, which was granted, July 19,
1772, and he sailed from Boston in August, and died near the Ohio, December 13,
1772, greatly lamented. Mr. Isaac Skillman, who was born in New Jersey, and
educated at Princeton college, was the third pastor of this church, from
September, 1773, to October, 1787, when he went back to New Jersey, and is now
the pastor of the Baptist church at Salem in that State. Directly after his
departure, this church called Mr. Thomas Gair to be their pastor, who was born
in Boston, educated in the college at Providence, and ordained at Medfield,
September 18, 1776, where he ministered to good purpose for ten years. But
then, as some of their ablest brethren were dead, and peculiar difficulties
arose in the church, they dismissed and recommended him; and his labors were
much blessed in Boston, until he was suddenly called away by death, April 27,
1790. And it is very remarkable that two pastors of this church, Davis and
Gair, each died in his 36th year, and were the only ministers who had died out
of the Warren Association since it was formed in 1767. In July after the
decease of the latter, the church obtained a visit from Mr. Thomas Baldwin, who
was born at Norwich in Connecticut, December 23, 1753, and ordained at Canaan
in New Hampshire, June 11, 1783, and preached with success in those parts until
he was now called to Boston, where he was installed the pastor of this church,
November 11, 1790. They had but 42 members when Mr. Skillman came there in
1773, and when he left them they had increased to 66, and when Mr. Gair died
they had 89, and now have 158.

VIII. These churches in Boston have equal liberties with other denominations,
and no man in that town has been compelled to support any minister that he did
not personally choose, since the year 1693; but this liberty is wickedly denied
to the generality of our towns in the country, contrary to the promise of our
delegates at Congress in 1774. Dr. Stillman preached the election sermon at
Boston, May 26, 1779, when he clearly described the difference between civil
States, and the government of the church of Christ, showing that they ought to
be entirely distinct. Yet in the constitution of our government, which was
formed the winter following, church and state are confounded together. He had
published four sermons in 1769, upon original sin, the efficacy of divine grace
in conversion, justification alone by faith in the perfect righteousness of
Christ, and the infinite importance of holy obedience to all the laws of
Christ. This was in the beginning of a happy revival of religion in Boston. He
has also published several other sermons and tracts since. Mr. Gair published
an ordination sermon, which he delivered at Cambridge in 1783; and also a
circular letter in the minutes of the Warren Association. Mr. Baldwin published
a discourse in 1789, at the request of the Woodstock Association, to show the
reasons why the Baptist churches refuse to commune in the ordinance of the
supper with any who were only sprinkled in infancy. Upwards of two years after,
the Rev. Noah Worcester, of Thornton, (N.H.) published an answer to him,
wherein he set up godly sincerity as the rule of communion, and not any
external mode of baptism. To this Mr. Baldwin replied, in March, 1794, which
was so much esteemed, that it passed a second edition in about two months. He
proved plainly, that this controversy all turns upon these two questions. 1.
Who are the subjects of baptism according to the law of Christ? 2. What is the
mode or manner of the baptism which he has instituted? Mr. Worcester published
another piece last winter, in which he refused to meet him upon this ground,
saying, "The attempt would be to dissolve the distinction between the two
denominations, rather than to open the way for a free communion between us, as
two denominations. For I presume, that, were we agreed upon these two
questions, we should not be two denominations." Worcester's Discussions, p. 8.
Very true; and why should any be unwilling to have but one Lord, one faith,
and one baptism? Yet this author has now published above an hundred pages upon
other things, while he refused to come to the point in hand.

IX. Bellingham, in the county of Norfolk, was so abusively treated by
Congregational ministers, that they have never settled one of them in that town
in above forty years past. The Baptist church there, was constituted October
15, 1750; and Mr. Elnathan Wight was their first pastor, who was ordained
January 14, 1755, and was a faithful and useful minister there, until he was
taken away by death, November 6, 1761, aged 46. Mr. Noah Alden was born in
Middleborough, May 31, 1725, converted there in 1741, and was ordained at
Stafford in Connecticut, June 5, 1755. But he was dismissed from thence, by the
advice of a council, August 28, 1765, and he was installed at Bellingham,
November 12, 1766, and continues their pastor to this day. Mr. Aaron Leland was
raised up in this church, who is pastor of the Baptist church at Chester, in
Vermont. Peace has generally been enjoyed in Bellingham, and they have been
favored with several revivals of religion, though their church has never been
very large. And the like may be said of the Baptist church in Wrentham, which
was constituted in 1769. William Williams, A. M. was ordained their pastor,
July 3, 1776. He was born in Pennsylvania, and was educated in Rhode Island
college, being one of the first class therein, and he is now a fellow of that
corporation. He also keeps a Latin school, in which many young gentlemen have
been fitted for the college. The Baptist church in Medfield was formed August
18, 1776, and Mr. Gair was ordained the pastor the next month, as was before
observed. In 1787 their church had increased to 81 members; but in 1789 they
dismissed 14 members to for^^ church in Weston. Mr. Edward Clarke removed to
Medfield soon after, and has preached there ever since, though he is not
ordained. He sprang from the family who were fathers of the first Baptist
church in Newport, which was formed in 1644; and he has published a reply to
Messrs. Fish and (...) upon baptism, and some other things. The (...) Baptist
church in the county of Norfolk was formed August 24, 1780, upon the borders of
Stough^^^ and Braintree, where now is the town of Rand^^^ Former revivals of
religion had been granted th^^^, but the work was more powerful in that glo^^^
year 1780. Joel Briggs, A. M. was born in No^^^ April 15, 1757, educated in the
college at Providence, and preached to this church about three years, before he
was ordained their pastor, December 5, 1787. A powerful work was again wrought
among them in 1790, which caused the addition of above twenty members to this
church: and it extended its happy influence into Bridgwater and Abington.

X. The county of Plymouth, where our fathers began the settlement of
New England, calls for^^^ next attention. The principles and manners of the
first planters of the country, are as much retained here as in any part of the
land. And this may be a cause why no person has been hanged in the county of
Plymouth for sixty years past. The inhabitants are as much upon a level, and
there are as few foreigners among them, as in any part of America. The people
are generally supported by their own labors, and not by the labor of others.
And a powerful work of the Spirit of God in Middleborough, in and after 1741,
prepared the way for the gathering of the first Baptist church in the county,
in this town. After the death of their minister in April, 1744, Judge Oliver,
who came from Boston, with a few more leading men in Middleborough, shut the
next minister whom the church chose, and two thirds of the people, out of their
meeting house, and from the use of their ministerial lands. And when a new
precinct was constituted in February, 1743, consisting part of Middleborough,
and part of Bridgwater, the communicants therein were denied a dismission from
the old churches for five years, lest if a church were formed in this precinct,
they should call a minister whom the world did not like. The communicants
therefore set up a meeting without license from arbitrary ministers, in
December, 1747, and formed a church here, February 16, 1748, and ordained a
pastor therein the 13th of April following. But in the month between, their
opponents held a parish meeting, and voted a large sum of money, to finish
their meeting house, and to hire other sort of preaching, and taxed the church
and their minister, with the rest of the inhabitants, to pay it. But after
distress had been made upon several of them, it appeared in a trial at Plymouth
court, that said money was voted at an illegal meeting, and the case was turned
against their collector. But they appealed to their superior court, and in the
mean time sent an agent to Boston, and obtained an act of the legislature to
establish said meeting as legal, and the superior court gave judgment against
the defendant upon this act, which was passed after the suit was commenced in
the first executive court. And this shows that the temporal interest of no
people can be secure, where one party of ministers are supported by tax and
compulsion.

XI. In August, 1749, a dispute about baptism was brought into this church,
which was managed with an unhappy temper by many, and caused great difficulties
among the people. Nine members of this church, and one who was not a member,
were baptized in September, and they set up a meeting from the church in
October, because their minister and church did not immediately become Baptists,
so as to obtain an exemption from taxes to Congregational ministers. They went
the next year and joined to old Baptist churches, and obtained such an
exemption. These things, with the unhappy temper which many discovered, caused
a great fear in others that there was some secret iniquity in the Baptist
principles, as tradition had long said there was. But they were led by degrees,
to distinguish between the truth of God, and the corruptions of men who profess
a zeal for it; and their minister was baptized in August, 1751, and others
afterward, who yet held communion with those who were only sprinkled in
infancy, until they were convinced that this was a practical saying that they
were baptized when they believed in their consciences they were not. Therefore
they formed a Baptist church here, January 16, 1756, and their former minister
was installed their pastor the 23d of June following, in which office he is
still continued. He was born at Norwich in Connecticut, January 9, 1724,
converted in 1741, and began to preach in September, 1746. This was then the
only Baptist church in an extent of country of above an hundred miles long,
from Bellingham to the end of Cape-Cod, and near fifty miles wide, between
Boston and Rehoboth. Their number was small for many years, though they had
some revivings from time to time, until such a work came on in 1779, as
increased their number in three years, from 59 to 138. And in forty years they
have buried 34, dismissed 61, and excluded 12, while 91 remain. Seven members
of this church have been ordained to the work of the gospel ministry, namely,
James Mellen, Abner Lewis, Asa Hunt, Elijah Codding, Job Macomber, Samuel
Nelson, and David Leonard; the last of whom was ordained as an itinerant,
December 17, 1794. He was born in Bridgwater, and educated at the college in
Providence, where he took his first degree in 1792. His brother Zenas Lockwood
Leonard graduated at that college in 1794, and was soon approbated by this
church to preach the gospel, and has been accepted in that work in various
parts of the country. Stephen Smith Nelson was a class-mate with him, and he
was approbated as a gospel preacher by this church last May. He is
great-grandson to the first Baptist in Middleborough, of whom we shall say more
presently. The pastor of this church published a discourse upon an internal
call to preach the gospel, in 1754; and he has published the most since of any
Baptist in America; but their value is left entirely to the judgment of the
public.

XII. The second Baptist church in Middleborough was formed in the following
manner. Thomas Nelson, who was born here in June, 1675, discovered such evils
in the second minister of the town, as caused him to examine the scriptures
concerning their principles; and finding nothing therein for infant baptism, he
went and joined to the first Baptist church in Swansea. And in the year 1717 he
removed into the south part of Middleborough, called Assawamset, being the
first English family who settled there. And Baptist ministers frequently
preached at his house, until he got one to preach there steadily, in the spring
of 1753. This was Mr. Ebenezer Hinds, who was born in Bridgwater, July 29,
1719, and began to preach in 1749. About four miles south westward from this
meeting, in a place called Beechwoods, Mr. James Mead was ordained the pastor
of a separate church, October 3, 1751, and continued in that office until he
died, October 2, 1756. The majority of that church became Baptists soon after,
and joined with Mr. Hinds's hearers in forming a Baptist church, November 16,
1757, and he was ordained their pastor, January 26, 1758. Mr. Hinds was
baptized by Mr. E. Moulton, and joined himself to the second Baptist church in
Boston, March 3, 1751.
They purchased a house and farm for the ministry, and built a convenient
meeting house 42 miles from Boston. Mr. Nelson died before this church was
constituted, aged eighty, but his widow lived to commune with them in the
ordinance of the supper, after she was an hundred years old. She died December
7, 1782, being an hundred and five years and seven months old; and she had then
living of her posterity 337, as near as the account could be collected; for
some of them were in Nova Scotia. William, Samuel and Ebenezer Nelson, three of
her grandsons, are now ordained Baptist ministers. Mr. Hathway, a minister in
Freetown, also sprang from this church. Such a revival of religion was granted
among them in 1773, as increased the church to 104 members the next year. But a
number of them were dismissed to form a church in Freetown soon after, and they
never have been so large since. Mr. Hinds has had two wives, and fifteen
children, of whom he has buried eight; and the great expenses in his family,
with different sentiments about the support of ministers, and the government of
the church, has caused many contentions among them, which has reduced the
church to a much smaller number than they once had; yet he is still continued
in his office there.

XIII. The third Baptist church in Middleborough sprang chiefly from the first.
The lands near the corners of Middleborough, Rochester, Wareham, and Carver,
were but little cultivated until 1754; and Baptist ministers were called to
preach there from time to time afterward, and persons from thence joined to
our church, until they obtained a dismission, and ten persons were formed into
a church there, August 4, 1761. Mr. Ebenezer Jones had preached to them for a
while before, and he was ordained their pastor the 28th of October following.
And a revival of religion came on among them the next spring, which prevailed
through the year, and spread its happy influence into many other societies, the
good fruits whereof are visible to this day. Yet some evil behavior in Mr.
Jones's wife, which drew him into a snare, caused a great division in the
church and society in 1763, which terminated in his removal from them; and he
traveled and preached in various parts of our land, until he died in the
county of Albany, in September, 1791. This church was in a furnace of
affliction for several years; but in the spring of 1770, they obtained Mr. Asa
Hunt to preach to them, and he was ordained their pastor, October 30, 1771. He
was born in Braintree, in July, 1744, and preached in Raynham for a year before
he went to them, when he joined to the first Baptist church in Middleborough.
His preaching was very acceptable, and they gave him a good place for a
settlement, beside the use of the ministerial lot; and they built a convenient
meeting house, above eleven miles from the first Baptist meeting in this town.
And such a work of the Spirit of God began among them in March, 1780, as caused
the addition of 113 members to their church by September, 1782, when they had
194 in all. But in the time of great changes in our country about money and
worldly property, Mr. Hunt entangled himself so much in the affairs of this
life, as caused much unhappiness, and he insisted upon a dismission from his
church, which they granted, though with reluctance, in December, 1789. He had
been a journey into Virginia, where he preached to good purpose the year
before, and he traveled into New Jersey and Pennsylvania after his dismission;
but he never removed his family, until he was called to visit his eldest son,
who was sick with the dysentery in the college at Providence, where the father
was seized with the same distemper, and died there, September 20, 1791. His son
recovered, while he was taken away, and his memory is precious to many,
notwithstanding his imperfections. The church was in low circumstances for some
time, and young people got to be so extravagant in vanity, that they could
hardly be kept civil in times of public worship. But the church prevailed with
Mr. Samuel Nelson to remove there to preach to them, in May, 1793. And in the
beginning of the next month, such a divine influence was granted, that old
Christians became all alive in religion, and such a concern for the soul and
eternity appeared among old and young through all the busiest time in the
summer, that they had frequent and crowded meetings, in season and out of
season, without the least disturbance from vain persons, which before were so
troublesome. Mr. Nelson was ordained their pastor January 16, 1794; and above
thirty were added to their church in about a year. He was born in this town
April 6, 1745, and is still useful in this church. Mr. John Tripp, and Mr.
Simeon Coombs have been of this church, who are now ordained ministers in other
places.

XIV. A few persons in the west part of Bridgwater had been members of the
first Baptist church in Middleborough near thirty years, before a happy revival
of religion began there in 1779, when their number increased so much that they
were encouraged to hold meetings among themselves, from time to time, until
sixteen members were dismissed, and a church was formed there, June 7, 1785.
Mr. George Robinson had preached to them for a year before, and he became their
pastor. He was born in Attleborough, in November, 1754, and was ordained at
Killingly in Connecticut, November 13, 1776, where he ministered for more than
seven years. But such difficulties then arose in their church, partly
occasioned by the public disorders in our country, that they called a council,
and, by their advice, dismissed and recommended him, and he removed to
Bridgwater, where many blessings have been granted under his ministry. Mr. Seth
Howard was baptized there, March 10, 1779, and was one of the first members of
this church, and he continued in their communion, until he died in a joyful
manner, October 11, 1794, aged near 92. Mr. Eleazar Snow, who was born in
Bridgwater, July 25, 1701, also joined to the first Baptist church in
Middleborough, and was then one of the first members of this church, and is now
the oldest man in Bridgwater. Mr. SNOW, full of divine consolation, died Feb.
18, 1796.


XV. Some persons of Marshfield joined to the first Baptist church in Boston,
before elder Callender died in 1738, and others joined to their second church
in elder Bound's time; but their number was small, until deacon Josiah Eames
invited Baptist ministers to preach there in 1773, and a meeting was set up, in
which Thomas Eames began to preach. But these men removed away, and the last of
them is now pastor of a church in Islesborough in the county of Hancock; and
the Baptists in Marshfield were in low circumstances, until a revival was
granted in 1786, and they built them a meeting house the next year, and a
church was formed among them, June 11, 1788. They received assistance from
neighboring ministers, from time to time, until Mr. Joseph Butterfield came to
preach there steadily in the fall of 1791, and he was ordained their pastor,
May 16, 1792. His gifts were promising, and his hearers increased for some
time; but from imprudent conduct, he proceeded to the use of deceitful means to
obtain a temporal living. Therefore a mutual council was called, May 8, 1793,
who advised the church to depose him from his office, which they did, and he
confessed it to be just. He was then forgiven and restored as a brother, and
recommended to another church, and he removed to Weston, and lately into the
district of Maine. They have experienced many trying things since at
Marshfield, but it is hoped that all will work for their spiritual good.

XVI. The town of Carver was formerly the south parish in Plymton, betwixt
Middleborough and Plymouth. Their first meeting house was built near the north
end of the parish, because most of the people lived there. But when the south
end was also planted and cultivated, the inhabitants claimed a right of having
it removed into the center; and because this was denied them, they built
another meeting house toward the south end, and obtained occasional preaching
in it for some years. At length they got Baptist ministers to preach there, and
their principles prevailed, until a Baptist church was formed there, July 13,
1791, and Mr. John Tripp was ordained their pastor the 28th of September
following. Most of the first members were dismissed from the third Baptist
church in Middleborough, as others have been since. And a happy revival of
religion in both churches in 1793, caused a large increase of this church. Mr.
Tripp preached an ordination sermon at Barnstable, April 29, 1795: which was
printed soon after at Boston.

In January, 1793, a great revival of religion began in Plymouth, the first
town that was planted in New England; and it prevailed to a greater degree than
any work of the Spirit of God has done there since the year 1742. Their
minister, the Rev. Dr. Robbins, was much engaged in it, and in the summer of
1794, he baptized one woman by immersion, which was a new thing in that town.

CHAP. VII.
I. An Account of the first Church in Swansea. II. Of the second Church there.
III. Of two in Rehoboth that are dissolved. IV. Of six Churches now there. V.
Of Mr. Winchester. VI. Of Mr. Ellis. VII. Of the last Baptist Church in
Rehoboth. VIII. Of Taunton. IX. Of Attleborough. X. Of Dighton. XI. Freetown.
XII. New-Bedford and Dartmouth. XIII. Raynham. XIV. Harwich. XV. Barnstable.
XVI. Martha's-Vineyard.

I. THE first Baptist church in the Massachusetts is in Swansea, which was
originally in Plymouth colony, the first in New England. Mr. John Miles was a
father of the Baptist churches in Wales, which began in 1649; and he was pastor
of the Baptist church of Swansea in that country, until he was ejected from
thence by a cruel act of parliament, which turned above two thousand teachers
out of their places in 1662. He then came over to our country, and brought
their book of records with him, which is in Swansea to this day, containing
many things concerning the first Baptist churches in Wales, that are no where
else to be found, and which have been lately transcribed and sent over to them.
Nicholas Tanner, Obadiah Bowen, John Thomas, and others, also came over to this
country; and one of Bowen's posterity is now Chancellor of the university at
Providence. A Baptist church was formed in Rehoboth in 1663, and Mr. Miles was
their pastor; and four years after they obtained a grant of the town of
Swansea, from the legislature at Plymouth; and there have been none but Baptist
churches in that town to this day. Mr. Miles often visited and labored with
his brethren at Boston, in the time of their sufferings; and he continued the
faithful pastor of the church in Swansea, until he fell asleep there, in a good
old age, February ^, 1663. Mr. Samuel Luther had been a representative (...)
Swansea in their legislature, and was otherwise useful in the town, before he
was ordained a pastor of this church, July 22, 1685, by the assistance of the
elders. Hull and Emblen of Boston; and he was much esteemed at home and abroad,
until he died in 1717, and his posterity are numerous to this day. Mr. Ephraim
Wheaton, who lived within the bounds of Rehoboth, had been a colleague with him
about thirteen years, and he was a faithful and successful minister until he
died, April 26, 1734, aged 75. He baptized and received fifty members into his
church in five years after a revival began in 1718, of which he wrote an
account to Mr. Hollis in London. Our second vol. p. 79. Mr. Samuel Maxwell was
ordained a colleague with him, April 18, 1733; but he was unsteady in his
sentiments, and in 1738, he embraced the opinion of keeping the seventh day of
the week as the Sabbath, which caused his dismission from this church. April
15, 1739. Elder Benjamin Herrington, formerly of Narraganset, was their near
pastor, and was installed in this church, August 18, 1742, and he had a crowded
audience for several years; but then he was accused of the sin of uncleanness,
and he went off to Canterbury in Connecticut, where he preached to a few
people, and lived in obscurity to old age. In March, 1748, Mr. Jabez Wood, of
Middleborough, was called to preach to this church, and he was ordained their
pastor, September 5, 1751. He was grandson to Mr. Thomas Nelson; but as the old
gentleman judged that Wood had made use of unjust and deceitful measures to
obtain that place, where was a good farm for the ministry, he removed his
membership to the first Baptist church in Rehoboth, and others went to other
churches; and the first church in Swansea was in a declining condition, until
elder Wood asked and received a dismission in ^^79, and he removed into
Vermont, where he died in 1794. But as the enemy had burnt their meeting house,
and house for the ministry at Warren, three miles off, in May, 1778, the two
churches agreed for the present to meet at Swansea, and elder Thompson was
received into this church, October 7, 1779, and has been their pastor ever
since. And such a rain of righteousness was granted there in 1780, as caused
the addition of above ninety members to that church in two years, and they have
had other revivals since.

II. The second church in Swansea was formed upon different principles from the
first, and they held the laying on of hands upon every member as a term of
communion, and did not sing in their public worship. Men who removed from
Providence, and from other places, set up worship by themselves there about
1680, and continued it until they formed a church, and Mr. Thomas Barnes was
ordained their pastor in 1693; and he was well esteemed in his place, until he
died, June 8, 1706. Samson Mason was a soldier in Cromwell's army, and he came
over to America upon the turn of times in England, and settled in Rehoboth, and
his posterity are now as numerous as, perhaps, those of any man who came to our
country in his day, and they have had the chief lead in this church. His sons
were Noah, Samson, James, John, Samuel, Joseph, Isaac, Pelatiah and Benjamin.
James and John went to Boston, but six of the others lived in Rehoboth and
Swansea, until the youngest of the six was seventy years old. Isaac Mason was
ordained a deacon in this church, at the same time that Barnes was ordained
their pastor, and he lived to January 25, 1742. His brother Joseph was ordained
their pastor in July, 1709, and continued so till he died, May 19, 1748. Mr.
John Pierce was ordained a colleague with him, October 19, 1715, and died
September 8, 1750, being each of them near ninety, and their memory is precious
to their posterity. Mr. Pelatiah Mason was born in March, 1669, and died in
March, 1763, and three of his sons have been pastors of this church. Elder Job
Mason was born February 28, 1695, ordained May 22, 1738, and died July 17,
1775. His character as a judicious man, a good preacher, and an exemplary
walker, was high among his acquaintance. Elder Russel Mason was born April 22,
1714, ordained November 2, 1752, and is now able to preach frequently, and to
discharge other duties of his office to the acceptance of his brethren. Elder
John Mason was born in October, 1716, ordained March 26, 1788, and is well
esteemed in his office. In the mean time, as their church has greatly increased
in latter years, and they had many who joined to it from distant places, and
gifted men were raised up among them, they ordained many elders. Elder Benjamin
Mason was ordained September 15, 1784, elder Nathaniel Cole, December 12, 1787,
and elder Philip Slade, October 15, 1788. Elder Cole is now settled in
Connecticut, while the others remain in this church in Swansea. It is also to
be observed, that a church in Rehoboth sprang from this church in 1753, and a
large part of another church ten years after to go to Nova Scotia. When all
North America was ceded to Great Britain, Nathan Mason and his wife, Thomas
Lewis and his wife, Oliver Mason and his wife, with Experience Baker, of this
church, and Benjamin Mason and his wife, Charles Seamans and his wife, Gilbert
Seamans and his wife, from other churches, were formed into a church, and
Nathan Mason was ordained their pastor, April 21, 1763, and they went and
settled at the head of the Bay of Fundy. But after some years they removed back
to New England, and most of them went and settled in Berkshire in the
Massachusetts. It is also to be observed, that the powerful work of grace which
was wrought in this country, under the ministry of men who held to infant
baptism, and who had oppressed the Baptists, was attended with such evil
reports as prejudiced the Baptists against the work for many years. But some
ministers from New Jersey came and preached among the Baptists in these parts,
in and after 1754, which served to remove those prejudices, in some measure.
And in 1756, colonel Andrew Cole, of Swansea, invited some of our new ministers
to preach at his house, and from time to time afterward. And though these
Baptist churches had received members by a general confession of their faith,
yet in a great revival which began in the fall of 1771, a particular relation
of experiences of an inward change of heart was introduced, which produced
powerful effects upon many. Several hundred persons were added to the Baptist
churches in Swansea and Rehoboth within two years after. The work was still
greater in and after 1780, and singing in public worship was soon after
introduced into the second church in Swansea. But as they still held laying on
of hands as a ^^^m of communion, a number drew off, and formed another church,
and ordained Mr. Michael Eddy as their pastor, in August, 1785; though it is
since dissolved, and he removed to Newport in 1790, where he is still useful.

III. Rehoboth is a large town, extending from Taunton and Dighton to
Providence, about twelve miles; and in 1791, there were 4710 persons therein,
and ten religious societies, which is more than we have in any other town of
their numbers in these parts. Cruel oppression, on the one hand, and an abuse
of liberty, on the other, have been the cause of it. Many had joined with the
Baptists in Swansea, from time to time, until Mr. John Comer came and assisted
in forming a church in Rehoboth. Some account of him is in our second volume,
p. 66, 110 -- 113, 121 -- 124. He was an excellent preacher of the gospel, and
an eminent instrument of reviving doctrinal and practical religion in Newport,
for six years before he removed to Rehoboth in August, 1731, and a Baptist
church was formed there, January 20, 1732, and he became their pastor, and it
increased to 95 members in less than two years. And in that time he went and
labored in Sutton, Leicester, Middleborough, and other places. But he exerted
his powers so much in this noble cause, that he fell into a consumption, and
died joyfully, May 23, 1734, before he was thirty years old. His son is now a
member of the Baptist church in Warren, and he lent me his father's diary, and
other writings, which have been very serviceable in our history. Nathaniel
Millard was ordained the ne^^ minister of this church, June 24, 1736. But his
principles and conduct were corrupt, and he w^^ dismissed in 1742, after which
he went off with another woman instead of his wife. And as Mr. Marwell had
retracted his opinion concerning the sabbath, this church called him to be
their pastor, in October, 1745. But in about three years, Congregational
ministers, who had oppressed the Baptists, had invited him to preach for them,
and he yielded so much to them that this church dismissed him, and he published
a complaint about it in 1749. He often preached in other places, and was
esteemed as a pious man, and lived to a great age, but never had the charge of
any other church. In the mean time, a second Baptist church was formed in the
northeast part of Rehoboth, and Mr. Richard Round was ordained their pastor,
July 13, 1743; and in nine years it increased to forty members. He was one of
the seals of Mr. Comer's ministry, and preached the gospel faithfully, until
his health failed, and he removed to the south part of the town, for the
benefit of the sea air. And about that time a division took place in both
churches, and a part of both joined together at their first place of worship,
and elder Round was their pastor until he died, May 18, 1768, aged 62. His
character as a minister of the gospel, and as a pious man, was very good; but
those churches are since dissolved.

IV. Mr. John Hicks was born in Rehoboth, May 10, 1712, and became a member of
the first Baptist church there, and then a preacher therein, until they gave
him a call to be their pastor; but he did not accept it, because many of the
church appeared to him to be unsound in principle, and to oppose the power of
godliness. But after much labor, a new church was formed, and Mr. Hicks was
ordained their pastor, November 10, 1762; and in the glorious year 1780, they
had 106 members. Mr. Nathaniel Round, brother to Richard, was a member of this
church, and called to preach the gospel therein; and on May 11, 1768, he was
ordained as a minister of the gospel, to go and labor in Nova Scotia, with a
people who went from these parts. He went accordingly, and was a successful
labourer there for several years, and then he removed back, and settled in the
east part of Attleborough, and preached occasionally round the country, until
he died at home, July 18, 1781, in the 64th year of his age. Another church was
raised out of the other, in the following manner. A powerful work began among
them in the fall of 1771, and elder Hicks baptized forty persons, and then was
taken sick in the winter, and Mr. Winchester came and baptized twenty more; and
such power appeared to attend his ministry, that many were taken with the
opinion, that baptism by immersion ought not to be held as a term of communion
in the church. A council was called upon it, in September, 1772, and they who
were not convinced by them, formed another church, and ordained Mr. Jacob Hicks
as their pastor, January 20, 1773. He is the eldest son of their old pastor,
and was born January 1, 1740 (...) vision caused much unhappiness for many
years, (...) both societies have usually held their worship together in late
times, and they now meet in the same house that was first built for Mr. Comer's
church. Elder John Hicks is now so old and infirm as not to be able to preach,
but he appears still steadfast in the faith and hope of the gospel. His son has
none i^ his church at home but those who have been buried in baptism, and seems
to have almost given up occasional communion with others; and so have other
churches, with whom he is connected. For as they communed with those who were
only sprinkled in infancy, because they loved them as Christians, and not
because they viewed them as baptized persons according to the written word,
they have found this to be an impediment in the way of enforcing the written
word as a rule in other cases. And to receive any member, to the grief of any
already in the church, they also find to be unwarrantable. Another such church
was formed on the north borders of Rehoboth, after a happy revival of religion
there October 2, 1777; and Mr. James Sheldon, of Providence, was ordained their
pastor, September 6, 1780. And he purchased a good fare^ for sixteen hundred
dollars; but after he had paid a thousand of it, he was pressed upon for the
rest, in the trying year 1786, in such a manner as to compel him to sell it
again, with the loss of about seven hundred dollars. And there was reason to
conclude, that a hope of his removal from that people, and of breaking up of
that meeting, caused the Congregational party to press harder in this case,
than they otherwise would have done. But be that as it may, elder Sheldon
removed his family back to where he had formerly lived, though he often came
and ministered to this people for several years, and then he obtained a
dismission, and removed into the State of New York in 1792. This church have
obtained occasional supp^^^ (...), from time to time, until Mr. Jeremiah Irons
was ordained their pastor, September 24, 1795. He was born in Gloucester, above
Providence, October 14, 1765. In the east part of Rehoboth, a Baptist church
was formed, January 17, 1780, in which were a number of very respectable
members; but as they never obtained a pastor, they now often go to other
meetings. Two Baptist churches have also been formed in Rehoboth, who refused
to commune with any baptized persons, but those who had laying-on of hands and
prayer after baptism. They likewise excluded singing in their public worship,
as most of the old Baptists in New England did, before our great reformation.
In order to form the first of these churches, above thirty persons were
dismissed from the second church in Swansea, and formed a church in Rehoboth,
and ordained Mr. Daniel Martin as their pastor, February 8, 1753; and Mr.
Nathan Pierce was soon ordained a colleague with him. Mr. Martin published a
discourse in 1770, against particular election, and efficacious grace in
conversion. But an answer to him was published the next year, which was
convincing to many minds. Elder Martin died in an advanced age, November 17,
1781, and elder Pierce died in 1794. Elder Thomas Seamans had been a colleague
with him for a number of years, and he still ministers to that people, but
their number is small. Another church sprang from them, in the northeast corner
of Rehoboth, and was formed on April 4, and two elders were ordained therein
April 20, 1789, viz. the elders Aaron Wheeler and Sylvester Round. The
doctrines of grace, and the power of godliness, have lately gained ground among
them.

V. Mr. Elhanan Winchester was born in Brooklyne, near Boston, September 19,
1751, and was very studious from a child; and he obtained a considerable
measure of human learning, before he made a profession of religion, was
baptized, and began to preach with much zeal. And his preaching in Rehoboth
caused a separation in Mr. Peck's church, and another church was formed, and he
was ordained their pastor, September 4, 177^, before he was twenty years old.
And though he was baptized himself, yet he was exceeding zealous for the
communion of all Christians together, let them be sprinkled in infancy or
baptized by immersion; and as his preaching appeared to be very powerful and
successful, it caused a division in elder Hicks's church before mentioned. But
soon after Mr. Winchester was ordained, a Baptist minister pointed out to him
the inconsistency of his conduct in such a manner, that, after eight months'
consideration, he declared to his church, that he could no more administer the
ordinance of the supper to any who were only sprinkled in infancy, though he
was still willing to discharge all the duties of his office to them that he
could do with a good conscience. But upon this the majority of his church
refused to let him preach another sermon among them; and they soon after
censured him for not fulfilling his first covenant with them. Yet they called
their way large communion, and the Baptist way close communion. This church
ordained Mr. Jonathan Chaffee as their pastor, in May, 1778, but their church
has decreased until it is now nearly dissolved. Mr. Winchester called a council
of Baptist churches in December, 1772, who advised him to confess his imprudent
conduct to that church, and then to offer himself as a member (...) some
Baptist church. He did so, and was received into the church in Bellingham;
after which he traveled and labored abundantly, through all the country, as
far as South Carolina. But in the beginning of 1781 he was rejected by the
Baptist church in Philadelphia, because the fathers of it discovered that he
had fallen into the doctrine of universal salvation. He had preached there but
a few months, but in that time he had admitted many members, by which means his
party became the majority; therefore they sued for the meeting house, and the
house for the ministry, with other property which belonged to that church.
Though after much cost in courts, for several years, they were defeated, and
the property secured to the original church. After this, he came and spent a
year in New England, without visiting many of his old friends, and then
returned to Philadelphia, from whence he sailed for England, in July, 1787. In
London he published a book, in which he said, "I have, at the expense of
character and popularity with the religious world, at the hazard of temporal
interest and emolument, and refusing no other sacrifice, in what I apprehended
to be the cause of God and truth, come forth as a writing witness on this
subject; and a defender of the faith which once I destroyed." Preface to
Winchester's Dialogues, 1788, p. 6, 7.
Though it is well known, that he concealed his opinion upon that subject as
long as he could, and that he grasped at the temporal property of said church
as long as he could hope for it. And what is the faith which he would now
defend? Why he says, " Punishment, without having the reformation and
subjection of rebels for its end, is unworthy of the Being we adore." Again he
says, "Since goodness is the perfection of God, and evil the imperfection of
the creature, there can be no doubt, that as good existed before evil, so it
shall exist to all eternity, when evil shall be no more." Dialogues, p. 23, 32,
33.
But how can any man believe, that the punishment which God has inflicted upon
the fallen angels, for near six thousand years, is designed for their final
salvation? Yea, or that the destruction of unbelievers in the wilderness, or of
the Sodomites by fire from heaven, was designed for their endless happiness?
How can any government or dominion be supported upon these principles? And as
God was infinitely good, before he created angels or men, how do we know that
he will not reduce them all back again to nothing? For he created all things
good, and the serpent persuaded our first mother, that death and ruin could not
come from eating the forbidden fruit. And one apostle says to Christians, I
fear lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2. Cor.
xi. 3. And another says, I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye
once knew this, how that the Lord having saved the people out of the land of
Egypt, afterward destroyed them that believed not. And the angels which kept
not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he has reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. Even as
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like manner giving themselves
over to fornication, and going after strange flesh, are set forth for an
example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Likewise also these filthy
dreamers defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities. Jude
5 -- 8. Here our times are exactly described by God, who saw them perfectly
seventeen hundred years ago. Yet Winchester has followed others in denying that
the words everlasting and eternal, when applied to future misery, mean without
end. And he says, "The foundation of endless misery, came from the Pagan
theology." Though in the same book he says, "The great number of Heathens, that
die without ever being favored with the light of the gospel, and certainly
without ever hearing of endless misery, convinces me, more than any logical
arguments, that God has many ways of instructing and reclaiming his creatures,
in another state, that we are at present unacquainted with." Ibid. p. 30, 151,
Boston edition, 1795, p. 68, 158.
And he has published this glaring contradiction now in Boston, seven years
after he first published it in London. So God says, Their folly shall be
manifest unto all men. 2 Timothy iii. 9. Mr. Winchester returned to America, and
landed at Boston in July, 1794, and is spreading his opinions in this country,
which makes it needful to hold up light against them.

VI. And the same may be said concerning ministerial tyranny. An instance of it
was before given, in the selling of their ministerial lands in Rehoboth, and
obtaining an act to incorporate the committees who should be annually chosen in
each parish, to manage their funds of money, so that the interest thereof might
support their ministers. The Congregational name was not in the original grant
of those lands, though the produce of them is now claimed under that name. And
since the foregoing account was written, a Narrative has been published, "By
James Ellis, A. M. attorney at law." He is a son of the minister before named;
and his narrative confirms what I had before written, if it is carefully
examined. He says, "The inhabitants of the precinct, at a lawful meeting,
called for that purpose, unanimously concurred with the church in the choice of
Mr. Ellis." This was on November 10, 1784, p. 11. But he did not accept of that
call, and wanted more money. Therefore at another meeting, December 27, 1784,
they offered him an hundred pounds a year, and then he accepted their call;
though this sum was voted by but little more than twenty men, and near three
hundred men were taxed to pay it. Our author says, "Every person within the
precinct was taxed, and the collector ordered to gather the moneys, without
favor or partiality, or the least discrimination." P. 63. Yet some of them
belonged to Mr. Snow's church, some to Mr. Peck's, and many to Baptist
churches; and a large majority never had any concern with Mr. Ellis as their
minister. Yet his son says of the party who chose his father, "Though they
begun a good work, yet being destitute of the grace of perseverance, they
failed in its final completion, and brought difficulties to themselves and all
concerned." P. 16. But can any man believe, that it was a good work, for the
minority to essay to force the majority to support a minister whom they never
chose; or that grace was ever given to enable any to persevere in such a way?
As these people found that they could not do it, and called back the bills from
the collectors in the spring of 1790, Mr. Ellis sued the whole precinct for his
salary in the fall after, but the action was continued to March. And as the
leaders of the precinct were not willing always to lie under this yoke, they
called a meeting, February 7, 1791, when it was voted, "That the precinct do
not agree that the Rev. John Ellis shall officiate as minister in said precinct
at the expense of said precinct." And his son says, "Thus they flattered
themselves they had discharged their minister, and boasted much of their novel
and short method of dismission." P. 23. Though the whole community of the
Massachusetts had dismissed their governor near four years before, and all
America have still the right to leave their highest rulers out of office at
appointed times. But God says of mystery Babylon, The woman which thou saw,
is the great city which reigns over the kings of the earth. Rev. xvii. 5, 18.
And how evident is it, that the ministers who are supported by law in our
country belong to that great city? For the most of them were very active in
procuring the revolt of America from the government of Great Britain, while
they have never allowed the people here the same liberty concerning their
religious teachers, as they have concerning their governors and legislators.
And how can our legislature give ministers a power that they never had
themselves? Can men be any longer blinded about these affairs? If Mr. Ellis
would have given up his claim upon that precinct for the future, his past
salary would have been paid, and all the trouble of shutting him out of their
meeting house, and the expense of courts upon these matters, would have been
prevented. But in October, 1794, their fund of money, as well as a salary for
seven years, was given to Ellis's party by our supreme judicial court, with
vast costs of courts against his opponents. His son says, "A very full and
candid hearing (continuing for two days and a half) was given both by judges
and jurors. All records, from the first settling of the town of Rehoboth, were
brought into view, the facts fully stated, and the law heartily considered." P.
49. And he says, "Respecting the fund, it appears by the records, that in the
year of our Lord, 1640, the old colony of Plymouth granted to the people of
Rehoboth certain lands for the purpose of supporting public teachers of the
gospel." P. 55. Very true; and for seventeen years after, all the arts of
ministers, and of other colonies, could not bring Plymouth legislature to
interfere with the law of Christ, who says, They which preach the gospel,
should live of the gospel. 1 Cor. ix. 14. But in 1658, governor Bradford, and
other fathers of the colony being dead, their children yielded to the other
colonies, in introducing the use of the sword to support religious ministers.
And four Quakers were hanged directly after at Boston, whose blood has brought
a lasting reproach upon New England. Though it has been ignorance or
wickedness, in all men who have not exempted Plymouth colony from that
reproach. And how could lands which were given to support preachers of the
gospel, be taken away to support men who will not trust the Lord Jesus Christ
and his influence for their temporal living? For though Abraham was an eminent
servant of God, yet his children were a generation of vipers when Christ came
in the flesh. Mat. iii. 7. And God says of such, They hatch cockatrice eggs,
and weave the spider's web: he that eats of their eggs dies, and that which
is crushed breaks out into a viper. Isaiah lix. 5. And how is this word now
verified in this and other countries? For justice can often be had in civil
causes, while it is denied in religious affairs. In the year 1760, they sold
674 acres of ministerial land in Rehoboth for more than four thousand dollars;
but half of that money, which belonged to the first parish, with seven hundred
pounds more for Ellis's salary, with great costs of court, have been taken from
the majority of the inhabitants, and given to a small party therein. And
because two men placed themselves upon the stars of the pulpit, to prevent Mr.
Ellis from crouding into it, on the day when the first Baptist minister
preached therein, his son says, "They were adjudged guilty of a breach of the
peace, and sentenced to pay costs of prosecution, amounting to ninety-five
pounds, fifteen shillings and eleven pence; a high price for a seat upon the
stairs in a decayed meeting house." P. 32. Yes; and if a Baptist justice of the
peace had not bound Mr. Ellis to his good behavior until the next March, we
have no reason to think that Baptist ministers could peaceably have preached in
said house all that time. And his son now says of them, "This conduct has
unwillingly obliged many, even of the charitable, to fear that they were not
men of piety, or common honesty." P. 68. Which gives a plain view of what many
call piety and charity in our days.

VII. But the people who invited Baptist ministers to preach there, soon
observed that they preached another kind of doctrine, as well as in another
manner, than their former ministers did; and a visible change was wrought in
many thereby, and the Baptists who used to go to other meetings, gathered to
this. Also since Mr. Peck's death, his church is dissolved, and many of his
society have come here. A number of souls were hopefully converted, and old
believers were quickened, and they sent for ministers to baptize them at sundry
times, until these, with some who were members of Baptist churches before,
having called in advice, formed a Baptist church there, November 27, 1794. And
Mr. John Pierce Jones, of Providence, having preached to them through the
winter, was ordained their pastor, March 18, 1795. They have since built
themselves a convenient meeting house, in sight of that which was taken from
them, at the distance of more than a quarter of a mile. Their worship therein
is to be governed by the church, and harmony appears among them. And the
majority of the inhabitants of the towns of Rehoboth, Taunton, and some other
towns, are now exempted from the taxing power of the Congregational
denomination. And it is hoped that this freedom will prevail through the
country, so that all men who are willing to obey the laws of Christ may no
longer be oppressed by any who do not love him above all the things of time.

VIII. The Baptist church of Taunton was first gathered in Norton. Mr. William
Carpenter was ordained the pastor of a separate church there, September 7,
1748. He was born in Rehoboth in 1710, and his labors in this church were
successful, until he and the majority of the church became Baptists, and he was
installed in that order, April 1, 1761. Some of the members of that church,
especially they who lived in Easton, had run into the most delusive notions
that could be conceived of; even so as to forsake their lawful wives and
husbands, and to take others; and they got so far as to declare themselves to
be perfect and immortal, or that the resurrection was past already, as some did
in the apostolic age. 2 Timothy ii. 18. Shadrach Ireland, hereafter mentioned, was
connected with them.
But elder Carpenter, and a majority of the church, rejected those
abominations, and he continued faithful unto his death, which happened August
23, 1768. The most of his church then lived in the east part of Norton, toward
Taunton, where a Baptist meeting had been long kept. Mr. Jeremiah Basset lived
there who was a member of elder Round's church in Rehoboth, and obtained
liberty from thence to hold worship on the Lord's-days at his house, as early
as 1744; and he improved his gifts there, and their society increased, until
they built a good meeting house, upon the great road from Taunton to Boston, in
1767, and in April, 1769, the Baptist church of Norton united with the society
in Taunton, and have held their worship in that house ever since. Their second
pastor was William Nelson, A. M. who was born in Middleborough, July 18, 1741,
baptized in June, 1761, educated in Rhode Island college, and ordained the
pastor of this church, November 12, 1772. And a great harvest of souls was
granted among that people in 1780, which increased their church to near eighty
members. But as Mr. Nelson was not of a strong constitution, a sudden cold,
after preaching at a funeral, seized his lungs in such a manner, that he was
not able to preach for some years; and he removed down to the sea in Dartmouth
in 1786, where he has recovered his strength so far as to be able to preach
occasionally. His brother Ebenezer Nelson was ordained a colleague with him,
November 10, 1790.

IX. A separate church was formed in Attleborough, and Mr. Nathaniel Shepard
was ordained their pastor, January 20, 1748; and he was well esteemed until his
death, April 4, 1752. Afterward the Baptist principles gradually prevailed
among them, until they constituted a Baptist church there in 1769, and Mr. Job
Seamans was ordained their pastor, December 15, 1773. He was born in Swansea,
May 13, 1748, and went to Nova Scotia with elder Nathan Mason in 1763, and was
converted and began to preach there. But upon a visit to his native place, he
went and preached in Attleborough, which was so agreeable to this church, that
they prevailed with him to remove and become their pastor; and a great blessing
was granted on his labors in the winter before the American war; and a greater
in the glorious year 1780, which increased his church to 81 members. Mr.
Seamans was also very successful in laboring in many other places. But his
people grew very slack about his support, and the insurrection in 1786 produced
unhappy effects in his society, so that he asked a dismission from them, which
the church granted in November, 1787, though with reluctance; and he removed
the next summer and settled at New London in New Hampshire, where (in its
place) we shall have a good account of him. This church in Attleborough sought
for other helps, and Mr. Abner Lewis removed there in 1789, and ministered to
them until 1794, when he removed back to Freetown, and though they have had
other preachers since, yet they have no settled pastor. Their meeting house is
upon the great road to Providence, 32 miles from Boston. Six miles south of
them is the second Baptist church in Attleborough. A separate church was formed
there, and Mr. Elihu Daggett was ordained their pastor, July 3, 1765. He was
born in that town, August 6, 1710; and he was beloved by his people, until he
was taken away by death, August 29, 1769. He was baptized, and so were a number
of his church, which increased to 43 members; but a past of them were only
sprinkled in infancy. Mr. Eli^^^ Carpenter was ordained their pastor, June 17,
177^ He was also born in Attleborough, August 17, 1745 and was a Baptist before
the church came into the Baptist order in 1781, in which they now appear to be
well established.

X. The town of Dighton lies north from Swansea, and east from Rehoboth, and a
powerful w^^^ began in those towns in the fall of 1771, and a large number were
baptized there soon after. Mr. Enoch Goff was one of them, who was born in
Dight^^, November 3, 1740, converted in 1765, bapt^^^ in 1771, and began to
preach the next sum^^^ And as his preaching was powerful upon many, Baptist
church was formed in the west part of Di^^ton, and he was ordained their
pastor, December, 1772. And though his advantages as to hum^^ learning were not
great, yet spiritual teaching h^^ made him a very useful and acceptable
minister, (...) home and abroad; and his church and congregation are become
very large. Mr. David Seamans was raised up in this church, and was ordained a
colleague with Mr. Goff, January 4, 1781, who was a useful minister at Freetown
afterward. Mr. Isaac Case was also raised up in this church, and labored to
good purpose in various parts of the land, until he went into the district of
Maine, where we shall hear more of him hereafter.

XI. Freetown, which is on the east side of the river, against Dighton and
Swansea, was so abusively treated by a Presbyterian minister above seventy
years ago, that a number of the people turned to the Quakers, and many others
disregarded any religious worship for a long time after. But it pleased God to
pour out his Spirit upon the east part of the town in 1773, when many were
hopefully converted, and joined to the second Baptist church in Middleborough.
The next year they obtained preaching among themselves, and they built them a
house for worship, and formed a church there, September 13, 1775, being
regularly dismissed from the church they had joined to in Middleborough, and
Mr. Abner Lewis was ordained their pastor, June 26, 1776. He was born in
Middleborough, March 16, 1745, joined to the first Baptist church there in
1765, began to preach in 1770, and had preached in Freetown two years before he
was ordained; and such a blessing was granted among them afterward as
increased their church to 128 members in 1780. But the public difficulties in
the country, with the unhappy temper of some of the members of the church,
caused Mr. Lewis to ask a dismission from them, which he obtained in August,
1784; and he has traveled and labored in various places since, and has
supplied the church in Harwich for more than a year past. The behavior of some
in this church has caused a number to ask and receive dismissions from it to
other churches, while some have died, and others removed away, until they are
become very small. The west part of Freetown enjoyed but little of the
blessings which were granted round them, until the glorious year 1780, when a
happy revival took place there, and a Baptist church was formed in 1781, and
Mr. David Seamans was installed their pastor, August 13, 1783. He was a good
preacher, and an exemplary walker, until he was drowned, by falling out of a
canoe in the night, June 7, 1786, as he was returning from visiting one of the
fick of his flock. After this mournful providence, they obtained occasional
supplies, from time to time, until Mr. Philip Hathway was installed their
pastor, June 13, 1792. He had been ordained in Middleborough, September 30,
1790. They have built a good house for public worship since he was settled, and
things appear to be encouraging among them.

XII. New-Bedford was once the east part of Dartmouth, and a Baptist church was
formed there, October 7, 1774; and Mr. Zaccheus Tobey preache^ to them for many
years, until he was ordained there in 1792. The first minister in Dartmouth was
a Baptist, but the Quakers have been a great majority in the town for many
years, until they censured and excluded one of their chief ministers in 1778,
for appearing openly in favor of the Americans, while at war with
Great Britain. This caused a division in their society, and gave their children
liberty to go to hear the preaching of other ministers, which was denied them
before, notwithstanding their great name for liberty of conscience. Baptist
ministers from Rehoboth and Swansea frequently preached in Tiverton and
Dartmouth, and such a blessing was granted upon their labors in 1780, that
many went and joined to those churches, until a Baptist church was formed in
Dartmouth, June 2, 1781, and Mr. Daniel Hicks was installed their pastor, the
10th of October following. He is a son of elder John Hicks, of Rehoboth, where
he was born November 30, 1755, and was ordained there July 12, 1780. Another
revival was granted in Dartmouth in 1784, which added thirty members to this
church by the close of the next year. In 1787 a great blessing was given upon
the north part of New-Bedford, and a meeting was set up there, and many were
baptized among them, who chose to join as a branch of Dartmouth church. Mr.
Tucker Tabor was raised up to preach there, who, with a number of his brethren,
afterward removed into the State of New York, though others have continued
this meeting ever since, A revival of religion in Dartmouth in 1788, caused the
addition of about forty members to the original church. A cold and trying time
followed for several years, but a fresh revival began in January, 1794, which
spread in Dartmouth, Freetown, New-Bedford and Rochester; and Mr. John Lawrance
was ordained a colleague with elder Hicks, the 23d of October following. He was
born in Freetown, August 30, 1761, and he preaches chiefly in the east part of
that town. A Baptist meeting house was built in the west part of Rochester in
1793, and such a blessing was now granted there, that about forty persons were
baptized, who also joined as a branch of Dartmouth church; and their addition
in this re^i^al in all their branches was an hundred and fifty members.

XIII. The Baptist church in Raynham sprang from the great revival of religion
which began in these parts in 1779, and it was formed in the year 1780, and
increased to above fifty members the next year. But some of them were drawn
away with corrupt principles, and others removed into distant parts of the
country, so that their number is now small, though these few appear to be
steadfast in the faith.

XIV. The first Baptist church in the county of Bernstable is in Harwich. The
ministers of that county generally opposed the great work which was in our
land, in and after 1741; but Mr. Elisha Pain, who was born in Eastham, went
and preached there, and also at Harwich, in 1744, with great success. A
separation from the opposing ministers was the consequence; and Mr. Joshua
Nickerson was ordained the pastor of a separate church there, February 23,
1749. Some of them were fined for separating, and distress was made upon many
for ministerial taxes; but this served to increase their number, until another
church was formed in the west part of the town, and Mr. Richard Chase was
ordained their pastor, December 11, 1751. These churches held to free communion
with all Christians, whether they were sprinkled in infancy, or baptized by
immersion; but as Mr. Chase was thus baptized in 1753, believers' baptism
prevailed among them so much, that many gave up mixed communion, and a Baptist
church was formed there, and Mr. Chase was installed their pastor, September
29, 1757. And their principles prevailed so much, that Mr. Nickerson left his
people, and went and settled at Tamworth, in New Hampshire. Mr. Chase
ministered to his church for twenty years, and then the lust of intemperance
had prevailed so upon him, that he was deposed from his office, by the advice
of a council, in January, 1777, and he remained out of fellowship until he died
in January, 1794, above eighty years old. And though his fall into sin was very
shocking to many, yet the faithfulness of the Baptists in deposing of him
raised the credit of their profession; and a fresh revival of religion among
them caused their principles to prevail, so that the south parish in Harwich
received a Baptist minister to preach in their meeting house, and a Baptist
church was gathered there, and a minister ordained in 1781. But they were not
in fellowship with the other church, and their minister proved himself to be a
deceitful man, and finally went away and left them and their church was
dissolved. And in November, 1792, a minor part of the inhabitants of that
parish settled a Congregational minister there, and about two years after they
taxed all the Baptists to him, and in January, 1795, they appeared fierce for
collecting of it, though advice from a distance restrained them therefrom. A
happy revival of religion was again granted among the Baptists in Harwich in
the spring of 1793, which might occasion this fresh attempt of their
adversaries to hold them in bondage as Pharaoh did. And in December, 1795, they
set out in a cruel manner to collect said tax, and hauled a number to gaol, and
seized the estates of others without mercy.

XV. A few people in Barnstable withdrew from their parish worship, and set up
a meeting by themselves in 1748; but they were sined therefore, and two women
were set in the stocks for not paying it. Yet their cause prevailed, and a
church was formed there, and Mr. Nathanael Ewer was ordained their pastor, May
10, 1750, and he continued with them for more than ten years, and then went and
settled at Newmarket, in New Hampshire; and the Baptist principles gained
ground in Barnstable, until they formed a church there, June 20, 1771; and it
increased gradually for ten years, in which time the most of them were exempted
from taxes to Congregational ministers, as they had given in certificates to
that party. But as a powerful work began among them in 1781, and a minister was
raised up to preach among them, and he was ordained their pastor, December 4,
1788, the ruling party resolved to try what they could do toward holding them
in bondage, as we have before related. Mr. Enoch Eldridge, who is their pastor,
was born in Harwich, and he has preached a part of his time to the Baptist
church in Harwich, ever since he began in the work of the ministry, until 1794.
A fresh revival of religion was granted in those two churches in the beginning
of 1793, and Mr. Shubael Lovel, a young physician, was converted in Barnstable
in March, and he began to preach there in January, 1794, and he was ordained as
an itinerant minister, April 29, 1795. Baptist meetings have been held for some
years in Sandwich, Wellfleet, and Provinceton, in that county, though Baptist
churches have not yet been formed among them.

XVI. Duke's county includes Martha's Vineyard, and some adjacent islands, on
which are the largest number of Indians that remain any where in this part of
America. Peter Folger was a schoolmaster among them, when Mr. Mayhew sailed
for England in 1657, and he became a Baptist, and joined Mr. Clarke's church in
Newport about 1675; and he promoted the Baptist principles among the Indians,
who formed a Baptist church among them about 1694, which continues to this day;
though Silas Paul, their last pastor, died August 24, 1787. Mr. Folger removed
to Nantucket, and was much esteemed among the early planters there; and a
daughter of his was mother to the late famous Dr. Benjamin Franklin. Historical
Collections at Boston, Vol. III. p. 160. See also our first volume, p. 437 --
439.
Baptist ministers had preached among the English on the Vineyard at times ever
since 1753; and after some were remarkably turned from darkness to light,
without preaching, in the spring of 1780, they called over several Baptist
ministers to preach and baptize there, until a church of fifty members was
constituted there the 20th of December following. (Our second volume, p. 377.)
Major Peter Norton, the high sheriff of the county, was a father in that
church, and it increased to about eighty members. But the late plundering of
vessels by the British ships has caused a large part of that society to remove
to the new lands up Kennebeck river.

CHAP. VIII.
I. Of the Baptist Church in Haverhill. II. Rowley, Danvers and Almsbury. III.
Chelmsford. IV. Newton. V. Cambridge, Woburn and Weston. VI. Leicester. VII.
Sturbridge. VIII. Charlton. IX. Sutton and Northbridge. X. Petersham and
Hardwick. XI. Royalstone. XII. Delusions at Harvard. XIII. And a Baptist
Church. XIV. Ashburnham. XV. Templeton. XVI. Grafton, Upton, Douglass, Dudley,
and others.

I. BEFORE the revival of religion which took place in 1764, there was no
Baptist church in any part of our country northward of Boston, except one that
is since dissolved. The ministers on both sides of Merrimack river were
combined together against the former reformation in our land; and though a few
people in Haverhill were subjects of that work, and set up a meeting in
separation from those ministers, yet it did not continue long. But a minister
of the west parish in Haverhill offended his people so much, as to cause
controversies in councils, and in publications to the world, which were
followed with a forcible shutting of him out of their meeting house, and then a
dismission from his office there. And the people saw so much partiality in
other ministers toward him, that they would not be directed by them in calling
another minister; therefore they had been destitute for some years, before Mr.
Hezekiah Smith came and preached there in 1764, and then gathered a church in
the heart of the town in May, 1765, as is related in our second volume, p. 236,
240 -- 242. Their church increased to an hundred and fifty members before the
war; and when that broke out, Mr. Smith engaged very heartily in the cause of
his country, and was a chaplain in our army through the most distressing part
of the war, only he was at home with his people in the winters. A fresh revival
of religion began among them in 1778, which caused the addition of 54 members
in three years; since which many have been dismissed to other churches, and
others have been added to this. Mr. Edmund Pilsbury, pastor of the church in
Northwood, was a member of this church. Asa Messer, A. M. a member of this
society, was educated in the college at Providence, in which (...) is an
esteemed tutor, as well as a preacher of the everlasting gospel.

II. A branch of Haverhill church was at the west part of Rowley, where a
meeting was held for several years, until a Baptist church was formed there in
1785, and Mr. William Ewing became their minister. (...) was born in Scotland
in 1728, and after (...) came to America, and became a Baptist, he preached in
various parts of the country, till he was ordained an itinerant minister at
Sturbridge, September ^7 1768. Afterward he labored a while at
South-Brimfield, and then at Halifax in Vermont, from whence he removed to
Shutesbury, before he came to Rowley, where he had some success; but in about
four years, this church dismissed him from them, and he removed to Weston, and
now preaches but little any where. In 1789 this church called elder Ahshai
Crosman, from Chelmsford, and in three years their church increased from 44 to
99 members. Yet in 1793 he was dismissed, and removed into New Hampshire, and
this church is at present destitute of a pastor. A number of people from
Danvers had joined to the church in Rowley; but they were dismissed and formed
a Baptist church in Da^vers, July 16, 1793, and Mr. Thomas Green removed from
Cambridge, and became their minister, of whom more will be said when we come to
Cambridge church. A Baptist meeting has (...) h^ld for many years at Almsbury,
in Essex coun^^y, and Mr. Moses Chase is their minister; but they have
considered themselves as a branch of the Baptist church at Brentwood in
New Hampshire.

III. The first Baptist church in the county of Middlesex was formed at
Chelmsford, in October, 1771, and Mr. Elisha Rich was ordained their pastor,
October 5, 1774. He had preached to them for a year and an half before, and he
labored among them until the beginning of 1778; but then some of the members
appeared to be so much against him, that he requested and obtained a
dismission, and removed into Vermont, and he is now pastor of a church there in
the town of Pittsford. Mr. Samuel Fletcher removed to Chelmsford directly
after, and preached there for some years, and then went and settled (...)
Salem, in New Hampshire, where he was pastor of a Baptist church until his
death last March. Mr. Abisha^ Crosman, of Northbridge, was called to
Chelmsford, and was ordained the pastor of this church, September 24, 1783, and
in four years it increased from 87 to 113 members; yet he was dismissed, and
went to Rowley in 1789, as before related. Mr. John Peckens, who was born in
Middleborough, and ordained in Vermont, removed to Chelmsford and became their
minister in 1792.

IV. The Baptist church in Newton sprang partly from members who formerly
joined to the second Baptist church in Boston, and partly from the separate
churches of Brooklyne and Newton. A separate church was formed in Brooklyne,
and Mr. Jonathan Hide was ordained their pastor, January 17, 1751; and he
ministered to them until a Baptist church was formed in Newton, and then he met
with them in his old age. A separate church was also formed in Newton, and Mr.
Nathan Ward was ordained their pastor, January 17, 1753. But different
sentiments about the support of the ministry, and about the improvement of
gifts in the church, caused them to call a council, in April, 1758, after which
Mr. Ward was dismissed, and he has been a minister in the town of Plymouth, in
New Hampshire, for thirty years past. Some of the old brethren died, and others
removed into distant parts of our country, and things were in a broken posture
in Newton for many years. But a shower of heavenly blessings (...) granted
there, and a Baptist church was formed by them, July 5, 1780, which increased
to seventy members in fourteen months. And Mr. Caleb Blood, who was born in
Charlton, August 18, 1754, and ordained at Marlow in October, 1777, was settled
as their pastor in 1781; and his ministry appeared to be very useful among them
for near seven years. But then the times became so difficult, that the society
thought they could not support him and his family; and he had an earnest call
to Shaftsbury, in the State of Vermont, therefore he was dismissed to
Shaftsbury, where he is still useful. But a fresh revival was granted at
Newton, and Mr. Joseph Grafton was called to preach there, and he was ordained
their pastor, June 18, 1788. He was born in Newport, June 9, 1757, and had
preached a various places, for several years, before he came to Newton, where a
fresh revival was granted in 17^^. He has published a piece upon baptism, and
a funeral sermon.

V. There was a Baptist church in Cambridge in 1751, and they had a minister
who was educated at New Haven college; but he was drawn away by a parish
minister in Cambridge, and left his church, and others of them fell in with
Shadrach Ireland, so that this church was dissolved. Yet there were a few names
in Cambridge who had not defiled their garments; and in the glorious year 1780
a number more were converted, and a new Baptist church was formed there in
1781, and Mr. Thomas Green was ordained their pastor, November 26, 1783. He is
grandson to the first Baptist minister of Leicester, and was born at Worcester,
January 3, 1761; and (...) church increased under his ministry to 56 members.
Their house for worship is near the borders of Lexington and Woburn, and
members of this society in each of these towns were forced to pay ^^xes to
Congregational ministers, until they had shed the money out of the hands of
their oppressors, first in Cambridge, then in Lexington, and lastly in Woburn;
and the Baptists never recovered half so much money in either of these towns,
as had been unjustly taken from them; and as soon as the Congregational party
found that they could not hold the money, they collected no more taxes for any
ministers from the Baptists. And not long after their last cases in court were
decided in favor of the Baptist, their minister left them, in April, 1793, and
removed to Danvers, as was before mentioned. Yet such a revival was granted
among them soon after, especially in Woburn, as caused the addition of 37
members to this church in two years, and a new meeting house was built in
Woburn. Mr. John Peak labored among them more than a year, and Mr. Lovel
succeeded him last fall. And in 1795 the first parish in Cambridge procured an
act of our legislature, to empower them to sell some ministerial lands in the
town, and to secure all the moneys obtained thereby, for the support of
Congregational ministers in that parish. A Baptist church was formed in Weston,
July 14, 1789, in which were 19 members the next year; but they have not
increased since. A Baptist meeting has been upheld for many years in
Framingham, where no church is yet formed.

VI. The Baptist church at Leicester, in the county of Worcester, was
constituted September 28, 1738, under the charge of elder Thomas Green, who was
ordained a year before, a colleague with elder March, of Sutton; but they now
became two churches by mutual consent. Elder Green went from Malden, and was an
early planter at Leicester, and became a very useful physician, and acquired
such an estate, that he was the main support of his society in temporals as
well as spirituals all his days. He traveled much in the country as a
physician, and preached frequently, and baptized many, until he was casted away
by death, August 20, 1773, aged 73. Benjamin Foster, D. D. who was educated at
Yale college, was ordained his successor, October 23, 1776, and the church
increased under his ministry, from 30 to 76 members, in five years. But as he
in^^^ed to devote himself entirely to study, and to the ministry of the word,
the people who had not him used to support their minister, neglected him to
much, that he requested a dismission from the church, which they at length
granted, though reluctantly, in 1782, and he went and preached Danvers, his
native place, above two years. And in January, 1785, he was called to the first
church in Newport, where he labored with success for man than two years, and
then went to New York, and is now the pastor of the first Baptist church in
that city. Mr. Isaac Beals was the next pastor of the Baptist church in
Leicester, where he was ordained, December 1, 1784, and they prospered under
his ministry for two years; but then an insurrection took place in that part of
the country, which greatly effected that church and society; and after many
endeavors to settle matters among them, without so good an effect as to unite
them all again, he was dismissed in 1789, and went and settled at Clarendon, in
Vermont, where he is now a useful minister. Mr. Nathan Dana, from Newton, was
soon after called to preach at Leicester; and he was ordained at Newton as an
itinerant minister, November 20, 1793, and now ministers to this people.

VII. A separate church was formed at Sturbridge, and Mr. John Blunt was
ordained their pastor, September 28, 1748; and they became numerous, before the
Baptist principles were embraced among them in June, 1749, and before the end
of that year above sixty members, including all the officers of the church,
were baptized. Some account of their sufferings was given in our second volume,
p. 191 -- 194. But some separate ministers in Connecticut made such terrible
representations of its being a wicked thing for any to be rebaptized, that Mr.
Blunt retracted his being dipped, and he left his people, and went into our
army, where he was slain near lake George, September 8, 1755. And though the
main body of the church persevered in their profession, yet they passed through
many trying scenes, and did not obtain a settled minister for many years. Mr.
William Ewing preached there for some time, and was ordained there, September
27, 1768, as an itinerant minister; and he went from thence to South-Brimfield,
and since to other places, as was before observed. Mr. Jordan Dodge, from
Canterbury, was called to preach at Sturbridge, and he was ordained their
pastor, October 27, 1784, and they prospered under his ministry for several
years; but in the close of 1788, such difficulties arose that he asked and
obtained a dismission, and went and settled in the State of New York, where he
was found to be a deceitful man, and was rejected by the Baptist churches in
those parts. However, the school of afflictions which this church has been in,
with the spiritual teachings that have been granted to them, has brought them
to considerable fruitfulness in Christian knowledge and conduct, in which it is
hoped they will grow and increase unto the end. A fresh revival was lately
granted among them under the preaching of brother Zenas L. Leonard, who is
likely to become their pastor.

VIII. The Baptist church in Charlton was first formed in Spencer in 1762, and
Mr. Nathanael Green was ordained their pastor October 12, 1763. Their meeting
was afterward held in the west part of Leicester, until it was removed into
Charlton in 1773, where it continues. And though it was a low time with them
for several years, yet a glorious work began among them in 1779, which caused
the addition of 109 members in three years. The wonders of divine grace in this
land at that time when the war raged on every hand, and had greatly corrupted
the morals of the people, and public credit was fallen to the ground, was
evidently a great cause of saving America from destruction. This work was then
powerful in Virginia, as well as in other part of our land. Elder Green
continued a faithful pastor and an exemplary walker, until he fell asleep in
Jesus, March 21, 1791, in the seventieth year of his age. And the church soon
after called Mr. David Rathbun to preach to them, and he was ordained their
pastor, September 25, 1793. He was born in Stonington, May 29, 1763, and his
father, uncle, and one of his brothers, are all now pastors of Baptist churches.

IX. A Baptist church was constituted in Sutton, September 16, 1735, and Mr.
Benjamin Marsh was ordained their pastor, September 28, 1737, colleague with
Mr. Green. Mr. Marsh was esteemed as a godly man, of an exemplary life, though
not of large gifts, until his death, January 4, 1775, aged 90. But the church
was then small, and it is since dissolved. There had been a great revival of
religion in the Congregational society in Sutton, in the year 1741, and a
separate church was formed among them, and Mr. Ezekiel Cole was ordained their
pastor, January 31, 1751. But they were broken and scattered afterward, and a
Baptist church was gathered there; April 27, 1765, and Mr. Jeremiah Barstow was
installed their pastor, May 26, 1768. But a difference in sentiment about the
doctrines of grace caused his dismission from them, by the advice of a council,
October 1, 1772; and he removed to Thompson, in Connecticut, and never took the
charge of any other church, though he preached occasionally, until he died
suddenly, by a fall from his horse, June 4, 1795. Mr. Elisha Ransom preached to
this church for some years, and was ordained there as an itinerant, November
11, 1778; but he went the next year to Woodstock, in Vermont. This church in
Sutton remained without a pastor, until such a division arose therein that they
were left out of the Warren Association in 1786. But the majority of them
obtained a comfortable settlement again, and Mr. Ebenezer Lamson removed there
from Ashford, and was their minister from 1788, until April, 1794, when they
discovered that he had fallen into the opinion of universal salvation, and
rejected him. The other part of this church embraced the opinion of mixed
communion, and at length joined to the Croton Conference; but both churches
were favored with a happy revival of religion in 1792, and are now in
comfortable circumstances. Two of the brethren of the first church in Sutton,
Samuel Waters and Samuel King, have been called to improve their gifts in
preaching the gospel, though they are not ordained. Mr. William Batcheller, a
member of the church in Northbridge, who lives in the east part of Sutton, has
preached in those parts for several years, until a fresh revival was granted
there, a church was formed, and he was ordained their pastor, October 10, 1792.
The Baptist church in Northbridge was constituted, August 31, 1780, and Mr.
John Cooper was ordained therein, October 11, 1794, when there was a happy time
among them.

X. A Baptist church was formed in Petersham, (...) 1768, and Mr. Samuel Dennis
preached to them for a number of years, before he was ordained their pastor in
October, 1778. He was so well esteemed in the town, that he was chosen a member
of our legislature in the time of the war: but worldly affairs did not turn him
aside from faithfulness in the church, until he rested from his labors in
April 1783. His church persevered in their profession, though their meeting is
removed into the bounds of Hardwick, where it is still continued.

XI. Royalstone lies upon the north borders of our State, adjoining to
Richmond, in New Hampshire. Mr. Whitman Jacobs had been pastor of the Baptist
church at Thompson, in Connecticut, more than twenty years, before a part of
them removed and settled in Royalstone, formed a church there and he was
installed their pastor, December 13, 1770. Their number was 29 the next year;
and they had a revival in 1774, and another in 1779, and their church increased
to 89. But such controversies arose in their church about discipline, and about
some political affairs, that their minister was dismissed in 1786, and he is
now at Guilford, in Vermont. In 1789 Mr. Moses Kenny was settled as the pastor
of Royalstone, and they had a large increase of members for several years after.

XII. Harvard is a place where the goodness of God and the folly of man have
been remarkably discovered. A powerful work of grace was wrought in that town,
in the time of the great revival of religion through this land; but amazing
delusions appeared there afterward. For Shadrach Ireland, of Charlestown, near
Boston, after acting as a teacher for some years, professed to have experienced
such a change, both in body and mind, that he was become perfect and immortal,
and a number more with him, in the spring of 1753. And he set himself up as the
head of the church, and assumed God's prerogatives in such a blasphemous
manner, that he was in danger of being punished by authority; upon which he
absconded, and his followers said he was gone out of this wicked country. But
he was concealed in Harvard, where a large house was built for him, in part of
which another family lived, and scarcely any men knew that he was there but his
followers, who resorted to him for his blessing, from various and distant parts
of the country, and brought him a plenty of provisions. Ireland forbid them to
marry, or to lodge with each other, if they were married, and he had left a
wife and children in Charlestown; yet he took another woman, and lodged with
her in Harvard all his remaining days. And when he was suddenly seized with
death, he said, "I am going, but don't bury me; for the time is short: God is
coming to take the church." Therefore he was put into a large ^or, filled up
with lime, and laid in the cellar, where it continued from September, 1778, to
July, 1779, when the body scented so much that it was carried out in the night
and buried in a corn-field. This account I have from under the hand of one of
his followers, who has since been delivered from that delusion. But in the
spring of 1780, another company appeared above Albany, with a woman at their
head, with great signs and lying wonders, and such uncommon motions of their
bodies, that they were called Shakers. They removed from place to place, until
they fixed their headquarters at the house where Ireland died, in August,
1781; and they carried on at so high a rate there, that a motion was made ^n
our legislature to have them punished by authority, which motion was negatived
by the majority of a single vote, as we were well informed. But the fear of a
mob caused the removal of their leaders from Harvard in 1782, and they came to
Norton, and then to Rehoboth in the fall of that year. And they prevailed with
many of their society to sell their estates, in order to build a ship to carry
the church to the New-Jerusalem, as they said. And a large vessel was built in
Rehoboth; but it was sent a voyage to the West Indies, from whence a rich (...)
go was brought, and the vessel and cargo were sold, and a few men cheated the
rest out of th^^ estates, and their community is dissolved in that parts. Some
of them remain in the county of Albany.

XIII. But a more happy scene now opens upon Harvard. A young physician was
converted there June 18, 1775, the day after the bloody batt^^ (...)
Charlestown; and while the war raged through the country, he was engaged in
real religion, and beg^^ to preach the gospel the next winter. He was born at
Westford, November 13, 1752, and studied physic with Dr. Green, of Leicester,
and then settled in Harvard. And having called elder Rich from Chel^^^ford,
Isaiah Parker, Stephen Gates, Tarbel Willard, William Willard, Joseph Stone,
Josiah Willard and eight women were baptized, and they were formed into a
church, June 27, 1776, and Dr. Parker was ordained their pastor, June 10, 1778.
But two years after they were remarkably oppressed, in a time when it might
have been least expected. For the constitution of the Massachusetts government
was published March 2, 1780, when the compilers of it said to the people, "Your
delegates did not conceive themselves to be vested with power to set up one
denomination of Christians above another; for religion must at all times be a
matter between God and individuals." This they said because Protestants were
not set above Papists in our legislature; but in each town, one denomination
has been set up above all the rest to this day, which they then acknowledged
they had ^o right to do. And one member of the Baptist church in Harvard was
imprisoned at Worcester three months, another five, and one of their society
six months, between the publication of the constitution, and its taking place
in October, for taxes to a Congregational minister, who was settled in the name
of the king of Great Britain. These three men kept exact accounts of all their
expenses while in prison, with all that was given them there; and their
accounts were examined the next year by two judicious men, who have given it
from under their hands, that they expended an hundred and three dollars and a
third, more than all that they received there. And no recompense has ever been
made therefore by their oppressors. And can any man who believes that God
governs the world, think it strange that the powers of Britain have been
suffered to rob the Americans of their property, when robberies for religious
ministers under British commissions have been openly approved of in our
country? May we not say with Jacob, O my soul, come not thou into their secret;
unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou united! This church in Harvard
was soon after attacked by the spirit of delusion, so that they said in a
letter to the Warren Association, September 8, 1783, "For twelve months we had
but two persons added, and several left us, and joined the Shakers. We
excommunicated eight persons in that time. A form of godliness appeared on one
hand, and a false power on the other, and the church in such a low state, that
we feared at times that our candlestick would be removed out of its place. We
saw the enemy coming in like a flood, and that except the Spirit of the Lord
should lift up a standard against him, we were a ruined people. Therefore we
appointed a day of fasting and prayer, that God would pour out his Spirit among
us, and work wonders under the name of his holy child Jesus; and we have reason
to think that the Lord gave us a spirit of grace and supplication, and, for his
own name sake, was pleased to answer us in mercy. The fast was on September 4,
1782, when there was a remarkable display of God's power and grace, in
convincing sinners of their lost state, the hardness of their hearts and
blindness of their minds, with their pride of life and rejecting the gospel of
Jesus Christ; and then giving them to behold the Lamb of God that takes away
the sin of the world; the free salvation of the gospel, and causing them to
rejoice therein; so that 49 persons were baptized among us from September 22 to
November 24, and 58 persons have been baptized among us since the work began;
and we have often sat under Christ's shadow with great delight, and his fruit
was sweet to our taste. Our present number is 110." And they have enjoyed many
blessings since.

XIV. The Baptist church in Ashburnham was constituted in February, 1779, and
they have gone through scenes of prosperity and adversity; have endured
oppression from others, and many trying things among themselves. In 1787 such a
revival was granted among them, as increased their church in one year from 37
to 61 members. But they have never had an ordained pastor, nor any great
alterations since. Several gifted brethren among them assist in carrying on
their worship, and they get help at times from other churches.

XV. The Baptist church in Templeton was formed August 21, 1782, and Mr. John
Sollon was ordained their pastor, November 19, 1783. He was born in England in
1727, and lived a while at Boston after he came to America. He ministered to
this church about two years, and then was dismissed; and he has preached since
in various places, and is now living in Petersham. This church has had many
ministers to labor with them, and a happy revival of religion has been
granted there in two years past, though they have not obtained another settled
pastor. The Baptists are so much esteemed in that town, that two members of
their church have lately been representatives in our legislature.

XVI. A Baptist church was formed in Grafton in 1767, and they prospered for
some years, and had 39 members in 1780. Above three years after, Mr. Elkanah
Ingalls, of Rehoboth, went and lived there, and was their minister for about
four years; and then it was discovered that he, with the majority of the
church, had fallen into the opinion of universal salvation, and they were left
out of the Warren Association in 1788, and he removed back to Rehoboth, and is
become a common drunkard. But a minor part of the church continued in their
former faith, and set up their meeting in Upton, and Mr. Simeon Snow was
ordained in their community in June, 1791. They hold worship steadily there,
though, their number being small, they have joined as a branch to Bellingham
church. A Baptist church was once formed in Douglass, and Adam streeter was
ordained their pastor, November 24, 1774; but he fell into the opinion of
universal salvation, and was deposed from his office in 1781, and the church is
since dissolved, though a Baptist meeting is often held there still. Streeter
preached up his new opinions in various parts of the country for several years,
and is since dead. A Baptist church was formed in Dudley in 1775, and elder
Obed Warren was raised up among them, who afterward removed into the State of
New York; but as many removed away, their church is small, if it is not
dissolved. Baptist meetings have been held in Brookfield, Shrewsbury, and
Holden, where churches are not yet formed.

CHAP. IX.
I. An Account of South-Brimfield. II. West-Springfield. III. Ashfield. IV.
Montague and Leverett. V. Wilbraham. VI. New-Salem. VII. Shutesbury. VIII.
Others in Hampshire. IX. First in Cheshire. X. Second and Third. XI.
Pittsfield. XII. Hancock. XIII. Washington and Sandisfield. XIV. Other Churches
in Berkshire. XV. The Work illustrated in a particular Instance.

1. THE first Baptist church in the county of Hampshire was formed in
Brimfield, November 4, 1736, and Mr. Ebenezer Moulton was ordained their
pastor, November 4, 1741. His father and a majority of the church opposed the
work that was then going on in the land, while he and a minor part were alive
in it; and they had much controversy about it for seven years, and then about
fifteen of them told their experiences to each others' satisfaction, and signed
new articles and a covenant; and Mr. Moulton took them as his church, and would
not allow any others to commune with them, without coming in at this door. The
majority complained of this as unreasonable, but acted nothing as a body
against them. And many from other towns joined with them, in this new form,
from time to time; and elder Moulton was often called to other places to preach
and baptize in and after the year 1749. Yes, he was called above eighty miles
that year, and baptized ten at Bridgwater, and three in Raynham. But as his
people had been trained up with prejudices against hireling ministers, they did
very little for the support of their own minister; therefore be took to
merchandising, when there were scarcely any merchants in that part of the
country; and he seemed to prosper for a number of years, and was a leader in
building them a new meeting house. But toward the close of the war, which
ended in 1763, money was plenty, and merchants were multiplied; and Mr. Moulton
found himself involved in debt, and his creditors ready to devour him, and he
fled to Nova Scotia, where he preached in several places. Hereupon the church
looked out for another minister, and at length obtained Mr. James Mellen, who
was ordained their pastor, September 11, 1765. He was of Framingham, but had
joined to the first Baptist church in Middleborough; and he was a faithful and
successful pastor, until he finished his course in a joyful manner, August 5,
1769. After his death many of the old members, who had been excluded from the
church for twenty years, came up and claimed a right therein; upon which they
sent to other elders and churches for advice, and when they had heard the case,
their advice was for each of them to endeavor to satisfy the others about the
reality of their religion, and so to covenant together anew. And this advice
was taken and followed with good effects. After this they called Mr. Elijah
Codding, another member of the first Baptist church in Middleborough, and he
was ordained their pastor, November 11, 1773. And though it was a low time with
them at South-Brimfield for some years, yet such a heavenly shower was granted
in 1779, as increased their members from 23 to 236 in four years, and their
minister still remains with them. And in those times Mr. Moulton obtained
letters of license from his creditors to come home, and he was esteemed among
his old people, until he died there in 1783.

II. A Baptist church was formed in West-Springfield, and Edward Upham, A. M.
was ordained their pastor, October 15, 1740. He was born at Malden, March 26,
1709, and educated in the college at Cambridge, where he took his first degree
in 1734. After the death of Mr. John Callender, he was prevailed with to remove
to Newport, in 1749, and he ministered to the first church there, only visiting
his old people once or twice a year, until he removed back to them in April,
1771. Though in the mean time some of the wealthiest Baptists had been drawn
into the incorporation of a new parish there, and to settle a minister, who was
to sprinkle or dip people as they chose, and all were to commune together. And
when Mr. Upham came back, and set up worship at his usual place, taxes to the
government were laid upon him, and he could not obtain the liberty that all
settled ministers have, without sueing for it in two or three courts. And many
broils, and great bitterness of spirit has been among them ever since. Mr.
Upham has been so infirm that he has not been able to preach for some years
past, and the people are in very broken circumstances.

III. The town of Ashfield was planted in 1751, and a Baptist church was formed
there, July 10, 1761, and Mr. Ebenezer Smith was ordained their pastor the 20th
of August following. An account of their sufferings was given in our second
volume, p. 247 -- 253. In 1770 they had 32 members, and they increased from
time to time, until the glorious blessings of the year 1780 raised their number
to 94. But the uncommon difficulties about money after the war, caused a
contention between the minister and the majority of the church about his
support, which produced an open division in 1785. They called a council in
December, 1786, who justified the minister, and condemned the majority of the
church, and in September, 1788, he prevailed with the Warren Association to
leave them out of their number. But a powerful work began among them at that
time, and they increased to 113 members in less than two years, having ordained
his brother as their pastor. But as there have been some very unhappy actions
in both parties, they have need of considering the warning which was given to
the churches of Galatia, which is, If ye bite and devour one another, take heed
that ye be not consumed one of another. Gal. v. 15.

IV. A Baptist church was formed at Montague, July 1, 1765. An account of their
sufferings is in our second volume, p. 261 -- 263. Mr. Simeon Coombs, from the
third Baptist church in Middleborough, removed there, and was ordained in that
church, November 10, 1791. The majority of their society then lived in
Leverett, and they now bear that name. Mr. Coombs ministered to them about
three years, and then was dismissed, and removed to Wardsborough in Vermont.

V. The first Baptist church in Wilbraham was constituted in 1768, and Mr. Seth
Clark was ordained their pastor, June 13, 1770. He was born in Northampton in
April, 1723, and experienced a change of heart, in the glorious work there in
1735, under the ministry of President Edwards. This church had 39 members in
1773, after which our national controversies and a bloody war engaged the minds
of men in general, until it pleased God to pour out his Spirit in such a manner
in 1778 as increased this church to 161 members in four years, beside those who
had died, been dismissed or excluded. After peace was restored to our land, the
minds of people were amazingly carried away with earthly vanities, and the love
of many waxed cold about religion. Yet this church enjoyed many blessings, and
they wrote to our Association in 1792, and said, "Through the goodness of God,
we are visited with the down-pouring of his Spirit in a most mavelous manner,
not only in almost all parts of this town, and in each denomination, but also
in the and joining towns. Our present number is 235." They wrote again 1794,
that they had dismissed 34, who were formed into a second Baptist church in
Wilbraham, while 228 members remained in the first church. These blessings will
appear the more wonderful, if we consider that the insurrection in 1787 was in
these parts.

VI. The Baptist church in New-Salem was formed in January, and Mr. Samuel
Bigelow was ordained their pastor, May 21, 1772. He was born at Watertown in
1738, and new born in 1763. A gradual increase was granted to this church,
until they had 38 members in 1785. But controversies about discipline in the
church were followed with a bloody contest in the State, which made rending
work among this people. The army who marched up against the insurgents in the
winter of 1787, took their course through Wilbraham to Springfield, where a few
were slain, from whence they went to Hadley, and then turned through New-Salem
to Petersham. Mr. Bigelow wrote to a friend on August 31, 1787, and said,
"Church travel and ordinances have ceased here, ever since the people arose in
arms against government; though at present we are better united as to public
worship. There is in general a good agreement between me and the body of the
people about worship. I have said but little about the family quarrel that has
been in this Commonwealth the year past; but what I have said has been to
condemn both sides. I think the political fathers have provoked their children
to wrath, and by oppression wise men have been mad, and the children have been
unruly and rebellious." And it was a low time among them for three years. But
he wrote to the same friend, February 12, 1790, and said, "This part of Zion
has scarce ever been without a few drops of the rain of righteousness; but
about six weeks ago, the Lord began to rain such a shower as has not fallen in
these parts before. It is chiefly on the youth, from ten to twenty years old.
The people in general are bowed before it. A goodly number are hopefully
gathered in, and some from almost every family. There is also some shaking
among the dry bones in Shutesbury." Mr. Bigelow had been dismissed from his
pastoral relation to this church before, by the advice of a council; and he
preached in various places afterward, until he gathered a church in
Belcherton, and is at present their minister. They obtained several ministers
to preach in New-Salem, until Mr. Josiah Orcutt was ordained their pastor,
October 30, 1794, and continues with them.

VII. When the late war began, the Congregational minister of Shutesbury openly
appeared to favor the British claims over America; therefore the people shut
him out of their meeting house, and he afterward removed from the town. Yet
after the war he sued the town for his salary, and our courts compelled the
town to pay it, which caused ministerial tyranny to appear so odious, that no
minister of that order has been received in the town since. Mr. William Ewing
was called to preach there for several years, and in 1779 he was elected a
delegate to the convention who formed the Massachusetts constitution of
government, and he earnestly opposed the continuance of the Congregational
establishment therein, as other Baptist members also did, though the majority
prevailed against them. A happy revival of religion was granted in Shutesbury
in 1780, when a Baptist church was formed there, and Ewing ministered to the
town until 1785, when he went to Rowley. Mr. Joseph Smellage was called from
South-Brimfield to preach at Shutesbury directly after, and he was ordained the
pastor of this church in October, 1786, and they have enjoyed many blessings
since, and he is continued with them to this time.

VIII. The Association minutes give the number of members in the churches of
Leyden, Chesterfield and Colerain; but a more full account of them, which I had
an encouragement of, is not arrived. Mr. Adam Hamilton, who came from Britain,
had lived some years in Westfield, before a revival of religion was granted
there, and a Baptist church was formed in 1784, and he was ordained their
pastor in November, 1785. He was much esteemed as a preacher of the gospel, and
labored much at home and abroad; and when the Danbury Association was formed,
he had a chief lead therein for two or three years. But he then removed to
New York, and was minister to a church there in 1793; after which he came back
to Westfield, but fell into some scandals, which caused him to cease from
preaching. Another Baptist church was formed in part of Westfield in 1785,
which part is since incorporated by the name of Russell, and Mr. Ebenezer Stow
is their pastor. The other churches in the county of Hampshire, with the date
of their constitution and then present state are given in the foregoing list,
from printed minutes, and the best information I could gain. I am favored with
a more particular account of some of the following churches.

County of Berkshire.

IX. The lands near the head of Housack river, which runs into the Hudson at
Still water, were purchased by some men in Providence and Coventry in 1766, and
a number of men removed there the next year. They first called the place
New-Providence; but the place was afterward a part of the town of Adams, having
Lanesborough on the south of it, until part of several towns were incorporated
by the name of Cheshire in 1793. The first inhabitants soon set up public
worship among them, and being joined by others from various parts of the
country, they formed a Baptist church there, August 29, 1769. Elder Peter
Werden paid them a visit in the fall after; and as many of them had been his
people before, he at their earnest request removed there in March, 1770. He was
born June 6, 1728, and ordained at Warwick, May 21, 1751, and, after many
labors in those parts, now removed to this place, and has been much of a
leader among the churches who form the Shaftsbury Association. An uncommon
death in the beginning of 1772, with a sermon at the funeral, was the means of
beginning a revival of religion among this people; and in the fall after, the
work came on more powerfully, and prevailed through the winter. As the church
gave a written account of this work, the most material part of it is here
inserted. They say,

"The children of God began to be more manifestly quickened, and more earnestly
engaged than they before had been. Love and unity daily increased, and concern
of mind began to be powerful on the minds of the unregenerate; and not long
after some began to give hopeful evidences that they had passed from death unto
life. The first of our young converts that made a public declaration of what
God had done for them, were received into the church and baptized on November
15, 1773. Soon after this, distress of soul, and awakenings on the consciences
of sinners, became more general, so that it was manifest by their uncommon
attention and solemnity in public meetings, and their earnest inquiries and
lamentable complaints in their private conversation, that the Spirit of God was
operating on many of them; and in the course of the ensuing winter and spring,
we had reason to hope that near forty were savingly brought home to God, by a
living union to Jesus Christ. Our number of members has increased to about
eighty. And although upon the most close inquiry, there appears to be a great
variety of circumstances in the subjects of the late work, yet in several
things there appeared a general agreement. A clear conviction of sin, of the
universal depravity of human nature, the reasonable requirements of God's holy
law, his just declaration of vengeanes against sin, and the total shutting up
of all the sources of their natural hope, which is ever seeking some legal
qualification to prepare for God's mercy; and then a discovery of the
all-sufficient righteousness of the Son of God, as mediator between God and
man, a sensible union to God, love to holiness, hatred of sin, union to the
children of God, and pity and benevolence to all mankind; in these and in other
things of like nature, there appeared a very general agreement. The means of
awakening people among us have been various, as, the preaching of the word,
prayer, exhortation, religious conversation, occurrences of divine providence,
and the like; but the public relations of experiences, of those who have been
wrought upon, have been as frequent a means as any. The most of the subjects of
this work were in the vigor of youth, from fifteen to twenty-five years;
though we have reason to think that some who were advanced in age, and some
little children, have been made the happy partakers of the salvation of God.
This church does not receive any as members, but such as give satisfying
evidences that they are born of God, neither have they table-communion with any
but those who profess and practice believers baptism. They make no bar of
communion, whether persons come under hands or not. They hold to a general
right in the brethren to improve their gifts, and yet believe that the church
ought to exercise government therein, so that the church may be edified by the
gifts of the brotherhood. We believe the entire depravity of human nature, and
that the justification of a sinner before God is alone in the righteousness of
Christ. This was publicly read and acknowledged by the church as a true
relation.

Peter Werden, elder, Jonathan Richardson, deacons. Stephen Carpenter, deacons.
Samuel Low."

January 15, 1774.
Another powerful work began among this people in 1779, which increased the
church to 133 members in 1782. A great blessing was again granted in 1788,
which caused the addition of eighty members to this church in a year. A like
favor was given again in 1791, so that the next year they had 194 members. But
many have been dismissed to other churches, while some have died, and some have
been excluded, so that their present number is not so large.

X. Elder Nathan Mason and his people, who went to Nova Scotia in 1763, enjoyed
many spiritual blessings there, and Mr. Job Seamans was converted, and began to
preach among them; but not finding the lands in that country, nor the
government of it, to answer their expectations, they removed back, and settled
in Lanesborough, a few miles from elder Werden, where a church was established
in 1771; and the work which came on in 1779 was powerful in both churches, and
caused such a friendship between them as gradually removed the separation that
had been handed down from their fathers, about laying on of hands upon every
member. His church increased to 150 members in 1784, and enjoyed many blessings
afterward. But when elder Mason joined with elder Leland in 1791, a few of the
church parted from him, and retain their old constitution, as was before
mentioned. Elder John Leland was born in the county of Worcester, and was
baptized and began to preach there in 1774. In the fall of 1776, he set off
with his wife, whom he had newly married, and removed into Virginia, and
settled in the county of Orange; and he traveled and preached abundantly in
those parts, and in fourteen years he baptized 607 persons, and chiefly in the
years 1780 and 1788, in which years religion was greatly revived in Virginia.
He was very helpful in obtaining the law, in 1786, which abolished all tax and
compulsion in Virginia for the support of any religious ministers. He published
a pamphlet called the Virginia Chronicle, in which was the address of the
Baptists to President Washington, and his answer, which we have referred to
under 1789. He has also published several other things; and he returned with
his family to New England in 1791, and settled in Cheshire, in that part which
once was Lanesborough, and elder Mason is in the church with him, which is now
large.

XI. Mr Valentine Rathbun was born at Stonington, in December, 1723, and after
he, with many of his friends, removed to Pittsfield, they formed a Baptist
church there in 1772, and he was ordained their pastor, and they became a large
church in 1780. But many of them had now become corrupt in their opinions, and
imagined that great and new things were at hand, with a more glorious
dispensation than had before been known. And in April that year a man came into
the place, and informed them, that a company of Christians appeared above
Albany, who had greater light and power than any had enjoyed before in latter
ages; and many went up and joined to them, among whom were Mr. Rathbun of
Pittsfield, and Mr. Samuel Johnson, a Presbyterian minister in New-Lebanon,
west of Pittsfield, in the State of New York; and most of the inhabitants of
that town received them, as well as a large part of elder Rathbun's church.
Though in about three months he left them, and published a discourse against
their abominations, dated December 5, 1780, which was so well received, that it
passed five editions in a year, and was read much in all parts of the country.
His brother Daniel Rathbun continued with them about four years, and then he
came out from them, and published a more full account of their delusions than
any before had done. But though those Shakers are now reduced to a small
number, and their power to deceive others seems to be gone, yet many who had
joined with them have turned off to other delusions, instead of coming into the
way of truth. But a few names in Pittsfield are steadfast in their profession.

XII. The place now called Hancock was first called Jericho, into which a
number of Baptists moved in 1768, and following years, it being a wilderness
before, upon New York line; and they met for worship with a number of brethren
who lived over said line, until they chose to be a society by themselves, where
Steventon church now is. Therefore in June, 1772, fifteen persons in Hancock
joined in covenant as a church of Christ, and elder Clarke Rogers became their
minister, though I have not obtained the date of his ordination. He went from
West-Greenwich in the State of Rhode Island, from which State a large number of
people went, who planted that northern wilderness. In the fall and winter after
this church was formed, a powerful work came on among them. They say, "There
seemed to be a remarkable out-pouring of God's Spirit on the people, and the
saints were much engaged in his cause, while the word, like arrows, pierced the
hearts of sinners, who were crying out under the guilt of sin; and when some
obtained deliverance, they were expressing the joy of their hearts, visiting
their neighbors, warning them to flee from the wrath to come, and to lay hold
on the hope of eternal life. Old and young were bowing to the scepter of king
Jesus, and with one united voice saying, Blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord, hosanna in the highest. There were open conferences held once a
fortnight, to hear the declarations of any who desired to join the church; and
there was not a conference for many months, but that some were added to our
number. Twenty were baptized in one day, and fifteen more in about a fortnight.
Our number increased in one year from fifteen to one hundred and eleven, and
other churches were gathered round us, and some were given up to them for
convenience, and some few were disciplined and have gone off from us, so that
our present number is ninety-six." This account was signed August 13, 1774, by
Clark Rogers, elder, David Vaughn, Caleb Carr, William Douglass, Jesse
Southwick, and Ichabod Southwick. But in the most trying time of the war, when
general Burgoyne sent out part of his army toward Bennington in 1777, and
captain Douglass collected his company together, ready to march against them
next morning, some of his men went off to the enemy in the night, and appeared
with them in battle the next day, when such a victory was gained as greatly
revived the hearts of the Americans, and Burgoyne and his army were captivated
soon after. This defection of some of the Baptists in Hancock caused a division
in the church, and another was formed and continued many years; but they are
lately united again, and one young man who then went to the enemy, has not
only manifested repentance, but also such ministerial gifts, that he is
ordained the pastor of a large Baptist church near the place where Burgoyne was
taken. How mavelous are the works of God!

XIII. A Baptist church was formed in Washington in November, 1777, and Mr.
John Nichols is their pastor, who was ordained in 1784. Another church was
constituted in Sandisfield in August, 1779, and elder Joshua Morse became their
pastor. He was born in an uncultivated part of Rhode Island colony, where he
never went to any religious meeting until he was sixteen years old; but in
hearing the clear preaching of the gospel soon after, he not only became
acquainted with experimental religion, but an exhorter of others to regard it,
until he commenced a public preacher, and he was ordained the pastor of a
church in New London in Connecticut, May 17, 1750. It was in that part of the
town which is now set off by the name of Montville. The Stonington Association
met there in 1773, the year after they were first formed. Mr. Morse was much
esteemed, as a clear preacher of the gospel, with uncommon solemnity, and with
much success. But in the time of the war, his people were much exposed to the
enemy, and many of them removed away, until their minister, by the advice of a
council, removed also and settled at Sandisfield, where his public
ministrations, and private conversation, were edifying and beneficial, and
occasionally elsewhere, until he died in a joyful manner, in June, 1795, in the
seventieth year of his age. The other Baptist church in that town I have not
received a history of, nor of Great-Barrington and Williamston.

XIV. Bullocksgrant is a tract of land which was granted to some men from
Rehoboth, which lies between Cheshire and Hawley, but is not yet incorporated
as a town. A number of people from Middleborough, Taunton, and Berkley, have
also removed there, and a number of them joined to the first church in
Cheshire. But a powerful work came on among them, and a Baptist church was
formed, and Mr. Nathan Haskins was ordained their pastor, January 28, 1789. He
went from Berkley in the county of Bristol, and many blessings have been
granted under his ministry since. A Baptist church was formed in
West-Stockbridge, January 29, 1781, and Mr. Elnathan Wilcox was installed as
their pastor; but they were afterward broken and scattered. Yet a Baptist
church was gathered in Stockbridge and West-Stockbridge in 1790, and Samuel
Whelpley, A. M. was ordained their pastor. He was graduated by the college at
Providence in 1790, and still continues with that people. I have not obtained a
particular history of the other Baptist churches in that county.

XV. But a particular account of the change which was wrought in one person,
may give a more clear idea of the nature of the work that was going on in those
parts. A poor woman who was brought up in the wilderness, in such a manner as
not to have learned to read, gave the following relation of her experiences, in
the time of the revival at Hancock in the fall and winter of 1772, 1773. She
said, "I lived in Little-Housack, and I heard of a wonderful work of God in
Jericho, how many were converted, which caused me to reflect on my past life,
which terrified me much. One night I dreamed that the devil was come for me; I
thought he came in a flash of fire, which struck me down to hell, into great
torment; then I lamented my condition, how I had neglected my salvation, and
now my day was over. Thus I awoke in great surprise, and told my husband, who
told me not to regard it, for dreams were nothing. But my guilty conscience
terrified me so that I could have no rest, day nor night: my sins appeared very
heinous, until I thought I could not live long under such horror. I went one
day to meeting at Jericho, and thought I would never return till I had found
some relief, for I could not live so; and I went and heard the number of
fifteen tell the dealings of God with them; and they would tell my heart, only
they had found deliverance, and I had not, which made me think there was no
mercy for me: I was an undone creature, and my sins appeared more heinous than
before. There was a lecture in the evening, and I went to hear it, and the
minister preached very powerfully, and instead of yielding me any relief, it
added to my torment. I I thought I had one more sermon to account with God for,
unless I obtained pardon through Jesus Christ, which I thought was not for me,
I had been such a great sinner. My load was so heavy that I thought I could not
bear up under it. I called my sister out of meeting, and told her that I felt
so that it seemed as though I could not live. She gave me but little answer,
and meeting being over, I went to a house to lodge, and the people were talking
of religion, but I was no company for them. I felt like a lonesome monument of
God's displeasure. I got but a little sleep that night. Next morning I set out
to go home, and these words were ushered into my mind, Turn, O sinner, why will
you die? But I thought I had done all that I could, and there was no mercy for
me; then these thoughts came into my mind, You have not given up your heart to
God; and I found my whole heart to be a sink of sin, and that I had been at
enmity against a just and holy God all my life long, and that God was angry
with the wicked every day; and I saw myself to be such a creature that I
wondered that he would suffer me to walk on his footstool. I wondered that the
earth did not open and swallow me up; as I passed along I was afraid that every
tree would fall on me and dash me to pieces, and I would run to get clear of
one, and the fear of another would take me. Still these words would follow me,
Turn, O sinner, why will you die? At length I was brought to view the justice
of God, and that I was a rebel justly condemned, and had been provoking God to
anger all my life long, and was now about to receive the just reward of my
deeds, and could only plead guilty before God, on which consideration I was
brought to yield myself into his hands, with this repeated cry Mercy, Lord,
mercy if possible; though I could see no way that God could be just and show
mercy to such a wretch as I was. While I was, as it were, sinking with these
melancholy thoughts, those words were ushered into my mind in a remarkable
manner, Ye believe in God, believe also in me. These words gave me some glimpse
of hope. The heft of my burden seemed to be taken away, and I felt calm and
peaceable, but could not tell what it might be. I thought that if I was
converted I should see Christ, and I would go out in the evening, and look on
the firmament, expecting to see Christ; but then these words were ushered into
my mind, Peace to all the children of God, and peace to thy soul. Then I went
in and got the Bible, for my husband to try to learn me to read, and I could
spell a little: and as I then to read I thought the Lord assisted me in
reading; and I said, Husband, it seems to me that the Lord assists me in
reading, I never could read so before. I had no sooner spoken than my soul was
filled with divine love, yea, more than full. I thought there was enough for
all the world to swim away unto the blissful shores of eternal day. My tongue
broke out in raptures of praise, crying, Glory, glory to God in the highest!
for he has redeemed my soul from the horrible pit! I thought I wanted to tell
all the world of the fullness there was in Christ."

CHAP. X.
I. A concise View of the District of Maine. II. Accounts of Baptist Churches
in the County of York. III. County of Cumberland. IV. Controversies about Land
in the County of Lincoln. V. Of the First Baptist Churches therein. VI. Of
their great Increase since 1790. VII. Of their Faith and Order, and Oppression
from others. VIII. Of the Counties of Hencock and Washington, with a Review of
Lincoln.

I. THE kings of England claimed a power of giving the lands of the Heathen in
America to their subjects; and in 1639 a grant was made to Sir Ferdi^^do
Gorges, of all the lands between Piscataqua and ^^ga^ahock, and an hundred and
twenty miles into the country, under the name of The Province of Maine. In this
grant, and all others of the like nature, are imitations of the Pope of Rome,
who received his power from the old dragon. And the inspired apostle says, I
beheld another beast coming up out of the ^^th, and he had two horns like a
lamb, and he spoke like a dragon, and he exercises all the power of the first
beast. Rev. xiii. 2, 11, 12. The same power had before granted the charter of
the Massachusetts, which extended three miles north of every part of Merrimack
river, which they construed so as to reach a line from the head of the river to
Casco Bay. And though New Hampshire was taken from them in 1680, yet they
exercised a power beyond it afterward. In 1681 a number of men came from
Kittery to Boston, and joined to the Baptist church there, one of whom was
William Screven, to whom they gave an approbation to preach the gospel, January
11, 1682. But he was persecuted for preaching in those parts, by ministers and
rulers. Yet older Hull and others were sent from Boston, by the request of
those people, to organize a church among them. Our first volume, p. 502 -- 505.
And a church was constituted in Kittery, September 25, 1682, consisting of
William Screven, elder, Humphry Churchwood, deacon, Robert Williams, John
Morgandy, Richard Cutts, Timothy Davis, Leonard Drown, William Adams, Humphry
Azell, George Litten, and a number of sisters. Elder Screven and others were
repeatedly carried to courts, where sentences were passed against them, of
fines and imprisonment, until they removed from such persecutors; and Screven
went to South Carolina, and became the pastor of the Baptist church in
Charleston, from whence he wrote to Mr. Ellis Callender, of Boston, June 2,
1707. He wrote again to him, August 6, 1708, and said, "I rejoice that you are
inclined to, and employed in the blessed work of the Lord, for the support of
his cause and the comfort of his faints, left of that poor languishing church
with you." Colonel Thomas Screven, a leading man (...) the Baptists now in
Charleston, sprang from (...) Leonard Drown removed to Boston, and his son was
deacon in the Baptist church there for many years, and his posterity remain in
these parts ever since, one of whom is a fellow of our college at Providence.
But we hear no more of any Baptist church in those parts for above eighty years
after.

II. There was a revival of religion in Berwick about the time that there was
through a great part of the country, and after Mr. Hezekiah Smith was settled
at Haverhill, he was sent for to Berwick, in 1767, and baptized a considerable
number; and he went again the next year and assisted in forming a Baptist
church there, June 28, 1768. Mr. Joshua Emery was their teacher, though he was
not ordained; and they gave in certificates of their society according to law,
and yet were taxed to parish ministers, and spoiling of goods or imprisonment
was fiercely pursued for some years, for the collection of those taxes, until
some trials in courts put a stop thereto. Our second volume, p. 263. A division
took place in this church and society a few years after, and Mr. Emery preached
to one part, and Mr. William Hooper was ordained pastor of the other, August
14, 1776, in which office he has continued ever since. He was born at Berwick,
February 28, 1747, but he resides at Madbury, where is a branch of this church,
and he preaches part of his time at each place. Sanford is above Berwick, where
a Baptist church was formed, and Mr. Pelatiah Tingley, who went from
Attleborough, was ordained there, October 22, 1772. But he afterward removed
to Waterborough, where he is pastor of a church that is not in full fellowship
with most of our Baptist churches; though another church was formed in that
town in their fellowship, and Mr. Henry Smith was ordained their pastor in
1794. A Baptist church was formed at Wells, in 1780, and Mr. Nathaniel Lord, of
Berwick, was ordained their pastor. Dr. Moses Hemmenway lives in that town,
whose writings have been before mentioned. A Baptist church was formed in
Coxhall, October 29, 1782, and Mr. Simon Lock was ordained their pastor,
December 18, 1783. Mr. Tozer Lord, an older brother to Nathaniel, was ordained
in a church at Lebanon, above Berwick, in 1776; but that church is dissolved,
and he now is minister of a church in Shapleigh. Another church was formed in
that town in 1785, and Mr. Nehemiah Davis is their pastor. Mr. Zebadiah
Richardson was minister of the church at Sanford in 1788, who is now pastor of
a church in Fryburgh, on the west borders of the county of York. There was a
powerful work in Francisburgh in 1788, from whence above twenty persons joined
to Sanford church. A Baptist church was formed in Cornish in 1792

III. The first Baptist church in the county of Cumberland was formed at
Goreham, by assistance from Haverhill, June 20, 1768. Mr. Smith, of Haverhill,
had been sent for, and baptized some persons there the fall before. An account
of their sufferings is in our second volume, p. 279. It is said that a majority
of them have since embraced the opinion of general redemption, and yet hold to
the final perseverance of the saints; and they are not in fellowship with most
of our churches. A Baptist church was formed in New-Gloucester in May, 1782,
and they tried various ways to get clear of oppression from the Congregational
party, and to support their own worship, until they applied to our legislature,
and obtained an incorporation of a Baptist society, invested with all the
powers and privileges of other parishes. But in about four years many of them
found this to be such a bondage, that they renounced the scheme, and formed a
new Baptist church in October, 1794, and they joined to the Bowdoinham
Association in August, 1795. A number of people in Harpswell had experienced a
happy change in former times, and a fresh revival began among them in 1783,
which led on to the forming of a Baptist church there, January 20, 1785. Mr.
James Potter had labored with success among them, and on October 6, 1785, he
was ordained there as a traveling minister; and Mr. Samuel Woodward who was
raised up among them, was ordained their pastor in October, 1792. In the mean
time such a rain of righteousness was granted in those parts, as caused the
wilderness to become a fruitful field; and three churches were formed in one
year. Those of Hebron and Buckfield were formed in August, and that of Paris in
November, 1791; and Mr. James Hooper, brother to William, was ordained at
Paris, June 25, 1795. Mr. Samuel Flagg, who went from Boston, is preaching at
Hebron. Mr. Abraham Cummings, who was educated in the college at Providence,
where he took his first degree in 1776, preached for some years in the
Congregational way, until he was convinced that believers' baptism was the way
that Christ instituted, and was baptized in March, 1783; and in the spring of
1787 he removed into the county of Cumberland, and preached so much in the
parish of Freeport, that they gave him a good farm, but he could not be
ordained as a parish minister because he could not sprinkle infants. He has
traveled and preached in many of our new plantations, but a number of persons
were baptized in North-Yarmouth in the fall of 1795, who purpose to form a
church there, and to call him to be their minister. He lately published a
discourse upon baptism. The late revival was powerful in Livermore, and a
Baptist church was formed there, August 7, 1793. Two brethren, Elisha Williams
and Otis Robinson, are preachers among them, though not ordained. The first of
them is a son of Dr. Williams, of East-Hartford, and was educated at Yale
college; but the spiritual teaching which he has received in that wilderness,
he prefers above all human learning. The other went from Attleborough. A
Baptist church was formed at Sudbury Canada, August 30, 1795.

IV. The great collection of the waters of the rivers Kennebeck and
Androscoggin, with the rivers that fall into them, were called Sagadahock. A
number of men came from England, and began a plantation there in 1607, thirteen
years before our fathers began at Plymouth, but they went back again the next
year. But the colony of Plymouth obtained a grant from England of a tract of
land of fifteen miles wide on each side of Kennebeck river, where they carried
on a trade with the Indians from 1630 to 1661, when they sold the same to four
men. Though in the mean time after the parliament of England had prevailed
against the king who made those grants of American lands, particular men
obtained deeds of a great part of them from Indian Sachems, until an agent for
the Massachusetts bought the whole of Gorges's grant of his heirs in 1676, and
then those lands were claimed by this government. And the charter of 1691 gave
them all the lands from thence to Nova Scotia, and this government have been
often granting lands since to particular men unto this time. So that a great
part of the same lands have been claimed by grants from the crown, by deeds
from the Indians, and by grants from the legislature of the Massachusetts.
Unspeakable troubles and costs of courts have been caused by these opposite
claims, and when these controversies will all be settled no man can tell. A
gentleman who was born in Berwick, but now lives in Boston, and is
attorney general for this State, published a history of the district of Maine
in 1795, which gives much light into these affairs. Yet he appears to be not so
clear in religious matters. For he says, "There never was any thing like
persecution in the district of Maine, nor was there much pain taken, in the
settlement of it, to establish a regular support for the clergy: the want of
this was a great injury to the people, for experience fully advocates the
point, that without a regular fixed mode of establishing teachers of piety,
religion and morality, a country can never be made virtuous and happy." And yet
he afterward says, "In the present state of our governments in America, and in
the enlightened age in which we live, religious opinions, however strongly they
may be expressed, or however forcibly they may be urged, can do us no hurt."
Sullivan's History, p. 79, 232.
But all ought to know, that reviling and lying as well as spoiling of goods
and imprisonment, for matters of conscience, are persecution in the sight of
God. Matt. v. 10, 11. Heb. x. 32 -- 34. And have there been nothing like these
in the district of Maine? And if religious opinions can do no hurt in our
governments, how can teachers of piety, religion and morality do any good
therein? For these virtues are plainly described in the word of God, who says,
If any have children or nephews, let them learn first to show piety at home,
and to requite their parents. 1 Timothy v. 4. Pure religion and undefiled, before
God and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the ^^^ld. James i. 27.
Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them; for this is the law and the prophets. Matt. vii. 12. This is God's
description of piety, religion and morality; but all men who support religious
worship by force, violate these rules, more or less. The nation of Israel was
the only visible church in the world which God empowered to use the sword in
religious affairs; all adulterers, idolaters and blasphemers were to die
without mercy. And when Christ by his death had abolished all hereditary
distinctions among mankind, and built his church of those who were born again
among all nations, the power of his gospel dashed the great Roman empire to
pieces, without any help from the sword of the magistrate. But mystery Babylon
was built, by confounding nature and grace, church and world together. And when
the fathers of the Massachusetts fled from her tyranny to America, they formed
a government in imitation of the church of Israel, and they made a law to put
all adulterers to death, the year after they first came to Boston. And they had
plain scripture for it, if the church of Christ is in the same covenant that
God made with Abraham; for by that covenant all adulterers were to be put to
death, and all bastards were excluded from the church. Levit. xx. 10. Deuteronomy.
xxiii. But the circumcision of the heart is essentially necessary, to give any
person a right in the church of Christ. Therefore an inspired apostle says,
Beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the concision. For we are the
circumcision, who worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh. Phil. iii. 3, 3. All men who trust in any arm
of flesh, are cursed with blindness, so as not to see when good comes; but
they who trust in the Lord, and make him their hope, are like trees planted by
a river, whose leaf shall be green, and they shall not cease from yielding
fruit. Jer. xvii. 5 -- 8. And all mankind are in one or the other of these two
classes.

V. There was but little appearance of religion in the county of Lincoln, until
God poured (...) Spirit upon them within a few years past. Mr. James Potter was
born there in 1734, and was awakened to some sense of sin when he was about ten
years old; and convictions followed him, from time to time, until a clear
deliverance was granted him, October 3, 1781. And he says, "Now I began to see
the base views I formerly had of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of the plan of
salvation; for when I had a discovery of actual sins, and of the danger I was
exposed to thereby, I would repent and reform, and think what a glorious
Savior Christ was, and that some time or other he would save me from hell, and
take me to glory, with a desire to be happy, but no desire to be holy. But,
glory be to God! he now gave me another view of salvation. Now I saw his law to
be holy and loved it, though I and all my conduct were condemned by it. Now I
saw that God's justice did not strike against me as his creature but as a
sinner; and that Christ died not only to save from punishment, but from sin
itself. I saw that Christ's office was not only to make men happy, but also to
make them holy, and the plan now looked beautiful to me, and I had no desire to
have the least tittle of it altered, but all my cry was to be conformed to this
glorious plan." Our second volume, p. 394. It was then a very cold and stupid
season all round him; but the views which were then given him of the glory of
the gospel, and of the worth of immortal souls, with the call of God to him to
hold up the light which was given him to others, caused him to leave the
management of his farm to his family, and to go from house to house, in his own
town and to neighboring places, to hold forth light to all he could converse
with, about the great concerns of the s^^l and eternity. And in the spring of
1782, he says, "The work began to break out wonderfully. Some were in great
distress, and others praising God, and inviting others to come away to Jesus
Christ." And a number of them were brought to hold believ^^ baptism, before
they had ever seen a Baptist minister. Mr. Job Macomber was then preaching at
New-Gloucester, and, hearing of the work in the county of Lincoln, he went
there in December, 1782, and preached in several places with great
satisfaction; and in January, 1783, he wrote a letter (...) Middleborough about
it, which was read to Mr. (...) Case, which had such an effect upon his mind,
that he was ordained for the purpose in September, 1783, and went directly into
those parts, and preached with success in Harpswell, and then with greater
power at Thomaston, where he first arrived in February, 1784. Mr. Macomber also
removed to Bowd^inham, in the fa^^ of 1783, at the request of the people. And
in the spring Mr. Lock was sent for from Coxhall, and a Baptist church was
formed in Bowdoinham, May 24, and another at Thomaston May 27, 1784. And Mr.
Macomber was ordained the pastor of the first of these churches, August 18,
1784, while Mr. Case was settled as the pastor of the other, having been
ordained before. Macomber was son to a Congregational deacon in Middleborough,
but joined to the first Baptist church there in 1772, began to preach in 1774,
and labored in various parts of the country, until he settled where he now is.
Case was born in Rehoboth, February 25, 1761, met with a change in December,
1779, began to preach in July, 1780, and was an early member of the Baptist
church of Dighton, where he was ordained September 10, 1783, and went directly
into those parts, where he is still useful. As there was a great field for
labor, and Mr. Elisha Snow, of Thomaston, was called into the work, their
elders and brethren met at Harpswell, June 11, 1788, and ordained him as an
itinerant minister. On the 29th of the same month a Baptist church was formed
in Vassalborough, and another at Bowdoin in the f^ll after, where Mr. Potter
lived, and he become their pastor. Mr. Humphrey Purinton is also a useful
preacher in that church. And a Baptist church was formed at Ballston, January
3, 1789. The churches of Bowdoinham, Thomaston, and Harpswell, began their
Association in 1787, which had become six churches in August, 1790, and 317
members.

VI. These new churches in a wilderness had the powers of the world against
them, and also many under the Baptist name, who gathered some churches who held
to doctrines which they could not have followship with, while they had many
difficulties among themselves. Yet God was pleased to grant a fresh revival
among them. The second. Baptist church in Bowdoin was constituted, August 17,
1791, and Mr. William Stinson was ordained their pastor July 5, 1792. Another
church was formed in Sidney, June 20, 1791, and Mr. Asa Wilbur was ordained
their pastor, November 13, 1793. Mr. Lemuel Jackson, a member of that church,
was ordained as a traveling minister the same day. The first of them was born
in Bridgewater, the other in Middleborough in the county of Plymouth. Mr.
Potter was very successful in Lewiston, from the beginning of his public
labors, and many joined to his church from thence, until they obtained a
regular dismission, and a church of 22 members was formed in Lewiston, March 3,
1792. And on August 3, 1793, thirteen of their members were dismissed, and
formed a church in Green. They also dismissed fourteen more, who formed the
third church in Bowdoin, February 13, 1794, at which time they had 59 members
left. And they say, "It appears that elder James Potter, and elder William
Stinson, were the instruments that the Lord blessed in the awakening the
greatest part of these, who appear to have been brought out of nature's
darkness into the glorious liberty of the gospel." A Baptist church was formed
at Readfield May 11, 1792, and elder Case removed and became their pastor,
leaving the church in Thomaston under the care of elder Snow. And on July 27,
1792, a church was formed in Stirling, now called Fayette, and elder Eliphalet
Smith became their pastor. He was converted at Stratham in 1764, and was
ordained the pastor of a Congregational church in Deerfield in New Hampshire,
in January 1770, though he and the majority of his church became Baptists in
June following. Our second vol. p. 267. But in some years after he removed into
the county of Lincoln, and now became the pastor of this church. A Baptist
church was formed on Miscongus Island, near Bristol, in 1792, and Mr. Andrew
Fuller, who went from Middleborough, was ordained therein, October 30, 1793.
Another church was formed at Cushing in 1792, and Mr. Ephraim Hall was ordained
their pastor October 24, 1793. A Baptist church was formed at Nobleborough July
25, 1793, another at New-Sandwich January 9, 1794, and a third at Barretstown
in December following. As many of the Baptists have removed from Martha's
Vineyard to Sandy-River, a high branch of the Kennebeck, they have called their
town New-Vineyard, and they formed a Baptist church there August 8, 1795.
Another was formed at Clinton the 5th of September after. Their elder,
Mephibosheth Cain, was ordained at Clinton January 12, and Nehemiah Go^ld and
Job Chadwick at Vassalborough January 15, 1796.

VII. Thus in less than twelve years twenty six Baptist churches have been
formed in two counties, in which are fifteen ordained ministers, and about a
thousand members. And in August, 1795, their Association gave a declaration of
their faith, wherein they say, "We believe that the scriptures of the Old and
New Testaments are the word of God; we believe there is but one living and true
God; we believe the important doctrines of three equal persons in the Godhead,
eternal and personal election, original sin, particular redemption, free
justification by the imputed righteousness of Christ, efficacious (...) in
regeneration, the final perseverance of re^^ believers, the resurrection of the
dead, the future judgment, the eternal happiness of the righteous, and
everlasting misery of the impenitent. We believe that baptism and the Lord's
supper are ordinances of Christ, to be continued until his seco^^ coming, and
the former is requisite to the latter; that is to say, that those are to be
admitted into the communion of the church, and so to partake of its ordinances,
who upon profession of their faith have been baptized by immersion in the name
of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost," Now in all these articles
they agree with the most eminent fathers of New England, except in sprinkling
infants upon the faith of their parents, and calling it baptism, for which
there is not a word in all the holy scriptures. But as a son of Gideon by his
concubine, slew seventy of his lawful children, so one error of our fathers has
prevailed against all their good principles and conduct. And all men who are
now contending for the faith which was once delivered to the saints, are daily
exposed to reviling and lying, spoiling of goods and imprisonment, from those
who support their worship by force. We are well informed, that more than an
hundred dollars have (...) taken from people of the Baptist sentiments in
T^psham for a Pedobaptist minister in the town, by ^^^ding civil and
ministerial taxes together; and the like is done in many other parts of the
country. Thus men would hold their religion by the same ever by which they hold
their worldly estates; though they daily deny their neighbors the liberty
about their souls which all enjoy about their bo^^^s and estates. For no man is
compelled to (...) a farthing to any physician, unless he is pleased to employ
him. And God says of false teachers, They have healed the hurt of the daughter
of my ^^^ple slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there is (...) peace. -- They
have rejected the word of the land, and what wisdom is in them? Jer. vi. 14.
viii. 9-11. And who can tell how many such teachers (...) are in our day?
Neither is any man obliged (...) employ or support any lawyer, if he will live
(...) them. But many who handle the law of (...), shut up the kingdom of heaven
against men, and neither go in themselves, nor suffer others to go into it. And
yet four States in New England deny the liberty to all men therein about their
souls and eternity, as they allow them concerning their bodies and temporal
estates. And when will men open their eyes, and renounce this iniquity!

VIII. A revival of religion began on an island in Penobscot-Bay, in the county
of Hancock, now incorporated by the name of Islesborough, in the fall of 1790,
and a Baptist church was formed there, May 27, 1791, and Mr. Thomas Eames was
ordained their pastor, June 19, 1794. He and a number of his people went from
Marshfield in the county of Plymouth. There is also a Baptist church at Eppin
in this county, and Mr. Joshua Young is their pastor, who was ordained at
Ballston April 8, 1795. We have also heard of some Baptists in Gouldsburgh, and
Canaan, in this county, as well as of some in the county of Washington, but
have not any such accounts of them as may be of service to the public. When the
work of God was powerful in the county of Lincoln in 1784, one of the subjects
of it observed, that the ministers who were settled and supported by law were
not made use of therein, even when they preached good doctrine, which caused a
serious inquiry in his mind, why it should be so? And having obtained a
satisfying answer, he wrote the same to a friend, saying, "The voice of the
general conduct of true ministers to sinners is, We pray you in Christ's stead,
be ye reconciled to God that your souls may live: But the voice of others, to
the church and the world is, We pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled
together that we may live." And the help of all the power of the ruling party
in our government has not settled but thirteen of these last sort of teachers,
in all the counties of Lincoln, Hancock and Washington, wherein are near sixty
incorporated towns, and many other plantations.

CHAP. XI. STATE OF RHODE ISLAND.
County of Providence.
I. The first Baptist Church in America was planted at Providence. II. The
Leaders of it for an hundred and thirty Years. III. President Manning's Success
therein. IV. The History of this Church ever since. V. A concise View of the
College. VI. Of Churches in Situate, Smithfield, Gloucester, Cumberland, and
Foster. VII. Of other Churches in those Towns and in North-Providence. VIII.
Account of the first Church in Newport. IX. Of the Second. X. The Third. XI.
Fourth. XII. Tiverton. XIII. Warren. XIV. Washington County. XV. General
Baptists therein. XVI. Sabbatarians. XVII. Exeter Church. XVIII. And many
others. XIX. County of Kent. XX. General Remarks.

1 THE first civil government upon earth, since the rise of antichrist, which
gave equal liberty of conscience, was begun in Providence; and there was also
the first Baptist church in America. Mr. Roger Williams was born in Wales, in
1599, was educated at Oxford university, and was introduced into the ministry
in the church of England for some years, before he came over to America, and
landed at Boston in February, 1631. When he came there, he could not agree with
the ruling party, in their use of the sword in religious affairs, nor in their
receiving the grant of American lands from the kings of England. This caused
his going to Plymouth, where he preached above two years, and then he was
called and ordained at Salem; but the controversy arose so high between him and
the teachers and rulers of the Massachusetts, that they passed a sentence of
banishment against him in October, 1635, and in January, 1636, they attempted
to seize him and send him back to England, but he fled to Rehoboth, and from
thence to Providence, where he obtained a grant of lands from the Narraganset
Indians. Winthrop's Journal, p. 91, 92.
And he says, "I was sorely tossed, for fourteen weeks, in a bitter winter
season, not knowing what bread or bed did mean." Collections of the Historical
Society at Boston, Vol. I. p. 276.
Yet he was so far from seeking any revenge upon those who banished him, that,
at the hazard of his life, he went into Narraganset, and prevented the Indians
there from joining with the Pequots, who were for driving all the English out
of the country, when Boston was not seven years old. And any man who will read
the books referred to in the margin, may see that Williams was a chief
instrument of saving all the English then in New England from ruin; though
ministerial influence was so great in the Massachusetts as to exclude him from
liberty of coming into their government all his days. But the very year after
Williams died in peace, the Massachusetts charter was taken away, and the king
of England claimed all their lands, and his governor and council made laws, and
imposed taxes upon them, without any house of representatives, and introduced
the taxes upon commerce, which finally brought on the late war. Mr. Williams,
having obtained a deed of the lands in Providence, gave twelve men an equal
right therein with himself, and he drew a covenant of such a government in the
town in civil affairs, as excluded them from governing in religious matters.
And because Joshua Verin refused to allow liberty of conscience to his wife, he
was excluded from the privilege of voting in the town, until he granted that
liberty. Upon this Verin removed to Barbados, and left his estate in
Providence. In Winthrop's Journal he is called Urdin, p. 167. But it is Veria
in Providence Records.
As Williams and a number of his friends were convinced that professing
believers were the only gospel subjects of baptism, they formed a Baptist
church in Providence, in March, 1639, when one of them baptized him, and then
he baptized the rest. Winthrop, p. 176
But the unruly passions of some among them, with other things, caused such
scruples in Williams's mind, in about four months, that he refrained from
administering or partaking of special ordinances in any church ever after, as
long as he lived, though he would preach the gospel, and join in social worship
with such as agreed with him, all his days. The reasons of this conduct may be
seen in our first volume, p. 143, 144. He went to England in 1643, and
published an account of the Indians, of their language, and of his labors to
instruct them concerning Christianity, which the Historical Society at Boston
have lately reprinted. He procured a charter for his colony the next year, and
went to England again to defend it in 1651, where he stayed until 1654, when he
returned, and was elected their chief ruler for near three years; and all his
life after was spent in seeking the good of his country, till he died in the
spring of 1683.

II. Mr. Thomas Olney, who had been a member of the Congregational church in
Salem, but left them and came to Providence in 1638, was the next pastor of
this Baptist church, and was also useful in civil offices, until his death in
1682. But a division arose in this church in 1652, about laying on of hands
upon every member of the church after baptism. Ten years before, the Baptists
in England had adopted the opinion, that every man who had a gift given him to
preach the gospel, had also a right to baptize, even before he was ordained in
any church; which opinion was held by some men of note in Providence for eighty
years after. Mr. William Wickinden was a chief leader in that part of the
church in Providence who held to the laying on of hands upon each member, which
they supposed to be intended in the sixth chapter of the Hebrews; and he was an
esteemed minister therein, until he died, February 23, 1669. Gregory Dexter was
president of this colony in 1653, and he was very useful in government, and a
father in this church, and lived to be 91 years old. Pardon Tillinghast was "a
leading man among the Baptists in Providence," in 1672; Williams's Dispute with
the Quakers, p. 208.
and he was much esteemed as a minister among them, until his death in 1718. He
gave the lot upon which their first meeting house was built. Chad Brown was an
early member of this church, and he is said to have been a teacher among them.
And his son John Brown was a minister in this church, as well as a useful man
in the State. And his son James Brown was a pastor of this church for many
years, and died October 28, 1732, aged 66. His son James had four sons, three
of whom have been at great expense toward the college in Providence, and
toward the Baptist meeting house there, as well as ^he support of worship in
that society. Joseph J^ncks came over from England, about the time that Charles
the Second came to the throne, and settled in Providence, and was a useful man
in his day; and his son Joseph was a magistrate, deputy governor, and then
chief governor of this colony; as well as a leading member in this church, and
lived to be above ninety. His brother Ebenezer Jencks was ordained a pastor of
this church in 1719, and continued so until his death, August 14, 1726, Aet.
57. His son Daniel Jencks, and grandson John Jencks, were both members of this
church, and were employed in several offices in the government, and also gave
very liberally toward the college, and for the support of the Baptist cause in
Providence. Deacon Samuel Winsor was ordained a pastor of this church in 1733,
and continued in that office until he died, November 17, 1758, aged 71. His son
Samuel Winsor was ordained his successor, and continued with this church until
after president Manning came to Providence, and then, in 1771, he, with a
number more of the church, went and formed another church in Johnston, where he
yet is minister. Mr. Thomas Burlingham was also ordained in this church in
1733; but he preached the latter part of his time in Cranston, where he died,
January 7, 1770, aged 82. After elder Winsor and his brethren had formed their
church in Johnston, this church in Providence sent a committee to treat with
them about their right in their old meeting house, and they agreed to take two
hundred dollars, which was given them accordingly. This summary has been
collected from the best light that could be obtained, for no regular records
have been found in this church before the year 1770.

III. James Manning, D. D. was born at Elizabeth-Town in New Jersey, October
22, 1738; was early changed by grace, and joined to the Baptist church in the
town where he was born. His education, and his service in the college, have
been described before, but we shall speak more of him as a minister of the
gospel. He was called to that work, and was ordained as an itinerant minister,
by the church where he was baptized; and he removed to Warren in the summer of
1764, and a Baptist church was formed there the 15th of October following, and
he became their pastor. But when the college was removed to Providence, in the
spring of 1770, he went with it, and was frequently invited to preach in the
Baptist church there, until elder Winsor, and a part of the church, drew off in
the summer of 1771, and formed another church in Johnston, and then elder
Manning was chosen to preach and administer ordinances to this church in
Providence; and he continued so to do, until he resigned that office in the
spring of 1786, although he ministered to them occasionally afterward as long
as he lived. And though his powers of mind and human accomplishments were very
great, yet he used great plainness of speech, and was as easily understood by
common people, as almost any preacher in the land. And few men ever prized the
special influence of the Spirit of God in preaching, more than he did. He was
at the Philadelphia Association in October, 1774, where he met with Mr. Daniel
Fristoe from Virginia, whom he heard afterward, with such clearness, life and
power, though not a man of liberal education, as fired his soul with fresh zeal
and courage in preaching salvation to perishing souls; and Mr. Manning labored
with such faithfulness and success, after his return to Providence, that he
baptized an hundred and ten persons by September, 1775; and a large number more
joined to Mr. Snow's church, even notwithstanding the confusions of war which
then broke out in our land. And when governor Cook was chosen member of the
college corporation, and some scrupled whether he could properly be denominated
a Baptist, because he was a member of a Congregational church, he informed them
that he was ever a Baptist in principle, and was baptized by immersion, and
should have joined to the Baptist church in Providence, if such doctrine had
been preached therein then as there was now. President Manning made it his
constant practice, to charge his scholars, when they left the college, not to
imagine that they were qualified to preach the gospel, until they were
satisfied that they were taught of God. At the commencement in September, 1789,
he said, "Should the Christian ministry, with any of you become an object,
reflect on the absurdity of intruding into it while strangers to experimental
religion. See that you yourselves have been taught of God, before you attempt
to teach godliness to others. To place in the professional chairs of our
universities the most illiterate of mankind, would be an absurdity far less
glaring, than to call an unconverted man to exercise the ministerial function.
This is to expose our holy religion to the scoffs of infidels, and furnish to
their hands the most deadly weapons. I omit to insist on the account such must
render in the great tremendous day!" And his constant behavior was agreeable
to his teaching; and he united dignity and condescension, authority and
mildness, in such a manner as to be scared and loved by the generality of his
scholars. He married a daughter of John Sires, an alderman of Elizabeth-Town,
and a useful member of the Baptist church there; and she met with a happy
change, and joined to the Baptist church in Providence, in January, 1775, of
which she is still an agreeable member, though she has no children. Dr. Manning
died in a sit of the apoplexy, July 29, 1791, when be, undoubtedly, entered
into eternal rest.

IV. The opinion of laying on of hands upon every member in the church, had
long made a separation among the Baptist churches in this land; but soon after
Dr. Manning came to Providence, he prevailed with this church to admit other
Baptists to occasional communion with them, though they would receive none as
members until after his death. But on August 4, 1791, the church had a full
meeting, and this point was distinctly considered, and a clear vote was gained
to admit members who did not hold that doctrine. At the same meeting the church
concluded to have another pastor ordained therein, namely, Jonathan Maxcy, A.
M. He was born in Attleborough, September 2, 1768, educated in the college at
Providence, where he took his first degree in 1787, and was a tutor in the
college, until he met with a change in October, 1789, and joined to this
church, in which he began to preach in April, 1790, and was ordained their
pastor, September 8, 1791. Mr. John Pitman, who was born in Boston, and had
been a minister some years at Freehold in New Jersey, removed to Providence,
and he and his wife were now the first members who were received into this
church, without holding to the laying on of hands upon every member. He has
frequently preached the gospel in various places ever since, without taking the
pastoral charge of any particular church. Thomas Ustick, A. M. took his first
degree in the college at Providence in 1771, was ordained in this church as an
itinerant minister, July 29, 1777, preached a while at Ashford, from whence he
removed to Grafton in May, 1779, and then to Philadelphia in June, 1782, where
he has been pastor of the Baptist church in that city ever since. A powerful
work of grace came on in Providence in the beginning of 1790, which caused the
addition of above fifty members to this church in about two years. September 6,
1792, Mr. Maxcy was chosen president of the college, pro tempore, and he has
been continued in that office ever since. He resigned his pastoral office in
this church two days after he was first elected president, and they immediately
called Mr. Stephen Gano to be their minister for six months, and he has been
so ever since. He was ordained before in the State of New York. Mr. John Gano,
his father, was a minister in the city of New York before the late war, but he
is now in Kentucky; and he has been the most extensive traveller to preach the
gospel, of any man now living in America. Forty-six members have been added to
this church in Providence, since Mr. Stephen Gano came there; and he drew the
circular letter for the Warren Association in 1795.

V. The corporation of the college at Providence consists of twelve fellows,
and thirty-six trustees. The fellows, as a learned faculty, have the power of
conferring the degrees, but in other affairs the college is governed by the
concurrence of both branches. The president is always to be a Baptist, and so
are seven more of the fellows, while the other four may be chosen out of any of
the other denominations. Twenty-two of the trustees are also to be Baptists,
five of them are to be Episcopalians, five Quakers, and four
Congregationalists. The chancellor is chosen out of the trustees, and the
secretary out of the fellows. No religious test is ever to be required of any
of the corporation, nor of the scholars who are graduated therein; though great
care is to be taken as to the morals of the college. Their first funds were
collected by Mr. Morgan Edwards, in England and Ireland, and by Mr. Hezekiah
Smith, in South Carolina and Georgia; to which additions have been since made
from various quarters, but all by personal generosity. These moneys were
chiefly lent to Rhode Island government, though some have been put into a
national bank; but the interest thereof, with the income from the students, who
are near eighty, is scantly sufficient to support the officers of the college.
In 1795, they had given degrees to 380 scholars who were educated in this
college.
The building and repairing of the college edifice, the president's house, with
the purchase of the lands about them, and also the college library and
apparatus, were all done by personal benefactions, and chiefly in the town of
Providence. And so was the Baptist meeting house, bell and clock, with the lot
on which it stands, all which cost about seven thousand pounds. They first met
in said house, May 28, 1775. How false then are the pretenses of many, that
religion and learning would fail from among us if they were not upheld by the
power of the magistrate! It is readily granted that there has been much
religion and knowledge among those who have gone on in that way; but the light
and power of the gospel is directly against all deceit or violence. And God
says of his church, In this mountain shall the Lord of hosts make unto all
people a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees; of fat things full
of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined. And he will destroy in this
mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the vail that is
spread over all nations, Isaiah xxv. 6, 7. A covering and appearance of
religion has been kept up by the power of the magistrate, which the feast of
the gospel, in the church of Christ, will destroy.

VI. Ever since the reformation in Germany, many have cast the reproach of all
the evils which have appeared among the Baptists upon that denomination in
general; which is as unjust as it would be for others to charge all the evils
that ever were it national churches, upon all men who hold to infant baptism.
But abusive treatment on either side is exceeding apt to beget prejudices in
the mind against good principles and conduct, which are held by their
opposites. And as Calvinism was held by those who banished the first planters
of Providence, and of Rhode Island colony, and who greatly abused those people
all their days, many of their children have imagined that the true liberty of
moral agents could not be secured upon that plan of doctrine. Though it is
abundantly evident, that Mr. Williams, who procured the first charter, and Mr.
Clarke, who procured the second, for this colony of liberty, held to that plan
of doctrine as firmly as any men in their day. And how can any man enjoy
comfort and liberty in his soul, in the midst of the confusions of the world,
without believing that men nor devils can never deceive their faithful God, nor
defeat any of his designs? That he never makes use of any positive influence to
move men to sin, or to hinder their coming to Christ, I as firmly believe as I
believe he is just and good; but the lusts of men are so powerful, and the
wiles of the devil are so many, that no man can overcome them of himself,
though the Spirit of God makes every true believer a conqueror over them all.
But as a separation among the Baptists in the last century, was followed with a
departure from these sentiments, and their churches have not been in fellowship
with most of the Baptist churches lately gathered in this land, I shall say but
little about them, more than to mention where they are, and who have been their
ministers. Mr. Samuel Fisk was ordained the pastor of a Baptist church in
Situate, and continued with them to old age; but I have not obtained the date
of his ordination, nor of his death, though he was one of their Association in
1729. Our second volume, p. 91. Elder Reuben Hopkins was their last minister,
who died in January, 1792. Elder Peter Place was in their church in Smithfield
in 1731, where now is elder John Winson. Elder Edward Mitchel was in their
church in Gloucester for many years, and he died, October 22, 1795, aged 98.
Elder William Bowen was a colleague with him, and now succeeds him. Elder Cook
was in their church in Cumberland, where now is elder Bollou. I suppose the
rest of the churches in their connection in that county have had but one
minister, and their names, with the number of their members, are given before,
taken from Asplund's Register for 1794.

VII. A few people in Gloucester met with a change about the time of the
separations in Connecticut, and Thomas Knowlton from thence was at the separate
ordination in Plainfield, September 11, 1746. A Baptist church was afterward
formed in Gloucester, and he was their minister for a number of years. After
his death, they had other preachers, until Mr. Joseph Winsor (brother to
Samuel) was ordained their pastor, October 31, 1763; and they prospered for a
number of years under his ministry, and had seventy-nine members when they
joined to the Warren Association in 1782, and had some increase afterward. But
as many have removed into other parts of the country, and their pastor is so
aged as not to be able to preach, their number is much reduced, as I am
informed, though I have not their present number. A Baptist church was formed
in North-Providence, and Mr. Ezekiel Angel was ordained their pastor, June 20,
1765; and he continued so until his death, September 27, 1782, aged 60. Mr.
Rufus Teffte, who was born March 14, 1752, was ordained their second pastor,
June 16, 1784. There were but 19 members in this church when their former
pastor died, but a great revival began in the fall of 1791, and prevailed much
in the east part of Smithfield, as well as in this town, and their number last
June, when I was there, was 170. Many of these had been brought up in a
careless neglect of all religion; but we hope that their future life may be as
becomes the gospel. Mr. John Hammond was baptized in 1780, began to gather a
church in the town of Foster in February, 1789, in which he was ordained in
June, 1791, and they increased to about ninety members in three years. There
was a second Baptist church in Cumberland above thirty years ago, but they were
much broken and scattered for some years; though there have been revivals
since, and especially within a few years past. A Baptist church was formed in
Cranston, and Mr. Elisha Green was ordained their pastor, July 30, 1764. He
was born in Warwick, August 5, School, baptized in 1717, began to preach in 1741,
and, after a useful life, died in Gloucester, October 29, 1780. This church is
now very small. There is another meeting house in Cranston, upon the great road
to Warwick, where Mr. Pitman often preaches, and a number of members from
thence have joined to the Baptist church in Providence.

County of Newport.

VIII. Mr. John Clarke, a physician from London, was one of the first planters
of Rhode Island, and the pastor of the second Baptist church in America, which
was formed at Newport in 1644. His brother Joseph Clarke was a member of it,
and often a ruler in the State, and adorned his profession for above forty
years after the church was constituted; and his posterity are numerous and
respectable unto this day. Samuel Hubbard was born in England in 1610, came
over to Salem in 1633, joined to the Congregational church in Watertown in
1635, but went up to Windsor, and helped to begin the colony of Connecticut the
same year. But as he and his wife embraced the Baptist principles, they removed
to Newport, and joined with this church in 1648; and he lived there above forty
years after, and preserved many writings which have been very serviceable in
our history. He left no son, but he had three daughters, who were married to
Joseph Clarke, junior, Robert Burdick, and Andrew Langworthy, whose posterity
are respectable to this day, especially among the Baptists in Hopkinton. In
1651 Mr. Coddington obtained a commission from the ruling powers in England, to
be governor of Rhode Island, without the consent of the people, when he had the
deeds of their lands in his hands. Therefore Mr. John Clarke went to England,
with Mr. Roger Williams, and got that commission disannulled; and he was agent
for his colony in that country, until he procured their second charter in 1663.
Mr. Hubbard wrote a letter to him, the spring after he went to England, and
Clarke wrote him an answer, October 11, 1652, and said, "There can be nothing
in the present evil world, so far as I am acquainted with my own heart as it
stands to Godward, that is more pleasing and delightful to it, than the
manifestation of the enlargement of the kingdom of his dear Son, and that many
obedient servants are added to the Lord, whom God the Father has resolved to
exalt above every name that is named, not only in this present world, but in
that which is to come; and that they who are so added, being living members of
that body which by a spirit of life is joined unto that living Lord who is head
over all, may increase with all the increase of God, is the earnest desire and
prayer of my soul. But I must tell you, that as the promise of the glorious
coming of our Lord does quicken and freshen in my heart, so does that prophecy
follow in my mind, When the son of man comes, shall he find faith on the
earth?" He returned to Newport in 1664, and was a faithful pastor of this
church, being also useful in the State, until he died in a happy frame, April
20, 1676. When Mr. Clarke sailed for England in 1651, he left the care of this
church with Joseph Tory, and Obadiah Holmes, and they were useful teachers
therein all their days. Holmes succeeded Clarke as pastor of the church, until
he died, October 15, 1682. Mr. Richard Dingley succeeded him; but in 1694, he
left them and went to South Carolina. In 1710 Mr. William Peckom was ordained
their pastor, and continued so until he died in 1734. He was esteemed as a
pious man, but his gifts were small; and Mr. John Comer was ordained a
colleague with him, May 19, 1726. He was born in Boston, August 1, 1704, met
with a happy change in November, 1721, and after obtaining a good share of
human learning, he began to preach the gospel at Swansea in May, 1724, and went
to Newport in the fall of 1725, and preached in this church four years, in
which time it increased from seventeen members to fifty-two. Yet two powerful
men in the church, prevailed with the majority to vote him a dismission in
1729, and he went and preached two years in the second church in Newport with
considerable success, and then removed and gathered the first Baptist church in
Rehoboth, where he died, as we before ^^ted. Mr. John Callender, who was born
in Bos^^^, and was educated at the college in Cambridge, was the next pastor of
this church, where he was ordained, October 13, 1731, colleague with elder
^^^kom. He was a man of superior powers, and published a century sermon in
1738, and a funeral sermon for Mr. Clap, the first Congregational minister in
Newport, in 1745, with some other things. He also collected many papers, which
have been serviceable in our history. But he was taken away by death, January
26, 1748, in the 42d year of his age. Mr. Edward Upham, of Springfield, at the
request of this church, removed to Newport in 1749, and ministered to them
until April, 1771, when he returned back to Springfield, as we before related.
Mr. Erasmus Kelly, who was born in Pennsylvania, July 24, 1748, educated at the
college in Philadelphia, and began to preach in those parts, was called to
Newport, and was ordained a pastor of this church, October 9, 1771. And the
church and society increased under his ministry, until the enemy came to
Newport, and he removed to Warren, where they followed him, and burnt the house
and goods where he resided, May 25, 1778. He then removed to Connecticut, and
from thence to Pennsylvania. But upon the return of peace, he came again to
Newport, and ministered to this church, until he was taken away by death,
November 7, 1784, before he had been with them a year in this last turn. Mr.
Josias Lyndon was of this society, and did much for the support of worship
therein. He was governor of the colony in 1769, and was very serviceable in the
State all his days. He died of the smallpox, March 30, 1778, aged 74, leaving
much of his estate to this church. The calamities of the war scattered this
church, and others were taken away by death, so that only three male members
remained at New-port, and but twenty-seven, male and female, remained any
where, when Dr. Benjamin Foster came there in January, 1785, and above twenty
were added to this church that year, and many to their society, a number of
whom attended no worship before. In September, 1786, this church was received
into the Warren Association, when they had 69 members. But in 1788 some of them
raised opposition against their minister, and he had an earnest call to
New York; therefore he was dismissed from this church, and has been pastor of
the first Baptist church in that city ever since. After various trials, this
church obtained Mr. Michael Eddy, who was ordained in Swansea, in 1785, but
removed to Newport in January, 1790, and he is now their pastor, and they have
prospered under his ministry.

IX. The doctrine of laying on of hands upon every member, came into the first
church in New-port in 1652, and the second church was formed about 1656. Mr.
William Vaughan was their first pastor, and continued so until his death in
August, 1677. Mr. Thomas Baker succeeded him for a time, and then he removed
and began a society in North-Kingston. Mr. John Harden was their third pastor,
who died in the year 1700. Mr. James Clarke was the next, who was ordained in
1701, and continued with them until he died, December 1, 1736, aged 87. Mr.
Daniel Wightman was ordained a colleague with him in 1704. He was born in
Narraganset, January 2, 1668, and died in New-port August 31, 1750. They were
well esteemed among their brethren, as faithful ministers, and exemplary
walkers; and in January, 1729, when elder Clarke was not able to preach,
through the infirmities of age, Mr. Comer was received to preach one half of
the Lord's days with elder Wightman, and continued to do so for two years.
Their church increased to 142 members, being the largest church then in their
colony. They had built the first meeting house in the colony, in 1707. On June
21, 1729, they had the largest Association of Baptist ministers and churches
that ever had been seen in America. The elders present were, James Clarke,
Daniel Wightman, and John Comer, of Newport, Jonathan Sprague and James Brown,
of Providence, Nicholas Eyers of New York, Valentine Wightman of Groton, Philip
Tabor of Dartmouth, Stephen Gorton of New London, and Daniel Everet of
South-Kingston. Beside whom the elders, Peter Place of Smithfield, Samuel Fisk
of Situate, Joseph Mason of Swansea, Manassah Martin of Warwick, and Richard
Sweet of North-Kingston, were in their connection of churches; and Mr. Comer
says, "Each of these hold to general redemption. Three other churches hold to
the doctrine of free grace. One in Newport, formerly my flock; one at Swansea,
Mr. Ephraim Wheason; one at Boston, Mr. Elisha Callender." And these, with one
at New-port, and one at Westerly, who kept the seventh day, were all the
Baptist churches then in New England. Comer gave his ideas of election in these
words, saying, "If God does not choose us, we shall never be moved to choose
him. It is from his choice of us that we are led to choose him. 1 Pet. ii. 9.2
These. ii. 13. They are chosen to obedience, and not for obedience. 1 Peter i.
2. We are chosen not in time upon works, but before time exclusive. Ephesians. i. 4.
All is rich, sovereign, free and pure grace in God through Christ." Comer's
Diary.
But as some would not hear him preach this doctrine there, he removed to
Rehoboth, and elder Nicholas Eyres came to Newport in October, 1731, and was a
pastor of this church until (...) death, February 13, 1759. He was born in
England, August 22, 1691, educated in the city of Bristol, came over to
New York about 1711, (...) baptized and ordained there in 1724, but his church
broke up in 1730, and he had great influence among these churches as long as he
lived, and he left many manuscripts, some of which have been serviceable in our
history. His son, Dr. Thomas Eyres, was educated at Yale college, and was one
of the first fellows of our college. Mr. Gardner Thurston was born in Newport,
November 21, 1721, met with a change and joined to this church in 1741, and was
ordained their pastor, April 29, 1759. The doctrines of grace gradually gained
ground in this church, and singing in public worship was introduced into it in
1765, and many blessings have been granted among them since. Dr. William
Rogers, one of the first class in our college, was called to preach in this
church, and he went to Philadelphia in 1771, where he has been useful ever
since. Elder Buroughs, of Tiverton, and elder Jones, of Rehoboth, sprang also
from this church. Their pastor continued with them through all the calamities
of the war, and is still useful to old age.

X. The third Baptist church in Newport was formed in the following manner.
Stephen Mumford came over from London in 1664, and brought the opinion with
him, that the whole of the ten commandments, as they were delivered from mount
Sinai, were moral and immutable; and that it was the antichristian power, which
thought to change times and laws, that changed the Sabbath from the seventh to
the first day of the week. Several members of the first church in Newport
embraced this sentiment, and yet continued with the church for some years,
until two men and their wives, who had so done, turned back to the keeping of
the first day again. But they who believed that this practice came from
antichrist, were much concerned about it, and wrote (...) their friends in
England for advice thereon. An answer was returned from London, and another
from (...). Edward Stennett, of Abington, March 6, 1670, (...) said, "My dear
friends, as for those that have down back from the Sabbath to profaneness,
after light and establishment therein, yourselves must not take pleasure in
them, but must withdraw yourselves from them, as sinful and disorderly persons;
and if the church will hold communion with those ^^^^tes from the truth, you
ought then to desire as be fairly dismissed from the church, which if (...)
church refuse, you ought to withdraw yourselves, and not be partakers of other
men's sins, but (...) yourselves pure, but with all humility, meek^^^ and
brokenness of heart." This brought on (...) debates on both sides, and finally
a separation (...) place, in December, 1671, when William His^^^, Samuel
Hubbard, Stephen Mumford, Roger ^^^er, and three sisters, joined in covenant as
a dis^^^t church. Mr. Hubbard wrote to their brethren in London, October 6,
1672, and said, "Dear brethren, pray for us, a poor weak band in a wil^^^^ss,
beset round with opposites, from the common adversary, and from Quakers,
generals and pro^^^ persons, and most of all from such as have been our
familiar acquaintance: but our battles are only in words, praised be God." If
the following things are considered, it may prevent divisions among Christians
upon this article. That God is Lord of all our time is a moral (...) table
truth, but the sanctification of a particular day was never (...) to man
without a positive precept. It does not appear that Israel (...) any thing
about the Sabbath of the seventh day, until after they came into the
wilderness, when it was said to them, Tomorrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath
unto the Lord. And he afterward said, It is a sign between me and the children
of Israel for ever; for in six days the Lord made (...) and earth, and on the
seventh day he rested, and was refreshed. (...) xvi. 23. xxxi. 17. And every
man in Israel who broke the Sabbath, (...) to be stoned to death. Numbers iv.
35. But when Christ came, he said to the Jews, The Son of Man is Lord even of
the Sabbath day. Matt. xii. 8. And after his ascension to heaven, an inspired
apostle said, He also has ceased from his own works, as God did from his. Heb.
iv. 10. Christ our passover was sacrificed for us on the sixth day of the week,
and the next day was the Sabbath, and fifty days from thence was the first day
of the week, when the Holy Ghost was given, and three thousand souls were
converted, as the first fruits of the death of Christ. Levit. xxiii. 5, 15, 16.
Acts ii. 1 -- 41. And how often is the first day of the week spoken of under
the gospel! Matt. xxviii. 1 -- 7. Mark xv. 2. Luke xxiv. 1. John xx. 1, 19, 26.
Acts xx. 7. And as liberality to the saints are sacrifices to God, he commands
them to be provided on the first day of the week. 1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2. Phil. iv.
1^ Heb. xiii. 16. And the glory of the ministration which was written and
engraven in stones, is done away under the New Testament. 2 Cor. iii. 6 -- 8.
But the Lord's day is ever to be regarded. Rev. 1.10. Though he who does not
regard it to the Lord, does not regard it at all. Romans xiv. 6.
Mr. Hiscox was pastor of this church until he died, May 24, 1704, aged 6^. Mr.
William Gibson, who came from London, was their second pastor, until he died,
March 12, 1717, aged 79. Mr. Joseph Crandal had been a colleague with him for
two years, and he continued in that office until he was taken away by death,
September 13, 1737. Mr. John Maxon was their next pastor, from 1754, unto March
2, 1778, when be di^^. Mr. Ebenezer David, from Philadelphia, was ^^^verted
while in the college at Providence, where he took his first degree in 1772, and
he was called to preach the gospel the next year by this church with their
brethren at Hopkinton; and he was a chaplain in the American army, much
esteemed, until he died in Pennsylvania, March 19, 1778. Thomas Ward was an
early member of this church, whose son Richard was governor of the colony in
1741, 1742; and-his son Samuel was governor in 1762 and 1765, and a member of
Congress in 1774 and 1775, until he died at Philadelphia, March 26, 1776, aged
52. Each of these were members of this church. Mr. William Bliss was called to
preach the gospel by this church before the American war, and he continued with
them through the war, and preached frequently on the island when the British
forces were there, from whom he suffered much. He was ordained as an
evangelist, December 11, 1779, and was installed as pastor of this church,
December 24, 1780. And as is so well esteemed by the Congregational ministers
in Newport, as to be frequently called to supply their pulpits when they go
journeys into the country.

XI. There have been a number of Baptists in Newport for many years, who did
not agree fully with either of the old churches in some things, but whose to
meet by themselves, and to call elders from abroad to minister occasionally to
them, until they formed another church in the town. They carr^^d the liberty
for every brother to improve his gifts in public worship, beyond what the other
churches did: and though a motion was lately made to have two of their most
gifted brethren ordained, yet the matter was deferred for further
consideration. However, we are well informed, that a greater harmony has lately
appeared among all denominations in Newport, than was heretofore known among
them.

XII. Elder Philip Tabor was pastor of the Baptist church in Tiverton and
Dartmouth, before he was imprisoned at Bristol for not favoring ministerial
tyranny. Both of these towns were under the Massachusette government until
1741; and because the majority of the inhabitants would not receive and support
Congregational ministers, a salary for such was put into their State tax, and
they were to draw is out of the State treasury. But their assessors being
informed of it, left that part of the tax on those two towns out of their
assessment. Tabor was one of them, and he, with three assessors more, were
seized on May 25, 1723, and were imprisoned at Bristol until an agent went over
to London, and procured their release by an order from the king and council.
Our second volume, p. 70 -- 73. He lived within the bounds of Dartmouth, but
their meeting was held in the east part of Tiverton, where he ministered to
this Baptist church, until he died in November, 1752. Mr. David Round was born
in Rehoboth, in January, 1706, and was ordained the next pastor of this church
about 1755, and ministered to them for many years, and is now living among
them, and esteemed as a pious man. But as his gifts were small, the church
called Mr. Peleg Buroughs, from the second church in Newport to preach to them
in May, 1775, and he was ordained their pastor, April 13, 1780. A happy rain of
righteousness was then granted among them, which caused the addition of about
an hundred members in two years. Elder Buroughs was born in Newport, June 5,
1748, converted in 1766, and began to preach in 1774; and he is still continued
with this church. That revival of religion caused the gathering of a Baptist
church in the south borders of Freetown, February 15, 1781, and Mr. Amos
Burris, from Groton, in Connecticut, was installed their pastor, May 22, 1783.
But in October, 1784, he removed into the State of Vermont, and they removed
their meeting into the north borders of Tiverton, where it now is; and two men
were raised up to preach among them, who were unitedly ordained as their
pastors, May 19, 1796, namely, James Boomer and Job Barden. The latter is
blind, as to natural fight, but he has such spiritual light as to be esteemed
a clear preacher of the gospel. A Baptist church was formed in New-Shore ham,
on Block-Island, and Mr. Thomas Dodge was ordained their pastor in 1784.

County of Bristol.

XIII. Though the charter of Rhode Island colony, which Mr. Clarke obtained in
1663, plainly included the lands which now are in the towns of Bristol,
Barrington and Warren, as well as two more towns which are in the county of
Newport, and one in the county of Providence, yet the Massachusetts held them
until the year 1741: since that time, the three towns first named, form the
county of Bristol in this State. Warren was a part of the town of Swansea, and
a number of the members of the first church there were formed into a church in
Warren, October 15, 1764, and Dr. Manning was their minister until he removed
to Providence in 1770, as we before observed. After some time, this church
obtained Mr. Charles Thompson to preach to them, and he was ordained their
pastor, July 3, 1771. He was born at Amwell, in New Jersey, April 14, 1748, was
one of the first graduates in our college at Warren in 1769; and such a
blessing was granted on his ministry there as to increase the church from fifty
to eighty-three members in four years. But when the (...) came on, it had many
pernicious effects; and the ^^^ny came up to Warren and burnt their
meeting house and their house for the ministry, May 25, 1778, and carried Mr.
Thompson away as a prisoner and ^^^fined him in a guard-ship at Newport. After
his deliverance was obtained, he went up into Connecticut and preached in
several places, and then was talked and settled at Swansea in 1779, as was
before related. The burnings and destructions which were made by the British
forces at Warren, prevented their ^^^cting another house for worship for many
years; neither could they unite in settling another pastor until lately. Mr.
Luther Baker was raised up among them, and he was ordained their minister,
October 17, 1793, and it is hoped that he may be useful to them for many years
to come.

County of Washington.

XIV. As there is no settled minister who holds to infant baptism, in any part
of this State west of Newport and Providence, it may be proper to inquire into
the reasons of it. A leading cause of it appears to be the sufferings of many
of their fathers from Pedobaptists. After Samuel Gorton and his friends had
purchased the lands in Warwick of Indian Sachems, they were seized and carried
to Boston by an armed force, in the fall of 1643, and were confined in those
parts all winter, and then were banished upon pain of death, not only out of
the Massachusetts colony, but also from their own lands. And captain Edward
Johnson, who was one of the officers that carried them away, published the
views they had in these proceedings, in a history which was printed in London
in 1654. He represents it as the command of Christ to them, that they should
subdue all his enemies in this country, as Israel did the heathen in Canaan.
And he says, "Fail not in prosecution of the work, for our Lord Christ (...)
furnished you with able pilots, to steer the helm in a godly peaceable civil
government; then see that you make choice of such as are sound both in
profession and confession, men fearing God and hating bribe^^ whose commission
is not limited with the commands of the second table, but they are to (...) to
the rules of the first table also. And let them be sure to put on Joshua's
resolution and courage, never to make a league with any of these seven
sectaries. 1. The Gortonists, who (...) the humanity of Christ, and most
blasphemously and proudly profess themselves to be personally Christ's 2. The
Papists, who, with (almost) equal blasphemy and pride, prefer their own merits
and works of (...) pererogation as equal with Christ's invaluable death and
sufferings. 3. The Famalists, who depend upon rare revelations, and forsake the
sure revealed word of Christ. 4. Seekers, who deny the churches and ordinances
of Christ. 5. Antinomians, who deny the moral law to be the rule of Christ. 6.
Anabaptists, who deny civil government to be proved of Christ. 7. The Prelacy,
who will have their own injunctions submitted unto in the church of Christ.
Johnson's History, p. 8.

But Gorton and some of his friends went over to England, and procured an order
from thence, for them to enjoy the lands which they had purchased. And as he
actually held, that what we read about the coming, death and resurrection of
Christ, are to be understood mystically, and not literally, he taught his
followers in that way, and fixed lasting prejudices in their minds against all
church government, as well as against tyranny under religious pretenses. And
many of their posterity neglect public worship even to our times. A sensible
man in Cranston, by particular request, took an account of all (...)
inhabitants of that town in 1774, and he found thirty-eight families who
^^^rded no religious meeting at all, nor their fathers before them. These
sprang from the first planters of Warwick.
The sufferings of the Quakers also who came to America after Johnson's history
was published, filled many with great dislike to the ruling denomination in the
Massachusetts. To which we may add, that no communities who held to infant
baptism, ever prevailed much without the sword of (...) magistrate to uphold
them, or oppression to drive them together. Neither have Baptist churches
prospered much without the power of the Spirit of God among them.

XV. The first Baptist church in the county of Washington was in
North-Kingston. Elder Baker ^ent from Newport, and began a meeting there
toward the close of the last century, as Mr. Comer (...) us; and a paper of
their own, dates the beginning of their church about 1710. Mr. Richard ^^^cot
was their pastor for many years, and lived till after 1740. Mr. David Sprague
was ordained a colleague with him about 1739. The great awakenings in other
parts of the country, in and after 1741, affected a number of people in these
parts, which caused various controversies. The laying on of hands upon every
member had been carried so far, as not to allow their members to hear any
others pray or preach. And when Mr. Bound, of Boston, met elder Wightman, of
Groton, at Warwick, in 1743, the elders with whom he was connected opposed his
acting in the ordination; and Mr. John Callender, of Newport, wrote an
unfavourable account of it to England, and also of the work then going on in
the land, and said, "I have seen no cause to alter the opinion I early
entertained of Mr. Whitefield, this he was a second George Fox." But all
experience since has evidenced his great mistake. For the plan of doctrine
which Whitefield held forth was directly opposite to that which Fox taught, and
he ever appeared against the idea of raising any new sect in the world, and
exerted all his powers to revive pure religion, according to the holy
scriptures, among all sorts of people wherever he came, and left the
government of churches to others. But Mr. Wesley and his followers have been
exceeding zealous for the doctrines which Fox held, and to raise a new sect
under another name. The work which began in the year 1740, naturally caused
opposition to arise in all who were settled down in formality, of every
denomination. And the general meeting of the Baptist churches at Newport,
September ^^, 1749, sent an address to their brethren, in which they said, "We
have endeavored to promote and maintain general peace and unity among the
brotherhood, and have not been altogether unsuccessful; and we heartily desire
that the fruits and effects of our endeavors may diffuse and spread themselves
abroad in other places, and throughout the churches. And though we should have
been glad to have had the company and assistance of more of our ministers and
brethren, to carry on and encourage the great work of our Redeemer's kingdom;
yet we who are assembled in our general meeting, according to our general
character, do take courage in the Lord to consider by what means the general
interest and peace of the churches might be promoted, and grieve at any
measures or steps that were or had been taken, by which the same were lessened
and impaired. This gave us occasion to consider the sad dissensions and
divisions which seem to be carrying on in several churches; more especially at
South-Kingston, North-Kingston, Warwick, Greenwich, etc" This was signed by
Daniel Wightman, Philip Tabor, Nicholas ^^^ts, Samuel Winsor, Job Mason, and
Stephen Gorton, elders, with seven brethren. Elder Sprague had been much
engaged in preaching up the doctrines which had promoted the late revival of
religi^^ in this country, and he assisted in ordaining Mr. Samuel Drown, as
pastor of a Baptist church lately formed in Coventry, October 11, 1749, where
he met with several separate ministers from Connecticut, and invited them to
come and preach among his people, which they did with great effects. And on
April 4, 1750, Sprague acted with Mr. Pain, in ordaining Mr. Stephen Babcock
as pastor of a Baptist church in Westerly. And upon these things, above seventy
members of this church, male and female, signed a paper in May, 1750, to shut
him out of their meeting house, and he went and gathered a church in Exeter.
Mr. James Wightman was afterward ordained a pastor of this church, and
remained so until his death in the spring of 1791. Mr. ^^han Hill was ordained
a colleague with him in 1781, and still continues in that office. And for same
years past they have received men to preach in their meeting house, who have
held forth the doctrine that was shut out of it in 1750. A church was firmed in
connection with them in Richmond, and Mr. John Pendleton was ordained their
pastor in June, 1771; and Mr. Henry Joslin succeeds him therein.

XVI. Hopkinton was once the north part of Westerly, where some of Mr. Clarke's
church lived, before the separation on account of the Sabbath took place in
1671. Mr. John Crandal was one of them, who was imprisoned with Clarke and
Holmes at Boston, in 1651. He was called over to New London, and baptized some
men there in 1674, for which the minister of the town threatened him with a
prosecution the next court; and "old Mrs. Rogers was laid under admonition for
maintaining that children had no right to baptism." In 1678 Mr. Hubbard wrote
to a friend in Jamaica, and said, "Our number here is twenty, at Westerly
seven, and at New London ten." On December 7, 1681, he wrote to England, that
two Indians came to Newport that week from Nantucket, who were Baptists, and
one of them a preacher, with "a letter of recommendation from one Peter Folger,
a member of our old church," that is, of Mr. Clarke's church. This preacher was
going over to Soconet to preach to the Indians there, of which captain Church
had given them notice, Thomas West and his wife, and another English woman, and
two Indians, of Martha's Vineyard, had joined to this church at Newport before;
and on January 28, 1682, Hubbard wrote to Providence, and said, "There is a
brother here, of Martha's Vineyard, one Isaac Takkamme, an Indian, who brings
word that all are well there; brother West and his wife, and sister Rogers, and
our brother David Oaks, an Indian, and that they stand fast in the faith."
Isaac Decamy was afterward pastor of a Baptist church among the Indians there,
who might be the same person. Our first volume, p. 438. In 1708 the brethren at
Westerly were amicably dismissed, and formed a church there. I have not
obtained an exact account of their ministers since, though I find by Mr. Comer
that Mr. Joseph Maxon was their pastor in 1729, and Mr. Thomas Hiscox was a
preacher among them; and he was a minister there to old age. Mr. Joshua Clarke
was a minister at Hopkinton for many years, and died in June, 1792. And by a
letter from Rhode Island, September 11, 1795, we are informed that "The church
at Hopkinton at present consists of four hundred and sixty-two members, under
the care of the Reverend John Burdick, who was ordained an evangelist, June 6;
1774, and installed pastor of the church, September 3, 1973. At the same time
and place, Henry Clarke, (son of the late elder Joshua Clarke) was ordained an
evangelist. Also Asa Coon was ordained an evangelist the same day. Three
churches have been set off from this church at Hopkinton in fellowship in
fifteen years. One at Bristol, in Connecticut, constituted in September, 1780,
formerly under the care of the Reverend John Davis, deceased, of about seventy
members. A second church at Petersburgh, in New York State, of ninety-two
members, under the care of the Reverend William Coon. A third at New London
great neck, of forty-two members, under the care of the Reverend Davis Rogers.
Elder Clarke has lately moved to Brookfield at the Uno^^tle, in the State of
New York, where are about twenty members who meet statedly on the Sabbath (...)
divine worship, and it is expected that they will soon form into a church."

XVII. Mr. David Sprague was born at Hingham, in the Massachusetts, and was
converted at Situate, in this State, where he joined to the Baptist church
under the care of elder Fisk. As he was a man of superior gifts, he was invited
to preach among them; but a sense of the greatness of the work made him afraid
to attempt it, until a passage of scripture was opened with peculiar clearness
to his mind, and then he came forward and delivered a sermon. This was very
agreeable to his minister, and to the people; but when he preached his second
discourse, they observed more the tenor of his teaching, and said to him, "If
you go on in this way, you will be as bad an ^lectioner as any of the
Presbyterians." This account I received from his own mouth; and he informed
(...), that their opposition turned him back into their general way of
preaching, for a number of years. And his coming forward in preaching as he was
first taught, caused his being shut out of the church where he was first
ordained, and another was formed at Exeter, in the fall of 1750. But as they
had before made so much of external baptism and laying on of hands, they now
went over to the other extreme and received one or more to the ordinance of the
supper without any water baptism. The powerful effects of the preaching of
separate ministers from Connecticut, had a great influence to cause this (...)
in their minds; and an acquaintance with lively Baptist ministers, also removed
the prejudices against the Baptists, from the minds of many in Connecticut, and
many were soon baptized, and it seemed as though all their separate churches
would become Baptists. But this raised such opposition to whom they called
re-baptizing, in the mind of the pastor of the separate church in Canterbury,
where the separation began, that he, with others, prevailed with seven or eight
teachers to retract their baptism by immersion. And a council of them censured
the pastor of the first separate church in Middleborough, because he refused to
follow that example. But this censure caused the meeting of the delegates of
twenty-seven churches at Exeter, May 23, 1753, who condemned the censuring of
each other on either side. Our second volume, p. 210, 211. Though the divisions
and controversies that have appeared where believer's baptism has been
introduced, has been held up as a strong argument against it from age to age.
In 1653 Mr. Henry Dunster, president of the college at Cambridge, gave up
infant baptism, and preached against it in the pulpit there. But Mr. Jonathan
Mitchel, pastor of their church, went to talk with him upon it, after which he
said, "I had a strange experience; I found hurrying and pressing suggestions
against pedobaptism, and injected scruples and thoughts whether the other way
might not be right, and infant baptism an invention of men, and whether I might
with a good conscience baptize children, and the like. And these thoughts were
darted in with some impression, and left a strange confusion and sickliness
upon my spirit. Yet, methought, it was not hard to discern that they were from
the EVIL ONE. 1. Because they were rather injected, hurrying suggestions, than
any deliberate thoughts, or bringing any light with them. 2. Because they were
unseasonable, interrupting me in my study for the Sabbath, and putting my
spirit into confusion, so as I had much ado to do aught in my sermon. It was
not now a time to study that matter; but when in the former part of the week I
had given myself to that study, the more I studied it, the more clear and
rational light I saw for pedobaptism; but now these suggestions hurried me into
scruples. But they made me cry out to God for his help, and he did afterward
calm and clear up my spirit. I thought the end of them was, First, to show me
the corruption of my mind; how apt that was to take in error, even as my heart
is to take in lust. Secondly, to make me walk in fear, and to take hold on
Jesus Christ to keep me in the truth; and it was a check to my former
self-confidence, and it made me fearful to go needlessly to Mr. Dunster; for,
methought, I found a venom and poison in his insinuations and discourses
against pedobaptism. Thirdly, that I might be mindful of the aptness in others
to be soon shaken in mind, and that I might warn others thereof, and might know
how to speak to them from experience. And indeed my former experience of
irreligious injections, was some help to me to discover the nature of these. I
resolved also on Mr. Hooker's principle, that I would have an argument able to
remove a mountain, before I would recede from, or appear against a truth or
practice received among the faithful." Mitchel's Life, p. 69, 70.
Dr. Cotton Mather published this account in 1697, and Mr. John Cleaveland of
Ipswich inserted it in the introduction to a large pamphlet on infant baptism,
which he published at Salem, 1784. Mr. Cleaveland was expelled out of New Haven
college in 1744, for meeting for worship on the ^ord's day in a house separate
from the parish meeting house in Canterbury, with the first Congregational
church in that town, who had refused to receive a teacher whom the world would
have forced upon them. But our Lord says, Mary that are first shall be last,
and the last shall be first. Matt. xix. 30. And so it has been in our land.
Those separate churches began in Canterbury, from whence they spread through
all our country; but there is not one of them now left in the Massachusetts,
and but few in Connecticut, while Canterbury still refuses to give up infant
sprinkling. The church in Exeter prospered under the ministry of elder Sprague
for about ten years, and then he gave up communion in the ordinance of the
supper with all who were only sprinkled in infancy, which caused his dismission
from this church. He then went and preached a while at New London, and another
season on Block-Island, which is called New-Shoreham; after which he returned
to Exeter, where he died in 1777. His son, Solomon Sprague, was early changed
by grace, and he was ordained pastor of this church June 1, 1769. He was a good
physician, as well as a faithful and successful minister of the gospel, until
he fell asleep in February, 1794, aged 65. Mr. Joseph Case was a useful
preacher in this church, until he removed into the State of New York, in 1791.
This church have experienced greater blessings since they gave up mixed
communion than ever they did before. Mr. John Tillinghast has been a main
leader among them lately.

XVIII. Mr. Stephen Babcock was one of the first members of a Congregational
church that was formed in Westerly, May 5, 1742. Princess Christian History,
Vol. 1. p. 207, 210
. But in a few years after he saw such opposition in his minister and others,
against what he believed to be the power of godliness, that he withdrew and set
up a meeting at his own house, and a church was gathered there, and he was
ordained their pastor, April 4, 1750; in whose ordination elder David Sprague
and elder Solomon Pain united, it being the first instance of the two
denominations uniting in such an action among these churches. Elder Babcock was
zealous for such a union all his days, while others renounced it. He died after
the war began in 1775. His son Oliver Babcock was his successor in that office
until he died, February 13, 1784. His cousin Elkanah Babcock was their next
minister, until the majority of the church rejected him because of his turning
off into corrupt principles. In the mean time another church was gathered in
Westerly, about the year 1770, and Mr. Isaiah Wilcox was ordained their pastor,
who was very zealous for the communion of the two denominations together, and
they were a large church when he died in March, 1793. In the fall of 1750, such
a church was formed in South-Kingston, and Mr. James Rogers was ordained their
pastor, and he continued so about twenty years; but he had entangled himself so
much in the affairs of this life, and was involved so deeply in debt, that he
went off into the State of New York, and his church was divided and dissolved.
A number of them, who still hold to mixed communion, have lately had a revival
among them, to whom others have joined, and they are of the Groton conference.
But in the work which began in 1778, a number gave up mixed communion, and
formed a church there, and Mr. Benjamin Weight was ordained their pastor, in
August, 1781, in which office he is yet continued. Another church arose out of
the ruins of the former about 1774, who since meet in Richmond, and Mr.
Benjamin Barber was ordained their pastor in 1793. In another part of Richmond
a new church was formed, and Mr. Charles Boss was ordained their pastor in
June, 1781, and he was well esteemed in his office until his death in 1789.
These three churches do not hold to mixed communion. But when the church in
Exeter gave up that practice, deacon Philip Jenkins drew off from them, and
gathered a church in that way, July 21, 1764, and he was ordained their pastor
the 6th of September following, and is still continued with them. Their meeting
is in North-Kingston. And in the glorious year 1780, religion was revived in
the south part of that town, and a new church was gathered, and Mr. William
Northup was ordained their pastor in 1782, and they are now a large church. An
Indian Baptist church was formed in Charlestown, in this county, above thirty
years ago, of which James Symons was pastor, and then Samuel Niles; and they
had many valuable Christians therein; In 1784 Niles's church had about fifty
members.
but most of them are since dead, and the church is dissolved. The chief of the
Indians who are living have removed into the State of New York.

County of Kent.

XIX. The first Baptist church in this county was in Warwick, and Mr. Manasseh
Martin was their minister, before 1730. In a letter from governor Jencks, in
February that year, he says, "I have often heard, that elder Martin denied that
Christ received any part of the human nature of the virgin Mary, in whose womb
he was conceived, and by whom he was born into the world." He held Jesus to be
the only begotten Son of God, but held his humanity in a mystical way, which
caused much uneasiness among his brethren, excepting elder Everet, who appeared
to be of his mind. Mr. Charles Holden succeeded Martin, and was pastor of this
church for many years; and Mr. Abraham Lippet was ordained therein in October,
1782; but in 1794 he removed into the State of New York, and Mr. Samuel
Littlefield was ordained in his place at Warwick. The church in East-Greenwich
was formed, and Mr. Daniel Fisk was ordained their pastor in June, 1743. He was
son to elder Fisk, of Situate; and he ministered to this church about four
years, and then was dismissed and went and preached in various places, until he
died with the smallpox in Swansea in 1764. Mr. John Gorton was born in
Cranston, April 22, 1723, and was ordained a pastor of this church, September
6, 1753; and he was an acceptable minister among them until his death, in 1793.
And Mr. Manchester, of Coventry, now ministereth also to this church. Mr.
Timothy Green was formerly the pastor of a Baptist church in Coventry; wherein
Mr. Thomas Manchester was ordained, September 12, 1782. A church was formed in
the west part of Warwick, in connection with these, and Mr. David Corpe was
ordained their minister in 1791. A Baptist church had been formed in the same
place about fifty years ago, and Mr. Benjamin Pierce was ordained their pastor,
and they came into fellowship with Exeter church and others in 1750. And they
increased so much, that Mr. Peter Werden was ordained a colleague with him, May
21, 1751. And he labored there until April, 1757, when he removed up to
Coventry, by the consent of the church. After Mr. Peirce's death, Mr. Budlong
was their minister for a while, and then this church was dissolved, and many of
them removed into other parts of the country. There was a powerful work in
Coventry in 1748, and a Baptist church was formed there, and Mr. Samuel Drown
was ordained their pastor, October 11, 1749. But in a few years he gave up his
Baptist principles, and went and settled at Portsmouth, in New Hampshire, where
he practiced inform baptism the remainder of his days. He died there January
17, 1770. After elder Werden removed to Coventry, he ministered to the church
there for twelve years, in which time many were hopefully converted, and
Christians were built up in the ways of God, and then, as a large part of his
people had removed, he also went and settled where he now is in Berkshire. The
west part of Coventry, and or the towns adjacent, had very little of the
appearance of religion among them, until God was pleased to pour out his Spirit
upon them in the beginning of 1773. Mr. Caleb Nichols was greatly blessed in
his labors there afterward. He was born in West-Greenwich in March, 1743, met
with a change in 1767, and began to preach among this people in 1773, and a
church was formed, and he was ordained their pastor in June, 1774. When the war
came on it produced many evil effects; yet in May, 1779, such a revival of
religion was granted in these parts, that he baptized above sixty in two
months, and his church increased to three hundred members in five years. But in
the great shakings and confusion which took place in 1786, this church was
scattered, and many removed into other parts of the land, and elder Nichols was
dismissed in the spring of 1788, and went and settled at Pownal, in Vermont,
where he is still useful. Mr. Nathaniel Price was raised up to preach to this
church, and he now holds meetings with some of them at the house where elder
Werden formerly preached, and Mr. John Benson preaches where Nichols did,
though neither of them are ordained. A Baptist church was formed in
West-Greenwich in 1773, and Mr. Elisha Green was ordained their pastor,
September 21, 1775, and remains so still.

XX. A few general remarks shall close this chapter. The multiplicity of sects
in this State, has often been advanced as an argument against the religions
liberty which was granted therein; but there are now about at many sects in the
town of Boston, as there are in the whole State of Rhode Island. There are some
in Boston who pray for souls in purgatory, while others boldly preach up the
fire of hell as that which will finally purge away all sin, without the prayers
of any in this world. And these things are carried the highest in Boston and
Philadelphia, of any part of America. A party spirit, and bribery in election
of rulers, were formerly laid as a great ^^proach on the colony of
Rhode Island; but our land is full of these evils now, and they have been
varried as high as any where in the town of Boston. Our land has also been
filled, in the year past, with publications against our highest rulers, because
a (...) was sent to England, and made a treaty with the rulers there, which
gives them more power here than they had before. But in the year 1786 two
ministers came over with commissions from the bishops in England, and they have
made other bishops the most of the United States, to whom moneys and stands are
given by governments; yet most men are silent about these things, or else
commend them as evidences of candor and catholicism in our land. Whereas the
bishops, and their ministry in England, who have been supported by law, have
had more influence in their late wars against liberty in America and France,
than all other men in their nation. But as the government of Rhode Island never
granted any lands to religious ministers, nor supported any by tax, all the
power of the church of England has raised no more than four of their societies
in the whole State, and one of them is now nearly dissolved, if not quite. And
bishop Seabury, who claimed a power there, died in March, 1796, state the first
part of this book was printed.
Governor Jencks was a leader in making the law in 1716, to exclude all sueing
for ministers salaries from their courts, though he was in earnest to have the
ministers of Christ supported voluntarily. Our second volume, p. 48, 114. But a
custom was introduced into their government in 1770, of incorporating societies
to collect and manage funds of money for the support of religious ministers;
and the hope of obtaining such a fund in Mr. Snow's congregation in Providence,
was an evident motive for the ordination there in 1793; which shut him out of a
house that he had as just a right in, as any minister has to any house for
worship in our land. And the four ministers from the Massachusetts, who acted
in that affair, are far from allowing the people in their own government a
power to dismiss their minister without his own consent, or else the advice of
a council whom he had a voice in calling. And according to the word of God, the
only ministers who are to be followed, hold forth Christ in their conversation,
the same yesterday, and today, and forever, and are willing in all things to
live honestly. Heb. xiii. 7, 8, 18. But how can any man live honestly, who eats
the bread of others for naught? 2 Thessalonians. iii. 7 -- 10. And how can a people
live honestly, if they require their minister to go a warfare at his own
charges? 1 Cor. ix. 7 -- 14. Each of which iniquities have long prevailed under
the mask of religion, beyond what they could possibly have done in any other
way.

CHAP. XII. STATE OF CONNECTICUT.
County of New London.
I. A concise View of the Government of Connecticut. II. Of the Baptist
Churches in Groton. III. New London. IV. Stonington. V. Lyme. VI. Colchester,
Bozrab and Preston. VII. Thompson. VIII. Ashford. IX. Woodstock. X. Hampton and
Killingley. XI. Plainfield and Mansfield. XII. Farmington. XIII. Suffield. XIV.
Enfield and others. XV. Wallingfoord. XVI. Stratfield. XVII. Stamford, etc.
XVIII. County of Litchfield. XIX. Of Middlesex. XX. Tolland.

1. CONNECTICUT has ever had the privilege of choosing her own rulers, and of
making her own laws, as well as Rhode Island; and ministerial influence was
much more mild there at first, than it has been in our days. John Hames was the
governor of Massachusetts Bay in 1635, and pronounced the sentence of
banishment against Roger Williams; but he and Mr. Thomas Hooker went up to
Connecticut soon after. And when Williams was at his house at Hartford, Haines
said to him, "I must confess to you, that the most wise God has provided and
cut out this part of his world for a refuge and receptacle for all forts of
consciences. I am now under a cloud, and my brother Hooker, with the Bay, as
you have been, We have removed from them thus far, and yet they are not
satisfied." Historical Collections at Boston, Vol. 1. p. 280.
No, nor ever could be satisfied in that way. For in 1708, a governor who had
been a minister, and came from the Massachusetts, obtained an act to set up
ministers above all their churches. And in 1742, their ministers procured a law
to punish every man who should preach the gospel in any parish, without the
consent of the parish minister. And as Mr. John Owen, pastor of the first
parish in Groton, ventured to preach against such proceedings, he was
complained of to the legislature at Hartford in May, 1743, and an act was
passed to bring him before them the next October. A resolve was also passed,
that no persons of the Presbyterian or Congregational denominations should have
the benefit of the act of toleration, granted to dissenters from their
establishment, and that no courts below the legislature should have power to
admit any to that privilege. Owen avoided being taken in October, when a law
was made against the preaching of any itinerant minister who might come from
any other government. And as a complaint was entered against Dr. Benjamin
Pomroy, of Hebron, for preaching against their laws, both he and Owen were
ordered to be brought before them the next May. And in May, 1744, both of them
were brought before the assembly at Hartford, and were compelled to make a
confession for said preaching, to pay costs of prosecution, and Pomroy was
bound to his good behavior. And in the December following, the ministers of
Windham county ordained a minister for the first parish in Canterbury, against
the vote of the church there; which began the separations in our country, from
such ministers and their churches. And how can any men be justly blamed for
separating from those who claimed a power above the churches of Christ?

II. The first Baptist church in Connecticut was formed in Groton about 1705.
Elder Valentine Wightman came from North-Kingston, and settled in Groton, and
was the first pastor of this church. They suffered for a while from the ruling
party; but in the glorious year 1741, he and Mr. Owen were agreed in the work
which was then going on in the land, and they enjoyed liberty until elder
Wightman was taken away by death, June 9, 1747, aged 66. He introduced singing
in public worship into his church, and published a pamphlet to defend it. And
being called to preach in Lyme, Mr. Bulkley, of Colchester, came and held a
dispute with him upon baptism and the support of gospel ministers, June 7,
1727, of which Bulkley published an account, and Wightman answered it. Our
second volume, p. 89, 90. After his death the church called elder Daniel Fisk
to be their minister, and he continued with them seven years; but they were
then so much divided, that many of them gave a new declaration of their
experiences, and signed new articles of faith and a covenant, June 28, 1754,
and elected Mr. Timothy Wightman to be their pastor, and he was ordained as
such, May 20, 1756, and continues so still. He is a son of their first pastor,
and was born November 20, 1719. His brother, John Wightman, was ordained as an
evangelist by this church, June 15, 1774, and traveled and preached in various
parts of the country. Mr. Wightman was a shining example of uniform piery and
benevolence, until death put an end to his useful life, which he ended in the
most joyful manner at Farmington.
A daughter of their first pastor married a Mr. Rathbun, who has two sons and
two grandsons, who are ordained Baptist ministers. Elder Timothy Wightman's
son, Jesse, is also a Baptist minister at Springfield. A dispute arose in this
church in September, 1765, about the nature of spiritual teaching and the
improvement of gifts, upon which a division ensued, and another church was
formed, in which Mr. Silas Burris was ordained; and they held to mixed
commuion, and the Groton Conference was named from thence. But a revival of
religion was granted in the mother church in 1774, which caused the addition of
thirty members to it in about a year; and another church was formed in the
north part of Groton, May 25, 1775, and Mr. Rufus Allen was ordained their
pastor, and they had thirty-six members in 1784. But their pastor died not long
after, since which their church is dissolved. Though the first Baptist church
in Groton had seventy-eight members in 1787, and they increased to one hundred
and fifty-eight in two years, and to one hundred and eighty two in 1794, beside
all that have died, have been dismissed or excluded.

III, The second Baptist church in Connecticut was formed at New London, and
Mr. Stephen Gorton was ordained their pastor November 28, 1726. He was a man of
considerable gifts, and was minister there for many years; but he fell into
some scandalous conduct, and his church was finally dissolved. It was in that
part of the town where the church now is, who keep the seventh day as the
Sabbath, of whom we have spoken before. In January, 1744, elder Timothy Peckom
baptized some persons in the heart of the town, and some more at Saybrook, for
which he was put in prison; and a church was gathered a year or two after, of
the two denominations together; and Mr. Noah Hammond was ordained in this
church in July, 1754, who afterward was pastor of a church on Long Island,
where he died in October, 1774. Elder Lester was also of this church, who is
now at Saybrook. Another church was formed, and Mr. Joshua Morse was ordained
their pastor, May 17, 1750, who in the time of the late war removed to
Sandisfield, and Mr. Reuben Palmer is minister in that place, which now is
called Montville. Mr. Zadock Darrow was an early teacher in the first of these
churches, of which he has been pastor many years. He was born in December,
1728, and his church gave up mixed communion in 1790. and there was such a
revival among them in 1794 as caused the addition of ninety-one members in one
year. John Rogers began a sect in this town in 1677, upon the following
principles. As to language and dress they held with the Quakers, but they held
the external use of baptism and the supper as the Baptists do. But they held
that the establishing the first day of the week as the Sabbath was idolatry,
and they took much pains to pull it down, by testifying against it, and
interrupting others in their keeping it. They were also earnestly set against
supporting ministers by law; and they suffered much for their opposition to
these two practices; and they were singular in refusing to employ any
physicians in sickness, or midwives for women in travail, holding that they
were to be healed or delivered by the prayer of faith. But as a few of them
were left to put an end to their own lives, and rulers have been so wise of
late as to avoid their former severities toward them, their society is nearly
dissolved, and many of their children are very useful men in various parts of
the country. Three brethren of one family are deacons in three Baptist churches.

IV. The work of the Spirit of God in our land in 1741, was very powerful in
Stonington, where there were three Congregational societies, with ministers in
each of them. Two of those ministers favored the work as long as their
churches were increased thereby; but a new piece of cloth, if put into an old
garment, makes the rent worse, and new wine will burst old bottles, as our Lord
observes to those who were building upon their own doings and traditions. Luke
v. 31 -- 38. Such opposition appeared against the late work, and elder Wightman
was so clear in it, that a number of people were baptized and formed a church
in Stonington, and Mr. Wait Palmer was ordained their pastor in September,
1743. And after the separation began at Canterbury, it spread into Stonington,
and a church was formed there, and Mr. Matthew Smith was ordained their pastor,
December 10, 1746; and he continued with them until the spring of 1749, and
then left them and removed out of the town. And many embraced believers'
baptism and went and joined to elder Babcock's church in Westerly; and when Mr.
Pain had determined to use all his influence to stop the prevalence of the
Baptist principles in their separate churches, he and Babcock joined in writing
letters to all their churches; and delegates from forty churches met at the
house of Mr. Simon Drown, of Stonington, May 29, 1754, and spent three days in
hearing the controversies between the two parties. Mr. Solomon Pain took much
pains to prove, that it was a bad temper and conduct in the Baptists that
caused the breach between him and them. But his brother, Elisha Pain, a man of
much more knowledge and experience, gave it as his mind, that the difficulty
sprang from the nature of opposite principles. For sprinkling of infants, upon
the faith of their parents, and burying of believers upon the profession of
their own faith, are opposite principles. And Mr. Elisha Pain said, "Dear
brother, if you can reconcile the above principles, in the essential parts
thereof, you will remove all the grounds of bars and disputes: but if there be
an essential difference in the above articles, and consequently in the practice
on them, then there is an Achan in the camp; and no marvel that Israel has, in
all reformations, been troubled therewith." Our second volume, p. 212. Infant
baptism is built upon the covenant of circumcision, which made a great
difference between Jews by nature, and all other men; but in the Christian
church the apostle Peter could not countenance that distinction without
dissimulation. Gal. ii. 11 -- 16. And for stealing of holy things, and
dissembling about them, Achan was destroyed in the valley of Achor. Joshua vii.
11 -- 26. And God says of his church, I will allure her, and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her; and I will give her her vineyards
from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope, and she shall sing
there as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came out of the
land of Egypt. And I will have mercy upon her that had not obtained mercy; and
I will say to them which were not my people, Thou art my people; and they shall
say, Thou art my God. Hosea ii. 14, 15, 23. This he says to his church under
the gospel. 1 Peter ii. 10. Romans ix. 25. The holy scriptures are our rule, and
not the best of men upon earth; yet love to men as Christians was then set up
by many as the rule of communion, instead of the written word; and their inward
feelings were also made a rule of discipline, until some were censured for not
concurring therewith. Upon this they renounced mixed communion, and gathered a
second Baptist church in Stonington, and Mr. Simeon Brown was ordained their
pastor in March, 1765. And a parish minister in Stonington said two years
after, "Not less than two thirds of the congregation, formerly under my care,
have withdrawn from my ministry, and formed themselves into Baptist and
separate churches." Preface to Fish's Nine Sermons, p. 3.
And in January, 1769, Mr. Eleazar Brown was ordained in the first Baptist
church in that town, which is four miles north of the other. He was born in
Stonington, in June, 1728, and was a faithful and successful minister, until he
died in peace, July 11, 1795. Such a blessing was granted there in 1792, as
caused the addition of fifty-six members to this church; and in 1793 Mr. Peleg
Randal was ordained a colleague pastor in this church, in which he yet
continues. And on October 22, 1794, they ordained Mr. Abel Brown as an
evangelist, to go up and labor in the State of New York. Elder Wait Palmer is
yet living, but has not preached much for many years. Elder Simeon Brown was
born in Stonington, January 31, 1723, and his usefulness is still granted, and
in the revival of 1792 seventy-six members were added to his church. The third
Baptist church in Stonington was constituted down at the harbor, April 22,
1775, and Mr. Valentine Wightman Rathbun was ordained their pastor in May,
1787. He was born May 13, 1761. Mr. John Rathbun, his father, was ordained
there as an evangelist, March 15, 1781, and is settled in Ashford. A fourth
church was formed in Stonington, and Mr. Samuel Northup, from Narraganset, was
ordained their pastor in 1793, in connection with the Groton Conference.

V. A separate church was formed at Lyme, and Mr. Ebenezer Mack was ordained
their pastor, January 12, 1749. He and many of the church became Baptists
afterward, and he continued with them until he was dismissed, in September,
1768, and he removed to Marlow in New Hampshire. And Mr. Jason Lee was ordained
the pastor of this church, and has had great success therein, being connected
with the Groton Conference. There had been a Baptist church in the east part of
Lyme before this, but they were broken and dissolved. There was also a Baptist
church formed in the north part of that town, and Mr. Christopher Minor was
their minister for some years, who is now at Enfield.

VI. A Baptist church was formed in Colchester in 1743, and Mr. Zebulun
Waterman was their minister for a number of years. After him Mr. Ichabod Allen
ministered to them for a longer time, and who is still living among them; but
he has been rather unsteady both in his principles and conduct, which served
to scatter the flock. But in May, 1784, a new gathering and union took place
among them, and Mr. Abel Palmer became their pastor, under whose ministry they
have enjoyed many blessings. Their house for worship is near the borders of
Montville. Another Baptist church had been formed in Colchester in 1783, near
the borders of Lebanon, and Mr. Christopher Palmer, father to Abel, was
ordained their pastor. They came from Stonington. Many blessings have been
granted upon these churches, and upon people who have sprung from them, many of
whom have settled in the wilderness, upon the head branches of the Mohawk and
Susquehanna rivers, in the State of New York, where a new Association was
formed in 1795, of thirteen churches, and more than five hundred members, which
churches had been all formed in five years, as Mr. Abel Palmer says, who was at
said Association. Those people went mainly from New England, and a large part
of them out of the Stonington Association. There has been a mixed communion
church in Norwich, in that part which is now Bozrah, for several years, and Mr.
Peter Rogers was their minister, who is now at Hampton, but I know not how
their state now is. The mixed communion church of Preston, have many of their
members in Canterbury, and meetings are often held in both places.

County of Windham.

VII. As the great reformation in our land was opposed by the ruling party in
Thompson, then a part of Killingly, a separation took place there, and a
Baptist church was formed in 1750, and Mr. Whitman Jacobs was ordained their
pastor. They held the laying on of hands upon every member as a term of
communion, and an Association was formed upon those principles, which increased
to about eight churches in 1763; but in two years after the most of them gave
up that bar of communion, of whom Mr. Jacobs was one, and a council was called
at Thompson in February, 1767, who could not unite the church; and as a number
of them removed soon after to Royalston, their minister removed there also in
1769. The brethren in Thompson, after many labors, covenanted together anew in
September, and Mr. John Martin was ordained their pastor, November 3, 1773. He
went from Rehoboth, and is still useful among them.

VIII. Mr. Thomas Dennison was baptized by elder Wightman, of Groton, in the
summer of 1743, and he gathered a small church at Ashford, where he was
ordained in November following. Elder Moulton assisted in his ordination, who
derived his succession from Mr. John Callender, and he from his uncle Elisha
Callender, in whose ordination three Congregational ministers of Boston
assisted. And this line of succession is much valued by some, while all who
consistently hold the Congregational principles, adopted by the fathers of the
Massachusetts, hold that the power of ordination is in each church. This church
in Ashford broke up in a year or two, and Mr. Dennison turned back to infant
baptism, and he assisted in the ordinations of the first separate ministers in
Mansfield, Canterbury, Plainfield and Norwich; and was installed himself as
pastor of a church in that part of Norwich which is now Franklin, all in the
year 1746. But in a few years he left that people, and preached occasionally in
various parts of the country, without being settled over any other flock, until
he died in Brooklyn, near Canterbury, October, 24, 1787. A new Baptist church
was formed in Ashford in 1774, and Mr. Ustick preached to them for a year or
two, and then went to Grafton, and Mr. Ebenezer Lamson was ordained their
pastor June 10, 1778. But he removed to Sutton in April, 1783, as was before
observed; and after several years, they obtained Mr. Dyer Stark for their
minister, who has had considerable success among them. The second Baptist
church in Ashford was formed in the glorious year 1780. Mr. John Rathbun had
removed from Stonington, into the north part of Ashford before; and after this
church was formed, he was ordained at Stonington, March 15, 1781, and has been
the pastor of this church ever since. He was born June 26, 1729. In a revival
of religion in the east part of Ashford, a third church was formed, and Mr.
Daniel Bolton was ordained therein, June 27, 1792. He went from Bridgwater.
Part of this church live in Pomfret. About three years after, Mr. Bolton
gathered another church near the adjoining corners of Ashford, Union and
Woodstock, and settled as their minister.

IX. The first Baptist church in Woodstock was gathered in the following
manner. Biel Ledoyt was a chief leader in mirth and vanity among young people
there, before he heard a Baptist minister preach a sermon in the town, in
December, 1763, which was a means of fixing conviction of sin in his
conscience, and in the March following his soul was brought into gospel
liberty; but as soon as his change was heard of abroad, four of his old
companions came one evening, to try if they could not draw him back to his
former ways again. He readily retired with them to a place where they could be
by themselves, and he laid open to them the way of sin and death, and the way
of life and peace, in such a manner that two of them went home with a deep
sense of sin upon their minds, which terminated happily, and religious meetings
were frequent among young people, until a large number were hopefully
converted. For some time after this work began, they attended the parish
meetings for worship, as they had done before; but such opposition was raised
against the work by the Congregational party, as convinced those young
believers that they could not be edified among them; and upon searching the
scriptures, they were convinced that believers' baptism was the way that Christ
had instituted, and many obeyed him therein, and a Baptist church was formed in
Woodstock in 1766, and Mr. Ledoyt was ordained their pastor, May 26, 1768, and
they had forty-eight members in 1773. And though it was a dark time with them
through most of the war, yet on September 8, 1780, they said in a letter to the
Warren Association, "After a long day of desertion and heavy trials, our God
has returned to us. By means of the uncommon darkness in May last, the Lord
was pleased to awaken some souls among us, and from that time the work of God
has been going on gloriously in the west part of this town, where a goodly
number are hopefully converted, and peace and love abound in the church, and we
have had twenty-eight added to us, and there is a prospect of the spreading of
the good work in other parts of this town and towns round us. Yet we are much
affected with the long confinement of our brethren in Worcester gaol, Three men
of Harvard Society, before spoken of.
and cannot but remember them in bounds as being bound with them; nor can we
expect to fare better ourselves very long; notwithstanding our endeavoring to
answer the unjust law of the ruling party, by giving certificates to the
members of our society, which have been carried to the parish clerk; yet a
considerable number of them are rated to the standing ministry, and soon expect
to be distressed on that account. Several of them were strained upon for such
taxes.
Our oppressors are deaf to all reasoning upon the subject, and are determined
to prosecute their design, let the consequence be what it may. These things,
brethren, are peculiarly mortifying to us, especially when we consider that we
have freely fought and bled by their sides in defense of liberty. It appears to
us, that if ever there was a time, since tyranny had existence in America, that
we were called upon to exert ourselves to obtain what is our own, it is now.
Should we let slip this golden season, we fear our chains will be so fast
rivetted that we shall not be able to shake them off. We feel but little heart
to hold the sword against a British invader in defense of liberty, while our
countrymen are endeavoring to deprive us of liberty of conscience. Oh,
brethren! if we must be deprived of this, who would desire to live and possess
the rest!" Their church increased the next year to 140 members. But in 1787 a
member of a Congregational church obtained a meeting of this Baptist church, to
hear a complaint which he had against one of their members, without taking the
steps prescribed by our Lord in Matthew xviii; and it divided, and raised such
a fire of contention in this church, as caused the dismission of their pastor,
at his request, in March, 1790, and he went into New Hampshire, where he is
still useful. Another revival was granted in this church in 1792, and Mr.
Samuel Webster was ordained there the 28th of June, who is now at Monson. A
second Baptist church was then formed in Woodstock, and Mr. Amos Wells was
ordained their pastor, August 9, 1792, and the Stonington Association met there
in October, 1795, when it was a good time with them.

X. Mr. Ledoyt was called to preach in the south part of Pomfret, and a happy
number were hopefully converted there, where were also several old believers;
and they embraced the Baptist principles, and formed a church there, January
18, and Mr. William Grow was ordained their pastor, June 19, 1776, and they
prospered under his ministry for several years. But in June, 1783, he confessed
that he had fallen into the sin of adultery, and resigned his office, and
afterward removed into Vermont. Though this was very shocking, yet the church
persevered in their profession, and obtained occasional supplies from time to
time, until they called and settled Mr. Peter Rogers as their pastor in 1794,
who had before been a minister in Bozrah. The place where this church meets,
with a part of Windham, were lately incorporated into a town by the name of
Hampton. A Baptist church was formed in Killingly, May 22, 1776, and Mr. George
Robinson was ordained their pastor the 13th of November following, and they
increased to 61 members in five years. But there arose such difficulties in the
church, about the time of the close of the war, that they called a council, and
then dismissed and recommended their minister, and he removed to Bridgwater in
June, 1784, where he is still useful. They have passed through many changes in
Killingly since, without obtaining so happy a settlement as were to be wished.

XI. The separation in Plainfield prevailed so far, that the general scheme of
taxing all to Congregational ministers was given up, and a minister was settled
in their town meeting house in 1784, who is supported by subscription and a
public fund, and the separate meeting was dissolved. But in the summer of 1792,
a remarkable awakening took place in the east part of the town, and in
Stirling, under the ministry of Mr. Nathanael Cole; and a Baptist church was
formed there, October 16, 1792, and he was installed their pastor the 5th of
December after, having been ordained at Swansea before; and in two years this
church increased to 87 members. I have not obtained any distinct account of the
present Baptist church in Mansfield, only what Mr. Asplund has given in his
Register.

County of Hartford.

XII. The first Baptist church in the country of Hartford was first constituted
in Wallingford. A number of people in that town became Baptists about 1731, and
joined to the Baptist church in New London, but usually met for worship at
Wallingford, until they obtained a dismission, formed a church there, and
ordained Mr. John Merriman as their pastor, in 1739. He was born in
Wallingford, October 15, 1695; and as he was a hearty friend to the great work
which came on in our land two years after he was ordained, he obtained Dr.
Bellamy, and then Mr. Robbins, to preach in his society, as they were clear
preachers of the gospel. But Mr. Robbins was most cruelly persecuted by his
brethren in the ministry, for preaching among the Baptists against their
advice, as we have before shown. Our second volume, p. 136, 178. In the year
1750, the body of this church removed to the south part of Farmington, where
they still remain. Mr. Merriman continued their faithful pastor as long as he
was able to labor with them, and he died there in 1784. Afterward they
obtained various helps, until they came into the state that is before
described, from the minutes of the Danbury Association for 1795. Bristol is not
far from them, where is the church who keep the seventh day as the Sabbath.

XIII. Suffield, on the west side of Connecticut-river, had a powerful work
among them in 1735, and a greater work six years after; and when the
separations came on, two separate churches were formed in the town, and each
had an ordained minister. Mr. Israel Holly was one of them, who published
several things in favor of their separate churches, and then against the
Baptists, after which he turned back, and became a parish minister. But Mr.
John Hastings, son to their other separate minister, was called out to preach
the gospel, and embraced believers' baptism; and just as the war was coming on
in our land, such a blessing was granted upon his labors, that a Baptist
church was formed, and he was ordained their pastor in 1775, and it increased
to above 200 members in about a year. And he has been very useful, at home and
abroad, ever since.

XIV. Enfield, on the east side of the river against Suffield, had also two
separate churches, in one of which the Baptist principles were early adopted.
Mr. Joseph Meacham was their minister, and they joined to the Warren
Association in 1769, when they had 30 members; but they afterward declined
from their profession, and their minister fell in with the Shakers, and is
since dead. The church was broken and scattered for a number of years; but we
hear of a late gathering among them, and that they have obtained Mr.
Christopher Minor as their pastor. He came from Lyme, and was minister to the
Baptist church in East-Hartford for a number of years, who now have Mr. Stephen
Shepard as their minister. A Baptist church was formed in the city of Hartford
in 1789, which increased to fifty-three members in two years, and greater
blessings are hoped for. A separate meeting was set up at Windsor, as early as
1747, and Daniel Marshall went from thence in 1754, and labored with great
success in the southern States, and began the first Baptist church in Georgia
in 1772. His brother, Eliakim Marshall, was frequently a representative for
Windsor in Connecticut legislature, before his cousin Abraham Marshall came
there from Georgia, and baptized him, and he was pastor of a Baptist church
there for four or five years, before he died there in June, 1791. But I know
not how things have been in that church since. There has been a Baptist meeting
in Wethersfield for many years, but perhaps not a church formed. The other
Baptist churches in this county appear in the foregoing list.

County of New Haven.

XV. After the Baptist church of Wallingford was removed from thence, their
parish minister died, and a division took place in the town, and the
consociation of the county assisted in forming another church, and ordaining a
second minister, because the majority had got a minister from Cambridge, whom
they judged to be an Arminian. And as the corporation of Yale college were very
zealous against admitting any into it but strict Calvinists, long controversies
were carried on in the government about it. And in February, 1783, the
controversy was introduced into the public papers at Hartford, and it was
pursued therein until June. And to show how injurious the rulers of the college
had been to its true interests, it was said, "Mr. Collins, late of Newport,
offered eight volumes to the library of Yale college. Being a Baptist, four of
the volumes were in defense of this system. The offer of the books was
accompanied with an intimation, that if the eight volumes were received with a
good grace, the whole library of the said Mr. Collins (who was a bachelor)
consisting of seven or eight hundred volumes, would probably be given to the
college. But the condition of giving the eight volumes was not complied with.
This condition was, that they should be placed in the library so that the
students might see them, and if they chose, read them." The writer who gave
this information styled himself Parnassus, to whom an answer was given by one
who says, "Parnassus finds fault that they did not accept of the Anabaptist
books upon a shameful condition, which, if they had done it, would have been a
ground of objection, that they had iutroduced erroneous books, and have given
up the government of the college." Thus it appears, that the corporation of the
college were afraid to have any of their scholars read any books against infant
baptism, lest it should weaken their plan of orthodoxy; while men who wanted to
pull down Calvinism, made use of this action as a means to do it, though they
were far from favoring the Baptists. A change in the government of the college
took place soon after, and the minister who had caused a separation at
Wallingford removed and settled in New Haven, and two Baptist churches have
since been formed at Wallingford. And through all the country the new Baptist
churches have evidently sprung from the spiritual work therein, while the towns
where that work was rejected remain in their old formality.

County of Fairfield.

XVI. Mr. John Sherwood was born in 1706, converted in 1741, and he with others
separated from the parish worship in Stratfield, because a minister was settled
there who did not appear to them to be a gospel preacher. In October, 1751,
elder Joshua Morse baptized him and a number more, and a Baptist church was
then formed there, and on December 15, 1757, Mr. Sherwood was ordained their
pastor, by the assistance of elder Morse and elder Timothy Wightman. He
ministered to that church about ten years, and then his health failed, and Mr.
Benjamin Coals was called from Long Island to preach to them, in the spring of
1768, and he labored with them until the fall of 1774, when he was called into
New Jersey. Mr. Sherwood was then weak in body, but steadfast and comfortable in
his mind; and how long he lived afterward I know not. But the church called
Mr. Seth Higby from Middletown, and he was ordained their pastor, and he
continued so until 1793, and then he removed to a church in the State of
New York, and elder Stephen Royce from New Hampshire became their pastor.

XVII. The Baptist church in Stamford was formed in the following manner. Dr.
Joseph Bellamy published a piece in 1768, to prove that a credible profession
of saving grace was necessary, in every person who came to the Lord's supper,
or who was active in baptism. But Dr. Moses Mather, of Stamford, published a
discourse in April, 1769, wherein he owned that the covenant of circumcision
with Abraham was not the covenant of grace, in the strict of the word, but held
it to be a covenant wherein parents and their children were constituted members
of the visible church of God, and that they ought to come to the Lord's supper
as a converting ordinance, if they were not converted before. Mr. Ebenezer
Farris, of Stamford, had newly joined to the first church in that town; but
these things gave such a turn to his mind as caused him to search the
scriptures afresh, whereby he was fully convinced that baptism and the holy
supper were instituted only for professing believers; and he was baptized by
Mr. John Gano, of New York, in April, 1770, as others were afterward, until
they obtained a regular dismission, and also assistance from the church in
New York, and formed a Baptist church at Stamford, November 6, 1773, of
twenty-one members. By a like dismission and assistance, a Baptist church was
formed three days before on the borders of Greenwich, called Kingstreet; and
Mr. Asplund mistakes in dating the beginning of that church in 1747. Mr. Farris
was afterward ordained the pastor of the church in Stamford, and also
published a defense of believers' baptism. Mr. Ebmezer White, of Danbury, was a
hearty friend to the revival of religion in our land; and when he read
Sandiman's letters, he manifested an approbation of his ideas concerning the
finished atonement of Christ, and so did a majority of his church; but a minor
part went and entered a complaint against Mr. White to their Association, upon
which he and a large majority of his church, on June 28, 1763, renounced the
power that was claimed over the churches on the Saybrook platform. But the
ministers of that county were so unwilling to part with that power, that they
met at Danbury, against the consent of Mr. White and the majority of his
church, and rejected them as men who had separated from the ecclesiastical
constitution of their government. This was on March 27, 1764. Sandiman came
into our country the next October, and gathered churches in several places; but
when he came to Danbury, Mr. White could not agree with him in many things,
though a number joined with him there, and also at New Haven, and Mr. Sandiman
died at Danbury, April 2, 1771, aged 53. But in the ensuing war, most of his
followers held with Britain, and a number of them went off to Nova Scotia, and
their societies are generally dissolved. In 1770 Mr. David Judson, minister at
Newtown, renounced the Saybrook platform, and published his mind against it,
while the majority of the ministers exerted all their influence against him;
and two Baptist churches have been since gathered in Danbury, and one in
Newtown. Ridgfield is also in this county.

County of Litchfield.

XVIII. There was more of a reformation in this county, in and after 1741, than
in many parts of the country. Dr. Bellamy was a very active instrument of that
reformation, and his writings afterward upon the nature of religion, and also
upon qualifications necessary for communion in the Christian church, scattered
much light in our land; and several other ministers in the county of Litchfield
have been clear preachers of the gospel, and successful in their labors, who
now rest therefrom, and others have been introduced in their stead, who are men
of another spirit. And since the late war, nine Baptist churches have been
formed in this county, and seven of them in six years. But as new towns have
been constituted, and old names have been altered, while some meetings have
also been removed, a little explanation is necessary. The Baptist church in
Litchfield was the first in Watertown, and Roxbury was once called
South-Britain, while the names of the other seven remain as they were. Some of
their ministers have removed from place to place. Elder Elisha Ransom was at
Watertown in 1790, who before and since has been at Woodstock, in Vermont.
Elder Stephen Shepard was at Torrington in 1790, who is now at East-Hartford.
Elder Isaac Roots was at Warren in 1790, and at the second in Watertown in
1793, but at no church in that Association in 1795. Elder Nathaniel Norton was
at Danbury in 1790, and at Wallingford in 1791, but out of that Association
since. In new churches, and in changes of sentiments, men are often more
unsteady than when they obtain more clear establishment. Though traveling
ministers, if they are wise and faithful, have done much good in every age;
while deceitful teachers, whether supported by law, or traveling through the
world, have done infinite evils to mankind.

County of Middlesex.

XIX. There were some Baptists in Saybrook as early as 1729, who then complied
with the certificate law, to exempt them from taxes to established ministers,
as Dr. Styles informed me. In January, 1744, elder Timothy Peckom visited them,
and baptized some persons on a Lord's day, when the water of a brook was raised
for the purpose. For these things he and a number more were imprisoned at
New London, one of whom was a woman with a child at her breast. Mr. Elnathan
Wilcox was a minister in the church there for a number of years before 1770,
but in 1780 he was settled at Stockbridge. Elder Lester, from New London, was
settled at Saybrook afterward, and remains there. But in 1788 a number drew
off and formed another church, and ordained Mr. William Hill as their pastor,
and they are connected with the Groton Conference. The other Baptist churches
in this county belong to the Stonington Association, and their state has been
given from their minutes. Abraham Doolittle, of Middletown, went to the
separate meeting there for some years, to hear Mr. Ebenezer Frothingham preach,
who was first ordained at Wethersfield, October 28, 1747, but removed his
meeting to Middletown a few years after. But as Mr. Doolittle embraced the
Baptist sentiments, Frothingham openly and frequently prayed and preached
against them, and then published a bitter pamphlet upon the subject; therefore
Doolittle and his friends withdrew and set up a meeting by themselves in 1769,
and Mr. Seth Higby, who married his daughter, began to preach there, who went
afterward to Stratfield, as was before related. Doolittle is a member of a
Baptist church in Wallingford. But about the year 1781, Mr. Frothingham was
rejected by his church, and they ordained Mr. Stephen Parsons in his stead, who
was well esteemed in his place, until he was constrained to give up infant
baptism, and was baptized, with about fifteen of his church, in the close of
the summer of 1795; so that a Baptist church is like to be settled there soon.

County of Tolland.

XX. A Baptist church was formed in Tolland, and Mr. Shubael Stearns was
ordained therein March 20, 1751, by the assistance of the elders Wait Palmer
and Joshua Morse. But in July, 1754, Stearns baptized Mr. Noah Alden, of
Stafford, and he set off the next month, with others, to go into our southern
governments. And Stearns wrote to Alden, from Hampshire county, in Virginia,
June 13, 1755, and informed him that some of their company were then settled in
North Carolina, who said to him in a letter, "That there was no established
meeting within an hundred miles of them, and that the people were so eager to
hear, that they often came forty miles each way, when they could have an
opportunity to hear a sermon." He went himself, and gathered a Baptist church
on Sandy-Creek, Orange county, North Carolina. When I was in Virginia in 1789,
I saw a record of the beginning of their Associations, and was informed that
Daniel Marshall baptized Samuel Harris, who had been a member of their
legislature, and a judge of court in Virginia. Their first Association met in
January, 1760, and they met again in July that year, when the list of their
churches stood thus, including both meetings. Sandy-Creek, elder Shubael
Stearns; Deep-river, Nathaniel Powel, a brother; Abbot'screek, elder Daniel
Marshall; Little-river, Joseph Breed, a brother; Neus-river, Ezekiel Hunter;
Black-river, John Newton; Dan-river, Pittsylvania county, elder Samuel Harris;
Lunenburg county, William Murphey. The two last are in Virginia, the rest are
in North Carolina. Elder Stearns wrote again to elder Alden, from Sandy-Creek,
October 16, 1765, and said, "The Lord carries on his work gloriously in sundry
places in this province, and in Virginia, and South Carolina." And he labored
in those parts as long as he lived; but Marshall went and gathered the first
Baptist church in Georgia, whereof his son, Abraham Marshall, is pastor. And it
appears by the minutes of their Association in 1792, that they had fifty-six
churches, and 3796 members in the State of Georgia. How wonderful are these
events! They who were left of the church in Tolland, joined with others in
Stafford, and ordained Mr. Alden as their pastor, June 5, 1755, and he labored
with them ten years, and then such disorders had crept into the church, that he
was dismissed by the advice of a council, as was before observed. They have
passed through various changes since, and their present state is given above. A
separate church was formed in Summers about 1751, and Mr. Joseph Marshall was
ordained their pastor, who soon became a Baptist, and then turned back to
infant baptism, and he was installed at Canterbury, successor to Mr. Pain; but
after a few years he was dismissed, and has preached about the country ever
since, without taking the charge of any other flock. But we are informed that a
Baptist church was constituted in Summers in 1790, and that Mr. Seth Parsons is
since ordained their pastor. Mr. Lillebridge, the pastor of the Baptist church
in Willington, came from the State of Rhode Island, and is esteemed in his
place. But I have no further accounts of that church, nor of the other Baptists
in the county of Tolland, that appear to be serviceable to the public, than
what are already given.

CHAP. XIII. STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE.
County of Rockingham.
I. A general View of New Hampshire. II. Of New town. III. Brentwood and its
Branches. IV. Salem. V. Northwood. VI. County of Strafford. VII. Wear,
Hopkinton, Sutton, Mason and Hollis: VIII. New London and Salisbury. IX.
Richmond. X. Westmoreland, Marlow, Newport and others. XI. County of Grafton.
XII. The Nature and Effect of good Principles. XIII. Of the Atonement of Christ.

1. ALL the lands between Merrimack and Piscataqua rivers, and sixty miles into
the country, were granted to captain John Mason, in 1629, under the name of
New Hampshire. But the Massachusetts charter extended three miles north of
Merrimack-river, and Mason, with his heirs or assigns, claimed all the rest of
those lands; and this was the cause why New Hampshire was not included in the
second charter to the Massachusetts, in 1691, as Gorges' grant was, which this
government had purchased of his heirs. None of the lands within this grant, nor
from thence to Connecticut-river, were ever the free property of the people, so
as to be granted by their representatives, before the late American war; and
quit-rents were reserved upon the lands which were granted by their governors,
until the American revolution put an end to them. Dr. Belknap has given a clear
view of these things, in his elegant History of New Hampshire. And as the
governors and counselors of that government were appointed by the crown, the
Congregational denomination were never exalted so high above all others there,
as they have been in Massachusetts and Connecticut; and since the revolution,
if the majority of any town elect a Baptist teacher for their minister, he may
have the privilege of the lands therein which were granted for the ministry,
and also may be supported by tax if he will. And the Baptists increased so much
in the year 1780, that a minister of Rowley published a letter against them, in
a Boston paper of February 8, 1781, in which he said, "Alas, the consequence of
the prevalence of this sect! They cause divisions every where. In the State of
New Hampshire, where there are many new towns, infant settlements, if this sect
gets footing among them, they hinder, and are like to hinder, their settling
and supporting learned, pious and orthodox ministers; and so the poor
inhabitants of those towns must live, who knows how long? without the ministry
of the gospel, and gospel ordinances." As if the gospel, and gospel ordinances,
were confined to the Congregational party. Yea, he said to the Baptists, "You
have had two grand conventions (the second of them upon adjournment) within a
few months past, at a town in the State of New Hampshire, to serve and promote
this cause; at which conventions, these illiterate and unskilful preachers, and
delegates from your little churches around, were members. And one thing I heard
of as a part of your business at said convention, was to consult what measures
you should take to make void in part our new constitution of government; that
part of it which respects the public worship of God." But all the pretense he
could have for this representation, was because the Warren Association met in
September, 1780, at Royalstone, which adjoins to New Hampshire, and after it
was over, the church there agreed to call a council the next month, for advice
upon some difficulties among themselves, and not upon the concerns of the
government. Though as three men of the Harvard society had been imprisoned at
Worcester, and others were daily exposed to the same sufferings, for taxes to
Congregational ministers, the Warren Association drew up a testimony against
such oppression, in their said meeting, and printed many copies of it, which
were sent into all parts of the government, and was signed by many hundreds of
men, of various denominations. And is it a crime for any men who are oppressed,
to expose the iniquity of their oppressors, and openly to testify against the
same?

II. The first Baptist church that was formed in New Hampshire, was at Newtown,
northward of Haverhill, in 1755. In June that year Mr. Walter Powers was
ordained their pastor, and they increased under his ministry for some years;
but then different sentiments about church discipline, with unhappy tempers in
controversies, caused such difficulties, that a council of four churches was
called, May 18, 1761, and held four days, without being able to reconcile
pastor and people. And he was afterward dismissed and removed away, and is
since dead; but his son is a useful minister at Gilmantown. This church at
Newtown labored through many difficulties, until a Baptist church was formed
in Haverhill, in 1765, and then many of the members joined there, and this
church was dissolved. But the main body of the inhabitants of Newtown, have
lately come so much into the Baptist sentiments, that they prevailed with Mr.
John Peak, who had been preaching at Cambridge and Woburn, to remove there in
the fall of 1795, and a Baptist church was formed here in February, 1796. He
was born at Walpole, in this State, September 26, 1761, was ordained at
Windsor, in Vermont, and has been a successful preacher in various parts of
the country.

III. The revival of religion in 1764, spread into several towns in
New Hampshire, and the doctrine of believers' baptism followed it, until Mr.
Smith, of Haverhill, was sent for, and he baptized thirty-eight persons in a
week, in June, 1770. Fourteen of them were the Congregational minister and
majority of his church in Deerfield, who were settled (...) Baptist church the
same month. Mr. Eliphalet Smith was their pastor, who is now at Fayette, in the
county of Lincoln, before spoken of. A Baptist church was formed at Stratham,
July 18, 1770, of fourteen members, and another at Brentwood of thirteen
members, May 2, 1771, and one of sixteen members was constituted at Nottingham
the next day; and these churches unitedly called Mr. Samuel Shepard to receive
ordination, and he was ordained at Stratham, September 25, 1771, when Dr.
Stillman preached the sermon, Mr. Smith, of Haverhill, gave the charge, and Dr.
Manning, of Providence, the right hand of fellowship. Mr. Shepard was born at
Salisbury, near Newbury, in 1739, was early changed by grace, and was a useful
physician, before he was baptized in June, and began to preach in July, 1770.
These three churches have united as one, and others have joined with them from
other places, so that they had one hundred and sixty-one members in 1785; and
though they did not increase for five years after, yet such a blessing was then
granted that they had three hundred and ninety-seven members in 1792, and five
hundred and twenty-six in 1793. And one hundred and twenty-one were dismissed
the next year, though they have a large number now. Mr. Joshua Smith was of
this church, who labored much in various places, with considerable success,
until he died with a consumption in February, 1795. Elder Samuel Currier was
also of this church, who is now ordained at Wentworth. Elder Shepard has
traveled and labored much in our new towns, especially in 1780. Our second
volume, p. 390. And he has since published several books in defense of our
sentiments.

IV. A Baptist church was formed at Salem, in this county, in 1780, and Mr.
Samuel Fletcher was ordained their pastor, December 6, 1781. He was born in the
couty of Middlesex, in August, 1747, born again in 1767, and began to preach in
1777. He was called to preach at Chelmsford in the spring of 1770, and preached
there the main of the time for two years, and his labors were also very
successful in several other places, which appeared to be the cause of his
meeting with uncommon abuse in one place. For being called to Pepperell, in
company with Dr. Parker, of Harvard, they met by the side of a river, for the
convenience of baptizing within an enclosed field; but while Mr. Fletcher was
preaching, a large mob broke into the field, and interrupted him in his sermon,
while a dog was carried and plunged in the river, in evident contempt of our
mode of baptism. The chief officers of the town were leaders of the mob;
therefore a gentleman invited these ministers to go and hold their meeting at
his house, near another river, and they did so, and Fletcher went through with
his sermon, after which two dogs more were dipped in that river, and one young
man also dipped his companion, in a most scornful manner, and some officers of
the town advised said ministers to depart immediately out of town for their own
safety. But they privately agreed with their friends to disperse, and they met
at another place of water, and baptized six persons near night, though further
abuse was offered them afterward. Our second volume, p. 323. Elder Fletcher
continued a faithful pastor of this church, until he was taken away by death in
March, 1795, when his corpse was carried to the Congregational meeting house in
Salem, where a Baptist minister preached a funeral sermon for him, and then
several Congregational ministers were his pall-bearers, with others of his own
denomination.

V. The Baptist church in Northwood was also formed in 1780, and Mr. Edmund
Pilsbury was ordained their pastor, who had been a member of Haverhill church.
They had forty-four members in 1785, but had no increase for five years after,
and then such a blessing was granted that seventy members were added in two
years, and they appear to be in harmony. But after two churches were formed, in
two parts of Canterbury in this county, in 1779 and 1780, some corrupt teachers
drew away a number of them, and those churches, as well as one in Chichester,
are not among our associated churches, if they are not entirely scattered and
dissolved. For although parishes that are formed and supported by the civil
magistrate, will continue as long as that power can uphold them, yet churches
that are formed by the laws of Christ, are removed out of their places if they
leave their first love, and refuse to repent. Rev. ii. 1 -- 5. Which is a
solemn warning to all mankind.

County of Strafford.

VI. The Baptist church in Gilmantown was formed in 1772, and Mr. Walter Powers
was ordained their pastor about four years after. In 1789 they had thirty
members, in 1792 they had forty-four, and in three years they increased to
seventy-six. The church in Meredith was formed in 1780, when forty-three
persons were baptized in one day by elder Shepard. Mr. Nicholas Folsom was
ordained their pastor in 1782, who went from Brentwood, and continues in that
office. Their Association began in 1789. The church in Sandburnton was also
formed in 1780, and Mr. John Crocket was ordained their pastor September 3,
1794. The church in Sandwich was formed in 1793, and Mr. Jacob Jewel is their
pastor. Madbury contains a part of Berwick church, and we have no late account
of any other Baptist church in this county.

County of Hillsborough.

VII. A Baptist church was formed at Wear, and they joined with the Warren
Association in 1768, when Mr. Pelatiah Tingley was their messenger. In 1770
they had sixteen members, but such unhappy controversies arose among them, that
they sent no more to the Association, and they were left out of it in 1774. But
they were revived again in 1783, and Mr. Amos Wood, who graduated at
Rhode Island college in 1786, was ordained their pastor, and has continued so
ever since. The town of Hopkinton is not far from Wear, and such a work took
place there, under the preaching of Mr. Smith, of Haverhill, and others, that
they had seventeen baptized persons among them in 1769, and they joined as a
branch of Haverhill church, until they were dismissed and formed a church in
Hopkinton in May, 1771. But false teachers and corrupt principles prevailed so
much among them afterward, as to dissolve their church. Though elder Seamans,
in a letter to a friend in 1794, gave the following account of a revival among
them. "Soon after I came into this wilderness (said he) I found that the
Baptist interest was much smaller than I expected. In Hopkinton, there had been
a Baptist church, but not one stone of that building was left upon another. I
preached some there, and baptized three persons; and after a conference or two
with them, they came into church state, adopted our articles of faith, and I
administered the communion to them, which they had not had for a number of
years. The reformation began there in the summer of 1792, and now there is a
church there, with its two branches in Bow and Goffstown, of one hundred and
thirteen members; a very respectable body of Christians." This was their state
in 1794, and they have since obtained elder Elisha Andrews to be their pastor.
There had been some Baptists in Temple for seventeen years, even from the
beginning of that plantation, until they formed a church there, Augut 21, 1782,
of twenty-two members. Another had been formed the April before in Perryston,
now Sutton, and Mr. Samuel Ambrose was ordained their pastor in September
after. The church in Mason, formed in 1786, obtained Mr. William Elliot for
their minister, but we are informed that he labors part of his time at Hollis,
where a Baptist church was formed in 1791.

VIII. We have more particular account of two other churches in this in this
county. The first is at New London, where elder Seamans removed from
Attleborough in 1788. As he was the first minister of the town, they gave him
the lands which were granted for the ministry therein, and also supported him
by a tax. A Baptist church was formed there in 1788, and he settled as their
pastor, but they had very little increase for four years; and he had many fears
that he took a wrong step in removing from Attleborough, although he then
thought he had good reasons for it. These fears were very distressing to his
mind, until a blessing was granted upon his ministry in 1792, which appeared
the most visible in and after August in that year. In a letter to a friend, of
Jannuary 29, 1793, he said, "This town consists of about fifty families, and I
hope that between forty and fifty souls have been translated out of darkness
into God's mavelous light, in this town, besides a number in Sutton and
Fisherfield, who congregate with us. Fifteen have been baptized, and joined to
the church, and I expect that a number more will come forward in a short time.
Indeed I know not of one of them but what is likely to submit to gosped order,
nor one person in the town who stands in any considerable opposition. We have
lectures or conferences almost every day or evening in the week. Our very
children meet together to converse and pray with each other; and I believe I
may safely say, that our young people were never a quarter so much engaged in
frolicking, as they now are in the great concerns of the soul and eternity.
Some things in this work have exceeded any thing I ever saw before. Their
convictions have usually been very clear and powerful, so that industrious men
and women have had neither inclination nor strength to follow their business as
usual. And they freely acknowledge the justice and sovereignty of God. They
also have desires beyond what I have ever before known, for the universal
out-pouring of the Holy Spirit." And in another letter, December 1, 1794,
directed to another friend, he said, "The work began here in 1792; our church
them consisted of eighteen members, and now we have one hundred and fifteen,
all except three or four within five miles of our meeting house, Some of all
ages from seventy down to eight years old have joined to the church. I think we
have thirty-seven men with their wives in the church." The town of Salisbury,
upon the great road from Boston to Dartmouth college, is not far from him; and
a number of men in that town were of the Baptist sentiments, and built a good
meeting house there, when there was hardly a baptized person among them. Elder
Seamans was called to preach among them in 1792, and he says in said letter, "A
number wanted to have a Baptist church constitued, as they intended to have a
Baptist minister. But I told them that there must be something done amongst
them which man could not do, before a Baptist church could be gathered there.
And this work the Lord begun about the same time as at Hopkinton, and now there
is a flourishing church there of one hundred and twenty-five members, with a
fine preacher." Mr. Elias Smith, who came from Connecticut, and preached in
many places, and was ordained as a traveling minister, is settled as their
pastor.

County of Cheshire.

IX. A Baptist church was formed in Richmond, and Mr. Matturean Bollou was
ordained their pastor, September 27, 1770, being the first minister of any
denomination in the town. They joined to the Warren Association in 1771, when
they informed the Association, that a number of the inhabitants were unwilling
to allow their minister the privileges of the first minister of the town, and
that neighboring towns would not regard the certificates which they gave to
some of their society who lived therein. Their church had then twenty-nine
members, and they increased to seventy-nine in three years; and then they were
in a low condition for six years after, until the revival in 1780 cause the
addition of forty-four in three years more. In the mean time a division took
place among them, and another church was formed, in which Mr. Artemas Aldrich
was ordained. And they were in broken circumstances, until another revival
began in 1790, which caused the addition of one hundred and six members in
about two years, and their two minsters were dismissed, and the two churches
united, with Mr. Isaac Kenny for their pastor. In 1794 they were dismissed to
the Leyden Association.

X. Many of the inhabitants of Westmoreland went from the first Baptist society
in Middleborough, and they formed a Baptist church there in 1771, and Mr.
Ebenezer Bayley was ordained their pastor, November 30, 1773. But after some
years a division took place among them, and another church was formed, in which
Mr. Nathaniel Wilbore preaches, though he is not ordained. Another church was
formed in Marlow in 1777, and Mr. Eleazar Beckwith was ordained their pastor,
and so continues. He and many of his people went from Lyme, in Connecticut. Mr.
Caleb Blood was ordained therein in October, 1777, who is now at Shaftsbury.
When this church joined to the Woodstock Association in 1786, they had one
hundred and eighteen members, and in 1790 they had one hundred and eighty-four.
A Baptist church was formed at Croyden in 1778, and in 1790 they joined with
Newport, and settled elder Bial Ledoyt as their pastor, who went from Woodstock
in Connecticut. And a revival of religion began among them in June, 1793, by
means of an alarming providence. For the eldest son of Mr. Seamans, a lovely
youth, came to assist in raising the frame of a meeting house at Newport, but
he fell from the top of it, and died soon. The affliction was exceeding great
to his parents, and very alarming to others, which the Spirit of God made use
of for their good. And on September 16, 1793, Mr. Ledoyt said in a letter to a
friend, "It has been a long, dark, and cloudy night with me, and the people
here; but glory to our God, the cloud is dispersing fast. His work is begun
among us; Newport and Croyden are greatly blessed. There have been forty souls
hopefully converted in a few weeks among us, I have baptized twenty-nine in
four weeks. The work appears still going on. I cannot be idle, it is out of my
power to answer all the calls I have at this time; but I endeavor to do all I
can. Being favored with health, and the spirit of preaching, I ascend the
mountains easy. There is a prospect of a glorious reformation in these parts. O
may it spread far and wide! God has remembered my family also for good; my
three eldest daughters, I hope, are converted; the oldest seventeen years, and
the youngest ten years old, are baptized. O bless the Lord with me, and let us
exalt his name together. I never more sensibly needed wisdom than at present.
You will not cease to pray for me. O dear brother, be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might." I must leave the rest of the churches in this
county, as they appear in the foregoing list.

County of Grafton

XI. The first Baptist church in this county, was formed at Lebanon, in June,
1771, and Mr. Jedidiah Hebbard was ordained therein in 1784. But so many of
them removed to other places, that in 1790 they concluded that the church was
dissolved. Elder Hebbard has since been pastor of the church in Cornish. A
Baptist church was formed in Canaan in 1783, wherein elder Baldwin was
ordained, and he ministered to them until he removed to Boston in 1790. Many of
the inhabitants of Grafton went from Rehoboth and Swansea, and they formed a
Baptist church there in 1785, and Mr. Oliver Williams was ordained their
pastor, and continued so until he died in a joyful manner, August 15, 1790,
aged 39. He went from the State of Rhode Island, and probably was one of the
posterity of Mr. Roger Williams, the founder of that State. The church in
Rumney was formed in 1780, and Mr. Cotton Hains was ordained their pastor in
August that year. The church in Holderness was formed the same year, and Mr.
Jeremiah Ward is their pastor. The rest of the Baptist churches in this county
appear in the foregoing list, of whom I have not received so full accounts as I
expected. But I have some things of a more extensive nature, concerning this
part of the country, which may be beneficial to the public.

XII. Dr. Eleazar Wheelock was settled in the ministry, in the west part of
Lebanon, in Connecticut, and was acquainted with experimental religion before
Mr. Whitefield came into our country; and he was an active and successful
labourer in the reformation that followed, until the work was much abated, and
then he turned his attention to the instruction of the Indians, in order to
spread the gospel among them; which led on to the forming Dartmouth college,
which was established in Hanover, in this county, to which he removed in the
summer of 1770. Some revival of religion was granted in this wilderness soon
after, and things looked encouraging, until war broke out in our land, which
tried the hearts of all. And as a quantity of money for this college had been
collected in England and Scotland, which was put into a fund in London, from
whence the interest was to be drawn annually, some imagined that Dr. Wheelock
was biassed in favor of Britain in the war, which occasioned the following
actions. He lived so remote from the seat of their government, that
proclamations for fasts and thanksgivings sometimes failed of reaching him
until the days appointed were past; and as Connecticut government had appointed
November 16, 1775, for their annual thanksgiving, of which he had received an
account, he and his people kept that day. But in the week following he received
a proclamation from the authority of his own government, which appointed
another day a fortnight after the other; and he was willing that all who had
not kept the former day should keep the latter, while he could not in
conscience keep two thanksgivings in that season, only to obey the commandments
of men. Yet because he refused to do it, he was threatened to be prosecuted by
authority, therefore he preached a sermon on said day, from John xviii. 36, and
published it to the world, under the title of Liberty of Conscience; or, No
King but Christ in his Church. He observed that rulers have only power to
propose the keeping of such days, and to protect all in their worship from
being injured by others, while the consent of the people to keep the day, is
the only thing that can make it binding upon them to do it. And he says, "When
civil power encroaches an inch upon Christ's prerogative, a sanctified and
enlightened conscience can never be compelled to a compliance; and if they are
of the truth, and hear Christ's voice, no instruments of cruelty will avail any
thing in this attempt. -- The least yielding in this case is dangerous, and a
direct and leading step to a flood of persecution, however remote it may seem
at present." (...) S^^^n. p. 26.
Yea, and supporting religious teachers by compulsion has been a greater
source of persecution, than a compelling of people to keep days of fasting or
thanksgiving ever was. Of this Mr. Eden Buroughs, pastor of the church in
Hanover, became so sensible that he gave up the practice. He had been a
minister in Connecticut, and he was so much affected with a view of the
corruption of their churches, that he published a discourse in 1784 from those
words, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I say? And he
plainly shows that the conduct of men, be it in obedience to the laws of
Christ, or in conformity to the world, is the language which speaks the loudest
in all rational minds, and much more to the Son of God. And he says, "If the
confidence of professing Christians one toward another is not founded upon a
mutual apprehension that each other is governed by a sacred regard to what
Christ has said and enjoined in his word, there is no Christian confidence, and
consequently no Christian charity amongst them -- And it is absolutely
impossible for professing Christians to have this mutual confidence toward
each other, while they see that they are so commonly disposed to bite and
devour one another, by seeking to get the advantage of each other, in their
commerce and dealings; or to stander, backbite, and reproach one another; or to
be unfaithful in fulfilling their promises and engagements to each other; or to
be insensible of the (...) and d^^lresses of each other." Again he says, "There
is nothing that can have such a tendency to prejudice the minds and harden the
hearts of men against the truth, as on the one hand to hold it up to view as
being of the most sacred and weighty importance, and on the other hand to
trifle with it in our daily practice. And this one observation is sufficient to
account for that flood of deism and infidelity that so awfully threatens to
deluge the land. It is in vain for professing Christians to call upon mankind
to believe that which it is evident, by their daily practice, they do not
believe themselves. -- Those corporations who call themselves churches of
Christ, whilst they refuse to put the laws of his kingdom into execution, and
will suffer them to be trampled under foot, are more awfully guilty of the
blood of souls than every other set of men under heaven." Borroughs on the Laws
of Christ, p. 14, 67, 68.
These things caused many controversies among their churches, as well as moved
many to withdraw from them. And we are informed that elder Seamans has found
it to be such a bondage to be supported by tax and compulsion, that he has
lately renounced that practice.

XIII. A foundation doctrine of Christianity was also openly struck against in
this part of our country, even the atonement of Christ. For a minister of
Newport published three sermons in 1786, to prove that all the sufferings of
Christ were from wicked men and devils, and that God never inflicted any
punishment at all upon him for the sins of men; but that the whole of the
atonement of Christ was his good teaching and good example in life and death.
His first argument for this opinion is this, "Nothing could merit favor for
sinners, which was not in itself agreeable to the divine mind." And having
proved that God has no pleasure in the death of sinners, he says, "Reason
forbids the conclusion, that he should have any pleasure in the sufferings of
his dutiful and well beloved Son." (...) on Atonement, p. 19.
But we ought to know, that the favor and love of God never could be
purchased; for it was his love that caused him to give his Son to suffer the
curse of the law, that God might be just, and the justifier of him who
believes in Jesus. Where is boasting then? It is excluded. By what law? of
works? Nay, but by the law of faith. Romans iii. 24 -- 27. And if men deny that
God could have any pleasure in the death of his Son, yet he says, It pleased
the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul
an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travail of
his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. Isaiah liii. 10, 11. Christ
loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for
a sweet smelling savor. Ephesians. v. 2. Wherefore he is able to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them. Heb. vii. 25. Yet this author, in his second argument, says, "If this
great work could not be finished until divine justice had its free and natural
course, in such a sense, as that his sufferings are to be considered as sin
punished; the consequence is unavoidable, that he in a very short season
endured the same quantity of misery which would have borne sinners down to
eternity. A thought which exceeds all rules of computation, and departs from
all principles of just reasoning." As if the Son of God could not do more in a
short time, than sinful men can ever do. Man was first drawn, into rebellion
against God, by setting up reason above revelation; and the world is still held
in bondage by the same means. Yet our author says, "Let no one be alarmed, if
we positively deny, that he suffered any of that divine wrath which sinners
justly deserve; for there can no such contradictory idea exist, that a being
should be angry with an object with which he is at the same time well pleased."
Ibid. p. 21, 33.
But how weak is this reasoning! For a parent cannot correct a child as he
ought, if he is angry with the child; neither can a judge give sentence against
a debtor, or a criminal, if he feels angry with them. And when a surety freely
engages to pay the debt of another, justice as clearly exacts the debt of him
as of the debtor, while the discharge of the debtor is as great a mercy as it
would have been if the creditor had forgiven him without a surety. And when a
sinner is convinced of the greatness of his debt, and God frankly forgives him
all, the sinner will love him much. Luke vii. 41, 42, 47. For the love of
Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then
were all dead; and that he died for all, that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose
again. -- Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things
are past away, behold, all things are become new. 2 Cor. v, 14 -- 17. Fear and
love are the great principles of all voluntary actions, and they were divided
by the fall; but Christ took on him flesh and blood, of the seed of Abraham,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is,
the devil; and deliver them who through fear of death were all their lifetime
subject to bondage. Heb. ii. 14 -- 16. And herein the promise of God to Abraham
was accomplished, who said, My covenant shall be in your flesh for an
everlasting covenant. Genesis xvii. 13. For Christ was given for a covenant of the
people, and for a light of the Gentiles. Isaiah xlii. 6.

CHAP. XIV. STATE OF VERMONT.
County of Bennington.
I. A general View of the Planting of Vermont. II. Of Shaftsbury Churches. III.
Pownal and others. IV. Woodstock and Bridgwater. V. A View of Oppression in
Vermont. VI. And of Fasting for Strife and Debate in the Massachusetts. VII.
The Minority are using Force with the Majority about Religious Worship.

I. THE royal prophet says, Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the
remainder of wrath shall thou restrain. And this truth shines with great
clearness in our day, and as clearly in Vermont, as in any part of our country.
All the lands therein were once claimed by the government of New Hampshire, and
Bennington was named from Benning Wentworth, the governor who granted the town.
He also granted a large number of other towns on the west side of
Connecticut-river, and made much money thereby, until some politicians of New
York obtained an act of the king in council, in 1764, to annex all those lands
to their government. Many of those who had purchased lands of Wentworth, had
made large improvements thereon; and to have all their property taken away
deceitfully, or to buy it again of men whose government they disliked, raised a
high degree of resentment against them; and the controversy was pursued for ten
years, which produced a hardy set of men, who did great exploits in the
American war, in the time of which they formed themselves into a distinct
government, and they are now owned as one of our United States. Balknap's
History of New Hampshire, Vol. II, p. 314 -- 316, 455.
And the folly of many in Connecticut and the Massachusetts, who ran into debt
at the close of the wars in 1763 and 1783, caused the planting of the
wilderness in New Hampshire and Vermont, beyond what human wisdom could
possibly have done. The Massachusetts had made some beginnings at Northfield
before the war which began in 1675, and we are well informed that there was not
one English family settled above Number Four, about fifty miles from
Northfield, until the peace of 1763. In all that time the French and English
were contending with each other about lands which neither of them had any right
to, and were employing the Savages in their quarrels until the French gave up
their claim to this continent. And then Britain engaged in the cruel design of
enslaving her own subjects, and forced them to renounce their power, and the
French assisted them in obtaining their liberty, and thereby learned how to
assert their own rights; upon which Britain has deluged their land with blood,
to prevent the prevalence of light and liberty in Europe. Popery is abolished
in France, much more than it is in England, and this has raised the cry of
many teachers and lawyers against them, representing them as bloody infidels!
But we ever should remember, that hypocrites were much more fierce for the
crucifixion or our Lord Jesus Christ than Heathen infidels were; and they are
ever so against true religion and liberty. And can men be blinded by them any
longer? For God sent such a drought and scarcity into Canada in 1795, as
compelled them to have recourse to Vermont and New Hampshire for food for man
and beast, where they had a plenty of both. Yea, England herself now wants food
from America, where they have cruelly oppressed the inhabitants heretofore.

II. The first Baptist church in Vermont was formed in Shaftsbury in 1768. Mr.
Bliss Willoughby, who was ordained pastor of a separate church at Newent, in
Norwich, in 1753, and ^ent to England as an agent for their churches in 1756,
and preached for Dr. Gifford, in London, became a Baptist after the year 1764,
and was a leader among this people, where his son Ebenezer has also been a
teacher, though neither of them have been pastors of this church. On August 4,
1774, the church wrote that they had thirty-nine members, twenty-one of whom
were males. But how things were among them for six years after, we know not. A
second church was formed in 1780, and a third in 1781, the last of them upon
the principles of the old Baptists, who held laying on of hands upon every
member as a term of communion. And the Association which was begun there in
1781, and has united a large number of other churches, yet has not united all
these in the town where it began. But to promote union among them, many of the
brethren sent an earnest request to Mr. Caleb Blood, of Newton, and he removed
there in the beginning of 1788, when a fourth church was formed, which had one
hundred and twenty-four members the next year, and one hundred and sixty in
1795. Mr. Blood is so much esteemed in their government, that he was called to
preach their Election Sermon, October 11, 1792, which was published by their
authority. One passage therein says, "A wise magistrate will set a constant
guard over the words of his mouth; that with a becoming moderation, he may
express his resentment of injuries done him, and have all his language such as
shall tend to prevent others from an uncivil, profane way of treating their
fellow citizens. A magistrate who is rough and profane in his language, is a
monstrous character. He is not civil himself, and we cannot expect but that the
practice, at least, will do hurt in the community. He is not the gentleman, for
any person of sense knows, that a rough, profane way of treating mankind,
better fits the character of a clown than a gentleman. Can I suppose myself in
danger of giving offense? No; I cannot think that so respectable a body, as I
am now called to address, will think me too severe in censuring so great an
evil; especially seeing it so much prevails in our land at the present day."
Said Sermon, p. 32, 33.


III. After the settlement of Pownal, the people lived for some time in a very
careless way, neglecting public worship, and indulging themselves in all kinds
of vanity and iniquity, until they were visited with distressing sickness, in
March, 1773, which alarmed their consciences, and they set up the worship of
God among them, and the Spirit of God fixed conviction in many minds, and about
two hundred often attended their meetings. A church was formed in April, which
increased to 49 members in fifteen months. This is a summary of the account
which the church gave in July, 1774. How things were among them for ten years
after, we know not; but in the spring of 1788, elder Caleb Nichols removed
there, having been dismissed from the church in Coventry, and this church
joined to the Shaftsbury Association in 1793, when they had seventy-two
members; and such a blessing was granted there, that they increased to one
hundred and sixty-five in two years. I must leave the other churches in this
county as they appear in the foregoing list.

County of Windsor.

IV. As people removed very fast into this county toward the close of the war,
several Baptist ministers were sent to preach among them from year to year. In
May, 1779, our elders Seamans and Ledoyt visited those parts, and labored in
various places to good purpose. And Mr. Elisha Ransom, who was ordained at
Sutton, November 11, 1778, is a traveling minister, removed up to Woodstock,
where a Baptist church was formed in July, 1780, and he became their minister.
He came as one of their messengers, and joined the Warren Association in
September following, when they had twenty-eight members. And in three years
they increased to eighty members, when, in February, 1783, they joined with
three other churches in forming the Woodstock Association, to which a fifth
church joined that year, and opened a correspondence with the Warren
Association, which has continued ever since. In three years the Association
increased to fourteen churches, and four hundred and ninety-six members. These
churches were those of Woodstock, Canaan, Croydon, Sutton, Wendel, Lebanon,
Royalton, second in Woodstock, Claremont, Temple, Windsor, Westminster,
Westmoreland, and Marlow. Mr. Joel Butler was ordained in Woodstock, January 5,
1785, and ministered to their second church for some time, and then he labored
in several places in the Massachusetts, from whence he removed into the State
of New York. As the members of this church were chiefly dismissed from the
first, they have since reunited in one again. Mr. William Grow, mentioned
above, removed from Pomfret, in Connecticut, to Bridgwater, in Vermont, and
recovered his credit so far, by a penitent and good behavior, that he was
settled as the pastor of a church gathered in Woodstock and Bridgwater, and for
two or three years they appeared to prosper; but then new difficulties arose,
and he was dismissed. I find that Mr. John Peckens, who went from
Middleborough, and who had been ordained at Claremont, was at Woodstock in
1786, who is now at Chelmsford. Mr. Joseph Call was also an ordained elder
there in 1789, who was at Cambridge in 1793. This work has spread into Canada,
where a Baptist church was formed at Coldwell's Manor, which joined to the
Woodstock Association in 1794. And elder Jedidiah Hebbard says, "I have been
four journeys into those parts, and have seen much of the power and grace of
God there."

V. Mr. Ransom has not only been a successful preacher of the gospel, but also
has earnestly contended for Christian liberty, against the ministerial tyranny
which has been carried into that wilderness, from the States of Connecticut
and the Massachusetts. And on March 23, 1795, he said in a letter, "A brother
living in Hartford, in Vermont, belonging to elder Drew's church, has suffered
much about rates from another denomination. He was first carried to gaol, and
then came out by paying the money, and prosecuted them in vain, for he was beat
three times. I cannot ascertain the costs, for his last trial was the last day
of February past; but it is supposed that his costs will be above fifty pounds.
Five petitions were carried into the Vermont assembly last fall, with more than
two hundred signers, against the certificate law, and I went to speak for them;
and after my averment that the certificate law was contrary to the rights of
man, of conscience, the first, third, fourth, and seventh articles of our
constitution, and to itself, for it took away our rights, and then offered to
sell them back to us for a certificate, some stretched their mouths; and though
no man contradicted me in one argument, yet they would shut their eyes, and say
they could not see it so. I had many great friends in the house, but not a
majority. They sent out a committee who altered the law much for the better, if
any law could be good of that kind, which was, that every man might assert his
own sentiments to the town clerk, and that should answer; but because it would
still be a bad law, and I would not thank them for it, and none of our friends
would acknowledge it as a savor, it fell back to where it was before. Only we
have this to comfort us, The Lord reigns, and their power is limited, and we
shall have no more affliction than is needful for us. Duty is ours, the event
is the Lord's." And as I failed of obtaining more accounts of their churches,
and of their sufferings in Vermont, which were expected, I shall close this
chapter with some late things in the Massachusetts, the mother of all the
persecutions in New England.

VI. God said to the church of Israel, Behold ye fast for strife and debate,
and to smite with the fist of wickedness. -- Will thou call this a fast, an
acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this the fast that I have chosen? to loose
the bands of wickedness, and to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Isaiah lviii. 4 -- 6. And is
not this language applicable to our country? For dissenters from the
established worship in New England were several times relieved from cruel
oppression, by special acts of the British court. But when our first Congress
was called at Philadelphia, in the fall of 1774, and they were like to be our
highest power of government for the future, the Warren Association sent an
agent there to try if some security for our religious rights could not be
obtained, while we united with our countrymen in defense of the civil rights
of America. And a conference was granted by the delegates in Congress from the
Massachusetts, to whom the Baptist agent declared, that we wanted no more
religious liberty in the country, than they had long enjoyed in Boston; and
this appeared so reasonable to the gentlemen who were present, that said
delegates promised to use their influence to obtain such liberty through all
the country. Yet a report was spread in New England, before the Baptist agent
got home, that he had been to Philadelphia on purpose to try to break the union
of the colonies in the defense of their civil rights. Therefore he soon met the
committee of the Warren Association at Boston, and presented an address to the
Massachusetts provincial congress upon it, and they returned an answer in which
they said, "The establishment of civil and religious liberty, to each
denomination in the province, is the sincere wish of this congress: But being
by no means vested with powers of civil government, whereby they can redress
the grievances of any person whatever, they therefore recommend to the Baptist
churches, that when a General Assembly shall be convened in this colony, they
lay the real grievances of said churches before the same, when and where their
petition will most certainly meet with all that attention due to the memorial
of a denomination of Christians so well disposed to the public weal of their
country." Here they denied that they were vested with powers of civil
government, while they assumed the whole power of government in the
Massachusetts; and as a General Assembly was called in July, 1775, the Warren
Association presented a memorial to them in September, which they slipped away
out of sight, without granting any relief at all to the Baptists. And when the
convention was called, who formed our new constitution, the first draught that
was made by their committee, was wholly partial for one denomination. They met
and chose the committee to make the draught in September, and then adjourned to
October 28, 1779. A general fast was appointed upon the occasion on November 4;
and though the third article was new drawn, with some appearance of favor to
dissenters from their worship, yet as they expected opposition to it from the
Baptists, two men, who were members of Congress in 1774, accused them of
sending an agent then to Philadelphia to break the union of the colonies, and
evidently carried the vote for the third article by enflaming the convention
against them. And was not this a fasting for strife and debate, and smiting
with the fist of wickedness? For the same men knew that they had promised to
exert all their influence to obtain all the liberty that the Baptists asked
for; but they have never fulfilled their promise to this day, although they
have been in high offices in our government. And for any men to violate their
promise, is to exalt themselves above the eternal God, who never failed of
fulfilling any one promise, nor ever can. Yet all men in this government, who
support one denomination by tax and compulsion, violate the promise in the
constitution which says, "Every denomination of Christians demeaning themselves
peaceably, and as good subjects of the commonwealth, shall be equally under the
protection of the law; and no subordination of any one sect or denomination to
another, shall ever be established by law."

VII. But as this has restrained our legislature from making any certificate
law to exempt the dissenters from the Congregational denomination from taxes to
their worship, and they have put the whole power into the hands of the majority
of voters in each town or parish, this iniquity has no covering left among us.
For ministers are supported by worldly men, who act without any sort of
religious qualification, and therefore there is no religion in their doings.
And they now violate the most essential rule of all civil government, which is,
that the majority of every civil community is the body politic, and that the
minority is not the body. Therefore Mr. Ellis was never elected as pastor of
the first parish in Rehoboth, Just before this work was finished at the press,
news came from Rehoboth, that a number who had been zealous for Mr. Ellis have
turned against him, so that he is gone off, not likely to return to be their
minister any (...)
from whom many thousands of dollars have been taken for him; neither was Mr.
Nathan Underwood ever elected the pastor of the second parish in Harwich, by
the body of the parish, who have been all taxed to him. But Mr. Ellis's great
success appears to have emboldened Mr. Underwood, and his collector seized six
men who were Baptists, on the first day of December, 1795, and carried them as
far as Yarmouth, where one of them was taken so ill, being old and infirm
before, that he saw no way to save his life but to pay the tax and costs, which
he did, and the other five were carried to the prison at Barnstable, where they
also paid the money, rather than to lie in a cold prison all winter. And these
things moved many to pay said tax, rather than to be strained upon. Though as
all did not do it, their collector went with aid to the house of one of the
Baptists, when he was not at home, January 8, 1796, and seized a cow for a tax
to said minister; but his wife and daughter came out and took hold of the cow,
and his wife promised to pay the money, if her husband would not do it, and
they let the cow go, and she went to Mr. Underwood the next day, and paid the
tax and costs, and took his receipt therefore. Yet four days after, the woman
and two daughters, one of whom was not there when the cow was taken, were
seized and carried before authority, and fined seven dollars, for talking to
the collector and his aid, and taking hold of the cow while they had her in
possession, so that they let her go. These things we have had very distinct
accounts of, and if there is the least mistake therein, let them point it out
in welcome. Another instance in the county of Plymouth is similar to these in
one respect, though not in others. The minister of a parish, lately
incorporated, was never chosen by the majority of the inhabitants therein, nor
by many who are taxed to him, one of whom was lately seized to be carried to
prison, but he paid the money, and others are threatened with the like
treatment. Before this distress was made for the salary of said minister, he
got several Baptist ministers to preach in his pulpit, and seems to be in
earnest to draw them into compulsive measures also. Yet the line of his parish
was extended eight or nine miles from his meeting, in order to take in two
valuable lots of ministerial lands, which lie near a Baptist meeting, where a
Baptist minister is settled. These are a few of the evils which have come from
the practice of confounding the church and world together, about the government
of the church, and the support of religious ministers. Whereas if the civil
government would protect all its subjects impartially, without supporting any
ministers by tax and compulsion, all true believers would lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, and the power of other men to
oppress them on religious accounts would be taken away.

CHAP. XV. OBSERVATIONS ON THE FOREGOING HISTORY.
I. Antichrist described, and also the Church of Christ. II. The Old and New
Testaments, believed and obeyed by the Children of God, are his Two Witnesses.
III. A being anointed with the Spirit of Christ, is essential to Christianity.
IV. Evidence that this Spirit has lately increased the Baptist Churches. V.
The Evil of confounding Church and World together. VI. The Glory of having them
distinct. VII. All Men should act by the Golden Rule. VIII. The Gates of Hell
cannot prevail against such. IX. For they stand on the Sea of Glass mingled
with Fire. X. How the Two Witnesses are slain. XI. And how they shall rise
again. XII. Mystery Babylon described. XIII. And the Nature of Heresy. XIV. Men
are known by their Fruits.

I. HOW clearly has the word of God been fulfilled! For he says, That day
shall not come except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition: who opposes and exalts himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he, as God, sits in the
temple of God, showing himself that he is God. And now ye know what
withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time. For the mystery of iniquity
does already work; only he who now lets will let, until he be taken out of
the way: and then shall that Wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume
with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his
coming: even him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power,
and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish; because they received not the love of the truth that they
might be saved. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusion that
they should believe a lie; that they all might be damned who believed not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. But we are bound to give thanks
always to God for you, brethren, beloved of the Lord, because God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the truth: whereunto he called you by our gospel, to the obtaining of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3 -- 14. Here all men are
described as in two parties. So our Lord says, Every one that does evil hates
the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved. But
he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest
that they are wrought in God. John iii. 20, 21. It is impossible for God to
violate his promise, or his oath, or to entice any into sin. Heb. vi. 13 -- 18.
James i. 13, 14. But all men are guilty of these evils, more or less, who are
not born again. And when Constantine removed the seat of his empire from Rome,
and then divided it at his death, the way was made for the bishop of Rome to
exalt himself above God in his church, and above all the kings of Europe, who
gave their power unto him. And forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain
from meats, was held in that church for many centuries before Luther's
reformation. 1 Timothy iv. 1, 2, 3. Yet an external succession of baptisms, and of
ministerial power, through all those abominations, is now held fast in our
land, as we have before proved. Yea, and the doctrine of original sin,
particular election, efficacious grace in conversion, justification wholly by
faith in the perfect righteousness of Christ, and the final perseverance of his
saints, is denied by multitudes in Europe and America. And are they not left to
a strong delusion to believe a lie? For all the holy priesthood that God has
under heaven are, Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
through sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the
blood of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. i. 2. ii. 5, 9. Yet ministers and parents still
imagine, that they can make children holy members of the church before they can
choose for themselves, and holy ministers by an external succession of
ordinations. And a minister before named says, "When you re-baptize those in
adult years, which we have baptized in their infancy, you and they jointly
renounce that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, whom we adore and worship as the
only living and true God, and on whom we depend for all our salvation." Dr.
Huntington, the author of this, died in 1795, when it appeared that he had
embraced the doctrine of universal salvation.
So some Jewish teachers said, Except ye be circumcised, after the manner of
Moses, ye cannot be saved. But the Holy Ghost, in the church at Jerusalem,
said, Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which
neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? Acts xv. 1, 10. The Sinai
covenant yoked believers and unbelievers together. And another minister says,
"Some who are not inwardly sanctified, are yet so far in covenant, that they
are rightful members of the visible church, as all but the Anabaptists must
grant." And again he says, "It is certain that the rule of admission is such,
that some, yea, many unsanctified persons may be, and are regularly admitted.
All the congregation of Israel were admitted or recognized as members of the
visible church by God himself at mount Sinai; yet who will say that one in ten
of them were saints in heart? The children of believers are reputed saints, and
as such, have a right of admission; yet we are not sure that the greater part
of them are inwardly sanctified from the womb, or even afterward." Hemmenway
on the Church. p. 29, 49.
Yea, we are so far from seeing any evidence of inward sanctification in most
of the children of professors, that they generally evidence the contrary in
their lives as much as other men. And when the church of Israel were entering
upon the promised land, Moses said, The Lord has not given you an heart to
perceive, and eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day. Deuteronomy. xxix. 4. So
far was he from giving them any idea that all their national church were
inwardly sanctified. But a little before the Babylonian captivity, it was said,
Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that I will make a new covenant with the
house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according to the covenant
that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand, to
bring them out of the land of Egypt (which my covenant they brake, although I
was an husband unto them, says the Lord;) but this shall be the covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel, After those day^, says the Lord, I will
put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be
their God, and they shall be my people: and they shall teach no more every man
his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know ye the Lord: for they
shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the
Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.
Jer. xxxi. 31 -- 34. And this is the covenant upon which the gospel church is
built. Heb. viii. 8 -- 12. And it is as distinct from the covenant of
circumcision with the nation of Israel, as Sarah was from Hagar, or Zion from
Sinai; yea, as distinct as Jerusalem which is above, and is free, being the
mother of all the children of God, is from Jerusalem below, which is in bondage
with her children. Gal. iv. 22 -- 26. And language cannot make a clearer
distinction, than is here made, between the national covenant with Israel, and
the covenant of grace with the church of Christ.

II. When the Jews returned from Babylon, and began to build the temple, their
enemies sent false accusations against them to the court of Persia, and
procured an order from thence to force them to cease from that work. But after
another king came to the throne, two prophets were raised up, to reprove the
Jews for their negligence, and to encourage them to finish the house of God.
Ezra iv. 11 -- 24. v. 1, 2. And because the old men wept to see how much
inferior this house was, to the glorious temple which was built by Solomon, one
prophet said to them, I am with you, says the Lord of hosts; according to the
word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my Spirit
remains among you; fear ye not. For thus says the Lord of hosts, Yet once,
it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens and the earth, and the sea,
and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the Desire of all Nations
shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts.
Hag. ii. 4 -- 7. And after the Son of God came and taught in that house, as no
man ever did before, and then offered himself a sacrifice to God for the sins
of his people, and arose and ascended to Heaven, and gave the Holy Ghost from
thence, to enable his ministers to preach the gospel to Jews and Gentiles, an
inspired apostle said, Yet once more, signifies the removing of those things
that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be
shaken may remain. Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let
us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and godly
fear; for our God is a consuming fire. Heb. xii. 27 -- 29. The other prophet
had a candlestick all of gold, set before him, with mediums to convey oil into
it for light; and upon his inquiry what was meant thereby, the answer was. This
is the word of the Lord unto Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power,
but by my Spirit, says the Lord of hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain?
Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, and he shall bring forth the
headstone thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it! Zech. iv. 1 --
7. And when they obeyed this call of God, their enemies wrote again to the
court of Persia against them, but a decree in their favor was procured
thereby, and all was plain before them. Ezra v. 7 -- 17. vi. 1 -- 16. The
golden candlestick represented the church of God, and the two olive trees were
his precepts and promises, whereby he poured the oil of his grace into his
church, to hold up light to the world, who hated it because it tormented their
consciences. Before the coming of Christ there was but one candlestick, with
two olive trees to pour oil into it; but when Christ came he broke down the
middle wall of partition between Jews and Gentiles, and built his church upon
the foundation of the apostles and prophets, for an habitation of God through
the Spirit. Ephesians. ii. 14 -- 22. And when antichrist arose, God said, I will give
power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and
threescore days, clothed in sackcloth. These are the two olive trees, and the
two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. And it is to be
observed, that the church is in the wilderness, and the beast continues, all
the time that these witnesses prophecy in sackcloth. Rev. xi. 3, 4. xii. 6, 14.
xiii. 5. The two testaments, believed and obeyed by the children of God, appear
to be the two witnesses.

III. And a being anointed by the Spirit of Christ, is essential to the name
Christian. For the disciples were not called by this name, until after the
Gentiles were received into the church without circumcision. Acts xi. 26. And
it is said, If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the
Spirit of glory, and of God rests upon you: on their part he is evil spoken
of, but on your part he is glorified. But let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body in other men's matters.
Yet if any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him
glorify God on this behalf. 1 Peter iv. 14 -- 16. Ye are not in the flesh, but
in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man
have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Romans viii. 9. Again it is
said, Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has given
us. 1 John iii. 24. And Jesus said, If a man love me, he will keep my words,
and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. Johm xiv. 23. Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both
the Father and the Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this
doctrine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God-speed; for he
that bids him God-speed is partaker of his evil deeds. 2 John 9 -- 11. And
how clearly do these things show, that no person can be a Christian without a
change of heart by the Spirit of Christ! Yea, and that receiving and supporting
true ministers, and refusing to receive false teachers, is ever a matter
between God and individuals, as much as faith in Christ is for eternal
salvation! And no men can have any more right to support religious teachers by
the sword, than they have power to pull down the Son of God from his throne in
heaven. For he says, All they that take the sword, shall perish with the sword.
Matt. xxvi. 52. My kingdom is not of this world: if my kingdom were of this
world, then would my servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the
Jews; but now is my kingdom not from hence. John xviii. 36. How then will any
men dare to support religious ministers by the sword of the magistrate? For his
power is to punish none but those who work ill to their neighbors; and it is a
matter of conscience with Christians to be subject to such rulers, who are not
a terror to good works, but to the evil. Romans xiii. 1 -- 10. But the royal
prophet says of wicked rulers, They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and
afflict thine heritage. They slay the widow and stranger, and murder the
fatherless. Yet they say, The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of
Jacob regard it. -- Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee,
which frames mischief by a law? -- The Lord at thy right hand shall strike
through kings in the day of his wrath. He shall judge among the heathen, he
shall fill the places with the dead bodies, he shall wound the heads over many
countries. Psalm xciv. 5 -- 20. cx. 5, 6. And how awfully is he now doing it!
Rev. xix. 11 -- 21.

IV. And is it not evident that the late increase of Baptist churches has been
caused by the influence of the Spirit of God? For before he poured out his
Spirit in the county of Hampshire, in and after 1734, there were but six
Baptist churches in all New England, except in Rhode Island government, wherein
are now two hundred and eighty-five churches. And in these four States, where
ministers have been supported by law, all the power of such ministers and
rulers have been against the Baptist churches; and they have found so much
difficulty in supporting their own ministers, and in guarding against
oppression from others, that some societies have obtained incorporations by the
laws of men. But our Associations have published testimonies against all such
incorporations, as they implicitly deny that the laws and Spirit of Christ are
sufficient to govern his church, and to support his ministers. And while they
act all the affairs of their Associations openly, before all men who have a
mind to hear them, and then publish their conclusions to the world, how can
they hope for any earthly advantage thereby? If heavely influence has not
increased their churches, what cause can be assigned therefore? All true
believers in Christ are born again, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God. John i. 12, 13. Natural descent, the power
of our own wills, and of the wills of other men, are all excluded from this
affair. And where the opposite principles have crept into Baptist churches,
their welfare has been obstructed thereby, and many such churches have been
dissolved. Yet the word and Spirit of God have reformed old churches, and
raised many new ones in all parts of America. There was one Baptist church in
Virginia, and a few in the Carolinas seventy years ago; but they were dark and
feeble societies, until some spiritual preachers were sent among them, in and
after 1753. The elders, Benjamin Miller, Isaac Stelle, Peter Peterson Vanhorne,
and John Gano, went from New Jersey and Pennsylvania, and labored in those
parts to good purpose. And elder Shubael Stearns, Daniel Marshall, and others,
went from Connecticut, and spent their lives in those part, as was before
observed; and how great has been the increase of the Baptist churches in those
southern States! And though vast pains have been taken, by men who have
supported their worship by force, to make the people believe that the Baptists
were enemies to good government, yet how are they now confounded in those
attempts! For it now appears that government and liberty are united in their
plan of conduct, which tends to bring all wars to an end. And in a prophecy
concerning that glorious event, it is said, All people will walk every one in
the name of his god, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God forever
and ever. Micah iv. 5. All men who love any creature above the Creator are
idolaters.

V. But our Lord says, If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love;
even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and abide in his love. -- If ye
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
John xv. 10, 19. How then will any men dare to confound the church and world
together in religious affairs? For as long as natural birth could bring the
children of Israel into the church, and into the priesthood, God said to them,
The man that commits adultery with another man's wife, even he that
commits adultery with his neighbor's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress
shall surely be put to death. Levir. xx. 10. And he now says to all the world,
Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world in
enmity with God? Whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world, is the
enemy of God. -- There is one lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy:
who art thou that judge another? James iv. 4, 12. Yet men in general have
assumed the power of lawgivers and judges for the church of Christ, and of
bringing children into it before they could choose for themselves; and they
have invented a multitude of other names and denominations of men, besides the
righteous and the wicked, the church and the world. Though the word of
revelation says, Whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother. For this
is the message that ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love one
another. Not as Cain, who was of that wicked one, and slew his brother: and
wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother's
righteous. 1 John iii. 9 -- 12. Woe unto them; for they have gone in the way of
Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in
the gainsaying of Core. Jude 11. Because the worship of Abel, by faith in the
blood of Christ, was accepted of God, and the worship of Cain without such
faith was not accepted, he was filled with envy against his brother. But the
Lord said unto Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if thou
do not well, sin lies at the door. And unto thee shall be his desire, and
thou shall rule over him. Genesis iv. 4 -- 7. True believers have ever been the
best subjects of civil government; but men have discovered enmity against them
in every age, because of the light of holiness which God has caused to shine
in their lives, to expose the hypocrisy and wickedness of others. But every man
is guilty of adultery, who has not been made dead to the works of the law, in
order to be married to Jesus Christ. Romans vii. 1 -- ^. For every true Christian
has been presented as a chaste virgin to him. 2 Cor. xi. 2. But after God had
consecrated Moses as the lawgiver to his church, and Aaron and his lawful
posterity to be the only priests therein, to offer sacrifices for iniquity,
until Jesus came and offered himself without spot to God for sinners, Korah
gathered a large company against them, saying, Ye take too much upon you,
seeing all the congregation are holy every one of them, and the Lord is among
them; wherefore then lift you up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?
But for this they perished most terribly. Numb. xvi. 1 -- 3, 32, 33. This gives
a plain view of the way of Cain, the error of Balaam, and the gainsaying of
Core, which evils many have charged upon believers, because they have held to
salvation by faith in the perfect righteousness of Christ, and to have his
church governed by his laws, which admit none into it without a credible
profession of the new birth. Thus men have called evil good, and good evil;
have put darkness for light, and light for darkness, bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. Isaiah v. 20.

VI. But an inspired apostle says, We have received not the spirit of the
world, but the Spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God. Which things also we speak, not in the words which
man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches; comparing spiritual
things with spiritual. 1 Cor. ii. 12, 13. And let us now attend to this rule.
For God says, Thy Maker is thine husband (the Lord of hosts is his name;) and
thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be
called. -- And all thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be
the peace of thy children. And Jesus says, No man can come to me, except the
Father which has sent me, draw him; and I will raise him up at the last day.
It is written in the prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man
therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.
Isaiah live. 5, 13. John vi. 44, 45. The children of the church of Christ, are
men, who have been taught of God, and have learned of the Father, so as to come
to the Son. So Paul says, Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the
mother of us all. Gal. iv. 26. And John says, I saw the holy city, new
Jeruslem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for
her husband. Rev. xxi. 2. And Jesus says, Give not that which is holy unto the
dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, left they trample them under
their feet, and turn again and rent you. -- The kingdom of heaven is like unto
a merchantman, seeking goodly pearls; who when he had found one pearl of great
price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it. Matt. vii. 6. xii, 45,
46. So likewise, whosoever he be of you, that forsakes not all that he has,
he cannot be my disciple. Luke xiv. 33. Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God. John iii. 3. Every several gate was of one pearl. --
Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree
of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. For without are
dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and adulterers, and whosoever loves and
makes a lie. I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify unto you these things in
the churches. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and
morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that hears,
say, Come; and let him that is athirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take
the water of life freely. Rev. xxi. 21. xxii. 14 -- 17. And how clearly do
these things show, that the government of the church of Christ is as distinct
from all worldly governments, as heaven is from earth! Yea, and that none has
any true right in his church, until he comes to Christ by faith which works
by love that is as free as water! For God says, In the last days it shall come
to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be established in the
top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and people shall
flow unto it. And many nations shall come and say, Come;and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; for the law shall go forth of
Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among many
people, and rebuke strong nations afar off, and they shall beat their swords
into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift
up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more. Micah iv. 1 --
3. Now all men may know, that this prophecy has never yet been fulfilled; but
it will as surely be accomplished, as any prophecy ever was in this world. How
earnest then should all be to hear and obey the revealed will of God!

VII. And no man can obey him without denying himself, and taking up his cross,
and following the example of Christ. And the apostle Paul says to the ministers
of Christ, I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God. Take
heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy
Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood. For I know this, that after my departing shall
grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of yourselves
shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them.
Therefore watch, and remember that by the space of three years, I ceased not to
warn every one night and day with tears. And now, brethren, I commend you to
God, and to the word of his grace which is able to build you up, and to give
you (...) inheritance among all them which are sanctified. I have coveted no
man's silver, or gold, or apparel. Yea, you yourselves know, that these hands
have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with me. I have
showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to support the weak; and
to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more blessed to
give than to receive. Acts xx. 27 -- 35. And how has this prophecy been
fulfilled in every age since it was published! And how few believe that God,
and the word of his grace, is able to build up his church, and to guard against
grievous wolves, and against perverse schismatics, without the laws of men
enforced by the sword! Yea, how much has the sword promoted both of these
evils? And how little do we believe, that it is more blessed to give than to
receive! It is blessed to receive, when we receive in a right manner; but all
things below perish in the using, while all that is given for the benefit of
the bodies or souls of others, is laying up treasure in heaven, which will turn
to praise, honor and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ. And though Paul
had written to the church of Corinth, upon their duty to support the preachers
of the gospel, yet as deceitful teachers had tried to destroy his character,
pretending that he acted from selfish motives, he refused to receive any
support from them, until he could come and have those accusations tried before
that church, in the mouth of two or three witnesses, according to the law of
Christ. But as his refusal to receive any thing of them, as he did of other
churches, might seem to be a dishonor to the church of Corinth, he said,
Forgive me this wrong. 2 Cor. xi. 12. xii. 13. xiii. 1 -- 4. And this shows
that a particular church of Christ is the highest judicature that he has
established upon earth, to carry his laws into execution in his name. And the
people also are to act toward their ministers as they can answer it to God in
the last day. For he says, The labourer is worthy of his reward. 1 Timothy v. 18.
Let him that is taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all
good things. Be not deceived; God is not mocked: for whatsoever a man sows,
that shall he also reap. For he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption; but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
life everlasting. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not. Gal. vi. 6 -- 9. Thus ministers and people are
required to act toward each other, as they can answer the same to God, who
only can bless or curse them in time and eternity. And Christ says to his
ministers, He that hears you hears me; and he that despises you despises
me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. Luke x. 16. And how
solemn are these considerations! Yea, and how safe are all true believers in
Christ!

VIII. For he says, Upon this Rock I will build my church; and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. Matt. xvi. 18. And though many have made
strange work of this saying, and others have paid no regard to it, yet many
ancient passages may serve to explain its vast importance. For it is said of
God's people of old, When he slew them, then they sought him; and they returned
and inquired early after God. And they remembered that God was their Rock, and
the high God their Redeemer. Nevertheless, they did flatter him with their
mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues; for their heart was not right
with him, neither were they steadfast in his covenant. Psalm lxxviii. 34 -- 37.
Wherefore hear the word of the Lord, ye scornful men that rule this people
which is in Jerusalem. Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with
death, and with hell are we at agreement; when the overflowing scourge shall
pass through, it shall no come unto us; for we have made lies our refuge, and
under falsehood have we hid ourselves: therefore thus says the Lord God,
Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious
cornerstone, a sure foundation; he that believes shall not make haste.
Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, and the
hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the
hiding place; and your covenant with death shall be disannulled, and your
agreement with hell shall not stand. Isaiah xxviii. 14 -- 18. And this prophecy
is applied to them who followed after the law of righteousness, but sought it
not by faith in Christ, but as it were by the works of the law. They had a zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge. For they being ignorant of God's
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. For Christ is the end of
the law for righteousness to every one that believes. And whosoever believes
on him, shall not be ashamed. Romans ix. 31 -- 33. x. 1 -- 4. He that believes
on him shall not be confounded. 1 Peter ii. 6. From whence we may learn, that
all men who trust in their own doings, instead of the perfect righteousness of
Christ, are in covenant with death, and at agreement with hell. And earthly
monarchy has generally been the darling of such men. Therefore God says to
them, Thou wentest to the king with ointment, and did increase thy perfumes,
and did send thy messengers afar off, and did debase thyself even unto
hell. Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way, yet said thou not, There
is no hope; thou have found the life of thine hand, therefore thou wast not
grieved. Isaiah lvii. 9, 10. David, and his race of kings, were anointed of the
Lord to their office, as eminent types of Christ. And the rage of hypocrites
and infidels, against the Lord, and against his anointed, was against his
Christ. Psalm ii. 2. Acts iv. 26. And every child of God has the anointing of
his Spirit abiding in him, which effectually teaches the soul to abide in
Christ. 1 John ii. 27. But the calling any ruler, since the death of Christ,
The Lord's anointed, and the setting up any earthly heads to the church, is a
practice which came from hell, from the bottomless pit; and this is the beast
who causes God's witnesses to prophesy in mourning, and at length kills them.
Rev. xi. 7. xiii. 1, 2, 12. xvii. 8.

IX. And the saints have a gradual victory over him. For John says, I saw as it
were a sea of glass, mingled with fire; and them that had gotten the victory
over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of
his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God. And they sing the
song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and
mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou
King of saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou
only art holy; for all nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy
judgments are made manifest. Rev. xv. 2 -- 4. The sea of glass, mingled with
fire, is the word of God, enforced upon the souls of men by his Holy Spirit.
For one apostle says, Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But we
all with open face, beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. 2
Cor. iii. 17, 18. And another says, Lay apart all filthiness, and superfluity
of naughtiness, and receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to
save your souls. But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own selves. For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like
unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass; for he beholds himself, and
goes his way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he was. But whosoever
looks into the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his
deed. James i. 21 -- 25. And when a prophet met with most cruel treatment, he
said, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name. But his
word was in mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary
with forbearing, and I could not stay. And God says, The prophet that has a
dream, let him tell a dream; and he that has my word, let him speak my word
faithfully: what is the chaff to the wheat? says the Lord. Is not my word like
as a fire? says the Lord, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?
Jer. xx. 9. xxiii. 28, 29. Therefore they who stand upon the sea of glass
mingled with fire, are they who hear and obey the revealed will of God. Moses
was the lawgiver to the church of Israel, and the Lamb is so to the church of
God among all nations. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a
servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but
Christ as a Son over his own house; whose house are we, if we hold fast the
confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. -- Now faith is
the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen. Heb. iii.
5, 6. xi. 1. And how clearly do these passages prove, that true believers in
Christ are the only persons of whom his house or church is composed! For no
others can hold fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of hope of salvation in
Jesus Christ. The beast appears to be the church of Rome, over many nations;
his image, all national churches; his mark, all supporting of worship by tax
and compulsion, and the number of his name, includes all the schemes of men to
hold the church in bondage, so that she might not be governed wholly by the
laws of Christ.

X. And this may lead us to consider, what is intended by the killing and
resurrection of the two witnesses. If they be the two parts of the holy
scriptures, believed and obeyed by the children of God, then their death is the
triumphing of the world over them. And the prophecy says, When they shall have
finished their testimony, the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit
shall make war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. And their
dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city, which spiritually is
called Sadom and Egypt. where also our Lord was crucified. And they of the
people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies
three days and an half, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in
graves. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and make
merry, and shall send gifts one to another; because these two prophets
tormented them that dwelt on the earth. Rev. xi. 7 -- 10. Our Lord was
crucified by hypocrites and infidels; and he declared those hypocrites to be
worse than the old Sodomites. Matt. xi. 23, 24. Luke x. 12. And God said in
prophecy, Sodom thy sister has not done, she nor her daughters, as thou have
done, thou and thy daughters. Behold, this was the iniquity of Sodom, Pride,
fullness of bread, and abundance of idleness was in her and in her daughters,
neither did she strengthen the hand of the poor and needy. And they were
haughty, and committed abomination before me; therefore I took them away as I
saw good. Neither has Samaria committed half thy sins; but thou have
multiplied thine abominations more than they. -- Nevertheless, I will remember
my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee
an everlasting covenant. Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed,
when thou shall receive thy sisters, thine elder and thy younger; and I will
give them unto thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant. Ezekiel. xvi. 48 --
51, 60, 61. According to which prophecy, the church of Christ was erected in
Jerusalem, and she received the Samaritans, and then the Gentiles into the
church as daughters, but not by the covenant of circumcision, which the Jews
were in after the Samaritans were separated from them. But this proverb, this
high figure which God delivered to Jerusalem, is now held up as a literal
prophecy, that all the old Sodomites will finally be saved from hell.
Winchester's Dialogues. p. 197 -- 200.
Though God said to Jerusalem, Thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother an
Hittite. Ezekiel. xvi. 3. Which could not be literally true, because Abraham and
Sarah sprang from Shem, and the Amorites and Hittites from Ham. But it is said
of false teachers under the gospel, As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so
do these also resist the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the
faith. 2 Timothy iii. 8. Jannes and Jambres were magicians of Egypt, who hardened
the heart of Pharaoh against the call of God, to let Israel go and serve him
according to his own institutions. And Sodom was never more set against purity,
nor Egypt against liberty, than the world now are against the purity and
liberty of the gospel. For truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot
enter. Isaiah lix. 14. The nations of the world will not suffer a form of
godliness to be buried from among them; but how are they set against the power
thereof! For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is
dead also. James ii. 26. Thou have a name that thou live, and art dead. Rev.
iii. 1. Whereas an inspired apostle said, The law of the spirit of life in
Christ Jesus, has made me free from the law of sin and death. Romans viii. 2. We
having the same spirit of faith, according as it is written, I believed, and
therefore have I spoken; we also believe, and therefore speak. -- For our light
affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen, are temporal; but
the things which are not seen, are eternal. 2 Cor. iv. 13 -- 18. But how is
this life of faith now killed by a deceitful world!

XI. Though the prophecy says, After three days and an half, the Spirit of life
from God entered into them; and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell
upon them which saw them. And they heard a great voice from heaven, saying unto
them, Come up hither. And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their
enemies beheld them. And the same hour was there a great earthquake, and the
tenth part of the city fell, and in the earthquake were s^^in of men seven
thousand; and the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe comes quickly. And the
seventh angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
and he shall reign forever and ever. Rev. xi. 11 -- 15. And we are to observe,
that when the seventh angel shall begin to sound his trumpet, the mystery of
God shall be finished, as he has declared by all his prophets. Rev. x. 7. So
that the resurrection of the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter, and the
resurrection of the souls of the faithful, in the twentieth chapter, appear to
be the same glorious event, given under different views. For our Lord said to
John, Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall be hereafter. Rev. i. 19. When Christ was born of a virgin,
in the true church of God, the nation of Israel was part of the Roman empire,
which had seven heads, and ten horns; and Herod sought to slay the child Jesus,
as soon as he was born, and Pilate crucified him, after which he was caught up
unto God, and to his throne, where he will rule all nations with a rod of iron,
and dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. Rev. xii. 1 -- 5. Luke i. 32,
33. Matt. ii. 3 -- 16. xxvii. 24. Acts ii. 23, 24. iv. 25 -- 28. Psalm ii. 1 --
9. And these things John had seen. He had seen the crucifying of Christ by the
rulers of the Roman empire, urged on to do it by false teachers among the Jews;
for God had before said, The ancient and honorable, he is the head; and the
prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail. Isaiah ix. 15. And deceitful
teachers have ever been the meanest and worst of all men upon earth, and they
were the tail of the dragon in the Roman empire. But no men who have supposed
that this twelfth chapter speaks of another child who should be born after the
apostolic age, could ever give any rational account of him. Many have supposed
it was Constantine, the first emperor who owned the Christian name; but he
divided the empire, and prepared the way for the advancement of the man of sin,
as we have before proved. And after the ascension of Christ to heaven, it was
said, Now is come salvation and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the
power of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down, which
accused them before our God day and night. And they overcame him by the blood
of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony; and they loved not their lives
unto the death. Rev. xii. 10, 11. In this way the power of the devil was
destroyed in the old Roman empire. And when Satan shall be bound, so as not to
deceive the nations any more, the prophecy says, I saw thrones, and they sat
upon them, and judgment was given unto them; and I saw the souls of them that
were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had
not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon
their foreheads, or in their hands; and they lived and reigned with Christ a
thousand years. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand
years were finished. This is the first resurrection. Rev. xx. 4, 5. And is not
this the same resurrection which is spoken of in the eleventh chapter? For the
kingdoms of this world will become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ,
according to each of these prophecies. And Daniel says, The saints of the Most
High shall take the kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever, even forever and
ever. Dan. vii. 18. And the raising of the souls of the old martyrs, appears to
mean the same as the coming of John in the spirit and power of Elijah. Mal. iv.
5, 6. Luke i. 17. Neither have we any more reason to think, that the bodies of
all the saints will be raised, before their reign with Christ a thousand years,
than the Jews had to expect that Elijah would personally come down from heaven,
before the Messiah appeared among them. And as all men are dead in trespasses
and sins, until they are made alive to God, through Jesus Christ our Lord, and
yet they have ever assumed the place of lawgivers and judges for the church of
Christ, I believe that when God says, The rest of the dead lived not again
until the thousand years were finished, he means that they shall not have the
power of government over the church, as they have ever had since the rise of
antichrist. For as Christ is the only Husband of his church, how much like
Sodom are all men who assume any power of government over her in religious
affairs, so as to hinder her from obeying him as a chaste virgin! There were
some ministers of the devil, who transformed themselves as the ministers of
righteousness, in the apostolic age, whose end was according to their works. 2
Cor. xi. 2 -- 15. And we may well conclude that there are many such in our day;
and how pernicious is their influence among all people who receive them! And
supporting such with the sword, is using of it to uphold the kingdom of the
devil. Nevertheless, the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The
Lord knows them that are his. And let every one that names the name of
Christ, depart from iniquity.

XII. We readily grant, that no prophecy of scripture was ever clearly
understood by men, until the event explained it. The disciples of Christ knew
not the scriptures that he was to rise again from the dead, until he appeared
to them, and explained the prophecies concerning it. Luke xxiv. 25 -- 27. John
xx. 9. And how long was it before they were clearly convinced that circumcision
was abolished? And it is most evident that all national churches have sprung
from an abuse of the covenant of circumcision. That covenant gave Israel a
right to seize upon the lands of the heathen in Canaan, and to buy others for
servants; and all the plantations that have been made in America, under the
name of Christianity, have been made by those who imagined that Christians had
a right to deal thus with all heathens. But as our Lord has expressly excluded
slavery, and the use of the sword of the magistrate from the government of his
church, we may know that all these things belong to mystery Babylon. Literal
Babylon had her name from Babel, where they said, Let us build us a city and a
tower whose top may reach unto heaven, and let us make us a name, lest we be
scattered abroad upon the face of all the earth. Genesis xi. 4. And is not the
pursuit of all men naturally, to get to heaven by their own doings, and to make
themselves a name upon the earth? Babel signifies confusion; and an inspired
apostle says, Where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil
work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality,
and without hypocrisy. James iii. 16, 17. And no men have this wisdom, but they
who are born again by the Spirit of God. And to such another apostle says, We
have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the
power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eyewitnesses of his
majesty. For he received from God the Father, honor and glory, when there came
such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I
am well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were
with him in the holy mount. We have also a more sure word of prophecy,
whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark
place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts; knowing this
first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For
the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man; but holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. But there were false prophets also among
the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways,
by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of. And through
covetousness, shall they with feigned words make merchandise of you; whose
judgment now of a long time lingereth not, and their damnation slumbereth not.
2 Peter i. 16 -- 21. ii. 1 -- 3. And how clearly are our times here described!
For the fleets and armies which have filled the world with confusion and
slavery, have been raised and upheld by national churches; and their vast funds
of money, which are daily bought and sold by deceitful men to enrich
themselves, have been kept in credit by the labors of the faithful. Thus, God
says, shall they make merchandise of you. And if it had not been for this
wicked conduct our national debt might all have been paid off before now. But
instead of it the debt is daily increasing, and many have tried all their arts
to draw America into another war with foreign nations. Though when the church
of Christ shall be wholly governed by his laws, above all the powers of the
world, Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn
war any more. Isaiah ii. 1 -- 4.

XIII. But, instead of such a blessing, more blood has been shed in latter
ages, by the nations who have borne the name of Christianity, than by all other
nations in the world; and this is now loudly proclaimed in Europe and America,
as a strong argument against divine revelation. Whereas we have just seen that
damnable heresies will cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of. The light
of revelation has ever enlarged the capacities of men, beyond any other means
in the world; but they who have not received the word into an honest and good
heart, have been hardened afterward like a rock, or have been as sharp as
thorns, to tare away the property, or to destroy the lives of others. Luke
viii. 4 -- 15. But that which bears thorns and briers is rejected, and is
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. Heb. vi. 8. Yet many teachers now
bring this last passage, to prove that the true children of God may fall away
and perish forever; while others are holding up hell as a purging fire, which
will finally purge away all sin from every child of Adam; as if the sufferings
of a creature could purge away sin, instead of the blood of Christ applied by
the Spirit of God. Thus they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and
put him to an open shame. His person was crucified between two thieves, and his
cause is crucified between opposite teachers and professors. But our Lord says,
Enter ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way,
that leads to destruction, and many there be who go in thereat; because
strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. Matt. vii. 13, 14. Though the world is full of men who
deny this, and who bring in damnable heresies. And they have perverted this
word so much, as often to turn it against all those who have withdrawn from
worldly churches, while others have applied the word to doctrines rather than
practice. But if we take our ideas from the word of God, and not from the
traditions of men, we may find that heresy means rebellion against God in his
church. For when the Jews accused Paul of sedition, and being a leader of a new
sect, he denied the charge, and said. After the way which they call heresy, so
worship I the God of my fathers, believing all things which are written in the
law and the prophets. Acts xxiv. 5, 14. They accused him of rebellion against
government, and of being the leader of a new sect, who preferred Jesus of
Nazareth above Moses, the great lawgiver to Israel. This last charge he owns,
and so was a firm believer in revelation, while they rejected the counsel of
God against themselves. And each heretic is subverted, and sins, being
condemned of himself. Titus iii. 10, 11. For our Lord says, All things
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them; for this
is the law and the prophets. And each professor who breaks this law of equity,
and will not repent, is to be rejected by the church. And when such men form
other communities, with other laws than the laws of Christ, it is a way which
tries the hearts of all. Therefore the voice of inspiration says, If any man
seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither the churches of God.
Now in this that I declare unto you, I praise you not, that you come together
not for the better, but for the worse. For first of all, when ye come together
in the church, I hear that there be divisions among you, and I partly believe
it. For there must also be heresies among you, that they which are approved may
be made manifest among you. 1 Cor. xi. 16 -- 19. Hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, strife, seditions and heresies, are all works of the flesh. Gal. v. 20.
Now in all these passages, heresy appears to mean rebellion against God in his
church. And another apostle says of them who loved the world above God, They
went out from us; but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that they might be
made manifest, that they were not all of us. And this is the spirit of
antichrist. 1 John ii. 15 -- 19. All religious communities wherein the love of
the world prevails above the love of God, are chargeable with damnable heresies.

XIV. In monarchical governments the power is in a few hands, but in America
all power of government is derived from the people, who have a fair opportunity
to know teachers by their fruits. And where is the man who cannot distinguish
thorns and brambles from trees which bear good fruit? Luke vi. 44, 45. Our Lord
here plainly refers us to a parable concerning the first man who set himself up
as king of the church of Israel, when God was their only king. All the good
trees refused any such power over other trees, but the bramble said, If in
truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow;
and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.
Judges ix. 8 -- 15. The tongue sets on fire the course of nature, and it is
set on fire of hell. James iii. 6. And such men would destroy the best
characters in the land, if they would not yield to their darling schemes. But
no man should ever be elected into office, who has not been found to be a good
tree by his fruits in private stations; and all teachers should be avoided, as
wolves in sheep's clothing, who tare away the property of any unjustly. And it
is impossible for any community to be clear of this evil, where religious
teachers are supported by force. For as the church of Israel were never allowed
to do it, when they came into that practice, God said, Her princes within her
are roaring lions, her judges are evening wolves, they gnaw not the bones till
the morrow. Her prophets are light and treacherous persons, her priests have
polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law. Zeph. iii. 3, 4.
And all the natural lions and wolves in the world, never destroyed so many men,
as national churches have done in our day. Again it was said of Israel, The
heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire, and the
prophets thereof divine for money; yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say,
Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. But for these iniquities
their nation was ruined, and the mountain of the house of God will be exalted
above all earthly powers, when wars shall come to an end. Micah iii. 11, 12.
iv. 1 -- 5. Is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us, was the
language which brought ruin upon Jerusalem, and such confidence in negatives
will ruin all people who build thereon. For reason as well as scripture
discovers, that the more light men have, the greater is their guilt and misery
if they sin against it. But when the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the
earth as the waters cover the sea, the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and they
shall not hurt nor destroy in all his holy mountain. Isaiah xi. 6 -- 9. And
this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent. John xvii. 3. This is the only way of peace and
eternal happiness.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 23, line 28, dele who. Page 28, line 28, read xlvi. instead of xvi. Page
69, last line, read true believers, instead of the believers. Page 97, line 36,
read Clinton, instead of Canaan. Page 113, line 17, read they, instead of them.
Page 281, line 7, read 1778, instead of 1770.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE First and Second Volumes of our History may be had at the Places where
this is sold; and also other Works of the Author.


