Defense of Usury; SHOWING THE IMPOLICY OF THE PRESENT LEGAL RESTAINTS ON THE
TERMS OF PECUNIARY BARGAINS.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A LETTER To ADAM SMITH, Esquire. L. L. D. ON THE Discouragement
of Inventive Industry.

BY JEREMY BENTHAM, ESQUIRE. OF LINCOLN'S INN.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR MATTHEW CAREY, By Lang and Ustick. M.DCC.XCVI.

CONTENTS.
LETTER I. INTRODUCTION Page 5 LETTER II. Reasons for Restraint. -- Prevention
of Usury Page 9 LETTER III. Reasons for Restraint -- Prevention of Prodigality
Page 17 LETTER IV. Reasons for Restraint -- Protection of Indigence Page 31
LETTER V. Reasons for Restraint. -- Protection of Simplicity Page 37 LETTER VI.
Mischiefs of the anti-usurious Laws Page 43 LETTER VII. Inefficacy of
anti-usurious Laws Page 57 LETTER VIII. Virtual Usury allowed Page 65 LETTER
IX. Blackstone considered Page 75 LETTER X. Grounds of the Prejudices against
Usury Page 83 LETTER XI. Compound Interest Page 95 LETTER XII. Maintenance and
Champerty Page 101 LETTER XIII. To Dr. Smith, on Projects in Arts Page 111
A DEFENSE, etc.
LETTER I. INTRODUCTION.
Crichoff, in White Russia, Jan. 1787,
AMONG the various species or modifications of liberty, of which on different
occasions we have heard so much in England, I do not recollect ever seeing any
thing yet offered in behalf of the liberty of making one's own terms in money
bargains. From so general and universal a neglect, it is an old notion of mine,
as you well know, that this meek and unassuming species of liberty has been
suffering much injustice.

A fancy has taken me, just now, to trouble you with my reasons: which, if you
think them capable of answering any good purpose, you may forward to the press;
or, in the other case, what will give you less trouble, to the sire.

In a word, the proposition I have been accustomed to lay down to myself on
this subject, is the following one, viz. that no man of ripe years and of sound
mind, acting freely, and with his eyes open, ought to be hindered, with a view
to his advantage, from making such bargain, in the way of obtaining money, as
he thinks fit; nor, (what is a necessary consequence) any body hindered from
supplying him, upon any terms he thinks proper to accede to.

This proposition, were it to be received, would level, you see, at one stroke,
all the barriers which law, either statute or common, have in their united
wisdom set up, either against the crying sin of Usury, or against the
hard-named and little-heard-of practice of Champerty; to which we must also add
a portion of the multifarious, and as little-heard-of offense, of Maintenance.

On this occasion, were it any individual antagonist I had to deal with, my
part would be a smooth and easy one. You, who fetter contracts, you who lay
restraints on the liberty of man, it is for you (I should say) to assign a
reason for your doing so. That contracts in general ought to be observed, is a
rule, the propriety of which, no man was ever yet found wrongheaded enough to
deny; if this case is one of the exceptions (for some doubtless there are)
which the safety and welfare of every society require should be taken out of
that general rule, in this case, as in all those others, it lies upon him, who
alleges the necessity of the exception, to produce a reason for it.

This, I say would be a short and very easy method with an individual: but as
the world has no mouth of its own to plead by, no certain attorney by which it
can come and defend this force and injury, I must even find arguments for it at
a venture, and ransack my own imagination for such phantoms as I can find to
fight with.

In favor of the restraints opposed to the species of liberty I contend for, I
can imagine but five arguments.

1. Prevention of usury. 2. Prevention of prodigality. 3. Protection of
indigence against extortion. 4. Repression of the temerity of projectors. 5.
Protection of simplicity against imposition.
Of all these in their order.

LETTER II. Reasons for Restraints. -- Prevention of Usury.
I WILL begin with the prevention of usury: because in the sound of the word
usury lies, I take it, the main strength of the argument: or, to speak
strictly, of what is of more importance than all argument, of the hold which
the opinion I am combating has obtained on the imaginations and passions of
mankind.

'Usury is a bad thing, and as such ought to be prevented: usurers are a bad
sort of men, a very bad sort of men, and as such ought to be punished and
suppressed.' These are among the string of propositions which every man finds
handed down to him from his progenitors: which most men are disposed to accede
to without examination, and indeed not unnaturally nor even unreasonably
disposed; for it is impossible the bulk of mankind should find leisure, had
they the ability, to examine into the grounds of an hundredth part of the rules
and maxims, which they find themselves obliged to act upon. Very good apology
this for John Trot: but a little more inquisitiveness may be required of
legislators.

You, my friend, by whom the true force of words is so well understood, have, I
am sure, gone before me in perceiving, that to say usury is a thing to be
prevented, is neither more or less than begging the matter in question. I know
of but two definitions that can possibly be given of usury; one is, the taking
of a greater interest than the law allows: this may be styled the political or
legal definition. The other is the taking of a greater interest than it is
usual for men to give and take; this may be styled the moral one: and this,
where the law has not interfered, is plainly enough the only one. It is plain,
that in order for usury to be prohibited by law, a positive description must
have been found for it by law, fixing, or rather superseding, the moral one. To
say, then, that usury is a thing that ought to be prevented, is saying neither
more nor less, than that the utmost rate of interest which shall be taken ought
to be fixed; and that fixation enforced by penalties, or such other means, if
any, as may answer the purpose of preventing the breach of it. A law punishing
usury supposes, therefore, a law fixing the allowed legal rate of interest; and
the propriety of the penal law must depend upon the propriety of the
simply-prohibitive, or, if you please, declaratory one.

One thing then is plain; that, antecedently to custom growing from convention,
there can be no such thing as usury: for what rate of interest is there that
can naturally be more proper than another? what natural fixed price can there
be for the use of money more than for the use of any other thing? Were it not
then for custom, usury, considered in a moral view, would not so much as admit
of a definition: so far from having existence, it would not so much as be
conceivable: nor therefore could the law, in the definition it took upon itself
to give of such offense, have so much as a guide to steer by. Custom therefore
is the sole basis, which, either the moralist in his rules and precepts, or the
legislator in his injunctions, can have to build upon. But what basis can be
more weak or unwarrantable, as a ground for coercive measures, than custom
resulting from free choice? My neighbors, being at liberty, have happened to
concur among themselves in dealing at a certain rate of interest. I, who have
money to lend, and Titius, who wants to borrow it of me, would be glad, the one
of us to accept, the other to give, an interest somewhat higher than theirs:
why is the liberty they exercise to be made a pretense for depriving me and
Titius of ours?

Nor has blind custom, thus made the sole and arbitrary guide, any thing of
steadiness or uniformity in its decisions: it has varied, from age to age, in
the same country: it varies from country to country, in the same age: and the
legal rate has varied along with it: and indeed, with regard to times past, it
is from the legal rate, more readily than from any other source, that we
collect the customary. Among the Romans, till the time of Justinian, we find it
as high as twelve per cent.: in England, so late as the time of Henry VIII. we
find it at ten per cent. Succeeding statutes reduced it to eight, then to six,
and lastly to five, where it stands at present. Even at present in Ireland it
is at six per cent.; and in the West Indies at eight per cent.; and in
Hindostan, where there is no rate limited by law, the lowest customary rate is
ten or twelve. At Constantinople, in certain cases, as I have been well
informed, thirty per cent. is a common rate. Now, of all these widely different
rates, what one is there that is intrinsically more proper than another? What
is it that evidences this propriety in each instance? what but the mutual
convenience of the parties, as manifested by their consent? It is convenience,
then, that has produced whatever there has been of custom in the matter: What
can there then be in custom, to make it a better guide than the convenience
which gave it birth? and what is there in convenience, that should make it a
worse guide in one case than in another? It would be convenience to me to give
six per cent. for money: I wish to do so. "No," (says the law) "you shall not." --
Why so? "Because it is not convenient to your neighbor to give above five for
it." Can any thing be more absurd than such a reason?

Much has not been done, I think, by legislators as yet, in the way of fixing
the price of other commodities: and, in what little has been done, the probity
of the intention has, I believe, in general, been rather more unquestionable
than the rectitude of the principle, or the felicity of the result. Putting
money out at interest, is exchanging present money for future: but why a
policy, which, as applied to exchanges in general, would be generally deemed
absurd and mischievous, should be deemed necessary in the instance of this
particular kind of exchange, mankind are as yet to learn. For him who takes as
much as he can get for the use of any other sort of thing, an house for
instance, there is no particular appellation, nor any mark of disrepute: nobody
is ashamed of doing so, nor is it usual so much as to profess to do otherwise.
Why a man, who takes as much as he can get, be it six, or seven, or eight, or
ten per cent. for the use of a sum of money, should be called usurer, should be
loaded with an opprobrious name, any more than if he had bought a house with
it, and made a proportionable profit by the house, is more than I can see.

Another thing I would also wish to learn, is, why the legislator should be
more anxious to limit the rate of interest one way, than the other? why he
should set his face against the owners of that species of property more than of
any other? why he should make it his business to prevent their getting more
than a certain price for the use of it, rather than to prevent their getting
less? why, in short, he should not take means for making it penal to offer
less, for example, than five per cent. as well as to accept more? Let any one
that can, find an answer to these questions; it is more than I can do: I except
always the distant and imperceptible advantage, of sinking the price of goods
of all kinds; and in that remote way, multiplying the future enjoyment of
individuals. But this was a consideration by far too distant and refined, to
have been the original ground for confining the limitation to this side.

LETTER III. Reasons for Restraint -- Prevention of Prodigality.
HAVING done with sounds, I come gladly to propositions; which, as far as they
are true in point of fact, may deserve the name of reasons. And first, as to
the efficacy of such restrictive laws with regard to the prevention of
prodigality.

That prodigality is a bad thing, and that the prevention of it is a proper
object for the legislator to propose to himself, so long as he confines himself
to, what I look upon as, proper measures, I have no objection to allow, at
least for the purpose of argument; though, were this the principal question, I
should look upon it as incumbent on me to place in a fair light the reasons
there may be for doubting, how far, with regard to a person arrived at the age
of discretion, third persons may be competent judges, which of two pains may be
of greater force and value to him, the present pain of restraining his present
desires, or the future contingent pain he may be exposed to suffer from the
want to which the expense of gratifying these desires may hereafter have
reduced him. To prevent our doing mischief to one another, it is but too
necessary to put bridles into all our mouths: it is necessary to the
tranquillity and very being of society: but that the tacking of leading-strings
upon the backs of grown persons, in order to prevent their doing themselves
mischief, is not necessary either to the being or tranquillity of society,
however conducive to its well-being, I think cannot be disputed. Such paternal,
or, if you please, maternal care, may be a good work, but it certainly is but a
work of supererogation.

For my own part, I must confess, that so long as such methods only are
employed as to me appear proper ones; and such there are, I should not feel
myself disinclined to see some measures taken for the restraining of
prodigality: but this I cannot look upon as being of the number. My reasons I
will now endeavor to lay before you.

In the first place, I take it, that it is neither natural nor usual for
prodigals, as such, to betake themselves to this method, I mean, that of giving
a rate of interest above the ordinary one, to supply their wants.

In the first place, no man, I hope you will allow, prodigal or not prodigal,
ever thinks of borrowing money to spend, so long as he has ready money of his
own, or effects which he can turn into ready money without loss. And this
deduction strikes off what, I suppose, you will look upon as the greatest
proportion of the persons subject, at any given time, to the imputation of
prodigality.

In the next place, no man, in such a country as Great Britain at least, has
occasion, nor is at all likely, to take up money at an extraordinary rate of
interest, who has security to give, equal to that upon which money is commonly
to be had at the highest ordinary rate. While so many advertise, as are to be
seen every day advertising, money to be lent at five per cent. what should
possess a man, who has any thing to offer that can be called a security, to
give, for example, six per cent. is more than I can conceive.

Yon may say, perhaps, that a man who wishes to lend his money out upon
security, wishes to have his interest punctually, and that without the expense,
and hazard, and trouble, and odium of going to law; and that, on this account,
it is better to have a sober man to deal with, than a prodigal. So far I allow
you; but were you to add, that on this account it would be necessery for a
prodigal to offer more than another man, there I should disagree with you. In
the first place, it is not so easy a thing, nor, I take it, a common thing, for
the lender upon security to be able to judge, or even to form any attempt to
judge, whether the conduct of one who offers to borrow his money is, or is not
of such a cast, as to bring him under this description. The question, prodigal
or not prodigal, depends upon two pieces of information; neither of which, in
general, is very easy to come at: on the one hand, the amount of his means and
reasonable expectations; on the other hand, the amount of his expenditure. The
goodness or badness of the security is a question of a very different nature:
upon this head, every man has a known and ready means of obtaining that sort of
information, which is the most satisfactory the nature of things affords, by
going to his lawyer. It is, accordingly, I take it, on their lawyers' opinion,
that lenders in general found their determination in these cases, and not upon
any calculations they may have formed, concerning the receipt and expenditure
of the borrower. But even supposing a man's disposition to prodigality to be
ever so well known, I take it there are always enough to be found, to whom such
a disposition would be rather an inducement than an objection, so long as they
were satisfied with the security. Every body knows the advantage to be made in
case of mortgage, by foreclosing or forcing a sale: and that this advantage is
not uncommonly looked out for, will, I believe, hardly be doubted by any one,
who has had any occasion to observe the course of business in the court of
Chancery.

In short, so long as a prodigal has any thing to pledge, or to dispose of,
whether in possession, or even in reversion, whether of a certain or even of a
contingent nature, I see not, how he can receive the smallest benefit, from any
laws that are, or can be made to fix the rate of interest. For, suppose the law
to be efficacious as far as it goes, and that the prodigal can find none of
those monsters called usurers to deal with him, does he lie quiet? No such
thing: he goes on and gets the money he wants, by felling his interest instead
of borrowing. He goes on, I say: for if he has prudence enough to stop him any
where, he is not that sort of man, whom it can be worth while for the law to
attempt stopping by such means. It is plain enough then, I conclude, that to a
prodigal thus circumstanced, the law cannot be of any service; on the contrary,
it may, and in many cases must, be of disservice to him, by denying him the
option of a resource which, how disadvantageous soever, could not well have
proved more so, but would naturally have proved less so, than those which it
leaves still open to him. But of this hereafter.

I now come to the only remaining class of prodigals, viz. those who have
nothing that can be called a security to offer. These, certainly, are not more
likely to get money upon an extraordinary rate of interest, than an ordinary
one. Persons who either feel, or find reasons for pretending to feel, a
friendship for the borrower, cannot take of him more than the ordinary rate of
interest: persons, who have no such motives for lending him, will not lend him
at all. If they know him for what he is, that will prevent them of course: and
even though they should know nothing of him by any other circumstance, the very
circumstance of his not being able to find a friend to trust him at the highest
ordinary rate, will be sufficient reason to a stranger for looking upon him as
a man, who, in the judgment of his friends, is not likely to pay.

The way that prodigals run into debt, after they have spent their substance,
is, I take it, by borrowing of their friends and acquaintance, at ordinary
interest, or more commonly at no interest, small sums, such as each man may be
content to lose, or be ashamed to ask real security for; and as prodigals have
generally an extensive acquaintance (extensive acquaintance being at once the
cause and effect of prodigality) the sum total of the money a man may thus find
means to squander, may be considerable, though each sum borrowed may,
relatively to the circumstances of the lender, have been inconsiderable. This I
believe to be the race which prodigals, who have spent their all, run at
present, under the actual system of restraining laws: and this, and no other, I
take it, would be the race they would run, were those laws out of the way.

Another consideration there is, I think, which will complete your conviction,
if it was not complete before, of the inefficacy of these laws, as to the
putting any sort of restraint upon prodigality. This is, that there is another
set of people from whom prodigals get what they want, and always will get it,
so long as credit lasts, in spite of all laws against high interest; and,
should they find it necessary, at an expense more than equal to any excess of
interest they might otherwise have to give. -- I mean the tradesmen who deal in
the goods they want. Every body knows it is much easier to get goods than
money. People trust goods upon much slenderer security than they do money: it
is very natural they should do so: ordinary profit upon the whole capital
employed in a man's trade, even after the expense of warehouse rent,
journeymen's wages, and other such general charges, are taken in to the
account, and set against it, is at least equal to double interest; say ten per
cent. Ordinary profit upon any particular parcel of goods must therefore be a
great deal more, say at least triple interest, fifteen per cent.: in the way of
trading, then, a man can afford to be at least three times as adventurous, as
he can, in the way of lending, and with equal prudence. So long, then, as a man
is looked upon as one who will pay, he can much easier get the goods be wants,
than he could the money to buy them with, though he were content to give for it
twice, or even thrice the ordinary rate of interest.

Supposing any body, for the sake of extraordinary gain, to be willing to run
the risk of supplying him, although he did not look upon his personal security
to be equal to that of another man, and for the sake of the extraordinary
profit to run the extraordinary risk; in the trader, in short in every sort of
trader whom he was accustomed to deal with in his solvent days, he sees a
person who may accept of any rate of profit, without the smallest danger from
any laws that are, or can be made against usury. How idle, then, to think of
stopping a man from making six, or seven, or eight per cent. interest, when, if
he chooses to run a risk proportionable, he may in this way make thirty or
forty per cent. or any rate you please! And as to the prodigal, if he cannot
get what he wants upon these terms, what chance is there of his getting it upon
any terms, supposing the laws against usury to be away? This then is another
way, in which, instead of serving, it injures him, by narrowing his option, and
driving him from a market which might have proved less disadvantageous, to a
more disadvantageous one.

As far as prodigality, then, is concerned, I must confess, I cannot see the
use of stopping the current of expenditure in this way at the fosset, when
there are so many unpreventable ways of letting it run out at the bung-hole.

Whether any harm is done to society, upon the whole, by letting so much money
drop at once out of the pockets of the prodigal, who would have gone on wasting
it, into the till of the frugal tradesman, who will lay it up, is not worth the
enquiry for the present purpose: what is plain is, that, so far as the saving
the prodigal from paying at an extraordinary rate for what he gets to spend, is
the object of the law, that object is not at all promoted, by fixing the rate
of interest upon money borrowed. On the contrary, if the law has any effect, it
runs counter to that object: since, were he to borrow, it would only be, in as
far as he could borrow at a rate inferior to that at which otherwise he would
be obliged to buy. Preventing his borrowing at an extra rate, may have the
effect of increasing his distress, but cannot have the effect of lessening it:
allowing his borrowing at such a rate, might have the effect of lessening his
distress, but could not have the effect of increasing it.

To put a stop to prodigality, if indeed it be worth while, I know but of one
effectual course that can be taken, in addition to the incomplete and
insufficient courses at present practicable, and that is, to put the convicted
prodigal under an interdict, as was practiced formerly among the Romans, and is
still practiced among the French, and other nations who have taken the Roman
law for the ground work of their own. But to discuss the expediency, or sketch
out the details, of such an institution, belongs not to the present purpose.

LETTER IV. Reasons for Restraint -- Protection of Indigence.
BESIDES prodigals, there are three other classes of persons, and but three,
for whose security I can conceive these restrictive laws to have been designed
-- I mean the indigent, the rashly enterprizing, and the simple: those whose
pecuniary necessities may dispose them to give an interest above the ordinary
rate, rather than not have it, and those who, from rashness, may be disposed to
venture upon giving such a rate, or from carelessness, combined with ignorance,
may be disposed to acquiesce in it.

In speaking of these three different classes of persons, I must beg leave to
consider one of them at a time: and accordingly, in speaking of the indigent, I
must consider indigence, in the first place as untinctured with simplicity. On
this occasion, I may suppose, and ought to suppose, no particular defect in a
man's judgment, or his temper, that should mislead him, more than the ordinary
run of men. He knows what is his interest as well as they do, and is as well
disposed and able to pursue it as they are.

I have already intimated, what I think is undeniable, that there are no one or
two or other limited number of rates of interest, that can be equally suited to
the unlimited number of situations, in respect of the degree of exigency, in
which a man is liable to find himself: insomuch, that to the situation of a
man, who, by the use of money can make, for example, eleven per cent. six per
cent. is as well adapted, as five per cent. is to the situation of him who can
make but ten; to that of him who can make twelve per cent. seven, and so on.
So, in the case of his wanting it to save himself from a loss, (which is what
is most likely to be in view under the name of exigency) if that loss would
amount to eleven per cent. six per cent. is as well adapted to his situation,
as five per cent. would be to the situation of him, who had but a loss
amounting to ten per cent. to save himself from by the like means. And in any
case, though, in proportion to the amount of the loss, the rate of interest
were even so great, as the clear saving should not amount to more than one per
cent. or any fraction per cent.; yet so long as it amounted to any thing, he
would be just so much the better for borrowing, even on such comparatively
disadvantageous terms. If, instead of gain, we put any other kind of benefit or
advantage -- if, instead of loss, we put any other kind of mischief or
inconvenience, of equal value, the result will be the same.

A man is in one of these situations, suppose, in which it would be for his
advantage to borrow. But his circumstances are such, that it would not be worth
any body's while to lend him, at the highest rate which it is proposed the law
should allow; in short, he cannot get it at that rate. If he thought he could
get it at that rate, most surely he would not give a higher; he may be trusted
for that: for by the supposition, he has nothing defective in his
understanding. But the fact is, he cannot get it at that lower rate. At a
higher rate, however, he could get it: and at that rate, though higher, it
would be worth his while to get it: so he judges, who has nothing to hinder him
from judging right; who has every motive and every means for forming a right
judgment; who has every motive and every means for informing himself of the
circumstances, upon which rectitude of judgment, in the case in question,
depends. The legislator, who knows nothing, nor can know any thing, of any one
of all these circumstances, who knows nothing at all about the matter, comes
and says to him -- It signifies nothing; you shall not have the money: for it
would be a mischief to you to borrow it upon such terms. -- And this out of
prudence and loving kindness! -- There may be worse cruelty: but can there be
greater folly?

The folly of those who persist, as is supposed, without reason, in not taking
advice, has been much expatiated upon. But the folly of those who persist,
without reason, in forcing their advice upon others, has been but little dwelt
upon, though it is, perhaps, the more frequent, and the more flagrant of the
two. It is not often that one man is a better judge for another, than that
other is for himself, even in cases where the adviser will take the trouble to
make himself master of as many of the materials for judging, as are within the
reach of the person to be advised. But the legislator is not, cannot be, in the
possession of any one of these materials. -- What private, can be equal to such
public folly?

I should now speak of the enterprizing class of borrowers: those, who, when
characterized by a single term, are distinguished by the unfavourable
appellation of projectors: but in what I shall have to say of them, Dr. Smith,
I begin to foresee, will bear so material a part, that when I come to enter
upon that subject, I think to take my leave of you, and address myself to him.

LETTER V. Reasons for Restraint. -- Protection of Simplicity.
I COME, lastly, to the case of the simple. Here, in the first place, I think I
am by this time entitled to observe, that no simplicity, short of absolute
idiotism, can cause the individual to make a more groundless judgment, than the
legislator, who, in the circumstances above stated, should pretend to confine
him to any given rate of interest, would have made for him.

Another consideration, equally conclusive, is, that were the legislator's
judgment ever so much superior to the individual's, how weak soever that may
be, the exertion of it on this occasion can never be any otherwise than
useless, so long as there are so many similar occasions, as there ever must be,
where the simplicity of the individual is equally liable to make him a
sufferer, and on which the legislator cannot interpose with effect, nor has
ever so much as thought of interposing.

Buying goods with money, or upon credit, is the business of every day:
borrowing money is the business, only, of some particular exigency, which, in
comparison, can occur but seldom. Regulating the prices of goods in general
would be an endless task; and no legislator has ever been weak enough to think
of attempting it. And supposing he were to regulate the prices, what would that
signify for the protection of simplicity, unless he were to regulate also the
quantum of what each man should buy? Such quantum is, indeed, regulated, or
rather means are taken to prevent buying altogether; but in what cases? in
those only where the weakness is adjudged to have arrived at such a pitch, as
to render a man utterly unqualified for the management of his affairs: in
short, when it has arrived at the length of idiocy.

But in what degree soever a man's weakness may expose him to imposition, he
stands much more exposed to it, in the way of buying goods, than in the way of
borrowing money. To be informed, beforehand, of the ordinary prices of all
sorts of things, a man may have occasion to buy, may be a task of considerable
variety and extent. To be informed of the ordinary rate of interest, is to be
informed of one single fact, too interesting not to have attracted attention,
and too simple to have escaped the memory. A few per cent. enhancement upon the
price of goods, is a matter that may easily enough pass unheeded; but a single
per cent. beyond the ordinary interest of money, is a stride more conspicuous
and startling, than many per cent. upon the price of any kind of goods.

Even in regard to subjects, which, by their importance, would, if any, justify
a regulation of their price, such as, for instance, land, I question whether
there ever was an instance where, without some such ground as, on the one side
fraud, or suppression of facts necessary to form a judgment of the value, or at
least ignorance of such facts, on the other, a bargain was rescinded, merely
because a man had sold too cheap, or bought too dear. Were I to take a fancy to
give a hundred years purchase instead of thirty, for a piece of land, rather
than not have it, I do not think there is any court in England, or indeed any
where else, that would interpose to hinder me, much less to punish the seller
with the loss of three times the purchasemoney, as in the case of usury. Yet
when I had got my piece of land, and paid my money, repentance, were the law
ever so well disposed to assist me, might be unavailing: for the seller might
have spent the money, or gone off with it. But, in the case of borrowing money,
it is the borrower always, who, according to the indefinite, or short term for
which money is lent, is on the safe side: any imprudence he may have committed
with regard to the rate of interest, may be corrected at any time: if I find I
have given too high an interest to one man, I have no more to do than to borrow
of another at a lower rate, and pay off the first: If I cannot find any body to
lend me at a lower, there cannot be a more certain proof, that the first was
not in reality too high. But of this hereafter.

LETTER VI. Mischiefs of the anti-usurious Laws.
IN the preceding letters, I have examined all the modes I can think of, in
which the restraints, imposed by the laws against usury, can have been fancied
to be of service.

I hope it appears by this time, that there are no ways in which those laws can
do any good. But there are several, in which they cannot but do mischief.

The first, I shall mention, is that of precluding so many people, altogether,
from the getting the money they stand in need of, to answer their respective
exigencies. Think what a distress it would produce, were the liberty of
borrowing denied to every body; denied to those who have such security to
offer, as renders the rate of interest, they have to offer, a sufficient
inducement, for a man who has money, to trust them with it. Just that same sort
of distress is produced, by denying that liberty to so many people, whose
security, though, if they were permitted to add something to that rate, it
would be sufficient, is rendered insufficient by their being denied that
liberty. Why the misfortune, of not being possessed of that arbitrarily exacted
degree of security, should be made a ground for subjecting a man to a hardship,
which is not imposed on those who are free from that misfortune, is more than I
can see. To discriminate the former class from the latter, I can see but this
one circumstance, viz. that their necessity is greater. This it is by the very
supposition: for were it not, they could not be, what they are supposed to be,
willing to give more to be relieved from it. In this point of view, then, the
sole tendency of the law is, to heap distress upon distress.

A second mischief is that of rendering the terms so much the worse, to a
multitude of those, whose circumstances exempt them from being precluded
altogether from getting the money they have occasion for. In this case, the
mischief, though necessarily less intense than in the other, is much more
palpable and conspicuous. Those who cannot borrow, may get what they want, so
long as they have any thing to sell. But while out of loving kindness, or
whatsoever other motive, the law precludes a man from borrowing, upon terms
which it deems too disadvantageous, it does not preclude him from selling, upon
any terms, however disadvantageous. Every body knows, that forced sales are
attended with loss: and to this loss, what would be deemed a most extravagant
interest bears in general no proportion. When a man's movables are taken in
execution, they are, I believe, pretty well sold, if, after all expenses paid,
the produce amounts to two thirds of what it would cost to replace them. In
this way the providence and loving kindness of the law costs him thirty-three
per cent. and no more, supposing, what isseldom the case, that no more of the
effects are taken than what is barely necessary to make up the money due. If,
in her negligence and weakness, she were to suffer him to offer eleven per
cent. per ann. for forbearance, it would be three years before he paid what he
is charged with, in the first instance, by her wisdom.

Such being the kindness done by the law to the owner of movables, let us see
how it fares with him who has an interest in immoveables. Before the late war,
thirty years' purchase for land might be reckoned, I think it is pretty well
agreed, a medium price. During the distress produced by the war, lands which it
was necessary should be sold, were sold at twenty, eighteen, nay, I believe, in
some instances, even so low as fifteen years' purchase. If I do not
misrecollect, I remember instances of lands put up to public auction, for which
no body bid so high as fifteen. In many instances, villas, which had been
bought before the war, or at the beginning of it, and, in the interval, had
been improved, rather than impaired, sold for less than half, or even the
quarter, of what they had been bought for. I dare not here for my part pretend
to be exact: but on this passage, were it worth their notice, Mr. Skinner, or
Mr. Christie, could furnish very instructive notes. Twenty years' purchase,
instead of thirty, I may be allowed to take, at least for illustration. An
estate then of 100 l. a year, clear of taxes, was devised to a man, charged,
suppose, with 1500 l. with interest till the money should be paid. Five per
cent. interest, the utmost which could be accepted from the owner, did not
answer the incumbrancer's purpose: he chose to have the money. But six per
cent. perhaps, would have answered his purpose; if not, most certainly it would
have answered the purpose of somebody else: for multitudes there all along
were, whose purposes were answered by five per cent. The war lasted, I think,
seven years: the depreciation of the value of land did not take place
immediately: but as, on the other hand, neither did it immediately recover its
former price upon the peace, if indeed it has even yet recovered it, we may put
seven years for the time, during which it would be more advantageous to pay
this extraordinary rate of interest than sell the land, and during which,
accordingly, this extraordinary rate of interest would have had to run. One per
cent. for seven years, is not quite of equal worth to seven per cent. the first
year: say, however, that it is. The estate, which before the war was worth
thirty years' purchase, that is 3000 l. and which the devisor had given to the
devisee for that value, being put up to sale, sold for but twenty years'
purchase, 2000 l. At the end of that period it would have sold for its original
value, 3000 l. Compare, then, the situation of the devisee at the seven years'
end, under the law, with what it would have been, without the law. In the
former case, the land selling for 20 years' purchase, i. e. 2000 l. what he
would have after paying the 1500 l. is 500 l.; which, with the interest of that
sum, at five per cent. for seven years, viz. 175 l. makes, at the end of that
seven years, 675 l. In the other case, paying six per cent. on the 1500 l. that
is 90 l. a year, and receiving all that time the rent of the land, viz. 100 l.
he would have had, at the seven years' end, the amount of the remaining ten
pounds during that period, that is 70 l. in addition to his 1000 l. -- 675 l.
subtracted from 1070 l. leaves 395 l. This 395 l. then, is what he loses out of
1070 l. almost 37 per cent. of his capital, by the loving kindness of the law.
Make the calculations, and you will find, that, by preventing him from
borrowing the money at six per cent. interest, it makes him nearly as much a
sufferer as if he had borrowed it at ten.

What I have said hitherto, is confined to the case of those who have present
value to give, for the money they stand in need of. If they have no such value,
then, if they succeed in purchasing assistance upon any terms, it must be a
breach of the law; their lenders exposing themselves to its vengeance: for I
speak not here of the accidental case, of its being so constructed as to be
liable to evasion. But, even in this case, the mischievous influence of the law
still pursues them; aggravating the very mischief it pretends to remedy. Though
it be inefficacious in the way in which the legislator wishes to see it
efficacious, it is efficacious in the way opposite to that in which he would
wish to see it so. The effect of it is, to raise the rate of interest, higher
than it would be otherwise, and that in two ways. In the first place, a man
must, in common prudence, as Dr. Smith observes, make a point of being
indemnified, not only for whatsoever extraordinary risk it is that he runs
independently of the law, but for the very risk occasioned by the law: he must
be insured, as it were, against the law. This cause would operate, were there
even as many persons ready to lend upon the illegal rate, as upon the legal.
But this is not the case: a great number of persons are, of course, driven out
of this competition, by the danger of the business; and another great number,
by the disrepute which, under cover of these prohibitory laws or otherwise, has
fastened itself upon the name of usurer. So many persons, therefore, being
driven out of the trade, it happens in this branch, as it must necessarily in
every other, that those who remain have the less to withhold them from
advancing their terms; and without confederating, (for it must be allowed that
confederacy in such a case is plainly impossible) each one will find it easier
to push his advantage up to any given degree of exorbitancy, than he would, if
there were a greater number of persons of the same stamp to refer to.

As to the case, where the law is so worded as to be liable to be evaded, in
this case it is partly inefficacious and nugatory, and partly mischievous. It
is nugatory, as to all such, whose confidence of its being so is perfect: it is
mischievous, as before, in regard to all such who fail of possessing that
perfect confidence. If the borrower can find nobody at all who has confidence
enough to take advantage of the flaw, he stands precluded from all assistance,
as before: and, though he should, yet the lender's terms must necessarily run
the higher, in proportion to what his confidence wants of being perfect. It is
not likely that it should be perfect: it is still less likely that he should
acknowledge it so to be: it is not likely, at least as matters stand in
England, that the worst-penned law made for this purpose should be altogether
destitute of effect: and while it has any, that effect, we see, must be in one
way or other mischievous.

I have already hinted at the disrepute, the ignominy, the reproach, which
prejudice, the cause and the effect of these restrictive laws, has heaped upon
that perfectly innocent and even meritorious class of men, who, not more for
their own advantage than to the relief of the distresses of their neighbor,
may have ventured to break through these restraints. It is certainly not a
matter of indifference, that a class of persons, who, in every point of view in
which their conduct can be placed, whether in relation to their own interest,
or in relation to that of the persons whom they have to deal with, as well on
the score of prudence, as on that of beneficence, (and of what use is even
benevolence, but in as far as it is productive of beneficence?) deserve praise
rather than censure, should be classed with the abandoned and profligate, and
loaded with a degree of infamy, which is due to those only whose conduct is in
its tendency the most opposite to their own.

"This suffering," it may be said, "having already been taken account of, is
not to be brought to account a second time: they are aware, as you yourself
observe, of this inconvenience, and have taken care to get such amends for it,
as they themselves look upon as sufficient." True: but is it sure that the
compensation, such as it is, will always, in the event, have proved a
sufficient one? Is there no room here for miscalculation? May there not be
unexpected, unlooked-for incidents, sufficient to turn into bitterness the
utmost satisfaction which the difference of pecuniary emolument could afford?
For who can see to the end of that inexhaustible train of consequences that are
liable to ensue from the loss of reputation? Who can fathom the abyss of
infamy? At any rate, this article of mischief, if not an addition in its
quantity to the others above noticed, is at least distinct from them in its
nature, and as such ought not to be overlooked.

Nor is the event of the execution of the law by any means an unexampled one:
several such, at different times, have fallen within my notice. Then comes
absolute perdition; loss of character, and forfeiture, not of three times the
extrainterest, which formed the profit of the offense, but of three times the
principal, which gave occasion to it.

The last article I have to mention in the account of mischief, is, the
corruptive influence, exercised by these laws, on the morals of the people; by
the pains they take, and cannot but take, to give birth to treachery and
ingratitude. To purchase a possibility of being enforced, the law neither has
found, nor, what is very material, must it ever hope to find, in this case, any
other expedient, than that of hiring a man to break his engagement, and to
crush the hand that has been reached out to help him. In the case of informers
in general, there has been no troth plighted, nor benefit received. In the case
of real criminals invited by rewards to inform against accomplices, it is by
such breach of faith that society is held together, as in other cases by the
observance of it. In the case of real crimes, in proportion as their
mischievousness is apparent, what cannot but be manifest, even to the criminal,
is, that it is by the adherence to his engagement that he would do an injury to
society, and, that by the breach of such engagement, instead of doing mischief,
he is doing good: in the case of usury, this is what no man can know, and what
one can scarcely think it possible for any man, who, in the character of the
borrower, has been concerned in such a transaction, to imagine. He knew, that,
even in his own judgment, the engagement was a beneficial one to himself, or he
would not have entered into it: and no body else but the lender is affected by
it.

LETTER VII. Inefficacy of anti-usurious Laws.
BEFORE I quit altogether the consideration of the case in which a law, made
for the purpose of limiting the rate of interest, may be inefficacious with
regard to that end, I cannot forbear taking some further notice of a passage
already alluded to, of Dr. Smith's: because, to my apprehension, that passage
seems to throw upon the subject a degree of obscurity, which I could wish to
see cleared up, in a future edition of that valuable work.

"No law," (says he, b. ii. chapter 10. vol. ii. p. 45. edit. 8vo. 1784,) can
reduce the common rate of interest below the lowest ordinary market rate, at
the time when that law was made. Notwithstanding the edict of 1766, by which
the French king attempted to reduce the rate of interest from five to four per
cent. money continued to be lent in France at five per cent. the law being
evaded in several different ways.

As to the general position, if so it be, so much, according to me, the better:
but I must cenfess I do not see why this should be the case. It is for the
purpose of proving the truth of this general position, that the fact of the
inefficacy of this attempt seems to be adduced: for no other proof is adduced
but this. But, taking the fact for granted, I do not see how it can be
sufficient to support the inference. The law, we are told at the same time, was
evaded: but we are not told how it came to be open to evasion. It might be
owing to a particular defect in the penning of that particular law; or, what
comes to the same thing, in the provisions made for carrying it into execution.
In either case, it affords no support to the general position: nor can that
position be a just one, unless it were so in the case where every provision had
been made, that could be made, for giving efficacy to the law. For the position
to be true, the case must be, that the law would still be broken, even after
every means of what can properly be called evasion had been removed. True or
untrue, the position is certainly not self-evident enough to be received
without proof: yet nothing is adduced in proof of it, but the fact above
noticed, which, we see, amounts to no such thing. What is more, I should not
expect to find it capable of proof. I do not see what it is, that should render
the law incapable of "reducing the common rate of interest below the lowest
ordinary market rate," but such a state of things, such a combination of
circumstances, as should afford obstacles equally powerful, or nearly so, to
the efficacy of the law against all higher rates. For destroying the efficacy
of the law altogether, I know nothing that could serve, but a resolution on the
part of all persons any way privy not to inform: but by such a resolution any
higher rate is just as effectually protected as any lower one. Suppose it,
strictly speaking, universal, and the law must, in all instances, be equally
inefficacious; all rates of interest are equally free; and the state of men's
dealings in this way just what it would be, were there no law at all upon the
subject. But in this case, the position, in as far as it limits the inefficacy
of the law to those rates which are below the "lowest ordinary market rate," is
not true. For my part, I cannot conceive how any such universal resolution
could have been maintained, or could ever be maintained, without an open
concert, and as open a rebellion against government; nothing of which sort
appears to have taken place: and, as to any particular confederacies, they are
as capable of protecting any higher rates against the prohibition, as any lower
ones.

Thus much indeed must be admitted, that the low rate in question, viz. that
which was the lowest ordinary market rate immediately before the making of the
law, is likely to come in for the protection of the public against the law,
more frequently than any other rate. That must be the case on two accounts:
first, because, by being of the number of the ordinary rates, it was, by the
supposition, more frequent than any extraordinary ones: secondly, because the
disrepute annexed to the idea of usury, a force which might have more or less
efficacy in excluding, from the protection above spoken of, such extraordinary
rates, cannot well be supposed to apply itself, or at least not in equal
degree, to this low and ordinary rate. A lender has certainly less to stop him
from taking a rate, which may be taken without disrepute, than from taking one,
which a man could not take without subjecting himself to that inconvenience:
nor is it likely, that men's imaginations and sentiments should testify so
sudden an obsequiousness to the law, as to stamp disrepute today, upon a rate
of interest, to which no such accompaniment had stood annexed the day before.

Were I to be asked how I imagined the case stood in the particular instance
referred to by Dr. Smith; judging from his account of it, assisted by general
probabilities, I should answer thus: -- The law, I should suppose, was not so
penned as to be altogether proof against evasion. In many instances, of which
it is impossible any account should have been taken, it was indeed conformed
to: in some of those instances, people who would have lent otherwise, abstained
from lending altogether; in others of those instances, people lent their money
at the reduced legal rate. In other instances again, the law was broken: the
lenders trusting, partly to expedidients recurred to for evading it, partly to
the good faith and honor of those whom they had to deal with: in this class of
instances it was natural for the two reasons above suggested, that those where
the old legal rate was adhered to, should have been the most numerous. From the
circumstance not only of their number, but of their more direct repugnancy to
the particular recent law in question, they would naturally be the most taken
notice of. And this, probably, was the foundation in point of fact for the
Doctor's general position above mentioned, that "no law can reduce the common
rate of interest below the lowest ordinary market rate, at the time when that
law was made."

In England, as far as I can trust my judgment and imperfect general
recollection of the purport of the laws relative to this matter, I should not
suppose that the above position would prove true. That there is no such thing
as any palpable and universally notorious, as well as universally practicable
receipt for that purpose, is manifest from the examples, which, as I have
already mentioned, every now and then occur, of convictions upon these
statutes. Two such receipts, indeed, I shall have occasion to touch upon
presently: but they are either not obvious enough in their nature, or too
troublesome or not extensive enough in their application, to have despoiled the
law altogether of its terrors or of its preventive efficacy.

In the country in which I am writing, the whole system of laws on this subject
is perfectly, and very happily, inefficacious. The rate fixed by law is five
per cent.: many people lend money; and nobody at that rate: the lowest ordinary
rate, upon the very best real security, is eight per cent.: nine, and even ten,
upon such security, are common. Six or seven may have place, now and then,
between relations or other particular friends: because, now and then, a man may
choose to make a present of one or two per cent. to a person whom he means to
favor. The contract is renewed from year to year: for a thousand roubles, the
borrower in his written contract, obliges himself to pay at the end of the year
one thousand and fifty. Before witnesses, he receives his thousand roubles:
and, without witnesses, he immediately pays back his thirty roubles, or his
forty roubles, or whatever the sum may be, that is necessary to bring the real
rate of interest to the rate verbally agreed on.

This contrivance, I take it, would not do in England: but why it would not, is
a question which it would be in vain for me to pretend, at this distance from
all authorities, to discuss.

LETTER VIII. Virtual Usury allowed.
HAVING proved, as I hope, by this time, the utter impropriety of the law's
limiting the rate of interest, in every case that can be conceived, it may be
rather a matter of curiosity, than any thing else, to enquire, how far the law,
on this head, is consistent with itself, and with any principles upon which it
can have built.

1. Drawing and re-drawing is a practice, which it will be sufficient here to
hint at. It is perfectly well known to all merchants, and may be so to all who
are not merchants, by consulting Dr. Smith. In this way he was shown how money
may be, and has been, taken up, at so high a rate, as thirteen or fourteen per
cent. a rate nearly three times as high as the utmost which the law professes
to allow. The extra interest is in this case masked under the names of
commission, and price of exchange. The commission is but small upon each loan,
not more, I think, than one half per cent.: custom having stretched so far, but
no farther, it might be thought dangerous, perhaps, to venture upon any higher
allowance under that name. The charge, being repeated a number of times in the
course of the year, makes up in frequency what it wants in weight. The
transaction is by this shift rendered more troublesome, indeed, but not less
practicable, to such parties as are agreed about it. But if usury is good for
merchants, I do not very well see what should make it bad for every body else.

2. At this distance from all the fountains of legal knowledge, I will not
pretend to say, whether the practice of selling accepted bills at an under
value, would hold good against all attacks. It strikes my recollection as a
pretty common one, and I think it could not be brought under any of the penal
statutes against usury. The adequateness of the consideration might, for aught
I know, be attacked with success, in a court of equity; or, perhaps, if there
were sufficient evidence (which the agreement of the parties might easily
prevent) by an action at common law, for money had and received. If the
practice be really proof against all attacks, it seems to afford an effectual,
and pretty commodious method of evading the restrictive laws. The only
restraint is, that it requires the assistance of a third person, a friend of
the borrower's; as, for instance: B, the real borrower, wants 100 l. and finds
U, a usurer, who is willing to lend it to him, at ten per cent. B. has F, a
friend, who has not the money himself to lend him, but is willing to stand
security for him, to that amount. B. therefore, draws upon F, and F. accepts a
bill of 100 l. at five per cent. interest, payable at the end of a twelvemonth
from the date. F. draws a like bill upon B.: each sells his bill to U. for
fifty pounds; and it is endorsed to U. accordingly. The 50 l. that F. receives,
he delivers over without any consideration to B. This transaction, if it be a
valid one, and if a man can find such a friend, is evidently much less
troublesome than the practice of drawing and re-drawing. And this, if it be
practicable at all, may be practiced by persons of any description, concerned
or not in trade. Should the effect of this page be to suggest an expedient, and
that a safe and commodious one, for evading the laws against usury, to some, to
whom such an expedient might not otherwise have occurred, it will not lie very
heavy upon my conscience. The prayers of usurers, whatever efficacy they may
have in lightening the burden, I hope I may lay some claim to. And I think you
will not now wonder at my saying, that in the efficacy of such prayers I have
not a whit less confidence, than in that of the prayers of any other class of
men.

One apology I shall have to plead at any rate, that in pointing out these
slaws, to the individual who may be disposed to creep out at them, I point them
out at the same time to the legislator, in whose power it is to stop them up,
if in his opinion they require it. If, notwithstanding such opinion, he should
omit to do so, the blame will lie, not on my industry, but on his negligence.

These, it may be said, should they even be secure and effectual evasions, are
still but evasions, and, if chargeable upon the law at all, are chargeable not
as inconsistencies but as oversights. Be it so. Setting these aside, then, as
expedients practiced or practicable, only behind its back, I will beg leave to
remind you of two others, practiced from time to time, under its protection and
before its face.

The first I shall mention is pawn-broking. In this case there is the less
pretense for more than ordinary interest, inasmuch as the security is, in this
case, not only equal to, but better than, what it can be in any other: to wit,
the present possession of a moveable thing, of easy sale, on which the creditor
has the power, and certainly does not want the inclination, to set such price
as is most for his advantage. If there be a case in which the allowing of such
extraordinary interest is attended with more danger than another, it must be
this; which is so particularly adapted to the situation of the lowest poor,
that is, of those who, on the score of indigence or simplicity, or both, are
most open to imposition. This trade, however, the law, by regulating, avowedly
protects. What the rate of interest is, which it allows to be taken in this
way, I cannot take upon me to remember: but I am much deceived, if it amounts
to less than twelve per cent. in the year, and I believe it amounts to a good
deal more. Whether it were twelve per cent. or twelve hundred, I believe would
make in practice but little difference. What commission is in the business of
drawing and re-drawing, warehouse room is, in that of pawnbroking. Whatever
limits then are set to the profits of this trade, are set, perhaps, not by the
vigilance of the law, but, as in the case of other trades, by the competition
amongst the traders. Of the other regulations contained in the acts relative to
this subject I recollect no reason to doubt the use.

The other instance is that of bottomry and respondentia: for the two
transactions, being so nearly related, may be spoken of together. Bottomry is
the usury of pawnbroking: respondentia is usury at large, but combined in a
manner with insurance, and employed in the assistance of a trade carried on by
sea. If any species of usury is to be condemned, I see not on what grounds this
particular species can be screened from the condemnation. "O but" (says Sir
William Blackstone, or any body else who takes upon himself the task of finding
a reason for the law) "this is a maritime country, and the trade, which it
carries on by sea, is the great bulwark of its defense." It is not necessary I
should here enquire, whether that branch, which, as Dr. Smith has shown, is, in
every view, but the mere one of defense, less beneficial to a nation, than two
others out of the four branches which comprehend all trade, has any claim to be
preferred to them in this or any other way. I admit, that the liberty which
this branch of trade enjoys, is no more than what it is perfectly right it
should enjoy. What I want to know is, what there is in the class of men,
embarked in this trade, that should render beneficial to them, a liberty, which
would be ruinous to every body else. Is it that sea adventures have less hazard
in them than land adventures? or that the sea teaches those, who have to deal
with it, a degree of forecast and reflection which has been denied to landmen?

It were easy enough to give farther and farther extension to this charge of
inconsistency, by bringing under it the liberty given to insurance in all its
branches, to the purchase and sale of annuities, and of post-obits, in a word,
to all cases where a man is permitted to take upon himself an unlimited degree
of risk, receiving, for so doing, an unlimited compensation. Indeed I know not
where the want of instances would stop me: for in what part of the magazine of
events, about which human transactions are conversant, is certainty to be
found? But to this head of argument, this argument ad hominem, as it may be
called, the use of which is but subsidiary, and which has more of confutation
in it than of persuasion or instruction, I willingly put an end.

LETTER IX. Blackstone considered.
I HOPE you are, by this time, at least, pretty much of my opinion, that there
is just the same sort of harm, and no other, in making the best terms one can
for one's self in a money loan, as there is in any other sort of bargain. If
you are not, Blackstone, however, is, whose opinion I hope you will allow to be
worth something. In speaking of the rate of interest, (b. ii. chapter 13.) he
starts a parallel between a bargain for the loan of money, and a bargain about
a horse, and pronounces, without hesitation, that the harm of making too good a
bargain, is just as great in the one case, as in the other. As money-lending,
and not horse-dealing, was, what you lawyers call, the principal case, he drops
the horse business, as soon as it has answered the purpose of illustration,
which it was brought to serve. But as, in my conception, as well the reasoning
by which he supports the decision, as that by which any body else could have
supported it, is just as applicable to the one sort of bargain as to the other,
I will carry on the parallel a little farther, and give the same extent to the
reasoning, as to the position which it is made use of to support. This
extension will not be without its use: for if the position, when thus extended,
should be sound just, a practical inference will arise; which is, that the
benefits of these restraints ought to be extended from the money-trade to the
horsetrade. That my own opinion is not favorable to such restraints in either
case, has been sufficiently declared; but if more respectable opinions than
mine are still to prevail, they will not be less respectable for being
consistent.

The sort of bargain which the learned commentator has happened to pitch upon
for the illustration, is, indeed, in the case illustrating, as in the case
illustrated, a loan: but as, to my apprchension, loan or sale makes, in point
of reasoning, no sort of difference; and as the utility of the conclusion will,
in the latter case, be more extensive, I shall adapt the reasoning to the more
important business of selling horses, instead of the less important one of
lending them.

A circumstance that would render the extension of these restraints to the
horse trade more smooth and easy, is, that in the one track, as well as in the
other, the public has already got the length of calling names. Jockey-ship, a
term of reproach not less frequently applied to the arts of those who sell
horses than to the arts of those who ride them, sounds, I take it, to the ear
of many a worthy gentleman, nearly as had as usury: and it is well known to all
those who put their trust in proverbs, and not less to those who put their
trust in party, that when we have got a dog to hang who is troublesome and
keeps us at bay, whoever can contrive to fasten a bad name to his tail, has
gained more than half the battle. I now proceed with my application. The words
in Italics are my own: all the rest are Sir William Blackstone's: and I
restore, (in parentheses) the words I was obliged to discard, in order to make
room for mine.

"To demand an exorbitant price is equally contrary to conscience, for the loan
of a horse, or for the loan of a sum of money: but a reasonable equivalent for
the temporary inconvenience, which the owner may feel by the want of it, and
for the hazard of his losing it entirely, is not more immoral in one case, than
in the other. * * * *

"As to selling horses, a capital distinction must be made, between a moderate
and an exorbitant profit: to the former of which we give the name of horse
dealing, (interest) to the latter the truly odious appellation of jockey-ship,
(usury): the former is necessary in every civil state, if it were but to
exclude the latter. For, as the whole of this matter is well summed up by
Grotius, if the compensation allowed by law does not exceed the proportion of
the inconvenience which it is to the seller of the horse to part with it,
(hazard run) or the want which the buyer has of it, (felt by the loan) its
allowance is neither repugnant to the revealed law, nor to the natural law: but
if it exceeds these bounds, it is then an oppressive jockey ship, (usury): and
though the municipal laws may give it impunity, they never can make it just.

"We see that the exorbitance or moderation of the price given for a horse
(interest for the money lent) depends upon two circumstances: upon the
inconvenience of parting with the horse one has, (it for the present) and the
hazard of not being able to meet with such another (losing it entirely). The
inconvenience to individual sellers of horses (lenders), can never be estimated
by laws; the general price for horses, (rate of general interest) must depend
therefore upon the usual or general inconvenience. This results entirely from
the quantity of horses (money) in the kingdom: for the more horses (specie)
there are running about (circulating) in any nation, the greater superfluity
there will be beyond what is necessary to carry on the business of the mail
coaches (exchange) and the common concerns of life. In every nation or public
community, there is a certain quantity of horses (money) then necessary, which
a person well skilled in political arithmetic might, perhaps, calculate as
exactly as a private horse dealer (banker) can the demand for the running
horses in his own stables (cash in his own shop): all above this necessary
quantity may be spared, or lent, or sold, without much inconvenience to the
respective lenders or sellers: and the greater the national superfluity is, the
more numerous will be the sellers (lenders), and the lower ought the national
price of horse flesh (the rate of the national interest) to be: but where there
are not enough, or barely enough spare horses (circulating cash) to answer the
ordinary uses of the public, horse flesh (interest) will be proportionably
high: for sellers (lenders) will be but few, as few can submit to the
inconvenience of selling" (lending). -- So far the learned commentator.

I hope, by this time, you are worked up to a proper pitch of indignation, at
the neglect and inconsistency betrayed by the law, in not suppressing this
species of jockey-ship, which it would be so easy to do, only by fixing the
price of horses. Nobody is less disposed than I am to be uncharitable: but when
one thinks of the 1500 l. taken for Eclipse, and 2000 l. for Rockingham, and so
on, who can avoid being shocked, to think how little regard those who took such
enormous prices must have had for "the law of revelation and the law of
nature?" Whoever it is that is to move for the municipal law, not long ago
talked of, for reducing the rate of interest, whenever that motion is made,
then would be the time for one of the Yorkshire members to get up, and move, by
way of addition, for a clause for fixing and reducing the price of horses. I
need not expatiate on the utility of that valuable species of cattle, which
might have been as cheap as asses before now, if our lawgivers had been as
mindful of their duty in the suppression of jockey-ship, as they have been in
the suppression of usury.

It may be said, against fixing the price of horseflesh, that different horses
may be of different values. I answer -- and I think I shall show you as much,
when I come to touch upon the subject of champerty -- not more different than
the values which the use of the same sum of money may be of to different
persons, on different occations.

LETTER X. Grounds of the Prejudices against Usury.
IT is one thing, to find reasons why it is fit a law should have been made: it
is another, to find the reasons why it was made: in other words, it is one
thing to justify a law: it is another thing to account for its existence. In
the present instance, the former task, if the observations I have been
troubling you with are just, is an impossible one. The other, though not
necessary for conviction, may contribute something perhaps in the way of
satisfaction. To trace an error to its fountain head, says Lord Coke, is to
refute it; and many men there are, who, till they have received this
satisfaction, be the error what it may, cannot prevail upon themselves to part
with it. "If our ancestors have been all along under a mistake, how came they
to have fallen into it?" is a question that naturally presents itself upon such
occasions. The case is, that in matters of law more especially, such is the
dominion of authority over our minds, and such the prejudice it creates in
favor of whatever institution it has taken under its wing, that, after all
manner of reasons that can be thought of, in favor of the institution, have
been shown to be insufficient, we still cannot forbear looking to some
unassignable and latent reason for its efficient cause. But if, instead of any
such reason, we can find a cause for it in some notion, of the erroneousness of
which we are already satisfied, then at last we are content to give it up
without further struggle; and then, and not till then, our satisfaction is
complete.

In the conceptions of the more considerable part of those through whom our
religion has been handed down to us, virtue, or rather godliness, which was an
improved substitute for virtue, consisted in self-denial: not in self-denial
for the sake of society, but of self-denial for its own sake. One pretty
general rule served for most occasions: not to do what you had a mind to do;
or, in other words, not to do what would be for your advantage. By this, of
course, was meant temporal advantage: to which spiritual advantage was
understood to be in constant and diametrical opposition. For, the proof of a
resolution, on the part of a being of perfect power and benevolence, to make
his few favorites happy in a state in which they were to be, was his
determined pleasure, that they should keep themselves as much strangers to
happiness as possible, in a state in which they were. Now to get money is what
most men have a mind to do: because he who has money, gets, as far as it goes,
most other things that he has a mind for. Of course, nobody was to get money:
indeed, why should he, when he was not so much as to keep what he had got
already? To lend money at interest, is to get money, or at least to try to get
it: of course, it was a bad thing to lend money upon such terms. The better the
terms, the worse it was to lend upon them: but it was bad to lend upon any
terms, by which any thing could be got. What made it much the worse was, that
it was acting like a Jew: for though all Christians at first were Jews, and
continued to do as Jews did, after they had become Christians, yet, in process
of time, it came to be discovered, that the distance, between the mother and
the daughter church, could not be too wide.

By degrees, as old conceits gave place to new, nature so far prevailed, that
the objections to getting money in general, were pretty well overruled: but
still this Jewish way of getting it, was too odious to be endured. Christians
were too intent upon plaguing Jews, to listen to the suggestion of doing as
Jews did, even though money were to be got by it. Indeed the easier method, and
a method pretty much in vogue, was, to let the Jews get the money any how they
could, and then squeeze it out of them as it was wanted.

In process of time, as questions of all sorts came under discussion, and this,
not the least interesting, among the rest, the anti-Jewish side of it found no
unopportune support in a passage of Aristotle: that celebrated heathen, who, in
all matters wherein heathenism did not destroy his competence, had established
a despotic empire over the Christian world. As fate would have it, that great
philosopher, with all his industry, and all his penetration, notwithstanding
the great number of pieces of money that had passed through his hands (more
perhaps than ever passed through the hands of a philosopher before or since),
and notwithstanding the uncommon pains he had bestowed on the subject of
generation, had never been able to discover, in any one piece of money, any
organs for generating any other such piece. Emboldened by so strong a body of
negative proof, he ventured at last to usher into the world the result of his
observations, in the form of an universal proposition, that all money is in its
nature barren. You, my friend, to whose cast of mind sound reason is much more
congenial than ancient philosophy, you have, I dare to say, gone before me in
remarking, that the practical inference from this shrewd observation, if it
afforded any, should have been, that it would be to no purpose for man to try
to get five per cent, out of money -- not, that if he could contrive to get so
much, there would be any harm in it. But the sages of those days did not view
the matter in that light.

A consideration that did not happen to present itself to that great
philosopher, but which, had it happened to present itself, might not have been
altogether unworthy of his notice, is, that though a daric would not beget
another daric, any more than it would a ram, or an ewe, yet for a daric which a
man borrowed, he might get a ram and a couple of ewes, and that the ewes, were
the ram left with them a certain time, would probably not be barren. That then,
at the end of the end of the year, he would find himself master of his three
sheep, together with two, if not three, lambs; and that, if he sold his sheep
again to pay back his daric, and gave one of his lambs for the use of it in the
mean time, he would be two lambs, or at least one lamb, richer, than if he had
made no such bargain.

These theological and philosophical conceits, the offspring of the day, were
not ill seconded by principles of a more permanent complexion.

The business of a money-lender, though only among Christians, and in Christian
times, a proscribed profession, has no where, nor at any time, been a popular
one. Those who have the resolution to sacrifice the present to the future, are
natural objects of envy to those who have sacrificed the future to the present.
The children who have eat their cake, are the natural enemies of the children
who have theirs. While the money is hoped for, and for a short time after it
has been received, he who lends it is a friend and benefactor: by the time the
money is spent, and the evil hour of reckoning is come, the benefactor is found
to have changed his nature, and to have put on the tyrant and the oppressor. It
is an oppression for a man to reclaim his own money: it is none to keep it from
him. Among the inconsiderate, that is, among the great mass of mankind, selfish
affections conspire with the social in treasuring up all favor for the man of
dissipation, and in refusing justice to the man of thrift who has supplied him.
In some shape or other, that favor attends the chosen object of it, through
every stage of his career. But, in no stage of his career, can the man of
thrift come in for any share of it. It is the general interest of those with
whom a man lives, that his expense should be at least as great as his
circumstances will bear: because there are few expenses which a man can launch
into, but what the benefit of them is shared, in some proportion or other, by
those with whom he lives. In that circle originates a standing law, forbidding
every man, on pain of infamy, to confine his expenses within what is adjudged
to be the measure of his means, saving always the power of exceeding that
limit, as much as he thinks proper: and the means assigned him by that law may
be ever so much beyond his real means, but are sure never to fall short of
them. So close is the combination thus formed between the idea of merit and the
idea of expenditure, that a disposition to spend finds favor in the eyes even
of those who know that a man's circumstances do not entitle him to the means:
and an upstart, whose chief recommendation is this disposition, shall find
himself to have purchased a permanent fund of respect, to the prejudice of the
very persons at whose expense he has been gratifying his appetites and his
pride. The luster, which the display of borrowed wealth has diffused over his
character, awes men, during the season of his prosperity, into a submission to
his insolence: and when the hand of adversity has overtaken him at last, the
recollection of the height, from which he is fallen, throws the veil of
compassion over his injustice.

The condition of the man of thrift, is the reverse. His lasting opulence
procures him a share, at least, of the same envy, that attends the prodigal's
transient display: but the use he makes of it, procures him no part of the
favor which attends the prodigal. In the satisfactions he derives from that
use, the pleasure of possession, and the idea of enjoying, at some distant
period, which may never arrive, nobody comes in for any share. In the midst of
his opulence, he is regarded as a kind of insolvent, who refuses to honor the
bills, which their rapacity would draw upon him, and who is by so much the more
criminal than other insolvents, as not having the plea of inability for an
excuse.

Could there be any doubt of the disfavour, which attends the cause of the
money-lender, in his competition with the borrower, and of the disposition of
the public judgment to sacrifice the interest of the former to that of the
latter, the stage would afford a compendious, but a pretty conclusive proof of
it. It is the business of the dramatist to study, and to conform to, the
humors and passions of those, on the pleasing of whom he depends for his
success: it is the course which reflection must suggest to every man, and which
a man would naturally fall into, though he were not to think about it. He may,
and very frequently does, make magnificent pretenses, of giving the law to
them: but woe be to him that attempts to give them any other law than what they
are disposed already to receive. If he would attempt to lead them one inch, it
must be with great caution, and not without suffering himself to be led by them
at least a dozen. Now, I question, whether, among all the instances in which a
borrower and a lender of money have been brought together upon the stage, from
the days of Thespis to the present, there ever was one, in which the former was
not recommended to favor, in some shape or other, either to admiration, or to
love, or to pity, or to all three; and the other, the man of thrift, consigned
to infamy.

Hence it is, that, in reviewing and adjusting the interests of these
apparently rival parties, the advantage made by the borrower is so apt to slip
out of sight, and that made by the lender to appear in so exaggerated a point
of view. Hence it is, that though prejudice is so far softened, as to acquiesce
in the lender's making some advantage, lest the borrower should lose altogether
the benesit of his assistance, yet still the borrower is to have all the
favor, and the lender's advantage is forever to be clipped, and pared down, as
low as it will bear. First it was to be confined to ten percent. then to eight,
then to six, then to five, and now lately there was a report of its being to be
brought down to four; with constant liberty to sink as much lower as it would.
The burden of these restraints, of course, has been intended exclusively for
the lender: in reality, as I think you have seen, it presses much more heavily
upon the borrower: I mean him who either becomes, or in vain wishes to become
so. But the presents directed by prejudice, Dr. Smith will tell us, are not
always delivered according to their address. It was thus that the millstone
designed for the necks of those vermin, as they have been called, the dealers
in corn, was found to fall upon the heads of the consumers. It is thus -- but
further examples would lead me further from the purpose.

LETTER XI. Compound Interest.
A WORD or two I must trouble you with, concerning compound interest; for
compound interest is discountenanced by the law; I suppose, as a sort of usury.
That, without an express stipulation, the law never gives it, I well remember:
whether, in case of an express stipulation, the law allows it to be taken, I am
not absolutely certain. I should suppose it might: remembering covenants in
mortgages that interest should become principal. At any rate, I think the law
cannot well punish it under the name of usury.

If the discountenance shown to this arrangement be grounded on the horror of
the sin of usury, the impropriety of such discountenance follows of course,
from the arguments which show the unsinfulness of that sin.

Other argument against it, I believe, was never attempted, unless it were the
giving to such an arrangement the epithet of a hard one: in doing which,
something more like a reason is given, than one gets in ordinary from the
common law.

If that consistency were to be found in the common law, which has never yet
been found in man's conduct, and which perhaps is hardly in man's nature,
compound interest never could have been denied.

The views which suggested this denial, were, I dare to say, very good: the
effects of it are, I am certain, very pernicious.

If the borrower pays the interest at the day, if he performs his engagement,
that very engagement to which the law pretends to oblige him to conform, the
lender, who receives that interest, makes compound interest of course, by
lending it out again, unless he chooses rather to expend it: he expects to
receive it at the day, or what meant the engagement? if he fails of receiving
it, he is by so much a loser: the borrower by paying it at the day is no loser:
if he does not pay it at the day, he is by so much a gainer: a pain of
disappointment takes place in the case of the one, while no such pain takes
place in the case of the other. The cause of him whose contention is to catch a
gain, is thus preferred to that of him whose contention is to avoid a loss:
contrary to the reasonable and useful maxim of that branch of the common law
which has acquired the name of equity. The gain, which the law in its
tenderness thus bestows on the defaulter, is an encouragement, a reward, which
it holds out for breach of faith, for iniquity, for indolence, for negligence.

The loss, which it thus throws upon the forbearing lender, is a punishment
which it inflicts on him for his forbearance: the power which it gives him of
avoiding that loss, by prosecuting the borrower upon the instant of failure, is
thus converted into a reward which it holds out to him for his hard-heartedness
and rigor. Man is not quite so good as it were to be wished he were; but he
would be bad indeed, were he bad on all the occasions where the law, as far as
depends on her, has made it his interest so to be.

It may be impossible, say you, it often is impossible, for the borrower to pay
the interest at the day: and you say truly. What is the inference? That the
creditor should not have it in his power to ruin the debtor for not paying at
the day, and that he should receive a compensation for the loss occasioned by
such failure. -- He has it in his power to ruin him, and he has it not in his
power to obtain such compensation. The judge, were it possible for an arrested
debtor to find his way into a judge's chamber instead of a spunging-house,
might award a proper respite, suited to the circumstances of the parties. It is
not possible: but a respite is purchased, proper or not proper, perhaps at ten
times, perhaps at a hundred times the expense of compound interest, by putting
in bail, and fighting the creditor through all the windings of mischievous and
unnecessary delay. Of the satisfaction due either for the original failure, or
for the subsequent vexation by which it has been aggravated, no part is ever
received by the injured creditor: but the instruments of the law receive,
perhaps at his expense, perhaps at the debtor's, perhaps ten times, perhaps a
hundred times the amount of that satisfaction. Such is the result of this
tenderness of the law.

It is in consequence of such tenderness, that on so many occasions, a man,
though ever so able, would find himself a loser by paying his just debts: those
very debts of which the law has recognized the justice. The man who obeys the
dictates of common honesty, the man who does what the law pretends to bid him,
is wanting to himself. Hence your regular and securely profitable writs of
error in the house of lords: hence your random and vindictive costs of one
hundred pounds, and two hundred pounds, now and then given in that house. It is
natural, and it is something, to find, in a company of lords, a zeal for
justice: it is not natural, to find, in such a company, a disposition to bend
down to the toil of calculation.

LETTER XII. Maintenance and Champerty.
HAVING, in the preceding letters, had occasion to lay down, and, as I flatter
myself, to make good, the general principle, that no man of ripe years, and of
sound mind, ought, out of loving-kindess to him, to be hindered from making
such a bargain, in the way of obtaining money, as, acting with his eyes open,
he deems conducive to his interest; I will take your leave for pushing it a
little farther, and extending the application of it to another class of
regulations still less defensible. I mean the antique laws against what are
called Maintenance and Champerty.

To the head of Maintenance, I think you refer, besides other offenses which
are not to the present purpose, that of purchasing, upon any terms, any claim,
which it requires a suit at law, or in equity, to enforce.

Champerty, which is but a particular modification of this sin of Maintenance,
is, I think, the furnishing a man who has such a claim, with regard to a real
estate, such money as he may have occasion for, to carry on such claim, upon
the terms of receiving a part of the estate in case of success.

What the penalties are for these offenses, I do not recollect; nor do I think
it worth while hunting for them, though I have Blackstone at my elbow. They
are, at any rate, sufficiently severe to answer the purpose, the rather as the
bargain is made void.

To illustrate the mischievousness of the laws by which they have been created,
give me leave to tell you a story, which is but too true a one, which happened
to fall within my own observation.

A gentleman of my acquaintance had succeeded, during his minority, to an
estate of about 3000 l. a year; I will not say where. -- His guardian,
concealing from him the value of the estate, which circumstances rendered it
easy for him to do, got a conveyance of it from him, during his nonage, for a
trifle. Immediately upon the ward's coming of age, the guardian, keeping him
still in darkness, found means to get the conveyance confirmed. Some years
afterward, the ward discovered the value of the inheritance he had been
throwing away. Private representations proving, as it may be imagined,
ineffectual, he applied to a court of equity. The suit was in some forwardness:
the opinion of the ablest counsel highly encouraging: but money there remained
none. We all know but too well, that, in spite of the unimpeachable integrity
of the bench, that branch of justice, which is particularly dignified with the
name of equity, is only for those who can afford to throw away one fortune for
the chance of recovering another. Two persons, however, were found, who,
between them, were content to defray the expense of the ticket for this
lottery, on condition of receiving half the prize. The prospect now became
encouraging: when unfortunately one of the adventurers, in exploring the
recesses of the bottomless pit, happened to dig up one of the old statutes
against Champerty. This blew up the whole project: however, the defendant,
understanding that, some how or other, his antagonist had found support, had
thought fit in the mean time to propose terms, which the plaintiff, after his
support had thus dropped from under him, was very glad to close with. He
received, I think it was, 3000 l.; and for that he gave up the estate, which
was worth about as much yearly, together with the arrears, which were worth
about as much as the estate.

Whether, in the barbarous age which gave birth to these barbarous precautions,
whether, even under the zenith of feudal anarchy, such fettering regulations
could have had reason on their side, is a question of curiosity rather than
use. My notion is, that there never was a time, that there never could have
been, or can be a time, when the pushing of suitors away from court with one
hand, while they are beckoned into it with another, would not be a policy
equally faithless, inconsistent, and absurd. But, what every body must
acknowledge, is, that, to the times which called forth these laws, and in which
alone they could have started up, the present are as opposite as light to
darkness. A mischief, in those times, it seems, but too common, though a
mischief not to be cured by such laws, was, that a man would buy a weak claim,
in hopes that power might convert it into a strong one, and that the sword of a
baron, stalking into court with a rabble of retainers at his heels, might
strike terror into the eyes of a judge upon the bench. At present, what cares
an English judge for the swords of an hundred barons? Neither fearing nor
hoping, hating nor loving, the judge of our days is ready with equal phlegm to
administer, upon all occasions, that system, whatever it be, of justice, or
injustice, which the law has put in his hands. A disposition so consonant to
duty, could not have then been hoped for: one more consonant is hardly to be
wished. Wealth has, indeed, the monopoly of justice against poverty: and such
monopoly it is the direct tendency and necessary effect of regulations like
these to strengthen and confirm. But with this monopoly no judge that lives
now, is at all chargeable. The law created this monopoly: the law, whenever it
pleases, may dissolve it.

I will not, however, so far wander from my subject as to enquire what measure
might have been necessary to afford a full relief to the case of that
unfortunate gentleman, any more than to the cases of so many other gentlemen
who might be found, as unfortunate as he. I will not insist upon so strange and
so inconceivable an arrangement, as that of the judge's seeing both parties
face to face in the first instance, observing what the facts are in dispute,
and declaring, that as the facts should turn out this way or that way, such or
such would be his decree. At present, I confine myself to the removal of such
part of the mischief, as may arise from the general conce^^, of keeping men out
of difficulties, by cutting them off from such means of relief as each man's
situation may afford. A sponge in this, as in so many other cases, is the only
needful, and only availing remedy: one stroke of it for the musty laws against
maintenance and champerty: another for the more recent ones against usury.
Consider, for example, what would have respectively been the effect of two such
strokes, in the case of the unfortunate gentleman I have been speaking of. By
the first, if what is called equity has any claim to confidence, he would have
got, even after paying off his champerty-usurers, 1500 l. a year in land, and
about as much in money: instead of getting, and that only by an accident, 3000
l. once told. By the other, there is no saying to what a degree he might have
been benefited. -- May I be allowed to stretch so far in favor of the law as
to suppose, that so small a sum as 500 l. would have carried him through his
suit, in the course of about three years? I am sensible, that may be thought
but a short sum, and this but a short term, for a suit in equity: but, for the
purpose of illustration, it may serve as well as a longer. Suppose he had
sought this necessary sum in the way of borrowing; and had been so fortunate,
or, as the laws against the sin of usury would style it, so unfortunate, as to
get it at 200 per cent. He would then have purchased his 6000 l. a year at the
price of half as much once paid, viz. 3000 l.; instead of selling it at that
price. Whether, if no such laws against usury had been in being, he could have
got the money, even at that rate, I will not pretend to say: perhaps he might
not have got it under ten times that rate, perhaps he might have got it at the
tenth part of that rate. Thus far, I think, we may say, that he might, and
probably would, have been the better for the repeal of those laws: but thus far
we must say, that it is impossible he should have been the worse. The terms,
upon which he met with adventurers willing to relieve him, though they come not
within that scanty field, which the law, in the narrowness of its views, calls
usury, do, in the present case, at twenty years' purchase of the 3000 l. a year
he was content to have sacrificed for such assistance, amount, in effect, to
4000 per cent. Whether it was likely that any man, who was disposed to venture
his money at all, upon such a chance, would have thought of insisting upon such
a rate of interest, I will leave you to imagine: but thus much may be said with
confidence, because the fact demonstrates it, that at a rate not exceeding
this, the sum actually would have been supplied. Whatever becomes, then, of the
laws against maintenance and champerty, the example in question, when applied
to the laws against usury, ought, I think, to be sufficient to convince us,
that so long as the expense of seeking relief at law stands on its present
footing, the purpose of seeking that relief will, of itself, independently of
every other, afford a sufficient ground for allowing any man, or every man, to
borrow money on any terms he can obtain it.

Crichoff, in White Russia, March 1787.
LETTER XIII. To Dr. Smith, on Projects in Arts, etc.
SIR,
I FORGET what son of controversy it was, among the Greeks, who, having put
himself to school, to a professor of eminence, to learn what, in those days,
went by the name of wisdom, chose an attack upon his master for the first
public specimen of his proficiency. This specimen, whatever entertainment it
might have afforded to the audience, afforded, it may be supposed, no great
satisfaction to the master: for the thesis was, that the pupil owed him nothing
for his pains. For my part, being about to show myself in one respect as
ungrateful as the Greek, it may be a matter of prudence for me to look out for
something like candor by way of covering to my ingratitude. Instead,
therefore, of pretending to owe you nothing, I shall begin with acknowledging,
that, as far as your track coincides with mine, I should come much nearer the
truth, were I to say I owed you every thing. Should it be my fortune to gain
any advantage over you, it must be with weapons which you have taught me to
wield, and with which you yourself have furnished me; for, as all the great
standards of truth, which can be appealed to in this line, owe, as far I can
understand, their establishment to you, I can see searce any other way of
convicting you of any error or oversight, than by judging you out of your own
mouth.

In the series of letters to which this will form a sequel, I had traveled
nearly thus far in my researches into the policy of the laws fixing the rate of
interest, combating such arguments as fancy rather than observation had
suggested to my views, when, on a sudden, recollection presented me with your
formidable image, bestriding the ground over which I was traveling pretty much
at my ease, and opposing the shield of your authority to any arguments I could
produce.

It was a reflection mentioned by Cicero as affording him some comfort, that
the employment his talents, till that time, had met with, had been chiefly on
the defending side. How little soever blessed, on any occasion, with any portion
of his eloquence, I may, on the present occasion, however, indulge myself with
a portion of what constituted his comfort: for, if I presume to contend with
you, it is only in desence of what I look upon as, not only an innocent, but a
most meritorious race of men, who are so unfortunate as to have fallen under
the rod of your displeasure. I mean projectors: under which invidious name I
understand you to comprehend, in particular, all such persons as, in the
pursuit of wealth, strike out into any new channel, and more especially into
any channel of invention.

It is with the professed view of checking, or rather of crushing, these
adventurous spirits, whom you rank with "prodigals," that you approve of the
laws which limit the rate of interest, grounding yourself on the tendency, they
appear to you to have, to keep the capital of the country out of two such
different sets of hands.

The passage, I am speaking of, is in the fourth chapter of your second book,
volume the second of the 8vo. edition of 1784. "The legal rate" (you say) "it
is to be observed, though it ought to be somewhat above, ought not to be much
above, the lowest market rate. If the legal rate of interest in Great Britain,
for example, was fixed so high as eight or ten per cent. the greater part of
the money which was to be lent, would be lent to prodigals and projectors, who
alone would be willing to give this high interest. Sober people, who will give
for the use of money no more than a part of what they are likely to make by the
use of it, would not venture into the competition. A great part of the capital
of the country would thus be kept out of the hands which were most likely to
make a profitable and advantageous use of it, and thrown into those which were
most likely to waste and destroy it. Where the legal interest, on the contrary,
is fixed but a very little above the lowest market rate, sober people are
universally preferred as borrowers, to prodigals and projectors. The person who
lends money, gets nearly as much interest from the former, as he dares to take
from the latter, and his money is much safer in the hands of the one set of
people than in those of the other. A great part of the capital of the country
is thus thrown into the hands in which it is most likely to be employed with
advantage."

It happens fortunately for the side you appear to have taken, and as
unfortunately for mine, that the appellative, which the custom of the language
has authorized you, and which the poverty and perversity of the language has,
in a manner, forced you to make use of, is one, which, along with the idea of
the sort of persons in question, conveys the idea of reprobation, as
indiscriminately and deservedly applied to them. With what justice or
consistency, or by the influence of what causes, this stamp of indiscriminate
reprobation has been thus affixed, it is not immediately necessary to enquire.
But, that it does stand thus affixed, you and every body else, I imagine, will
be ready enough to allow. This being the case, the question stands already
decided, in the first instance at least, if not irrevocably, in the judgments
of all those, who, unable or unwilling to be at the pains of analyzing their
ideas, suffer their minds to be led captive by the tyranny of sounds: that is,
I doubt, of by far the greater proportion of those whom we are likely to have
to judge us. In the conceptions of all such persons, to ask whether it be sit
to restrain projects, and projectors, will be as much as to ask, whether it be
fit to restrain rashness, and folly, and absurdity, and knavery, and waste.

Of prodigals I shall say no more at present. I have already stated my reasons
for thinking, that it is not among them that we are to look for the natural
customers for money at high rates of interest. As far as those reasons are
conclusive, it will follow, that, of the two sorts of men you mention as proper
objects of the burden of these restraints, prodigals and projectors, that
burden falls exclusively on the latter. As to these, what your definition is of
projectors, and what descriptions of persons you meant to include under the
censure conveyed by that name, might be material for the purpose of judging of
the propriety of that censure, but makes no difference in judging of the
propriety of the law, which that censure is employed to justify. Whether you
yourself, were the several classes of persons made to pass before you in
review, would be disposed to pick out this or that class, or this and that
individual, in order to exempt them from such censure, is what, for that
purpose, we have no need to enquire. The law, it is certain, makes no such
distinctions; it falls with equal weight, and with all its weight, upon all
those persons, without distinction, to whom the term projectors, in the most
impartial and extensive signification of which it is capable, can be applied.
It falls, at any rate, (to repeat some of the words of my former definition)
upon all such persons, as, in the pursuit of wealth, or even of any other
object, endeavor, by the assistance of wealth, to strike into any channel of
invention. It falls upon all such persons, as, in the cultivation of any of
those arts which have been, by way of eminence, termed useful, direct their
endeavors to any of those departments in which their utility shines most
conspicuous and induibitable; upon all such persons as, in the line of any of
their pursuits, aim at any thing that can be called improvement; whether it
consist in the production of any new article adapted to man's use, or in the
meliorating the quality, or diminishing the expense, of any of those which are
already known to us. It falls, in short, upon every application of the human
powers, in which ingenuity stands in need of wealth for its assistant.

High and extraordinary rates of interest, how little soever adapted to the
situation of the prodigal, are certainly, as you very justly observe,
particularly adapted to the situation of the projector: not however to that of
the imprudent projector only, nor even to his case more than another's, but to
that of the prudent and wellgrounded projector, if the existence of such a
being were to be supposed. Whatever be the prudence or other qualities of the
project, in whatever circumstance the novelty of it may lie, it has this
circumstance against it, viz. that it is new. But the rates of interest, the
highest rates allowed, are, as you expressly say they are, and as you would
have them to be, adjusted to the situation which the sort of trader is in,
whose trade runs in the old channels, and to the best security which such
channels can afford. But, in the nature of things, no new trade, no trade
carried on in any new channel, can afford a security equal to that which may be
afforded by a trade carried on in any of the old ones: in whatever light the
matter might appear to perfect intelligence, in the eye of every prudent
person, exerting the best powers of judging which the fallible condition of the
human faculties affords, the novelty of any commercial adventure will oppose a
chance of ill success, superadded to every one which could attend the same, or
any other adventure, already tried, and proved to be profitable by experience.

The limitation of the profit that is to be made, by lending money to persons
embarked in trade, will render the monied man more anxious, you may say, about
the goodness of his security, and accordingly more anxious to satisfy himself
respecting the prudence of a project, in the carrying on of which the money is
to be employed, than he would be otherwise: and in this way it may be thought
that these laws have a tendency to pick out the good projects from the bad, and
favor the former at the expense of the latter. The first of these positions I
admit: but I can never admit the consequence to follow. A prudent man, (I mean
nothing more than a man of ordinary prudence) a prudent man acting under the
sole governance of prudential motives, I still say will not, in these
circumstances, pick out the good projects from the bad, for he will not meddle
with projects at all. He will pick out old-established trades from all sorts of
projects, good and bad; for with a new project, be it ever so promising, he
never will have any thing to do. By every man that has money, five per cent. or
whatever be the highest legal rate, is at all times, and always will be, to be
had upon the very best security, that the best and most prosperous
old-established trade can afford. Traders in general, I believe, it is commonly
understood, are well enough inclined to enlarge their capital, as far as all
the money they can borrow at the highest legal rate, while that rate is so low
as five per cent. will enlarge it. How it is possible, therefore, for a
project, be it ever so promising, to afford, to a lender at any such rate of
interest, terms equally advantageous, upon the whole, with those he might be
sure of obtaining from an old-established business, is more than I can
conceive. Loans of money may certainly chance, now and then, to find their way
into the pockets of projectors as well as of other men: but when this happens
it must be through incautiousness, or friendship, or the expectation of some
collateral benefit, and not through any idea of the advantageousness of the
transaction, in the light of a pecuniary bargain.

I should not expect to see it alleged, that there is any thing, that should
render the number of well-grounded projects, in comparison of the ill-grounded,
less in time future, than it has been in time past. I am sure, at least, that I
know of no reasons why it should be so, though I know of some reasons, which I
shall beg leave to submit to you by and by, which appear to me pretty good
ones, why the advantage should be on the side of futurity. But, unless the
stock of well-grounded projects is already spent, and the whole stock of
ill-grounded projects that ever were possible, are to be looked for exclusively
in the time to come, the censure you have passed on projectors, measuring still
the extent of it by that of the operation of the laws in the defense of which
it is employed, looks as far backward as forward: it condemns as rash and
ill-grounded, all those projects, by which our species have been successively
advanced from that state in which acorns were their food, and raw hides their
clothing, to the state in which it stands at present: for think, Sir, let me
beg of you, whether whatever is now the routine of trade was not, at its
commencement, project? whether whatever is now establishment, was not, at one
time, innovation?

How it is that the tribe of well-grounded projects, and of prudent projectors
(if by this time I may have your leave for applying this epithet to some, at
least, among the projectors of time past), have managed to struggle through the
obstacles which the laws in question have been holding in their way, it is
neither easy to know, nor necessary to enquire. Manifest enough, I think, it
must be by this time, that difficulties, and those not inconsiderable ones,
those laws must have been holding in the way of projects of all sorts of
improvement (if I may say so) in every line, so long as they have had
existence: reasonable, therefore, it must be to conclude, that, had it not been
for these discouragements, projects of all sorts, well-grounded and successful
ones, as well as others, would have been more numerous than they have been: and
that accordingly, on the other hand, as soon, if ever, as these discouragements
shall be removed, projects of all sorts, and among the rest, well-grounded and
successful ones, will be more numerous than they would otherwise have been: in
short, that, as, without these discouragements, the progress of mankind, in the
career of prosperity, would have been greater than it has been under them in
time past, so, were they to be removed, it would be at least proportionably
greater in time future.

That I have done you no injustice, in assigning to your idea of projectors so
great a latitude, and that the unfavourable opinion you have professed to
entertain of them is not confined to the above passage, might be made, I think,
pretty apparent, if it be material, by another passage in the tenth chapter of
your first book, (edit. 1784, 8vo. p. 177.) "The establishment of any new
manufacture, of any new branch of commerce, or of any new practice in
agriculture," all these you comprehend by name under the list of "projects:" of
every one of them you observe, that "it is a speculation from which the
projector promises himself extraordinary profits. These profits (you add) are
sometimes very great, and sometimes, more frequently perhaps, they are quite
otherwise: but in general they bear no regular proportion to those of other
trades in the neighborhood. If the project succeeds, they are commonly at
first very high. When the trade or practice becomes thoroughly established and
well known, the competition reduces them to the level of other trades." But on
this head I forbear to insist: nor should I have taken this liberty of giving
you back your own words, but in the hope of seeing some alteration made in them
in your next edition, should I be fortunate enough to find my sentiments
confirmed by yours. In other respects, what is essential to the public, is,
what the error is in the sentiments entertained, not who it is that entertains
them.

I know not whether the observations which I have been troubling you with, will
be thought to need, or whether they will be thought to receive, any additional
support from those comfortable positions, of which you have made such frequent
use, concerning the constant tendency of mankind to get forward in the career
of prosperity, the prevalence of prudence over imprudence, in the sum of
private conduct at least, and the superior fitness of individuals for managing
their own pecuniary concerns, of which they know the particulars and the
circumstances, in comparison of the legislator, who can have no such knowledge.
I will make the experiment: for, so long as I have the mortification to see you
on the opposite side, I can never think the ground I have taken strong enough,
while any thing remains that appears capable of rendering it still stronger.

"With regard to misconduct, the number of prudent and successful undertakings"
(you observe, b. II. chapter iii. edit. 8vo. 1784, vol. ii. p. 20.) "is every where
much greater than that of injudicious and unsuccessful ones. After all our
complaints of the frequency of bankruptcies, the unhappy men who fall into this
misfortune, make but a very small part of the whole number engaged in trade,
and all other sorts of business; not much more perhaps than one in a thousand."

It is in support of this position, that you appeal to history for the constant
and uninterrupted progress of mankind, in our island at least, in the career of
prosperity: calling upon any one who should entertain a doubt of the fact, to
divide the history into any number of periods, from the time of Caesar's visit
down to the present: proposing, for instance, the respective aeras of the
Restoration, the Accession of Elizabeth, that of Henry VII. the Norman
Conquest, and the Heptarchy, and putting it to the skeptic to find out, if he
can, among all these periods, any one at which the condition of the country was
not more prosperous than at the period immediately preceding it; in spite of so
many wars, and sires, and plagues, and all other public calamities, with which
it has been at different times afflicted, whether by the hand of God, or by the
misconduct of the sovereign. No very easy task, I believe: the fact is too
manifest for the most jaundiced eye to escape seeing it: but what and whom are
we to thank for it, but projects, and projectors?

"No," I think I hear you saying, "I will not thank projectors for it; I will
rather thank the laws, which, by fixing the rates of interest, have been
exercising their vigilance in repressing the temerity of projectors, and
preventing their imprudence from making those defalcations from the sum of
national prosperity which it would not have failed to make, had it been left
free. If, during all these periods, that adventurous race of men had been left
at liberty by the laws to give full scope to their rash enterprises, the
increase of national prosperity during these pexiods might have afforded some
ground for regarding them in a more favorable point of view. But the fact is,
that their activity has had these laws to check it: without which checks you
must give me leave to suppose, that the current of prosperity, if not totally
stopped, or turned the other way, would, at any rate, have been more or less
retarded. Here then," (you conclude) "lies the difference between us: what you
look upon as the cause of the increase about which we are both agreed, I look
upon as an obstacle to it: and what you look upon as the obstacle, I look upon
as the cause."

Instead of stating this as a sort of plea that might be urged by you, I ought,
perhaps, rather to have mentioned it as what might be urged by some people in
your place: for, as I do not imagine your penetration would suffer you to rest
satissied with it, still less can I suppose that, if you were not, your candor
would allow you to make use of it as if you were.

To prevent your resting satisfied with it, the following considerations would,
I think, be sufficient.

In the first place, of the seven periods which you have pitched upon, as so
many stages for the eye to rest at in viewing the progress of prosperity, it is
only during the three last, that the country has had the benefit, if such we
are to call it, of these laws: for it is to the reign of Henry VIII. that we
owe the first of them.

Here a multitude of questions might be started: Whether the curbing of
projectors formed any part of the design of that first statute, or whether the
views of it were not wholly confined to the reducing the gains of that
obnoxious and envied class of men, the moneylenders? Whether projectors have
been most abundant before that statute, or since that statute? And whether the
nation has suffered, as you might say -- benefited, as I should say, most by
them, upon the whole, during the former period or the latter? All these
discussions, and many more that might be slarted, I decline engaging in, as
more likely to retard, than to forward, our coming to any agreement concerning
the main question.

In the next place, I must here take the liberty of referring you to the proof,
which I think I have already given, of the proposition, that the restraints in
question could never have had the effect, in any degree, of lessening the
proportion of bad projects to good ones, but only of diminishing, as far as
their influence may have extended, the total number of projects, good and bad
together. Whatever, therefore, was the general tendency of the projecting
spirit previously to the first of these laws, such it must have remained ever
since, for any effect which they could have had in purifying and correcting it.

But what may appear more satisfactory, perhaps, than both the above
considerations, and may afford us the best help toward extricating ourselves
from the perplexity, which the plea I have been combating (and which I thought
it necessary to bring to view, as the best that could be urged) seems much
better calculated to plunge us into, than bring us out of, is, the
consideration of the small effect which the greatest waste that can be
conceived to have been made within any compass of time, by injudicious
projects, can have had on the sum of prosperity, even in the estimation of
those whose opinion is most unfavourable to projectors, in comparison of the
effect which, within the same compass of time, must have been produced by
prodigality.

Of the two causes, and only two causes, which you mention, as contributing to
retard the accumulation of national wealth, as far as the conduct of
individuals is concerned, projecting, as I observed before, is the one, and
prodigality is the other: but the detriment, which society can receive even
from the concurrent efficacy of both these causes, you represent, on several
occasions, as inconsiderable; and if I do not misapprehend you, too
inconsiderable, either to need, or to warrant, the interposition of government
to oppose it. Be this as it may with regard to projecting and prodigality taken
together, with regard to prodigality at least, I am certain I do not
misapprehend you. On this subject you ride triumphant, and chastise the
"impertinence and presumption of kings and ministers," with a tone of
authority, which it required a courage like yours to venture upon, and a genius
like yours to warrant a man to assume (b. II. chapter iii. vol. ii. p. 27. edit.
8vo. 1784.) After drawing the parallel between private thrift and public
profusion, "It is" (you conclude) "the highest impertinence and presumption,
therefore, in kings and ministers to pretend to watch over the economy of
private people, and to restrain their expense, either by sumptuary laws, or by
prohibiting the importation of foreign luxuries. They are themselves always,
and without exception, the greatest spendthrifts in the society. Let them look
well after their own expense, and they may safely trust private people with
theirs. If their own extravagance does not ruin the state, that of their
subjects never will."

That the employing the expedients you mention for restraining prodigality, is
indeed generally, perhaps even without exception, improper, and in many cases
even ridiculous, I agree with you; nor will I here step aside from my subject
to defend, from that imputation, another mode suggested in a former part of
these papers. But however presumptuous and impertinent it may be for the
sovereign to attempt in any way to check, by legal restraints, the prodigality
of individuals; to attempt to check their bad management by such restraints
seems abundantly more so. To err in the way of prodigality is the lot, though,
as you well observe, not of many men, in comparison of the whole mass of
mankind, yet at least of any man: the stuff fit to make a prodigal of is to be
found in every alehouse, and under every hedge. But even to err in the way of
projecting is the lot only of the privileged few. Prodigality, though not so
common as to make any very material drain from the general mass of wealth, is,
however, too common to be regarded as a mark of distinction, or as a
singularity. But the stepping aside from any of the beaten paths of traffic, is
regarded as a singularity, as serving to distinguish a man from other men. Even
where it requires no genius, no peculiarity of talent, as where it consists in
nothing more than the finding out a new market to buy or sell in, it requires,
however, at least, a degree of courage, which is not to be found in the common
herd of men. What shall we say of it, where, in addition to the vulgar quality
of courage, it requires the rare endowment of genius, as in the instance of all
those successive enterprises by which arts and manufactures have been brought
from their original nothing to their present splendour? Think how small a part
of the community these must make, in comparison of the race of prodigals; of
that very race, which, were it only on account of the smallness of its number,
would appear too inconsiderable to you to deserve attention. Yet prodigality is
essentially and necessarily hurtful, as far as it goes, to the opulence of the
state: projecting, only by accident. Every prodigal without exception, impairs
-- by the very supposition impairs -- if he does not annihilate, his fortune.
But it certainly is not every projector that impairs his: it is not every
projector that would have done so, had there been none of those wise laws to
hinder him: for the fabric of national opulence, that fabric of which you
proclaim, with so generous an exultation, the continual increase, that fabric,
in every apartment of which, innumerable as they are, it required the
reprobated hand of a projector to lay the first stone, has required some hands
at least to be employed, and that successfully employed. When in comparison of
the number of prodigals, which is too inconsiderable to deserve notice, the
number of projectors of all kinds is so much more inconsiderable -- and when
from this inconsiderable number, must be deducted, the not inconsiderable
proportion of successful projectors -- and from this remainder again, all those
who can carry on their projects without need of borrowing -- think whether it
is possible, that this last remainder could afford a multitude, the reducing of
which would be an object, desciving the interposition of government by its
magnitude, even taking for granted that it were an object proper in its nature?

If it be still a question, whether it be worth while for government, by its
reason, to attempt to control the conduct of men visibly and undeniably under
the dominion of passon, and acting, under that dominion, contrary to the
dictates of their own reason: in short, to effect what is acknowledged to be
their better judgment, against what every body, even themselves, would
acknowledge to be their worse; is it endurable that the legislator should by
violence substitute his own pretended reason, the result of a momentary and
scornful glance, the offspring of wantonness and arrogance, much rather than of
social anxiety and study, in the place of the humble reason of individuals,
bending itself with all its force to that very object which he pretends to have
in view? Nor let it be forgotten, that, on the side of the individual in this
strange competition, there is the most perfect and minute knowledge and
information, which interest, the whole interest of a man's reputation and
fortune, can ensure; on the side of the legislator, the most perfect ignorance.
All that he knows, all that he can know, is, that the enterprise is a project,
which, merely because it is susceptible of that obnoxious name, he looks upon
as a sort of cock; for him, in childish wantonness, to shy at. -- Shall the
blind lead the blind? is a question that has been put, of old, to indicate the
height of folly: but what then shall we say of him who, being necessarily
blind, insists on leading, in paths he never trod, those who can see?

It must be by some distinction too fine for my conception, if you clear
yourself from the having taken, on another occasion, but on the very point in
question, the side, on which it would be my ambition to see you fix.

"What is the species of domestic industry which his capital can employ, and of
which the produce is likely to be of the greatest value, every individual, (you
say) it is evident, can, in his local situation, judge much better than any
statesman or lawgiver can do for him. The statesman, who should attempt to
direct private people in what manner they ought to employ their capitals, would
not only load himself with a most unnecessary attention, but assume an
authority which could safely be trusted, not only to no single person, but to
no council or senate whatsoever, and which would no where be so dangerous as in
the hands of a man who had folly and presumption enough to fancy himself sit to
exercise it.

"To give the monopoly of the home market to the produce of domestic industry,
in any particular art or manufacture, is in some measure to direct private
people in what manner they ought to employ their capitals, and must in almost
all cases, be either a useless or a hurtful regulation." -- Thus far you: and I
add, to limit the legal interest to a rate at which the carriers on of the
oldest, and best established, and least hazardous trades are always glad to
borrow, is to give the monopoly of the money market to those traders, against
the projectors of new imagined trades, not one of which but were it only from
the circumstances of its novelty, must, as I have already observed, appear more
hazardous than the old.

These, in comparison, are but inconclusive topics. I touched upon them merely
as affording, what appeared to me the only shadow of a plea, that could be
brought, in defense of the policy I am contending against. I come back,
therefore, to my first ground, and beg you once more to consider, whether, of
all that host of manufactures, which we both exult in as the causes and
ingredients of national prosperity, there be a single one, that could have
existed at first but in the shape of a project. But, if a regulation, the
tendency and effect of which is merely to check projects, in as far as they are
projects, without any sort of tendency, as I have shown, to weed out the bad
ones, is defensible in its present state of imperfect efficacy, it should not
only have been defensible, but much more worthy of our approbation, could the
efficacy of it have been so far strengthened and completed as to have opposed,
from the beginning, an unsurmountable bar to all sorts of projects whatsoever:
that is to say, if, stretching forth its hand over the rudiments of society, it
had confined us, from the beginning, to mud for our habitations, to skins for
our clothing, and to acorns for our food.

I hope you may by this time be disposed to allow me, that we have not been ill
served by the projects of time past. I have already intimated, that I could not
see any reason why we should apprehend our being worse served by the projects
of time future. I will now venture to add, that I think I do see reason, why we
should expect to be still better and better served by these projects, than by
those. I mean better upon the whole, in virtue of the reduction which
experience, if experience be worth any thing, should make in the proportion of
the number of the ill-grounded and unsuccesful, to that of the well-grounded
and successful ones.

The career of art, the great road which receives the footsteps of projectors,
may be considered as a vast, and perhaps unbounded, plain, bestrewed with
gulfs, such as Curtius was swallowed up in. Each requires an human victim to
fall into it 'ere it can close; but when it once closes, it closes to open no
more, and so much of the path is safe to those who follow. To tie men neck and
heels, and throw them into the gulfs I have been speaking of, is altogether out
of the question: but if, at every gulf, a Curtius stands mounted and
caparisoned, ready to take the leap, is it for the legislator, in a fit of old
womanish tenderness, to pull him away? Laying even public interest out of the
question, and considering nothing but the feelings of individuals, a legislator
would scarcely do so, who knew the value of hope, "the most precious gift of
heaven."

Consider, Sir, that it is not with the invention-lottery (that great branch of
the projectlottery, for the sake of which I am desending the whole, and must
continue so to do until you or somebody else can show me how to defend it on
better terms), it is not, I say, with the invention-lottery, as with the
mine-lottery, the privateering lottery, and so many other lotteries, which you
speak of, and in no instance, I think, very much to their advantage. In these
lines success does not, as in this, arise out of the embers of ill success, and
thence propagate itself, by a happy contagion, perhaps to all eternity. Let
Titius have found a mine, it is not the more easy, but by so much the less
easy, for Sempronius to find one too: Let Titius have made a capture, it is not
the more easy, but by so much the less easy, for Sempronius to do the like. But
let Titius have found out a new dye, more brilliant or more durable than those
in use, let him have invented a new and more convenient machine, or a new and
more profitable mode of husbandry, a thousand dyers, ten thousand mechanics, a
hundred thousand husbandmen, may repeat and multiply his success: and then,
what is it to the public, though the fortune of Titius, or of his usurer,
should have sunk under the experiment?

Birmingham and Sheffield are pitched upon by you as examples, the one of a
projecting town, the other of an unprojecting one, (b. I. chapter x. vol. i. p.
176, edit. 8vo. 1784.) Can you forgive my saying, I rather wonder that this
comparison of your own choosing, did not suggest some suspicions of the justice
of the conceptions you had taken up, to the disadvantage of projectors.
Shessield is an old oak: Birmingham, but a mushroom. What if we should find the
mushroom still vaster and more vigorous than the oak? Not but the one as well
as the other, at what time soever planted, must equally have been planted by
projectors: for though Tubal Cain himself were to be brought post from Armenia
to England to plant Sheffield, Tubal Cain himself was as arrant a projector in
his day, as ever Sir Thomas Lombe was, or bishop Blaise: but Birmingham, it
seems, claims, in common parlance, the title of a projecting town, to the
exclusion of the other, because, being but of yesterday, the spirit of project
smells fresher and stronger there than elsewhere.

When the odious sound of the word projector no longer tingles in your ears,
the race of men thus stigmatized do not always find you their enemy. Projects,
even under the name of "dangerous and expensive experiments," are represented
as not unfit to be encouraged, even though monopoly be the means: and the
monopoly is defended in that instance, by its similarity to the other
instances, in which the like means are employed to the like purpose.

"When a company of merchants undertake at their own risk and expense to
establish a new trade, with some remote and barbarous nation, it may not be
unreasonable (you observe) to incorporate them into a joint stock company, and
to grant them, in case of their success, a monopoly of the trade for a certain
number of years. It is the easiest and most natural way, in which the state can
recompense them, for hazarding a dangerous and expensive experiment, of which
the public is afterward to reap the benefit. A temporary monopoly of this kind
may be vindicated, upon the same principles, upon which a like monopoly of a
new machine is granted to its inventor, and that of a new book to its author."

I have sometimes been tempted to think that were it in the power of laws to
put words under proscription, as it is to put men, the cause of inventive
industry might, perhaps, derive scarcely less assistance from a bill of
attainder against the words project and projectors, than it has derived from
the act authorizing the grant of patents. I should add, however, for a time:
for even then the envy, and vanity, and wounded pride, of the uningenious herd,
would, sooner or later, infuse their venom into some other word, and set it up
as a new tyrant, to hover, like its predecessor, over the birth of infant
genius, and crush it in its cradle.

You have defended against unmerited obloquy two classes of men, the one
innocent at least, the other highly useful; the spreaders of English arts in
foreign climes, (b. IV. chapter 8. vol. ii. p. 514. et alibi, edit. 8vo. 1784.) and
those whose industry exerts itself in distributing that necessary commodity,
which is called by the way of eminence, the staff of life. May I flatter myself
with having succeeded at last in my endeavors, to recommend to the same
powerful protection, two other highly useful and equally persecuted sets of
men, usurers and projectors. -- Yes -- I will, for the moment at least, indulge
so flattering an idea: and, in pursuance of it, leaving usurers, for whom I
have said enough already, I will consider myself as joined now with you in the
same commission, and thinking with you of the best means of relieving the
projector from the load of discouragement laid on him by these laws, in so far
as the pressure of them falls particularly upon him. In my own view of the
matter, indeed, no temperament, no middle course, is either necessary or
proper: the only perfectly effectual, is the only perfectly proper remedy, -- a
sponge. But, as nothing is more common with mankind, than to give opposite
receptions, to conclusions flowing with equal necessity from the same
principle, let us accommodate our views to that contingency.

According to this idea, the object, as far as confined to the present case,
should be, to provide, in favor of projectors only, a dispensation from the
rigor of the anti-usurious laws: such, for instance, as is enjoyed by persons
engaged in the carrying trade, in virtue of the indulgence given to loans made
on the footing of respondentia or bottomry. As to abuse, I see not why the
danger of it should be greater in this case than in those. Whether a sum of
money be embarked, or not embarked, in such or such a new manufacture on land,
should not, in its own nature, be a fact much more difficult to ascertain, than
whether it be embarked, or not embarked, in such or such a trading adventure by
sea: and, in the one case as in the other, the payment of the interest, as well
as the repayment of the principal, might be made to depend upon the success of
the adventure.

If the leading-string is not yet thought tight enough, boards of control
might be instituted to draw it tighter. Then opens a scene of vexation and
intrigue: waste of time consumed in courting the favor of the members of the
board: waste of time, in opening their understandings, clenched, perhaps, by
ignorance, at any rate, by disdain and self-sufficiency, and vanity, and pride:
the favor (for pride will make it a favor) granted to skill in the arts of
self-recommendation and cabal, devoid of inventive merit, and refused to naked
merit unadorned by practice in those arts: waste of time on the part of the
persons themselves engaged in this impertinent inquiry: waste of somebody's
money in paying them for this waste of time. All these may be necessary evils,
where the money to be bestowed is public money: how idle, where it is the
party's own! I will not plague you, nor myself, with enquiring of whom shall be
composed this board of nurses to grown gentlemen: were it only to cut the
matter short, one might name at once the Committee of the Society of Arts.
There you have a body of men ready trained in the conduct of enquiries, which
resemble that in question, in every circumstance, but that which renders it
ridiculous: the members or representatives of this democratic body would be as
likely, I take it, to discharge such a trust with fidelity and skill, as any
aristocracy that could be substituted in their room.

Crichoff, in White Russia, March 1787.
THE END.
Elements of Chemistry.
NOW IN THE PRESS OF LANG and USTICK, (And will be published by the first of
September)

Elements of Chemistry: By M. I. A. CHAPTAL, Chevalier of the Order of the
King, Professor of Chemistry at Montpellier, Honorary Inspector of the Mines of
France, and Member of several Academies of Sciences, Medicine, Agriculture,
Inscription and Belles Lettres.

TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH.

This edition of Chaptal's Elements of Chemistry, is printing under the
revision of James Woodhouse, M. D. Professor of Chemistry in the University of
Pennsylvania. The first American, from the last London edition -- three volumes
in one. -- It will be sold by Matthew Carey, H. and P. Rice and Co. Thomas
Dubson, Joseph Crukshank, John Ormrod, and the Printers.

In a few weeks will be published, OUTLINES OF AN HISTORICAL VIEW OF THE
PROGRESS OF THE HUMAN MIND; Being a posthumous Work of the late M. DE CONDORCET.

[Translated from the French.]

This work will be embellished with a Frontispiece -- a likeness of the author.
It will be sold by Matthew Carey, H. and P. Rice and Co. the Printers, Lang and
Ustick, etc.


