MR. BARKER's Century Sermon.

The Stability of Christ's Church. A Century Sermon, PREACHED AT MIDDLEBORO'
JANUARY 6, 1795. That day completing One Hundred Years since a Church was first
gathered in that Place.

BY JOSEPH BARKER, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN MIDDLEBOROUGH.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY J. BUMSTEAD, UNION-STREET. 1796.

A Century Sermon.
MATTHEW XVI. 18. AND I SAY ALSO UNTO THEE, THAT THOU ART PETER, AND UPON THIS
ROCK I WILL BUILD MY CHURCH: AND THE GATES OF HELL SHALL NOT PREVAIL AGAINST IT.


THESE words, which were spoken by Jesus Christ to his disciples in private,
contain a more full declaration of his divine character, than he saw fit ever
to make in public. In this conference, he acknowledged to his disciples,
without reserve, that he was the promised Messiah. But, at the same time, "he
charged his disciples, that they should tell no man that he was Jesus the
Christ."

THE occasion of these words was this: Christ had been inquiring of his
disciples what opinion of him the public entertained. "Whom do men say, that I,
the Son of man am? And they said, some say that thou art John the Baptist, some
Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the prophets." He then asked them their
own opinion. "Whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou
art Christ, the Son of the living God. And Jesus answered and said unto him,
Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona: for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
thee, but my Father which is in heaven."

THIS reply of Christ was expressive of his approbation of Peter's answer, and
an implicit acknowledgment, that his opinion of his master was just. And, on
account of the faith, expressed in his answer, Christ pronounced him blessed;
and intimated, also, that that faith, which entitleth to happiness, comes not
from man, but God. "Flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
father which is in heaven. And I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and
upon this rock I will build my church: and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it."

CHRIST was pleased, as Peter had made a good profession, frankly to declare
himself to be the Messiah, or the STONE, laid for the foundation of the church,
which had been foretold by the prophets; also, to declare the stability of the
church.

THIS passage of scripture has occasioned much controversy amongst the
professors of christianity. The Papists have alleged, that, by this rock, on
which Christ promised to build his church, was meant Peter, the word Peter
signifying a rock, or stone. The Protestants, on the contrary, have maintained,
that Jesus Christ himself was intended by this rock. Some, however, have
supposed, that they might grant, that, by this Rock, Christ meant Peter, and
the other Apostles, (in whose name Peter answered) without helping, in the
least, the cause of the Papists, who wish, by the aid of this text, to
establish the supremacy of the Pope, denominated, by them, the successor of the
Peter; inasmuch, as Christ faith nothing about any successor of Peter, or of
the other apostles; and as the apostles were, in a sense, the foundation of the
church, as is intimated in Ephesians. ii. 20, "And are built upon the foundation of
the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone."
Also, Rev. xxi. 14. "And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in
them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb."

As the apostles were instruments, which God employed, first to propagate the
gospel, and set up the christian church, in the world, they were, in a sense,
the foundation of the church. But, it does not appear that Peter was a
foundation, rather than the other apostles, nor, that any of them had
successors in their office. The apostles were extraordinary officers, raised
up, in the beginning of the age of christianity, to spread the gospel, and
plant churches; and the office expired with those, who were at first honored
with it.

THAT Christ meant himself, and not Peter, it is also argued, from his varying
the term, when he said On this rock, and not using the very word Peter, though
that also signified a rock. He might, also, point out himself, in some way,
when he uttered these words, as he probably did at another time, when he said,
"Destroy this temple, and within three days I will rear it again." Some, then,
understood him to speak of the temple, to which the Jews resorted for worship;
"but he spoke of the temple of his body." So, in the passage under
consideration, without doubt, he meant himself, by this rock, alluding to that
prophecy in Isai. xxviii. 16. "Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I lay
in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a
sure foundation." As Peter had professed to believe, that Jesus was the Christ,
the Son of the living God, Christ proceeded, in addition to his profession, and
said, "On this rock," On the stone spoken of by Isaiah -- on Christ, whom you
acknowledge me to be, "I will build my church."

CHRIST, in many places of scripture, is styled a rock or stone, and is said to
(...) foundation of his church. 1 Cor. iii. 11. "For other foundation can no
man lay, than that laid, which is Jesus Christ."

FURTHER, it may be remarked upon the words of Christ in our text, that this
mode of expression, which he used, I say also unto thee, denotes the thing
asserted to be true and infallible -- that what he predicts will assuredly be
accomplished. The thing asserted by Christ is, that he will build his church on
a firm foundation; and, that the gates of hell -- the powers of darkness -- the
church's adversaries, shall not prevail against it -- shall neither be able to
destroy it, nor, prevent its growth.

It is implied, in these words of Christ, that the powers of darkness will
fight against the church; and affirmed, that they shall not prevail against it.
We may, then, be led by our text, in the ensuing discourse, to consider

I. The opposition which has has been made to the church, and

II. The safety of the church, notwithstanding its adversaries.

I. LET us consider the opposition, which has been made unto the church.

By the church are meant believers, or the multitude of the faithful, in the
whole world, whether Jews or Gentiles. Though this church, when completed, will
be a glorious body, Christ being its head, and the banner displayed over it,
LOVE; yet it has its enemies! It was early foretold, even when the first
intimations of the being of a church were given, that it would have a subtle,
malignant foe. Genesis iii. 15. "And I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy feed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel." Further on in the sacred scriptures, we learn, that, by the
seed of the woman, was meant Jesus Christ, as the head of his church; that
satan is the serpent, and the adversary of Christ; and, that this ancient
prediction intimated, that there would be war between satan and the church, in
which, Christ, or the church, would receive some wounds, not mortal, as they
were in the heel; but that satan would be bruised in the head -- disappointed
and ruined. We have some account of this war, in Rev. xii. 7. "And there was
war in heaven: Michael and his angels fought against the dragon, and the dragon
fought and his angels." Michael is Christ; and by the dragon, as we are told in
the following verse, was meant, "that old serpent, called the devil and satan,
which deceives the whole world. "This shows, that the devil makes great
opposition to Christ and his church. Christ had no sooner begun to build up his
church (which he did soon after the apostasy of Adam) than satan began to
oppose him, and to attempt to destroy the church, or, prevent its growth. And
that opposition has been carried on, in all succeeding ages, even to the
present time.

SOME of the ways, in which satan has fought against Christ, and endeavored
to prevent the growth of the church, are the following:

1. By tempting, and persuading, mankind to reject the offers, made unto them
in the gospel.

IN that passage, just now quoted from Revelation, it is said, that the devil
deceives the whole world, that is, a great part of mankind. The apostle says,
in 2 Cor. iv. 3 -- 4, "If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost:
in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not,
lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God,
should shine unto them," It hence appears, that satan has such influence
upon many, as to prevent their receiving the gospel of Christ. Through the
depravity of the human heart, men are easily deceived by satan, and prevailed
upon to neglect the great salvation, offered to all in the gospel. Hence they
are said to be "carried captive by him at his pleasure." By the artifice of
satan, the gospel, as yet, has been heard, but by the smaller part of mankind.
And a great part, there is reason to fear, of those who hear it, are persuaded
by satan to disobey, despise and reject it, and refuse to give their
assistance, in building Christ's church, by becoming believers.

2. By prevailing upon some members of Christ's visible church to conduct in
such a manner, as to bring a reproach upon religion.

CHRIST has set up a visible church in the world, as a "light in a dark
place," to enlighten the world, to recommend true religion, and induce many to
embrace it. But, sometimes, members of the visible church, by their scandalous
conduct, like David, "give great occasion to the enemies of the Lord to
blaspheme," bring religion into contempt, and, thereby, prevent the growth of
the church. Whereas, if professors of religion conducted with propriety, and
walked as becomes their profession, "others, by seeing their good works, might
be led to glorify God."

Satan entered into Judas, and prevailed upon him to betray Christ; also, in
tempting Peter to deny his Lord and Master, he proved successful. And how many
of the professed friends of Christ, since that time, have, by their works
denied him, and betrayed his cause!

3. By propagating schisms, herefies, and pernicious doctrines.

THERE were, in the visible church, even in the apostolic age, false doctrines,
divisions and heresies. One was for Paul, another for Cephas. Some contended
earnestly for the observance of the Mosaic rites, denying, without this, the
possibility of salvation. Some held, "that the resurrection was past already,
and thereby overthrew the faith of some." And, in all ages since, satan has
prevailed upon some of the visible church to spread sentiments, which have a
tendency to prevent the conversion of sinners, and to obstruct the increase of
Christ's church. Also, this malicious foe has succeeded, in his attempts to
stir up strife and divisions in the visible church, and cause schisms and
separations among the professed followers of the Lamb of God. How many sects,
denominations, and parties, there are, in the Christian church! Some appear to
imbibe gross errors and delusions, implicitly "denying the Lord who bought
them." And others separate from, and hate, their brethren only for differing
from them in opinion, with respect to modes, and rites, and non-essentials of
religion. Such schisms and heresies have a tendency to increase skeptics and
infidels, and hinder the growth of the church of Christ.

4. By exciting persecution.

WICKED men, in almost every age, being instigated thereto by Christ's
adversary, have cruelly persecuted the church. The prophets, who predicted the
coming of Christ, were put to death. And he, and his apostles, fared no better.

SOON after Christ's church, through the instrumentality of the apostles, began
to grow, the Jews severely persecuted it. Many, who professed christianity,
were put to death. Afterward, it was most violently persecuted, by the Roman
Emperors, Nero, Domitian, Trajan, Severus, Dioclesian, and several others. And
some of these persecutions were carried on, with such fury, as to threaten the
utter extirpation of the church. Thousands of thousands were put to death, and
many of them, in a most cruel manner, only for professing, and endeavoring to
propagate, the christian religion. Many, wrapped in combustible matter, fell
victims to the devouring flames; some expired in agonies, like their innocent
master, upon the cross; others were drawn to pieces by wild beasts.

AN edict was made, by the bloody Emperor Decius, about the middle of the third
century, by which, the Praetors, upon pain of death, were obliged to extirpate
the whole christian sect. What distress among christians, what horror, what
torrents of blood, were occasioned by this!

AND, after the christian religion had so far prevailed, as to be established
in the Roman empire; -- when the pleasing hope of being persecuted no more, was
excited in the breast of christians, then, Satan, by his wiles, brought upon
the church, persecution, from a quarter, not in the least suspected. The
visible church, in consequence of its establishment* as the national church,
soon became so corrupt, as to commence a persecutor. Professed christians
persecuted, to the death, other professed christians, because they differed
from them in sentiments!

THE church of Rome, called the catholic church, had swerved so far from the
simplicity and purity of the gospel, and introduced so many flagrant
corruptions, from the relics of paganism; that many conscientious christians
were obliged to renounce some of her gross errors and pernicious practices. The
consequence of which was, the reformers were persecuted, in the most
unchristian, inhuman manner, and driven from the church, and declared to be
heretics.

AT length, they were protected by some temporal princes; and the reformed
religion was established in England, and several other places. But, astonishing
to relate! the church called the reformed, which had once suffered persecution,
became a persecutor herself. They refused those privileges to their brethren,
which they had claimed, as the rights of man, for themselves. Those, who could
not conscientiously conform to the established modes of the church of England,
were persecuted, as severely, by that church, as the reformers, before, had
been, by the papists. The same arguments, which they had formerly used, to
judge their departure from the established corruptions of the church of Rome,
were now offered to them, by their dissenting brethren, with as much reason,
and with as little success, to justify their nonconformity to what they deemed
antiscriptural. The same pleas for liberty of conscience, which they had once
made, in their turn, they imprudently and unchristianly rejected.

THIS persecution was the occasion of the settling of New England. Those, who
were persecuted in their native country, came into the wilderness of America to
enjoy liberty of conscience, denied unto them at home, by their cruel and
unrighteous brethren.

AND is it not a fact, that, wherever the christian religion has been
established as the national religion, none could enjoy liberty of conscience,
without some degree of persecution, except that particular sect, or
denomination, which happened to bear rule? Have not New England and other parts
of the United States been disgraced with persecution?

AND if, at any time, the civil government of any country, or nation, has not
allowed of men's suffering in their estate, or limbs, or life, for their
religion, (as is now the case in the United States) Satan has contrived, and
carried into execution, another species of persecution, even satire and banter,
which, perhaps, is an improvement in the diabolical art, and better calculated
to accomplish the purpose of its author, and obstruct the growth of Christ's
church, than fire or sword, the wheel or gibbet, or any other instrument of
cruelty.

5. By exciting professors of christianity to substitute superstition in the
place of true and evangelical religion.

THE children of Israel, before Christ's day, as appears from the writings of
the prophets, substituted the observance of rites and sacrifices in the place
of righteousness and mercy. The Pharisees, a religious sect of Jews, in
Christ's day, strictly and conscientiously tythed mint, annise and cummin,
whilst they neglected "the weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy, and
faith." And, how soon, the Christian church was corrupted, in this way! And to
what an enormous height was superstition carried, by the Catholic church! how
many rites and ceremonies, and some of them the most whimsical that could be
imagined, were enjoined, by that church, to be religiously observed!

THE natural consequence of such superstition, is, to cause men, when they
become in a certain degree enlightened, to disbelieve the divine origin of
revealed religion. They cannot readily distinguish between genuine
christianity, and its corruptions, blended with it, by the folly of men.
Therefore, when they see so much superstition and false religion, mixed with
christianity, they discard it all together; as many, at the present day, are
doing in France, where superstition has, for a long time, so greatly prevailed.

AND, without doubt, one reason of the increase of infidelity, in christian
countries, is the prevalence of superstition among the professors of
christianity. Let the christian religion be separated from superstition, and be
acted out, and taught, in its simplicity and purity, and it will recommend
itself to every one, who is governed by reason. Then the age of reason, and the
age of christianity, will be synonymous.

BUT, so long as professors of christianity are zealous and conscientious about
indifferent matters, and slack in the performance of moral duties, the growth
of Christ's church will be obstructed.

THESE are some of the ways, in which satan has been opposing, and fighting
against, Christ and his church. But his opposition is in vain. This leads to
the next thing proposed:

II. THE consideration of the safety of the church, notwithstanding its
adversaries.

"THE gates of hell shall not prevail against it." The church is safe,
notwithstanding all the opposition, made against it, by the powers of darkness.

BY the church's being safe, it is not meant, that every part of the visible
church, or every individual visible church, shall be preserved, and continue to
the end of time. For many, which flourished for a time, are now no more. Where
are the churches, planted by the Apostles in Asia; -- those, to which some of
Paul's epistles were written, and to which john was ordered to write,
Revelation? Their candlestick has been removed out of his place. That country,
once blessed with the residence of christian churches, is now inhabited,
principally, by Mahometans and Pagans.

THE JEWS, formerly the church of God, have been cast off by Christ, for their
unbelief and irreligion. And, probably, this is the case of some, who call
themselves Christians. Christ threatened to spue the church of Laodicea out of
his mouth, except they should repent: also the church of Ephesus were
forewarned of the removal of their candlestick out of his place, unless they
should reform. And, long since, those threatenings have been executed.

NEITHER is it certain, that any one individual church, now on the earth, will
endure to the end of the world. Most probably there will not. All are corrupt,
and will be taken down, or pass a great change, by reformation. Probably, among
all the sects, no one is entirely right. One has one good qualification; and
another, another: But all have their errors and imperfections, and most
probably will be removed.

BUT by the safety of the church, as the phrase is used in this discourse, it
is meant, that there shall be a visible church in the world, so long as the
world endures; also, that Christ's invisible, or real church shall live forever.

THE safety of Christ's church, in these respects, depends on its foundation.
Christ is the foundation of the church. It rests on him -- on him it is
dependent for its support, as a building rests on its foundation. If Christ,
then, is a good foundation, the building, erected on him, will stand. And, in
our text, Christ calls himself a rock, which, is a firm foundation; and by
the prophet, who foretold his coming, he is styled, " a precious cornerstone,
A SURE FOUNDATION." The church, then, being built on such a foundation, is
stable. And if the whole church be safe, then the individuals, of which the
church consists, are safe, and cannot be destroyed: For if one individual,
who was ever built on Christ, could fall from him, and perish, then why might
not another, and the whole? How then is Christ a sure foundation?

THE safety of each real christian, and the impossibility of his perishing, are
asserted by Christ, in Mat. vii. 24, 25. "Therefore, whosoever hears these
sayings of mine, and does them, I will liken him unto a wise man which built
his house upon a rock: And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house: and it fell not, for it was founded upon
a rock."

MANY who have thought themselves to be real saints, and have been deemed such
by others, may have their delusion discovered, their garb of hypocrisy stripped
off, and, perish: But every soul, built on Christ by faith, will endure,
notwithstanding all the storms of temptation, which may assault him, and all
the powers of darkness; for he is founded on a rock.

CHRIST'S being compared to a rock, denotes his strength and stability -- that
he is able to uphold his church. And if he is able, we may be sure that he will
do it; for he has expressly promised it. John vi. 37, 39. "All that the Father
gives me shall come to me; and him that comes to me I will in no wise cast
out. And this is the Father's will which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last
day." Also see John x. 27 -- 29. "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me. And I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is
greater than all: and none is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand." Here
Christ declares, not only, that he will hold and save all that come unto him,
but, that his Father, also, is engaged to hold them in his hand, that they may
never perish.

THE safety, and continuance of the visible church, to the end of the world,
depend on the same foundation, viz. the promise and power of Christ. The power
and providence of God have preserved the visible church in the world, from the
beginning to the present time. When the world was destroyed by a deluge, in
Noah's day, the church was preserved in the ark. It was led, in safety, through
the red sea, where the hosts of Egypt, pursuing it, were drowned. It has been
preserved through many bloody, and fiery persecutions. It has been preserved
through the revolutions, which have taken place, in the kingdoms of this world.
Nations have been dispersed, subdued, and extirpated from the earth: but the
visible church has survived.

SATAN has often been disappointed, and baffled, in his attempts to destroy
the church by persecutions, by their being overruled, in Divine Providence, so
as to have an opposite tendency. Persecutions, sometimes, have been the
occasion of spreading the gospel the more speedily, and enlarging Christ's
kingdom. This was the effect of a persecution in Jerusalem, mentioned in the
viiith of Acts: "And at that time there was a great persecution against the
church which was at Jerusalem, and they were all scattered abroad, throughout
the regions of Judea and Samaria. Therefore they that were scattered abroad
went every where preaching the word."

The things, which God has done to preserve and enlarge his church, may be
considered as a sacred pledge, for the future accomplishment of all his
promises concerning the prosperity and increase of his church, in the latter
day. The church, which is compared to leaven, will be preserved, 'till it has
leavened the whole lump -- 'till it has filled the whole world. For it is
declared, by the spirit of prophecy, that, "In the days of these kings" (those
spoken of in the preceding verses) "shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be lest to other
people, but it shall break in pieces, and consume all those kingdoms, and it
shall stand forever.

IMPROVEMENT.
1. WE ought all to be upon our guard, lest we be found to aid satan, in his
attempts to injure the church of Christ.

WE have heard how he employeth mankind as instruments to execute his projects.
Therefore, let not those, who as yet have not obeyed the gospel, be prevailed
upon, by any temptation, to persist any longer in their disobedience. Let not
professors of religion be enticed, and drawn, into any conduct, which will
wound the cause of Christ. Let us beware of embracing, or propagating,
heresies, and hurtful doctrines. When satan spreads these, he puts on the
appearance of great religion, and "transforms himself into an angel of light."

LET us have no hand in any kind of persecution: for this is the work of satan.
And how vain, and unreasonable, is persecution! "Every plant," says Christ,
"which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up." Gamaliel said,
"Refrain from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsel or this work
be of men, it will come to naught: But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it;
lest happily ye be found even to fight against God."

LET us also beware of superstition, which is an enemy of true religion, and a
weapon, with which satan fights against the church of Christ.

2. THOSE may be pronounced blessed, who belong to Christ's church.

THE visible church is not meant here; for, though it may be considered as a
great privilege to belong to that, merely that does not ensure one's happiness.
For some have a standing in the visible, who do not appertain to the invisible,
church of Christ. "All are not Israel who are of Israel." All the natural seed,
or descendants of Israel, were not in reality God's people: So now all, who are
of the visible, are not of the invisible, church of Christ, which will
eternally reign with him in glory. But all, who belong to the latter, that is,
all who have ever heartily received Christ by faith, are safe -- their
salvation and eternal happiness are sure. They are built on a rock, and the
gates of hell cannot prevail against them. They will not fall away and perish;
for Christ has declared, that they shall never perish, and that, none shall
pluck them out of his hand.

BUT none besides these are safe; none are happy. There is nothing durable in
this world. Let us, then, all join to this happy kingdom. All are invited, and
he that comes shall in no wise he cast out.

3. WE ought gratefully to remember and acknowledge God's goodness and
faithfulness, displayed in redeeming, preserving, and saving, his church.

WHAT goodness God has discovered, by giving his Son to redeem, and to be the
foundation of, his church! What faithfulness God manifests, by protecting,
and finally saving it, notwithstanding all its external enemies, and internal
corruptions!

WHAT infinite mercy and wisdom God has discovered, by preserving a visible
church in the world, through all past ages -- through times of darkness,
superstition, and ignorance -- times of distress and persecution -- times of
infidelity and apostasy! This calls for our admiration and gratitude.

WE have convened, at this time, to take notice of a specimen of this goodness
and faithfulness of God, displayed, by his having preserved a visible church,
in this place, for so considerable a length of time; -- and, it is to be hoped,
with a disposition thankfully to acknowledge them.

THIS day completes one century, since a visible church was first gathered in
this place. And, as it is presumed that it will not be unacceptable to the
auditory, a sketch of its history will be recited. But, as the most ancient
records of this church, are entirely lost, a short and imperfect account, only,
is to be expected.

IT is evident, from the date of the church's covenant and confession of faith,
which have been preserved, and from other testimony, that the church, in this
place, was established, on Dec. 26th. A. D. 1694. O. S.; and, that the Reverend
Samuel Fuller, a deacon of the church in Plymouth, was, at the same time,
ordained its Pastor. Of how many the church then consisted, and who they were,
no documents, which we have seen, give any information, except, that it
consisted partly of members from the church in Plymouth.

MR. FULLER continued but a short time after his ordination, dying August 17th.
1695, (as appears from his gravestone, which is yet legible) in the 71st.
year of his age. He was considered to be a sincerely godly man, and useful
preacher. Before his ordination, he had occasionally preached to this people,
above sixteen years. His death was considered as a great loss, and lamented by
his people.

AFTER his decease, another deacon of Plymouth church, Mr. Isaac Cushman, was
invited, by this church, to take the pastoral charge of them. But he negatived
their call, and settled in a contiguous parish, since called Plymton.

HOW long they continued destitute, it cannot precisely be ascertained; but,
probably, it was not long after Mr. Fuller's death, when Mr. Thomas Palmer was
ordained to the pastoral office: For, June 30th. 1708, by the advice of an
Ecclesiastical Council of twelve churches, he was deposed from the ministry,
and laid under church censure. And, some time previous to that, he had been
dismissed by his church and congregation, and preached, in a private house, to
a party of his adherents.

THE Rev. Peter Thacher began to preach, in this place, Sept. 1707, and was
ordained, Nov. 2d. 1709, to universal satisfaction. How large the church was,
when he took the Pastoral charge of it, cannot be ascertained; but, during the
whole of his ministry, 402 were added to it. Having, to good acceptance,
officiated as Pastor, about thirty five years, on the 22d. of April, 1744, he
died, about fifty-five years of age.

SOME of the remarkable events, during his ministry, are the following: In
March, A. D. 1718, the two deacons, John Bennet, and -- Tinkham, died on the
same week, and, (what is still more extraordinary) the wife of each of them
died, and was buried at the same time, and in the same grave, with her husband.
About that time, sickness and mortality prevailed in this place, and several
other useful members of this church were taken away.

LUKE SHORT, a man, supposed to be an an hundred years old, was received into
the church.

TOWARD the close of Mr. Thacher's life, there was a remarkable revival of
religion, in this place, as well as in various other places in all parts of the
country; so that, A. D. 1742, one hundred and forty eight were received into
this church. But this religious commotion was followed by an unhappy contention
and division in this church, occasioned by the different opinions concerning
it, which different persons entertained. The contention was so sharp, and party
spirit run so high, as to occasion a division of this once happy people, and
the setting up of another meeting. A large marjority of the church, with the
minor part of the society, made choice of the Rev. Silvanus Conant for their
Pastor, who was ordained, March 28, 1745, within a year after Mr. Thacher's
death. The other part of the church, with the majority of the society, the
October following, settled Rev. Thomas Weld; who continued with them but a few
years, his party gradually leaving him, and going to the other meeting, 'till
at length he was dismissed; and then the church and society, which had been
rent asunder, were again happily united.

Mr. CONANT, a man, whose memory is yet very dear to many of this audience,
died Dec. 8, A. D. 1777, in the 58th year of his age, and 33d. of his ministry;
being called from his labors, in the midst of his usefulness, and in the full
possession of the love and esteem of his large flock.

It does not appear, that, during the whole of his ministry, more than seventy
five were added to this church.

THE church remained destitute of a pastor, after his decease, about four
years, in which time only four members were added.

Their present Pastor was ordained, Dec. 5, 1781; since which time, just as
many have been admitted into the church, as were, during Mr. Conant's ministry.
And in one of these, we have an instance of longevity, nearly equal to the one
in Mr. Thacher's day, already mentioned. The widow Hannah Tinkham, Nov. 6,
1788, delivered to the church and others, by the word of mouth, a rational and
affecting account of the religious exercises of her heart -- received the
ordinance of baptism, and was admitted to full communion with the church, being
ninety four years old. She died, March 25, 1792.


AN accurate list of those who have officiated as deacons in this church, by
reason of the deficiency of the church records, cannot be given. But it
appears, that some of the deacons were inducted into their office, in a very
solemn manner. Samuel Barrows and Ephraim Wood, July 25, 1725, were ordained to
the office of deacon, having previously been proved above two years. A solemn
charge was given them, faithfully to perform the work, incumbent on that
office, which charge was preceded and followed by prayer; also, as a token of
their being accepted in that office, the right hand was given them by the
Pastor. The only other similar instance was in March, A. D. 1737, when Samuel
Wood, and Ebenezer Finney, having been elected to that office, previously, more
than two years, were ordained.

THIS church has been diminished, at various times, by supplying members for
the establishment of other churches -- as that in Halifax, and those in the
second and third Precincts of this town; besides many, who have emigrated to
Vermont, and other places. But it is still preserved. Hitherto the Lord has
helped us. How much longer it will continue, God only knows. No particular
visible church is sure of remaining; though Christ will have a church in the
world, to the end of time. Sometimes, when a church becomes corrupt, and
lukewarm, Christ spues it out of his mouth.

LET us, therefore, be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that
are ready to die. Let us take heed, that we do not corrupt our ways, nor the
ordinances of God. Let us speedily reform in every particular, in which we have
erred from the rule of God's word, and followed the traditions of men. And let
us all remember the need there is of watchfulness in those, who belong to
Christ's kingdom. They have powerful, crafty, and malicious enemies, who are
constantly seeking their destruction. Therefore, let us comply with the
exhortation of the apostle, in those words: "Finally, my brethren, be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of his might. Put on the whole armor of God, that
ye may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil. For we wrestle not
against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against powers, against
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickednesses in
high places. Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God, that ye may be
able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand."

"NOW unto him who is able to keep you from falling, and to present you
faultless before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy -- to the only
wise God our Savior, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and
ever. AMEN."


