AN ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMIC FEVER WHICH PREVAILED IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK,
DURING PART OF THE SUMMER AND FALL OF 1795.

COPY RIGHT SECURED.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE EPIDEMIC FEVER WHICH PREVAILED IN THE CITY OF NEW YORK,
DURING PART OF THE SUMMER AND FALL OF 1795.

By RICHARD BAYLEY.

NEW YORK: Printed and sold by T. and J. SWORDS, Printers to the Faculty of
Physic of Columbia College, No. 99 Pearl-street. 1796.

PREFACE.
THE following sketch of the probable causes of the late epidemic, as they
appeared to the writer, with the treatment which proved most successful in his
own practice, as well as in that of some of his friends, is respectfully
offered to the perusal of his fellow citizens, as well as to the practitioners
of medicine; from whom he expects the exercise of that candor, of which the
best judges are commonly the most liberal, and which he is conscious it very
much requires.

R. B.
New York, May 30, 1796.
AN ACCOUNT, etc.
THE epidemic fever which made its appearance in this city, at the latter end
of the month of July last year, and which occasioned a degree of mortality
among the people never experienced in so short a space before, afforded matter
of much serious conversation, and gave rise to a great diversity of opinion. An
idea was entertained by some, and this idea was, by others, industriously
propagated abroad, that the disease was imported from the West Indies, and that
it was contagious: while, on the other hand, many contended that a concurrence
of local circumstances, which derived an uncommon activity from a peculiar
constitution of the air, were alone sufficient to account for its production.

It is the main object of the writer of this pamphlet to lay before the public
a few facts on this important subject; and in doing this, he is conscious that
the chief merit of these will consist in the diligence with which they were
collected, and the fidelity with which they are detailed. He shall purposely
avoid attacking any particular doctrines in medicine, relatively to the nature
of the fever in question; and the same temper will incline him to pass, without
animadversion, the practice of those who have stood deservedly high in their
profession. He will therefore hold himself responsible only for a faithful
narrative. -- It has, indeed, been thrown together under circumstances very
unfavourable to regular composition; but as it sprung from no vain conceit of
ability to render that clear, which has long been involved in obscurity, he
thinks he may rely on the purity of his motive for publishing it, as a shield
against the severity of criticism. The motive, as it first suggested itself to
his mind, was none other, than a desire to point out the real causes, as they
appeared to him, of the late epidemic, and thereby, in some degree, to moderate
individual apprehension, and quiet popular alarm.

At the first appearance of the disease, the following reports were diligently
circulated, and very generally credited, viz. that Dr. Treat, then health
officer of the port of New York, had visited the brig Zephyr, just arrived from
Port-au-Prince; that he found the crew sickly; that several men had died on the
passage; that a boy had died the morning of her arrival; that Dr. Treat had
incautiously opened the dead body; that it was very generally tinged with a
yellow color; and that it was extremely offensive to the smell.

How correspondent these reports were with truth, will hereafter appear, from a
statement of facts, substantiated by the testimony of indubitable authority.

A few days after Dr. Treat visited the brig Zephyr, about the 20th of July, he
was seized with fever. The manner of the attack, the nature and severity of the
subsequent symptoms, attended with a yellow countenance, and a similar tinge of
the skin generally, were supposed to constitute the disease the yellow fever.

About the same time that Dr. Treat became indisposed, a fever, resembling that
of which he died, made its appearance on board the ship William, said to be
then lying at Fitch's wharf, nearly opposite Dover-street. Shortly after,
August 1st, the family of Mr. Jenkins, living in Water-street, near
Dover-street, was attacked with fever, which was supposed to have been
communicated from the ship William.

At first it seemed rather extraordinary, that the ship William, which had
sailed directly from Liverpool to this place, and whose men had been healthy
during the passage, should have contained matter of a contagious nature, which
only operated upon the crew in producing fever several weeks after her arrival.

This difficulty, however, was soon made to vanish, and the explanation became
easy, when it was alleged that the brig Zephyr, on board of which no one was
supposed to doubt that the yellow fever existed, had hauled along-side the ship
William, and thus communicated the disease to the sailors.

This account, plausible in appearance, obtained almost universal credit, and
though highly erroneous, as will hereafter be proved, was in a hasty and
unauthorized way conveyed to Philadelphia, and, no doubt, afforded a
considerable ground upon which the regulations that took place in that city,
relative to this, were founded.

At this period the public mind labored under great apprehensions. A new
disease was supposed to have made its appearance. Several deaths had already
happened, the nature of which, judging from the adventitious circumstance of
color, had an aspect extremely formidable. The progress, also, of the
complaint, was supposed to be such, that to those who took things for granted,
there remained but little doubt that the city would soon be overspread with
contagion: and it cannot be sufficiently regretted, that the supposed
contagious nature of the disease was too much urged by those who ought to have
been more reserved in their opinion: for as yet no circumstances had really
occurred to countenance or justify the violent and exaggerated accounts which
were circulated upon this subject.

In this state of affairs the torrent of opinion became irresistible. Fear and
dismay pervaded every mind; and those of the inhabitants who were most alarmed,
as well as many of those who had no particular motive for remaining in the
city, sought refuge in the country.

In all situations in which our safety becomes a matter of considerable doubt,
it is natural for us, after the panic, with which at first we are apt to be
seized, has a little subsided, to enquire what the chances are that we escape
the danger. Accordingly, those who remained in the city, and were at the
trouble of investigating the subject, found, that many examples had offered,
where the sick had been attended with impunity: neither physicians, nor
friends, nor attendants had imbibed any infection: and the circumstances
attending the very few instances which were supposed to favor the idea of
contagion, were so extremely obscure and doubtful, that nothing could be
collected from them, of a nature at all satisfactory. In confirmation of this,
we have the declaration of the Medical Society, in answer to a letter from
Governor Jay, dated 24th of September, 1795: -- The collective opinion of this
Society, as the result of attentive observation, is, that the fever is not
specifically contagious; and we are confirmed in this opinion from the
following powerful considerations, that neither relatives, nurses, nor
physicians have, save in one or two doubtful cases, been infected by attending
on those who have either recovered or died of the disease.

Much was daily urged from these facts; and finally, the terror with which the
supposed contagious nature of the disease had filled people's minds, was in a
great measure done away: and the confidence which took place, between the
patient and physician, as a consequence of this conviction, was, I have no
doubt, in many instances, a mean which greatly contributed to the recovery of
the sick.

Thus it would appear, from what has already been said, that a difference of
opinion had existed, as well among the citizens as the physicians, with respect
to the real origin and character of the late epidemic.

The object I have in view is to reconcile those opinions, as far as that can
be effected, by bringing into one view all the facts I have been able to
collect upon the subject. These shall form the principal data upon which any
future reasoning may be founded; and if the sentiments I may advance are found
to differ from the opinion of others, I hope that a liberal and candid
communication may tend to our mutual information, and that the public may be
benefited by our attempts to arrive at truth.

We shall, therefore, in the next place, proceed to examine the validity of the
opinion, that the brig Zephyr introduced a contagious fever into this city. And
the following letters from Messrs. Armstrong and Barnwell, and Miller and
Hoope, are, in my mind, very explicit.

New York, 20 th Oct. 1795. SIR,
The brig Zephyr, Capt Frederick Bird, arrived from Port-au-Prince on or about
the 19th of July last, loaded with sugar and coffee. The cargo came to our
address. She hauled first to the Old-slip, where her cargo was unloaded. The
vessel leaked much on her passage from Port-au-Prince, which damaged twenty-two
hogsheads of coffee in the ground tier: in consequence of which the vessel was
ordered into the stream, where the damaged coffee was thrown into the water,
under the inspection of the Wardens of the Port. One boy died on board the day
of her arrival, who had been sick all the passage. The captain, mate, and one
seaman, were taken sick at Port-au-Prince, and continued so during the passage;
but were perfectly restored to health soon after their arrival. Dr. Treat
visited the vessel on her arrival. The day was extremely hot, and he used
uncommon exertions in the middle of it, to find the commanding officer on
Governor's Island, to obtain permission to inter the boy there. He complained
on his return, that the day and exercise had almost overcome him.

The vessel, after she was unloaded, put up for freight for Baltimore, and took
on board her cargo for thence at the Coffee-house slip. She was never near the
ship William, which laid at, or near Fitch's wharf. During the delivery of the
inward cargo we were on board every day, as were also the Wardens of the Port;
and we have not learned that any person has been taken ill in consequence.

We understand that the captain proceeded to Baltimore in the vessel, and the
mate to Boston. However, as they were more immediately under the direction of
Messrs. Miller and Hoope, to whom the vessel was consigned, we refer to them
for particulars in that respect. We were informed by Capt. Bird that it was
sickly at Port-au-Prince when he was there in June and July, which is generally
the case at that season, but that it was scarcely known among the French
inhabitants, and fell chiefly on the British and Americans. He also told us
that the place was growing more healthy when he left it.

We are, Sir, etc. etc. ARMSTRONG and BARNWELL.

New York, Oct. 20 th, 1795. SIR,
The brig Zephyr, of Boston, Capt. Bird, came addressed to our house from
Port-au-Prince; her cargo, consisting of sugar, coffee, and hides, was
addressed to Messrs. Armstrong and Barnwell. The brig hauled to the east side
of the Old-slip, and there discharged her cargo, except a quantity of damaged
coffee, which was thrown into the East-river. The brig was then hauled to the
end of Jones's wharf, below the Coffee-house, and took in her cargo for
Baltimore.

Capt. Bird and all his crew were sick leaving Port-au-Prince, and one of them
died the day or day after the brig arrived.

The captain was in good health when he sailed for Baltimore, and we believe
the crew recovered soon after their arrival in this city.

MILLER and HOOPE.

The foregoing letters afford an unequivocal testimony of the condition of the
crew of the brig Zephyr, on her arrival in this port. They afford, also, a
complete refutation of the assertion, that the Zephyr communicated a contagious
fever to the ship William, the two vessels having never been near one another:
and, in short, they show, that, excepting the death of the boy, the reports
circulated concerning the Zephyr, at the first appearance of the fever, and
indeed believed by many during its continuance, were altogether without
foundation.

When it was discovered that the brig Zephyr had not been nearer the ship
William than half a mile, so wedded were individuals to the idea of imported
contagion, that they fixed on the brig Active, which had just arrived from
Martinique, as the contagious vessel. But the following letters from Messrs.
Lawrence and Van Zandt will be found to contain facts as little favorable to
the opinion, that contagion had been communicated from the Active, as has been
proved with respect to the brig Zephyr.

SIR,
It affords us sincere pleasure to furnish you with such facts as came within
our knowledge, concerning the brig Active, supposed to have been one of those
vessels which introduced a contagious disease into this city. The said brig
sailed from this port on the 9th of April last, bound to the West Indies,
navigated by Capt. Matthew Rogers, a mate, and five hands. After touching at
several islands for a market, she finally arrived at Martinique, where the
captain disposed of her cargo, and received in payment thirty-six hogsheads of
molasses, and the residue in bills of exchange on this city. He also received
on board, on freight, and consigned to Messrs. Concklin and Loyd, merchants
here, one hundred and thirty-four bales of cassia, commonly called wild honey.
This and the molasses constituted the whole of her return cargo. The said brig
sailed from Martinique on the 30th of June, bound for this port, and arrived
here the 22d of July. Seventeen days previous to her arrival, she lost one man
by sickness, and from information received from the captain, he died with a
fever, the nature of which he could not ascertain, but supposed it was brought
on by the use of liquor, of which the deceased would, previous to his sickness,
drink large quantities. After his body was committed to the waves, the captain,
for three successive days, had the birth, bedding, and every thing belonging to
the deceased, carefully cleaned, under his own inspection. The residue of her
crew enjoyed a full state of health during the voyage, and were all perfectly
well on her arrival in this port. Her cargo was landed at Fitch's wharf, partly
by her crew and partly by laborers: nor do we know an instance of any one of
them being sick after their discharge from the vessel. She remained at Fitch's
wharf about three weeks; at which time we disposed of her to Mr. Orange Webb,
merchant of this city, who immediately loaded her and sent her to sea.

The above is a true and perfect account of the brig Active. If you can draw
any information from it that will aid you in your laudable undertaking, we
shall enjoy the pleasing reflection of having, in a small degree, served the
cause of humanity.

We remain, etc. LAWRENCE and VAN ZANDT.


We are indebted to Mr. Strong for the following: --

SIR,
In pursuance of your request, I yesterday saw Capt. Rogers, late master of the
brig Active, who tells me he hauled along side of Fitch's wharf on Friday the
24th of July last, and that he began to break bulk the next day, being Saturday
the 25th.

He further assures me, that a number of his acquaintance were on board the
brig every day, and that he has since seen several of them, none of whom have
been taken with the late disorder.

I was repeatedly on board, and in the cabin: once in particular, before she
hauled along side the wharf, I was in the hold of the brig, and examined the
cargo; but as I was not taken with the disorder until the 5th of September
following, (although I lived near Peck-slip, where the disease first began to
rage) I am confident I never took it on board Captain Rogers' brig.

I am, Sir, etc. BENJAMIN STRONG.


The preceding letters leave little doubt with respect to the healthful state
of the brig Active. It appears that she arrived in port on the 22d of July: on
the 23d she laid on the outside of a vessel at the end of Fitch's wharf: on the
24th she hauled into the slip; and on the 25th of July she broke bulk.

Hitherto it has been supposed, that the ship William also laid at Fitch's
wharf; but the truth is, that this vessel did not, at any period this season,
lie at that wharf. Her situation, at first, was at the wharf of Lawrence and
Kipp, about fifty yards westward of Fitch's; and on the 24th of July she
removed to Rutgers' wharf, distant about half a mile from her first station.

Upon a comparison of these statements it will appear, 1st, that the vessels
above named were never nearer one another than fifty yards; and, 2dly, that the
day before the Active began to unload, the William was removed to the distance
of half a mile. Thus it is shown how little foundation there was for a report
of a fever being communicated from the brig Active to the ship William.

The next subject of suspicion was a parcel of cotton, which had been imported
in the brig Caroline, and which was deposited in the store of Lawrence and
Mott, at the foot of Dover-street. It was reported that a man had thrust his
arm into a bag of damaged cotton, and that, when he withdrew it, the arm, from
the virulence of the contagion, was of a livid color. However extravagant this
declaration may seem, there were not wanting those who subscribed to its
credit. In short, so infatuated were some of the inhabitants with the belief of
imported contagion, that they suspected every vessel, which had arrived from
the West Indies previous to the late epidemic, to have brought contagion in her.

With regard to the suspected cotton, the following certificates will give the
necessary information: --

I, John Church, master of the brig Caroline, of New York, do certify, that the
fifty-one bales of cotton, shipped on board the said brig Caroline, about the
20th of June, 1795, was purchased by me in the neighborhood of Lance and Veau,
and was never on board any vessel but the said Caroline, until landed from on
board her in New York, about the 22d of July, 1795.

We, the subscribers, do certify, that we were on board the brig Caroline,
which laid at Lawrence's wharf, foot of Dover-street, diverse times on the 21st
and 22d of July last -- that we saw a number of bales of cotton wool on board
the said brig -- that we examined the cotton by picking it open, and running
our hands into the sacks, for the purpose of ascertaining its quality -- that
George Townsend did purchase one bale on the 22d of July, and retailed it out
of his store -- that Selah Strong was not taken with the disorder: Benjamin
Strong was taken sick on the 5th, and George Townsend on the 21st of September
following.

BENJAMIN STRONG, SELAH STRONG, GEO. and BENJ. TOWNSEND.

New York, 16 th Dec. 1795.

I have thus advanced such documents, upon the subject of imported contagion,
as, from a careful enquiry, I have been able to collect. From this
investigation the public is in possession of such information, as may be made
the basis of a tolerably accurate judgment; and I have little hesitation in
believing, that the conclusion naturally resulting from the premises, will be
extremely unfavourable, if not absolutely against the opinion which some have
so warmly embraced, that the cause of the late epidemic was imported contagion.

We must now take the liberty of recurring to a further consideration of
circumstances relative to the brig Zephyr.

From the statements contained in the letters already inserted, regarding this
vessel, several facts of considerable importance are made to appear, viz. that
no person died on board the Zephyr, during the whole of her voyage, except the
boy already mentioned; that all those of the crew who had been taken sick at
Port-au-Prince, and had become convalescent, soon got well after her arrival in
this harbor; and that neither the wardens of the port, the consignees, nor any
other person who had been transiently on board the Zephyr, except Doctor Treat,
suffered any bad consequences from their visits. -- The question then occurs,
Did Doctor Treat take the disease, of which he died, from the Zephyr?

It was a circumstance well known, that the health of Doctor Treat was
generally impaired. His stomach was in a state of constant disorder; and this,
independent of other effects, was, at particular periods, accompanied with such
extreme dejection of spirits, that he did not, as he had often assured me,
expect to live from one day to another. The Doctor had been complaining more
than common for several days before he visited the Zephyr. He embarked in a
small open boat at midday, with a black hat on his head, and without an
umbrella, which he had always been accustomed to use, to defend him from the
sun's rays. The day was calm, extremely hot, and the vessel at least one mile
and a half from the place of his departure. It is also stated, that he was much
fatigued, upon Governor's Island, in searching for the commanding officer.

Thus, then, it would appear as matter of fact, first, that Doctor Treat was
indisposed at the time he visited the Zephyr: secondly, that in performing that
duty he was exposed, for several hours, to the extreme heat of the sun; and,
thirdly, that he encountered considerable bodily fatigue. If these
circumstances are well considered, and that peculiar state of the weather,
which predisposes to fever, is taken into the estimate, is it unreasonable to
suppose that the fever with which Doctor Treat was attacked, might have
originated from the operation of such a combination of causes? Every candid
physician will give a negative answer to the question. But we shall not be very
solicitous to prove, that Doctor Treat did not contract his disease in this
manner -- We grant that he might have received infection from the Zephyr; but
does it necessarily follow, that it should have caused a contagious fever? A
consideration of the consequences, in a variety of parallel cases, will
contribute much to the formation of an opinion upon this subject. -- The
following is considered illustrative of this point.

At the termination of the late war between the United States and
Great Britain, Colonel William Smith, of this city, was appointed, by General
Washington, to reside in New York, with the consent of Sir Guy Carlton, for the
purpose of superintending the evacuation of the country, and to see that it was
performed agreeably to the treaty. In the exercise of this duty, he had
frequent occasion to go between the decks, and into the holds of vessels. In
the course of these visits, he was seized with (what is commonly denominated a
ship-fever) a bilious remitting fever. After a few days, the fever happily
intermitted, and Colonel Smith soon recovered a tolerable share of strength.

It was thought proper to caution him against the danger he would incur by
repeating his visits on board ship. He answered, that the duty was
indispensible. The consequence was, he contracted a second fever. The first of
the attack was attended with a sense of coldness, which was soon succeeded by
violent pain in the head. His countenance was flushed, and his eyes were very
red. The third day his neck and breast took on a yellow appearance; and in
forty-eight hours, the whole of his body became as yellow as an orange. From
the accession of his fever to its termination, his heat was so considerable,
that on feeling his pulse, or grasping his wrist, the sensation communicated
was similar to the sting of nettles, or very fine needles pricking the hand.

Colonel Smith lodged at Mr. Depeyster's in Pearl-street, and notwithstanding
the unremitting attention he received from the family, the disease was not
communicated to one of his attendants. 'Sometimes only one man in a ship may be
seized with the petechial, or with the yellow fever, while all the rest
continue unaffected: of this the Magnamine afforded an instance,' etc. etc. etc.

'Another person was sent from the Raven sloop, in the yellow fever, of which
he also died; and yet no other person on board of those two ships were, either
before or afterward, taken ill of such fevers.'

'I have frequently visited patients in fevers similar to the above mentioned,
in families, where an infection was not in the least suspected.'

Lind on Seamon. p. 213.




I have twice, in the pursuit of my avocations, imbibed infectious fevers --
once on shipboard; and again on visiting a prison. I was handled very severely
in both instances, and deprived of my senses several days during each
confinement. My attendants were numerous, and vigilant; yet no one suffered
from contact with my body, or from breathing the air of my chamber.

As favorable to the same conclusions with the above instances, and tending to
illustrate the doctrine we are endeavoring to establish, we shall here
introduce the history of a fever which raged among the men of Mons. De la
Motte's fleet, in 1757.

A fleet, under the command of Mons. De la Motte, sailed from Breast on the
third day of May, 1757, for Louisburg, in Nova Scotia. A number of sailors
(about two hundred) who had been confined in Rochfort hospital, with putrid
fever, and had become convalescent, were embarked on board the Glorieux and Duc
de Burgogne, ships of war. These ships had been two years in a state of
equipment, and most of that time at sea; they, therefore, could not be supposed
to have been very clean. The other ships of the fleet had lain some time in the
harbor of Breast, and were not in a very healthy condition. On board the
different vessels were also distributed four hundred sailors, who had just
returned from confinement in the English prisons. The ships' companies became
sickly on their passage, particularly those of the Glorieux and Burgogne; and
on the 20th of June they arrived at Louisburg. The wind was fair during the
passage, blowing mostly from the south-east; and the weather was so favorable
and temperate, that it was found unnecessary to shut the port-holes or close
the hatch-ways.

As soon as the fleet arrived at Louisburg, the different ships had their tents
pitched on shore, for the accommodation of the sick; and they were accordingly
disembarked immediately. The tents were pitched too near one another, and hence
the sick did not receive all the advantages which they might have derived from
their situation.

The particular state of the sick during the months of July and August, their
number, or the mortality which prevailed, is not mentioned. But it is observed,
that the number of the sick was greatly augmented during the latter part of
September. This arose from two causes; first, from the necessity they were
under of collecting all their strength from the different vessels, to finish
works, in order to defend the city: secondly, from a severe gale of wind, which
happened on the 25th of September, and threatened destruction to the whole
fleet. Several ships were in particular danger, to save which, the united
exertions of officers and sailors were required; and in performing this duty,
the men were unavoidably exposed to excessive labor and extreme bad weather.
After this, the sick became more numerous; and by the 30th of October, the day
on which the fleet left Louisburg for Breast, the sick amounted to fourteen
hundred. Of this number, four hundred of the worst cases were left at
Louisburg, in bad lodgings, and under the management of few, and those
unskilful attendants.

The fleet had not been at sea more than six days, before most of those who
were sick at the time of sailing, with many others, died. The passage was
attended with very boisterous weather; and the sea ran so high, that the ports
were obliged to be kept shut. Under circumstances so uncomfortable, the malady
spread with great rapidity, and on the arrival of the fleet at Breast, which
happened on the 22d of November, the number of the sick amounted to four
thousand.

Fifteen days before the return of De la Motte's fleet, the two ships of war,
Bizarre and Celebre, arrived in Breast harbor from Canada. The crews of these
ships were affected with a complaint similar to the one which prevailed on
board the Louisburg fleet; and they had already sent one thousand men to the
hospitals at Breast. The hospitals, therefore, were found crowded; and for the
accommodation of the sick newly arrived, temporary hospitals were erected. Into
these the sick were hurried from the ships, in cold and wet weather, and thrown
together in heaps(entasse pele mele). Under these circumstances, little benefit
was obtained from the means employed for their relief.

The disease raged, with unrelenting violence, from the 22d of November to the
last of February. It began to diminish in the month of March, and ceased
entirely in April. But it was remarked, that this cruel disease did not cease
until it had destroyed so many men, that those who remained had, in
consequence, an opportunity of enjoying all the advantages of breathing a pure
air, of cleanliness, and good attendance.

The number that died in the hospitals at Breast, at this period, was not less
than ten thousand, besides a considerable number in the city.

Of the four hundred men left at Louisburg, who appeared to be in a condition
from which a recovery could not be expected, badly accommodated, and worse
attended, three hundred and eighty were cured.

The foregoing is an epitomized narrative of a voyage from Breast to Louisburg,
in which is related the prevalence and mortality of a fever, which the author
of the account denominates PUTRID, MALIGNANT, CONTAGIOUS, and PESTILENTIAL.

A consideration of the circumstances attending this expedition, and the state
of a considerable part of the men employed on the occasion, will readily, I
apprehend, explain the fatality attending it, without recurring to the
supposition of the disease being, in its nature, essentially contagious or
pestilential.

It will have been perceived before this, that we have been somewhat solicitous
to establish a distinction between diseases which are infectious, and those
which are contagious. By contagion we understand something peculiar and
specific, possessing properties essentially different from any thing else. Thus
the contagion of the smallpox, the measles, etc. Those diseases do not require
the concurrence of certain causes to render them contagious; they are so under
all circumstances. But other diseases may, or may not be infectious, according
to the conditional state in which they are placed. Thus a fever shall continue
days, or even weeks, without giving rise to the least suspicion that it has, in
any instance, been the cause of fever in any person, who may have been, either
a frequent visitor, or constant attendant: whilst a fever, accompanied with the
same symptoms and appearances, and not more violent in degree, shall be
communicated from one to another, and extend to incalculable lengths, so long
as the circumstances exist which favor its propagation. Agreeably to this
difinition, may be explained the slow, or rapid progress of the fever of the
Louisburg fleet, at different periods.

To illustrate this more fully, we shall take a review of the circumstances
attending that fleet, from the time of its sailing from Breast harbor, to its
return to that port, and the after disposal of the men.

The convalescents from Rochfort hospital received on board the fleet, had been
weakened by a previous disease; the nature of which we presume not to have been
contagious, because no mention is made of it. They were ordered into ships
which had been the greatest part of two years at sea, and in a condition, it is
stated, not very favorable to the re-establishment of health. The consequence
was, that most of these unfortunate men had a return of fever, and this fever
became infectious. The fever, it is said, was communicated to some of the
ships' company during the passage to Louisburg. We have no doubt of the fact.
But we by no means admit this as a proof of the contagious nature of the
disease. It is very common for fevers to become infectious, when a number of
sick are crowded together in confined apartments; and on shipboard they are
particularly liable to become so, from the impossibility of ventilation in some
instances, and the neglect of it in others. Here, too, it often happens, that,
for want of room, the well are compelled to lie with, or near the sick, and to
breathe an air rendered extremely noxious from the abstraction of that part
which is essential to animal vigor, and from a combination of the different
effluvia arising from the sick, the dying, and perhaps the dead. Hence a cause
appears why ship-fevers are often communicated with so much facility, and are a
cause of so great a mortality.

But in the case now more immediately under consideration, the extension of the
fever, beyond those who came on board in a debilitated state, did not take
place in many instances; and the reason is evident: -- The weather, during the
passage from Breast to Louisburg, was so mild, that the port-holes (the windows
of a ship they might be called) and hatch-ways were permitted to be generally
open, by which means a circulation of air was kept up between decks, and thus
the causes of infection were, in a great measure, carried away. The fine
weather, also, allowing the men to be chiefly on deck, was another reason why
the crews were not more sickly.

The narrative does not mention the state, nor the number of the sick during
the months of July and August. It says, "On a perdit quelqu'un."

If this fever had been contagious, ought it not to have spread more generally
during the summer months? "Il repandit tres peu." I presume that a contagious
disease among so many people would have been so generally experienced, that a
particular account of it would have been kept, and reported in the general
statement.

To promote the object of the expedition, it was thought necessary, some time
in September, to collect all the men of the fleet, and throw up works, in order
to defend the town. The exertions that were made on this occasion greatly
augmented the number of the sick; and this effect was attributed to the
contagious nature of the disease. But I apprehend the cause to have been
over-fatigue, and of that sort to which the men had not been accustomed: to
which we may add, exposure to inclement weather, and a scarcity of provisions,
and those of a bad quality.

On the 25th of September, a severe gale of wind happened. This necessarily
occasioned a great degree of exposure, and much fatigue. From these causes the
sick became more numerous; and the number increased till the period of their
departure from Louisburg, which was on the 30th of October, when fourteen
hundred were upon the list. Of these it was thought that four hundred of the
most desperate and hopeless cases should remain at Louisburg.

The fleet had not been at sea more than six days before most of those who were
ill at the time of sailing, with many others, were dead; and by the time that
the fleet arrived at Breast, which was on the 22d of November, four thousand
sailors were confined with fever.

If we consider the circumstances of the passage, viz. the state of the men
taken on board the fleet; the condition of them afterward, owing to boisterous
weather, which rendered close confinement necessary, and a proper ventilation
impracticable, we need not be surprised that the fever should have prevailed so
generally, nor that the mortality should have been so considerable. The air
between decks, in a stagnant state, and in which so many sick were crowded
together, could not fail of becoming infectious: and the heat, as well as the
moisture, which must necessarily exist in such situations, would give a
particular activity and virulence to the infection. And in this way we may
account for the propagation and fatal tendency of the disease, without
supposing it to have had any thing in its nature specifically contagious.

After the arrival of the fleet at Breast, the men were placed under
circumstances as little favorable to their recovery, as they were before their
debarkation. They were sent to hospitals, too small to contain them, save in a
state extremely crowded; and there were not attendants in sufficient number to
take proper care of the sick, and to preserve cleanliness.

In this situation, so confined was the air, and so impregnated with the foul
vapors, arising from the sick, that, on entering the hospital, it is observed,
a person found himself surrounded by an air so extremely warm, and possessing a
cadaverous odor, so disagreeable to breathe, that one who had not been
accustomed to it, could not remain exposed to its operation but for a few
minutes, without feeling a pain in the head.

When, from the great numbers who died, the hospital became so thinned, and the
sick so few, that they received all the advantages of pure air, good
attendance, a due observance of cleanliness, proper medicines, etc. the
progress of the disease was soon arrested, and in a short time it finally
disappeared.

Now, when the preceding history is well considered, together with the
conclusions drawn from the facts therein stated, it will appear, that the fever
of De la Motte's fleet ought to be arranged under the head of infectious
diseases, and not that of a contagious one.

But if it should still be urged, that there was contagion in the case, and at
the same time we admit, (which facts compel us to grant) that a free air, and
other circumstances, will stop the progress of a contagious disease, nay,
destroy its contagious property, the concession is all we wish to obtain, in
order to establish our doctrine of the nature of infectious fevers.

As a corroborating fact to our opinion, it will be proper to remark the
astonishing recovery of three hundred and eighty, out of the four hundred worst
cases, that were left at Louisburg. The history of contagious disorders no
where, I believe, furnishes any thing like a parallel example of so large a
proportion of sick getting well. 'When a malignant fever, in the late war, was
brought from England into the hospital at Mahon, the house being insufficient
for the reception of so great a number of patients, tents were erected in the
fields for many of the men. These poor men were thought to be hardly
accommodated but it was observed, that most of those who lay in tents
recovered; when the mortality in the house was so great, that, in some wards,
not one in three escaped,' etc. etc.

Lind on Seamon.




We find upon record, numberless examples of people having received infection
of the most serious nature, from going out of the healthy air of the common
atmosphere, into confined places; such as dungeons, crowded prisons, or between
the decks of vessels, where fevers have prevailed. But there is not an instance
within my recollection or observation, where a person, having imbibed such
infection, and where cleanliness, keeping the room well aired, and other proper
attentions have been observed, has communicated the disease, either to
occasional visitors, nurses, friends, or relatives: and the particulars of
Doctor Treat's case will furnish another analogous fact.

He went on board the Zephyr, and, as his duty required, descended into the
hold, or between decks, to ascertain the state of the vessel, as it regarded
infection. In doing this, we will suppose that he exposed himself to foul and
stagnant air, rendered particularly noxious by the exhalations which passed off
before and immediately after the boy's death.

A day or two afterward he began to complain. Where he resided, there was a
family about him. His sister, particularly during his illness, was a constant
attendant at his bedside. His numerous friends were pressing around him to his
last moments. Several of them assisted in the execution of the means prescribed
for his relief, when they had direct contact with his body, and were more
immediately exposed to whatever arose from it: -- Yet the fever was in no
instance communicated to a second person.

If, then, the Doctor's disease had been specifically contagious, ought we not
to have expected an unequivocal manifestation of it, in some of those who were
placed under circumstances so favorable for receiving contagion?

Many people were confirmed in the opinion, that the fever was contagious, from
the vague reports of examples having occurred, where persons were infected with
fever in the country, in consequence of having had a communication with those
who had carried the disease from the city. Now, I believe, there are not any
well authenticated cases of this sort: and if a few solitary instances are
offered in support of the contagious nature of the disease, which, however, are
very obscure, they prove very little when compared with the uniform confinement
of the disorder to those who were immediately exposed to the first causes which
produced the complaint.

We have already admitted that the air of a room in which a person is lying
with a bilious remitting fever, may become infectious, if ventilation is not
performed; if all excrementitious matter is not speedily removed, and if the
bedding and clothing of the patient are not in due time changed. And if the
fever has arisen in the country, in the manner the reports above stated
express, I presume infection has been the cause, and not contagion; for all
that has hitherto been alleged is, that one or two instances have happened,
where people have taken the disease, from the many of those who have sickened
in the country after leaving the city; not that the disease has spread through
a neighborhood or a village.

I presume it is sufficiently proved by this time, that the late epidemic fever
was not brought here from abroad; and, also, that there exists in nature, and
that there ought to be made, a distinction between infectious and contagious
disorders. Much more might be said upon these subjects, and a variety of
testimony added; but, without fatiguing the reader, by entering into a farther
discussion of these questions, I shall proceed to enquire into those causes
which may, with great probability, be considered as productive of the late
epidemic.

During the months of January and February, 1795, the weather was unusually
variable; the lowest degree to which the thermometer fell was five degrees of
Farenheit's scale, and it rose as high as forty-six degrees.

The weather of the succeeding spring, during the months of March and April,
was also very variable, and was attended with a greater degree of cold and wet
than common. This was remarkably evidenced by their effects upon vegetation.
Trees put forth their buds, and blossomed later, than is usual in ordinary
seasons.

As the season advanced, the weather became warmer; but the moisture of the air
was in no degree diminished. This state of the atmosphere continued during the
summer months. The accession of heat was slow, but by the latter end of July it
became excessive, and continued so generally during August and the first part
of September. The effects of this hot and moist air was remarkable in the
production of mould.

It was a very common complaint, that hardly any thing could be kept without
becoming moldy. Books, which had remained for years in libraries and other
places, became covered with this substance. Shoes and boots, thrown aside only
a day or two, contracted an abundance of mould; and the wooden floors, and
papered walls of family rooms which were closed a few days only, and even in
some instances where the rooms were daily exposed to a free access of air,
which before had always remained perfectly dry, now generated a great quantity
of mould.

The prevailing constitution of the air produced remarkable effects upon
cabbages. It was observed, that this vegetable grew with uncommon rapidity to
its usual size, and with the appearance of great health and vigor; it would
then suddenly assume an unhealthy aspect, which, on examination, was found to
depend upon some disease at the juncture of the head with the trunk; and this,
on many occasions, proceeded so far as to cause a complete separation, and the
head would fall to the ground. It was also a common observation, that the
cabbages which were brought to market, were found damaged about the center:
and, further, that some species of cabbages would not form into a head as usual.

The effects of a peculiar season were shown also upon different kinds of
fruit. It was remarked that cherries did not come to that perfection in which
we commonly have them, and that they very soon showed a disposition to decay.
Early in the season the apple trees were very generally extremely productive,
and promised a large supply of their fruit in the autumn; but the expectations
of the husbandman on this head were greatly disappointed: the apples began to
fall at least a month before the usual time, and in a very imperfect state; and
those which came to maturity could not be kept so long as it is common for them
to be preserved.

In a letter from John Kemp, Esquire professor of natural and experimental
philosophy, etc. etc. in Columbia college, dated April 12th, 1796, it is
stated, "that in his observations upon the state of the atmosphere during the
last summer, the mercury in the thermometer was, on an average, three degrees
of Farenheit's scale higher than it has been, at the same season, during the
ten preceding years; that the moisture, as indicated by the best hygrometers,
was much greater than usual; that the quantity of active electricity was so
small, as to be frequently imperceptible by very sensible electrometers,
connected with an exploring rod; that the quantity of rain was much greater
than usual, and thunder storms less frequent; and that, for the most part, the
wind was between south-east and north-east."

The first being established, that the state of the air, during the winter of
1794 -- 5, and particularly during the succeeding spring and summer, has
differed very materially from its usual temperature and disposition, can there
be any good reason assigned why the diseases to which our climate is liable in
a greater or less degree, every season, should not receive a particular
character, or be variously modified by a peculiarity of weather? The influence
of climate upon the human constitution has been remarked in all ages; and not a
year passes that we do not hear of particular diseases, being attended with
some uncommon appearances, arising from peculiarity of season.

At a meeting of the Medical Society of the State of New York, held on the
second Tuesday in July, it was remarked by one of the members, that he had seen
several cases of angina trachealis, which were attended with anomalous
symptoms, and also a few cases of dysentery in adults, which proved obstinate:
and as these diseases were not unsual at that season of the year, he concluded
that they would become epidemic, or be found the forerunner of one. He was led
to this opinion from the history of epidemics; diseases of that kind being
almost always anticipated by some particular previous disorder: and he further
remarked, that there was something in the state of the air which predisposed to
complaints.

At the same time it was observed by another member, that he had also seen
several cases of angina trachealis, and he found the disease attended with less
danger of suffocation than usual. Bleeding served rather as a check to the
symptoms than to afford that manifest advantage which is its effect on common
occasions. The disease yielded to emetics, warm bathing, moderate bleeding, and
liberal bowels.

It was further remarked, that febrile complaints had occurred more frequently
than usual at that season, and especially among children; and that in the use
of antimonials, the evacuations were extremely bilious in their appearance.
From what had been observed, therefore, there would remain little doubt that
there was some circumstance in the season, which predisposed to complaint, and
on many occasions attended with a superabundance of bile.

Several members of the society had met with instances of cholera, and also
with obstinate constipation of the bowels. It was also noticed, that the
diarrhoea and dysentery, to which children are so liable here in the summer
season, and which is sometimes a cause of great mortality among them, were very
rare diseases.

The Medical Society came to a resolution to be particular in noticing the
diseases which might take place in the interval between the then present
meeting and their next monthly meeting. But the report of a contagious yellow
fever, which began to prevail in the city about the 25th of July, was a cause
of so much hurry and hasty declaration of opinions, that a comparison of notes,
and a friendly discussion of a question of so much importance, at the time
appointed, was entirely superseded. But, however widely individuals differed in
sentiment on this interesting occasion, it is but justice to mention, that no
exertions were wanting, on either side of the question, to lessen the calamity
with which our city was threatened.

If we carefully peruse the history of diseases, we shall find, that those
which have proved most fatal to the human race, have proceeded, either directly
or indirectly, from some acknowledged peculiarities of the state of the air.

Of this truth, every author, who has written on epidemic diseases, bears
abundant testimony: and notwithstanding that some countries are more exposed to
changes than others, few have been found altogether exempted. Nor can it be
expected, from the nature of things, that the people of North America, who
inhabit a climate which may be said to participate of all the climates in the
world, should not, in their turn, experience the operation of similar causes.

In order the better to understand why the fever arose in a particular part of
the city, and was more prevalent, as well as malignant, in that part, it will
be necessary to take a general view of the situation of New York, and the
disposition of the ground.

New York is situated in north latitude forty degrees and an half, longitude
seventy-four degrees west from the meridian of London. It is built on a
south-west point of land, the highest elevation of which, above the level of
high water mark, is near forty feet, and which is continued, through the city,
near a mile lengthways. From this elevation in the original state of the
ground, there was a pretty bold descent continued, in opposite ways, to the
water's edge. But it has been the policy of the corporation of this city, at
different times, to make new ground, as it is called, or to sell to others the
privilege of doing so; which has considerably increased the dimensions of the
city, both on the east side, and on the north.

The new made ground is nearly a level, or the descent is so gradual, that it
is drained with difficulty; and we may add, that the level of the new made
ground is but very little above the mark of high water. Indeed, it is sometimes
entirely overflowed by the spring tides; and from the loose nature of the
ground, the water frequently finds its way into the cellars of the houses in
Front and Water streets, and sometimes even into those of Pearl-street.

The new made ground from Whitehall to Catharine-street, along the East-river,
is, on an average, four hundred feet in breadth, creating, if one may so speak,
fifty acres of ground, all of which is built upon. The ground made on the west
side of the city is about ten acres. The consequences of this mode of extending
the city are, no doubt, extremely injurious to the health of the inhabitants;
and it is much to be regretted, that measures are not taken to prevent an
increase of the evil: for we shall presently see, that the late epidemic was
rendered particularly malignant and fatal, from causes arising in this plan of
enlarging the city. To render this apparent, we must take a more particular
survey of that part of the city where the epidemic first made its appearance.

We shall begin at the river on the east side of Peck-slip: from thence to
Water-street the ground is nearly a level: proceed up the slip, and after
leaving Water-street a few paces, the ground ascends until you arrive at Pearl
(late Queen) street: from this to Dover-street the ground is rising, but
gradually descends again as you proceed along Cherry-street as far as
Roosevelt-street: from this to the New-slip it is nearly a level. The ground at
the top of Dover-street may be considered as the highest spot in the range
between Peck and the New-slip, by the way of Pearl and Cherry streets, and
extending east and west, maintains a general height, which may be computed at
fifteen, twelve, ten, etc. feet above the level of Water-street.

The houses on the high grounds are principally three stories high, and built
of brick, between which and those lowly situated on the north side of
Water-street, there is a space of ground constituting the different yards of
the above houses, measuring about one hundred feet.

Water-street, extending from Peck to New-slip, in many places has been raised
two feet, or more, above the ordinary level of the ground on the north side of
the street. From those grounds to the river there are no drains to convey off
the water, etc. which renders an accumulation of filth, in the rear of the
houses upon those lots, almost a necessary consequence. Water will frequently
become stagnant, and this containing animal and vegetable matters, exposed to a
hot sun, must prove a fruitful source of noxious vapors. Under these
circumstances, it is natural to expect that those who are exposed to the
influence of such foul air, should feel its effects, especially in a state of
predisposition, arising from a peculiar constitution of the air.

The grounds on the south of Cherry-street are so arranged, that they are more
immediately exposed to the sun; for they may be considered as on the south side
of a considerable hill; and no one is ignorant of the powerful effects which
the sun produces on a surface of this exposure.

In a very correct map of this city, by Benjamin Tailor, it will appear, that a
line drawn from Whitehall to the bottom of Dover-street, will run in the
direction of north-east; and from the bottom of Dover-street to Corle's-hook,
the course is nearly east. An attention to this fact, also, is of consequence,
if it produces the effect upon the tides it is said to do, viz. that of
creating different eddies, which furnish a vast quantity of floating,
perishable matter, to the slips in the vicinity of the ground which we have
been describing.

From this arrangement of the shores along the East-river, the salutary effects
of those winds which blow during the hot months, from the different points of
the compass, between south-west and north-east, and which so often afford
refreshment to the inhabitants of the elevated situations, and at the west end
of the town, are little or not at all experienced by those who reside at the
east end: for the air is so changed in its temperature and qualities, before it
arrives there, by passing over a large part of the city, that it loses that
vivifying principle so essential to health.

From all these circumstances it is plainly discoverable, that the south-east
part of the city is placed under circumstances not very conducive to the health
of its inhabitants; especially as a great number of them are of the poorer
kind, and in many places very much crowded together in small confined
apartments. To strengthen this opinion, I will give an extract of a letter from
a gentleman of great candor and respectability in the neighborhood of
Dover-street: -- Although the docks in the vicinity of the store which I occupy
may be less offensive than in many other parts of the city, yet many of them
are in a very exceptionable situation. The ponding of water, by running a
bulk-head across an unfinished dock, and leaving the vacancy, for several
years, to be filled with every species of filth and perishable matter, is an
object worthy the attention of the police. The situation of the grounds between
Water and Cherry streets is rendered very noxious, by Water-street being raised
above a certain level, and thus preventing those grounds from being drained.
The effect of such a nuisance on the health of the inhabitants of a crowded
part of the city cannot be imaginary.

It is not to be understood, that the latitude of a place is always to
determine its temperature; nor is it uniform in giving a similar character to
the diseases most prevalent under a similar parallel. Local circumstances will
have a much more powerful operation, and, in general, are found to produce the
characteristic distinctions which exist between the prevalent diseases of
countries upon or near the same line of latitude.

The country bordering upon the seacoast, from the Province of Main to the
Neversink, or Highlands of Shrewsbury, is rough and irregular, and almost every
where covered with hardy oaks and hickories; and the soil is generally as
irregular as the face of the country. Most of the different capitals, on the
coast, are situated upon eminences, or high ground, and so near the sea, that
the rapid currents which wash their harbors, may be considered almost as pure
as the sea itself; and this is particularly the case with the harbor of
New York.

The nearness of New York to the sea, the ready access which the tides have to
its harbor, and the elevation and boldness of the shores, must doubtless be a
great security to the health of the inhabitants. I believe it may be said, with
great truth, that few cities enjoy so many natural advantages, arising from
situation, as New York; and I make no doubt, that a vigilant and determined
police would render it as healthy a city as any under the sun.

The country, on the seacoast, for many hundred miles to the west and south of
the Highlands of Neversink, is low, with very few elevations, and those not
considerable. The principal cities are mostly situated at a distance from the
sea, and on the margin of some river, the navigable waters of which are a
mixture of fresh and salt water; and the freshets which take place in those
rivers, at particular seasons of the year, often overflow their banks, and
have, no doubt, a considerable agency in producing the epidemic diseases which
so often prevail in those climates, of which Doctor Jackson has given a very
particular and interesting description. We learn from experience (says the
Doctor) that fevers are little known in rough and hilly countries, where waters
flow with a rapid course: while we also know, that they are common in low and
champaign countries, where water stagnates, or has only a sluggish motion.
Independent of which, those situations which are in the neighborhood of large
swamps, or near the oozy banks of large rivers, have always been observed to be
particularly liable to such diseases.

Winterbotham, on the climate of North Carolina, remarks, that "in the flat
country, near the seacoast, the inhabitants, during the summer and autumn, are
subject to intermitting fevers, which often prove fatal, as bilious or nervous
symptoms prevail. These fevers are seldom immediately dangerous to the natives
who are temperate, or to strangers who are prudent. They, however, if suffered
to continue any length of time, bring on other disorders, which greatly impair
the natural vigor of the mind, debilitate the constitution, and terminate in
death. The countenances of the inhabitants, during these seasons, have
generally a pale yellowish cast, occasioned by the prevalence of bilious
symptoms. They have very little of the bloom and freshness of the people in the
northern states."

The plague, which often rages in Egypt, appears, upon good authority, to be
occasioned by similar causes. En Egypt ou' la peste est trois, ou quatre mois
l'annee, a cause des disbordmens du Nil. Leur mauvais effet, se fait surtout
sentir, quand un vent chaud and humide, souffle, ou being quand il est mele
avec des vapeurs corrompues. The effect of low situations, attended with
moisture, in producing fever, is well illustrated in the following detail: --
"In the year 1748, upon the breaking up of the British camp in Flanders, the
cavalry were cantoned upon the unhealthy ground, about Bois le Duc, and were
soon after attacked with a general sickness, occasioned by a late inundation of
that part of the country. Doctor Horn, then surgeon to Cope's dragoons,
observes (Dissertat. Medica. Inaug. de Febre Remittente) that the troops
suffered in proportion to their proximity to the marshes; and that,
universally, the nearer to Bois le Duc, the more violent was the distemper; the
number of sick, by very accurate observations, being found exactly to
correspond with the dampness of their situations and of the air.

To put the matter beyond all doubt, this ingenious gentleman provided himself
with a good hydroscope, by which he carefully measured, every day, the degree
of moisture and dryness of the air.

Upon comparing his tables with the register he kept of the sick, he found that
the progress of the disease kept an exact pace with the humidity of the air.

On the 29th of June they left the camp, and from that day to the 12th of July,
the air being dry, not one soldier was affected with an ailment.

On the evening of the 20th, the hygrometer indicated a great degree of
moisture in the air; and that very night the epidemic sickness ( viz. the
remittent fever) began among the troops, three dragoons of Cope's regiment
being seized with it.

During eight days afterward the air continued extremely moist, and the number
of the sick was proportionably increased. The ten following days being dryer,
the number of the infected visibly diminished: but two very moist days
succeeding, the patients were again greatly increased.

In a word, the same quality of the air which differently affected the
instrument, did also, every day, in like manner, affect the health of the men.

Sir John Pringle, on the diseases of the army, has also the following
observations. Speaking of the diseases of the low and marshy parts of the
Netherlands, which are considerably to the northward of our situation; "It is
to be remarked, (says he) that the sickness never begins till the heats have
continued so long as to give time for putrefaction, and evaporation of the
water; the commencement, therefore, of the epidemics, may be dated from some
time in July, or the beginning of August, under the canicular heats; their
sensible decline about the falling of the leaf; and end when the frost begins."

Speaking of the garrison of Ghent, he observes, -- "The battalion of the
guards was a remarkable instance of the difference of quarters: two of its
companies were stationed on St. Peter's hill; the remaining eight in the lower
part of the town, in rooms so very damp, that the men could hardly keep their
shoes and belts from moulding. In the month of July, the sick of this one
battalion amounted to about one hundred and forty; of which number only two men
belonged to the companies on the hill, and all the rest to those in the lower
town. But in the middle of August, upon changing the barracks, the sickness
suddenly abated."

Can any thing show more satisfactorily than this short description of Sir John
Pringle, the unfailing influence of situations in determining the extent of
diseases under particular constitutions of the atmosphere? And might not any
one suppose, that Doctor Horne's hydroscopical observations were made in
New York, during the prevalence of the late epidemic? For my part, I cannot
refrain from comparing Broadway, and the higher situations of New York, to St.
Peter's hill; and the upper end of Water-street, to the lower part of the city
of Ghent.

It is a fact, then, well established, that while an epidemic has raged among
the inhabitants of flat and low situations, those who have lived on high
grounds, in the neighborhood, have not, in the smallest degree, felt its
influence: but they need only descend to the low ground, and they will there
sicken in common with the inhabitants.

If the preceding circumstances are considered, they afford a sufficient
explanation why the effects of the late epidemic were so partially felt by the
inhabitants of this city.

It will be proper to remark here, that the epidemic of last year is not a new
disease. It is established upon respectable authority, that a disorder, in
every respect similar to the one which made its appearance in this city in July
last, and in one instance attended with the symptom of black vomiting, occurred
in Water-street, in the neighborhood of Dover-street, four or five years ago,
and more or less every year since; and was particularly confined to that part
of the city: but being unaided by a particular state of the air, and under the
influence, perhaps, of exciting causes of a less active nature, it was neither
so generally felt, nor so fatal in its operation.

Agreeably to this opinion is the declaration contained in a letter we before
have had occasion to quote; the author of which observes, -- I am convinced
that the disorder has originated from local causes, because it has appeared in
this quarter of the city, at the same season, for several years past.

Nor has this disease been confined to New York. It is a fact beyond
controversy, that during the warmer parts of the year 1795, a fever, in all
essential circumstances resembling the epidemic of this place, appeared in many
places in this state and in the state of Connecticut. The same causes, we
should naturally expect, would produce similar effects. Accordingly, we have it
upon the evidence of several very respectable characters, that a peculiar
constitution of the air, the sensible qualities of which were excessive heat
and moisture, was generally prevalent. This state of the atmosphere, operating
with the exhalations arising from the decomposition of dead animal and
vegetable matters, in low and damp situations, were a frequent cause of bilious
remitting fever.

In confirmation of this truth, we are fortunate in being enabled to present
our readers with the following interesting communication from Doctor Williams.

Philadelphia, 19 th Dec. 1795. SIR,
As near as I can recollect, there are at Whitehall, formerly called
Skeensborough, about two hundred and eighty families; out of which, and
transient persons, there died, from the first of July to the last of October,
about twenty of a bilious fever.

In the town of Hampton, which lies south-east, and adjoining Whitehall,
containing about one hundred families, five died of bilious fever. In Westfield
and Greenfield about twenty-four died, two thirds of a bilious fever.

That part of the town of Whitehall where the deaths in general happened, is by
the side of Wood-Creek, where there are low marshy grounds and dead waters. New
comers to this place are commonly attacked with bilious or intermittent fevers.
But the last year, by reason of continued hot and dry weather succeeding an
uncommon wet spring, some of the old settlers were likewise attacked with these
complaints.

It was observed that the lowness of the waters had exposed, more than common,
dead vegetable matter to the action of the sun; and thus the exhalations did
not consist of watery vapors only, but of a putrid effluvia, arising from the
decomposition of dead vegetable matter, and innumerable insects, which are
always found in such situations.

About the year 1788, at the town of Hebern, south and adjoining Grenville, a
mill was erected on a dead creek. The waters in consequence spread over the
flat grounds for near three miles in length. This caused, in the hot seasons, a
fourth of the inhabitants adjoining this water, to be attacked with bilious
fever.

About six years since, in the town of Argyle, an obstruction of water was
caused as above, so that three hundred acres of land were overflowed. This
occasioned, the first year, slight bilious and intermitting fevers. The second
year, when part of the land before covered with water became dry, and was
exposed to the sun, the complaints became putrid in their tendency, and numbers
died. The obstruction, the following winter, was removed, and the place again
became healthy, and so remains.

It is to be remarked, that the last summer produced more sickness than was
ever known in that country, except in the year 1788; when, at the latter part
of July, there happened a great flood, which was followed by a great drought.
The heat of last summer was acknowledged by all to have been much greater than
in former seasons. The water of Saratoga lake, in Saratoga county, was very
low, and the color exceeding green.

From Lansingburgh, northerly, along the banks of the river Hudson, the
inhabitants were generally attacked with bilious fever; most of which, without
timely care, became putrid. At Schochticook, a town about a mile to the east of
Hudson river, and upon the banks of Hosack river, heretofore healthy, the
inhabitants were generally attacked with bilious fever, and some died.

Although I have attended numbers, and frequently remained days and nights with
the sick, I never felt any bad effects from it. But I have observed, that, if
the nurses came from situations not so much exposed to bilious complaints, it
was not uncommon for them to be taken sick.

I am, etc. etc.


The existence of a bilious remittent fever, resembling the late epidemic of
this place, at a distance from the city, is further confirmed by the testimony
of a gentleman, of high estimation, and extensive practice in his profession,
in the city of Hartford, in the state of Connecticut, who writes, in a letter
to Doctor Wright Post, dated January 12th, 1796, as follows: --

This epidemic (the dysentery) was by no means a partial one; it spread over
the whole city, and continued until about the beginning of October, when it
gave way to the introduction of the bilious remittent, which has, as yet,
scarcely left us, though for a month or six weeks past, the cases have been few
and trifling. This, although not so prevalent as the dysentery, spread over
particular parts of the town, and many of the cases were obstinate and lengthy.

The weather, especially in August and September, while the dysentery
prevailed, was very singular, such as is without a similar instance in the
recollection of the oldest persons; I mean particularly as it respected the
deluging rains, which fell so frequently in the course of these two months.
Every two or three days, a fall of rain, which generally lasted about six
hours, would deluge the whole country; insomuch that most of the vegetables,
plants, grass, etc. in the valleys, where vegetation was much the most rapid,
were killed and swept away, or remained among stagnant waters. In many places
the air became highly offensive, and wholly unfit for respiration. These heavy
rains were succeeded, almost without an exception, by uncommonly hot suns;
hence the whole atmosphere was impregnated with exhalations, from putrid
vegetables, and more especially in the neighborhood of rivers and valleys.

The effect of local situation was particularly observable in this place; I
mean as it respects the bilious remittent. Between our front street and the
river, a distance of about forty rods, the ground is much lower than on each
side. This extends about half a mile in length, with several interruptions, by
streets being built across it. It was about this place, and on the banks of a
little river which runs through a part of the town, that this disease was
mostly confined; and this I find was generally the case in the most sickly
parts of the state.

I will relate to you the situation of one family, which was the most
remarkable of the whole. Some time in the month of September, I was called to
visit a young man, about eighteen years old, in a family in the skirts of this
town. He was violently attacked with most of the characteristic symptoms of the
yellow fever, as described by Rush. The next day a second was taken in the same
manner; and on the morning of the third day, three more were taken sick. This
led me to suspect some particular cause. I searched for it in vain at that
time. The next morning, on passing through the kitchen, I smelt something that
was very offensive, which none of the family had noticed. On opening the
cellar-door, I found that it proceeded from the cellar. Two persons went down
to examine, and found in one corner of a small tight room, a quantity of June
cabbages, on which the sun had shone about three hours in the day. They had
rotted, and sunk down into a lump of putrefaction. They run a stick under them,
and lifted them up, and there immediately issued such an intolerable stench, as
obliged them instantly to leave the cellar. A vomiting was brought on at once,
which lasted them nearly an hour. Notwithstanding that the doors and windows of
the cellar were thrown open, it was two days before they could clear it out. No
other person in the family was taken afterward, and those who were already
seized, all recovered.

Here was the same disease, excited by the same cause which produces it
elsewhere, and that cause detected. Why may we not suppose, that if this
circumstance had taken place in a thickly inhabited neighborhood, prepared by
predisposition, and aided by all those causes which generally exist during the
hot season, in populous places, that it would have spread with the same
rapidity it did in New York or in Philadelphia? I confess the conjecture
appears to me a rational one, and ought, at least, to excite our attention.

We cannot forbear to remark on the facts contained in the above letters, how
analogous the circumstances were, under which the bilious fever arose in
different parts of the country: and by comparing these facts, more especially
as they relate to the city of Hartford, with what happened in this place, we
see a very strong analogy indeed. Now, were it necessary to enlarge any further
upon the subject of imported contagion, we might, with great propriety, adduce
the existence and prevalence of a fever at Hartford, and especially in the
family so particularly mentioned, the same as our late epidemic, which no one
ever entertained a suspicion to have arisen from any causes than those
perfectly local.

It would be difficult to ascertain with accuracy, what proportion the
different descriptions of people bear to one another, who were attacked with
the late epidemic fever. It may be taken for granted, however, upon the
testimony of those whose opportunities best enabled them to judge, that the
number that were taken sick, living on the new made ground, particularly at the
south side of the city, and in other low places, compared with those residing
in more elevated situations, may be computed as twenty to one; and if we were
to make a calculation of the number of inhabitants who died, compared with
visitors, or transient persons, we might say five of the latter to one of the
former.

This disproportion may be accounted for: firstly; visitors, especially those
from the northward, where the air is generally purer, are more susceptible of
an epidemic influence than the inhabitants, who are accustomed to the
circumstances of their situation: for there cannot remain a doubt, that the
human constitution acquires, by habit, the power of resisting, to a certain
degree, the effects of those causes which have a tendency to produce disease.

We find this fact particularly noticed by most writers on the bilious or
yellow fever, which so commonly makes its appearance on board the shipping in
the different harbors in the West Indies. It is described as most fatal to
those lately from the northern latitudes. So, in New York, the first appearance
of the fever was on board the ship William, from Liverpool, the 25th of July,
four of whose crew died. On the 26th of July the fever appeared in the ship
Connecticut, from Liverpool: she also lost four of her men. These vessels, it
must be remarked, laid at the wharfs in front of that part of Water-street,
where the disease first appeared among the inhabitants. Their men, without
doubt, were frequently on shore, and having lately arrived, were more
susceptible of the causes producing the fever, than the residents of that
situation, who had become gradually habituated to its action.

The men of many other vessels from the northward, which were stationed at
different wharfs in the east river, felt more or less the effects of the
epidemic influence: whereas the crews of those vessels which arrived during the
summer months from the West Indies, and other warm latitudes, all remained
well; and such individuals among them as had been sick on their passage,
recovered very soon after their arrival in this harbor.

Secondly; of the visitors who were seized with the epidemic fever, a great
proportion were emigrants from England, Ireland and Scotland; and they were
more exposed to its effects from the very crowded and confined situations in
which they were unavoidably placed.

The miserable condition of that class of unfortunate people, is well shown in
a candid and very interesting communication from the Rev. Mr. O'Brien, pastor
to the Catholic congregation in this city, from which the following is an
extract: --

As soon as the above causes had produced their malignant effects in the part
of the city which was previously disposed to receive them, I was constantly
employed, insomuch that I might with some truth say, that I lived in the center
of the disease; and for nearly two months, never laid in bed one whole night. I
found in most places, a total want of every necessary of life. Numbers of poor
sufferers, confined in subterraneous apartments, which admitted no light, but
from their hatch-doors; so that when shut down at night, it might literally be
said of them that they were buried alive. In the progress of visiting the sick,
I was much disgusted at the abominable, uncleanly state of their miserable
habitations, and a total want of necessaries: for in most places, they had not
even a stool to sit on, nor a bed to lie upon. On inquiry, I found the much
greater part of them to be emigrants of that very summer; insomuch that out of
four hundred and sixty-two of my congregation, who sunk under the disorder,
nineteen twentieths were totally unknown to me.

To this deplorable condition of the poor emigrants who arrived in this city
during the prevalence of the epidemic fever, is to be ascribed, humanly
speaking, the extent of its mortality. It is a circumstance, moreover, well
known to many, that numbers of them were obliged to remain on board ship for
some time after their arrival in this port, as well from their want of means to
procure comfortable lodgings, as from the very crowded state of the city; and
at last they exchanged their confined holds for those subterraneous apartments
which have just been so emphatically described by Mr. O'Brien. This may account
for the fact, that out of nearly eight hundred persons who died, not more than
one hundred and fifty were citizens of New York; and of this number but a small
proportion until the disease had prevailed a considerable time, perhaps one
half during the last four weeks.

If the above statement be true, what a lesson does it convey, as well to the
people as to the magistracy! Ought it not to inspire the citizens with a proper
degree of confidence, and stimulate those who have the regulation of our city
police to adopt such measures as are within their authority, in order to
obviate, as far as possible, the fatal effects of another visitation?

I shall now dismiss this part of the subject, in order to lay before my
readers the symptoms which served to characterize the fever in question, as far
as they came under my observation.

The first and the most constant of these, as well as the most severe, was a
pain ordinarily fixed in the fore part of the head; and this was usually
attended with a diffused redness of the eyes, and a pain in the back. These
symptoms have been known to exist, in a moderate degree, several days previous
to the attack of fever.

A sense of coldness did not always take place at the beginning of the fever;
and much less frequently was any thing like rigors experienced. The loss of
strength, also, in the beginning, was very variable. Many did not complain of
any particular weakness; whilst others felt so great a degree of prostration,
as to be unable to support themselves.

The patients sometimes complained of a general soreness of the muscles, and
particularly those of the thighs and legs; and in some this affection continued
a troublesome symptom.

It did not frequently happen that the stomach was much affected at the
commencement of the disease; yet instances occurred where the fever was ushered
in with great sickness, frequent retchings to vomit, oppression and pain about
the praecordia, with excessive anxiety and restlessness.

The tongue often at first appeared natural, but it most commonly looked white.
After the fever had continued some days, the matter collected upon its surface,
assumed a brown color, but continued moist. At length it became dark,
sometimes black, dry, and rough.

The pulse was generally frequent at the beginning of the fever, but varied, as
to fullness and strength, according to the habit and constitution of the
patient. It sometimes happened, after the fever had made considerable progress,
that the pulse remitted, and was commonly a symptom of great danger. A rare
pulse, also, was in some instances met with. In a boy who had had the fever six
or seven days, and in whom the number of pulsations in a minute had been, for
the most part, about one hundred and twenty, the frequency was suddenly
diminished, and did not exceed fifty-five strokes in a minute. In this state
they continued, with very little variation, for two days, while the patient
appeared to be getting well. The pulse then suddenly became as frequent as
before, and two days after the accession, he died. It happened also in the
instance of a gentleman, whose attack was very violent; whose pulse was
frequent, full, and strong, and who had been freely and repeatedly bled; that
after eight days, the number of pulsations were reduced below the usual
standard, and seemed to be attended with a general change for the better. These
appearances; however, were fallacious: a recurrence of violent symptoms soon
put a fatal termination to the disease. The same circumstance we find taken
notice of by Doctor Hunter and others.

Yellowness of the skin was by no means a constant concomitant of the disease.
Sometimes it appeared partially about the face and neck; at other times a
little tinge of the eyes was the only yellowness to be observed. In some
instances it made its appearance about the third day, but more commonly not
until the fifth, sixth, or seventh day. When it came on early, it was generally
attended with violent symptoms, and denoted danger: and yet patients recovered,
whose skin was universally as yellow as saffron.

The temperature of the skin varied very considerably. In some cases it was hot
and dry, and communicated a very disagreeable sensation to the touch. In others
it was moist and cool from the first attack, and continued so during the
disease.

Although the fever frequently ran high, it was seldom attended with much
thirst; except in some few cases, where it was difficult to satisfy the demands
of the sick for drink.

When the pain in the head was very considerable, the eyes were commonly a good
deal inflamed, suffused with tears, and very impatient of light: and it now and
then happened, that the patients complained of a sensation, as if the eyes were
endeavoring to escape from the sockets.

The respiration was seldom much affected at the beginning. On some occasions,
however, it was difficult, attended with a sense of fullness in the chest, which
was sometimes a cause of great anxiety, and frequent deep sighing. Doctor
Hunter observes, that there is no difficulty in distinguishing those symptoms
from laborious respiration, that depends upon a local affection of the lungs.
In the latter the difficulty of breathing is uniform; whereas, in the former,
both the expirations and inspirations will, for two or three times, be natural
and easy, and immediately after become laborious and unequal, and so on,
alternately.

The urine, in general, underwent very little change. It was sometimes a little
increased in quantity, and at other times rather diminished. But in those cases
where the skin became yellow, the urine put on that dark brown appearance which
is common in diffusions of bile. In some instances of black vomiting, and in
two or three cases, previous to the occurrence of that symptom, the urine
became exceedingly turbid, and deposited a dark colored matter.

These were the ordinary train of symptoms, which attended the fever, we have
endeavored to describe; and though in particular cases, no doubt, some
deviations might be noticed, yet it is believed there were none which could be
thought to affect essentially the character of the disease.

In the treatment of the late epidemic fever, my first care was to have the
patient placed in a room as large, and well ventilated as possible. The
advantages arising from an attention to this part of practice, must appear
obvious to all who reflect, that while a cause which may have produced a
disease continues to act, or while circumstances exist, which tend very much to
aggravate the symptoms, the efficacy of our remedies is rendered, if not of no
avail, at least extremely doubtful.

When the patient was placed in a situation as eligible as could be procured,
the leading object was to evacuate the stomach and bowels. If this important
point could be effected at the first attack, it was often found to cut short
the course of the disease: and when it did not do this, it for the most part
rendered the subsequent symptoms so moderate, that they more readily yielded to
the means of art.

In general it was not thought of much consequence, what purgative medicine was
used, except in instances where the stomach showed signs of particular
disorder. A solution of salts and manna, in such doses as circumstances seemed
to indicate, was very commonly prescribed. In most cases it sat easy upon the
stomach; and even when the first doses were rejected, by persevering in its
use, in finally passed downwards, and, upon the whole, was found to operate
with more certainty and effect, than any other medicine.

The bowels being emptied, with salts and manna, it was thought expedient to
continue the evacuation in a moderate degree; and for this purpose, a solution
of manna and cream of tartar was employed, so as to produce its effect three or
four times a day. This was a favorite medicine. It was found not disagreeable
to take, and generally remained upon the stomach, without producing any
sickness, or other uneasiness. When the disease was extended beyond the sixth
or seventh day, and purgatives were indicated, there was a manifest advantage
derived from equal parts of rhubarb and magnesia, in mint-water, over any other
medicine, given in small and repeated doses; or a strong watery infusion of
rhubarb, with the addition of a little manna, and sp. lavend. comp. to render
it agreeable to the taste. These medicines answered the purpose of gentle
aperients, whilst they induced no debility by their operation.

If jalap and calomel were prescribed at the beginning of the complaint, it was
seldom thought necessary to repeat them. To preserve the bowels soluble, a
solution of manna and cream of tartar was found better to answer the intention.

When a disordered stomach did not appear among the primary affections, but, on
attempting the use of purgatives, they were thrown up again, a few grains of
ipecacuanha, with a free use of camomile tea, has sometimes emptied the stomach
to advantage. After allowing the stomach to rest a few hours, purgatives could
then be employed with the usual success.

A disordered stomach, with frequent retchings and efforts to vomit, was now
and then met with at the beginning of the fever, and sometimes, with other
matters thrown up, there was an appearance of bile. Glysters, frequently
repeated, very commonly moderated this symptom. Occasionally an infusion of
camomile, or, where the patient preferred it, warm water, was used to cleanse
the stomach; and as soon as there was a probability that the stomach would
retain it, recourse was had to the purgative solution.

When a sense of weight and oppression at the stomach, a tenderness or soreness
of the praecordia upon pressure, a vomiting of a bilious matter, of a dark
poracious appearance, extreme restlessness, a dejection of spirits, were met
with among the primary symptoms, the case wore an alarming aspect, and called
for the utmost skill and exertions of the physician. To allay the vomiting,
frequent glysters, and the application of a blister to the region of the
stomach, were found most effectual; and to these was added the occasional use
of effervescing draughts. If this method did not succeed, the feet and legs
were wrapped in large flannel cloths, wrung very dry out of hot water. This
expedient, by relaxing the vessels on the surface, and inducing perspiration,
sometimes relieved the distressing symptoms just enumerated.

When the vomiting could not be subdued, the patient at length threw up a dark
colored matter, resembling the grounds of coffee, and sometimes little dark
colored flakes were found mixed with it. To this affection of the stomach,
succeeded coldness of the extremities, with a livid appearance of the hands and
feet, intermitting pulse, excessive anxiety, oppression about the region of the
stomach, and hiccough, with difficult and laborious respiration. These symptoms
continuing in a high degree, commonly indicated the near approach of death,
which was seldom protracted to more than two or three days. I am happy to add,
however, that there were not wanting instances of the recovery of persons who
had labored under black vomiting, accompanied with all the distressing
symptoms peculiar to this stage of the disease.

It likewise happened during the progress of the foregoing symptoms, but at no
certain period, that a haemorrhage took place from the nose, mouth, or gums,
and sometimes from all three sources at once. In one instance, a friend of mine
informed me, that the blood trickled from the internal parts of the ears. But
in the course of my visiting the sick, I seldom met with considerable
haemorrhages, that the application of ice to the bleeding vessels, or to the
neighboring parts, did not most certainly check the discharge.

The severe train of symptoms above enumerated, according to my observation,
generally occurred in what might be called the second stage of the disease, and
sometimes after a free use had been made of the lancet.

At the first of my attendance upon the epidemic fever, I was impressed with an
idea that an early recourse to the bark was essentially necessary to the
successful treatment of it. Under the influence of this opinion, after the
contents of the stomach and bowels were carried off, I directed the bark to be
used, either in powder, decoction, or the cold infusion, as circumstances
appeared to indicate. In every instance it was found to disagree with the first
passages. In some it occasioned a fullness and straightness about the
praecordia: in others it offended the intestines, producing a fullness and
soreness in the abdomen: whilst in others it excited the system, increased the
headache, and brought on an accession of fever. Nor did I ever see the bark do
good, until an entire solution of the disease took place. That it might not
have been beneficial, I shall not assert. If, however, an opportunity of a
similar kind unfortunately occurs, I shall prescribe it, under particular
circumstances, in a manner very different from that in which I have before used
it.

The bad effects of the bark, which so invariably followed the use of it, under
my direction, were commonly removed by the use of purgatives. Whilst the
patient was taking laxative medicines, I made it a common practice to give
freely of sp. minderer. and evidently with good effects.

If the heat and fever were considerable, and the stomach retentive, small
doses of antimonials, particularly James's powder, sometimes joined with
camphor, were found useful. The sp. minderer. also, was a useful medicine in
this state of the disease.

The diaphoresis which it commonly induced afforded great relief, and generally
brought on a remission, if not an intermission of the fever. When a free
perspiration took place on the second or third day, it was considered as a
favorable event, and denoted a happy termination of the disease. But sweating
did not always prove serviceable. Instances happened, where this evacuation was
profuse from the first attack, without seeming to benefit the patient in any
degree. When it came on thus early, the temperature of the skin generally, and
particularly of the extreme parts, was so altered as to communicate a
considerable sense of cold to the touch.

With respect to calomel, which many have prescribed with that freedom and
constancy, as if it possessed some specific qualities, I can say little from my
own experience. I never could induce my mind to believe that it possessed any
advantages over many other purgatives; and from the account given of its
effects by some of my friends, I am disposed to favor a belief that its
operation, as a purgative, was very limited. It produced frequent stools, but
the quantity discharged was very small; and during the use of it, the patient
frequently complained of a sense of fullness and constriction in different
regions of the abdomen. These feelings were commonly soon relieved by the more
copious evacuations procured by either of the purgative solutions before
mentioned. That calomel has nothing specific in its nature, seems pretty
clearly evinced by those cases in which it has been taken as a preventive.
Instances of this sort were not unfrequent during the prevalence of the late
epidemic in this city. But the fever was known to attack persons under the
influence of this medicine; while others, who did not take mercury, and were
living precisely under the same circumstances, have escaped the disease.

Three persons out of four, of the same family, had taken mercury for some
time, with a view to guard themselves against the fever; but they were,
notwithstanding, seized with the epidemic. In one, a salivation had been
produced, and in this situation, he was attacked with fever. As soon as the
fever came on, from a conviction that the mercury had not been of any service
to him, he omitted the use of it, and with the assistance of mild purgatives,
soon got well. The fourth person, who had not taken any calomel, and who nursed
the other three, escaped the disease.

A number of other instances might be mentioned, in which calomel had been
taken as a preventive, where the persons, notwithstanding, took the disease.

In the management of the late epidemic, the cold bath was frequently resorted
to. As a general application, I can say nothing of it from my own observation.
I have been, indeed, in the habit of washing the hands, arms, face, neck, and
breast, with cold vinegar and water, in cases of fever, and always found it a
very grateful refreshment to the patient. I accordingly employed it freely, and
as extensively as conveniences would allow. But I know that the general bath
was also employed for the late fever, with great advantage, but under what
particular circumstances I cannot speak with precision. Doctor Charlton, of
this city, a physician of much experience, who had in many instances witnessed
its good effects, favored me with the following communication: I experienced
the happiest effects from cold bathing, in a variety of cases. I used
river-water, and had the patient placed in a large tub, and a couple of
pails-full thrown over him. It happened in one instance only, that the patient
did not feel so much refreshment, as to be impatient for a repetition of it. In
this case the patient grew chilly after using the bath, which I thought a
sufficient reason for discontinuing it. In every other instance I found no
method so effectual for relieving the extreme distress of the head and stomach,
so generally attendant on that disease.

We find a similar practice recorded by Mr. Bruce, who says, that the
inhabitants of Masuah are subject to violent fevers, which generally terminate
the third day in death. If the patient survives till the fifth day, he very
often recovered by drinking water only, and throwing a quantity of cold water
upon him, even in his bed, where he is permitted to lie, without attempting to
make him dry, or change his bed, till another deluge adds to the first.

In the use of cordial medicines, or drinks of that nature, much circumspection
was necessary. In the first stages of the disease, they were altogether
inadmissible. They were prescribed in some instances, after considerable
remissions had taken place, but manifestly to the injury of the sick. Even
after complete intermissions had formed, they sometimes produced a state of
excitement, which rendered the patient's situation much less comfortable. These
observations apply particularly to those cases, where the remissions took place
at an early period, or where the disease did not run out beyond the fifth,
sixth or seventh day. When the fever was of longer continuance, the debility it
induced made the use of cordials not only allowable, but particularly necessary.

Porter, more or less diluted, was found to agree better with the sick than any
other drink of the cordial kind: but its salutary effects appeared very much to
depend upon a liberal state of the bowels. When given conjointly with some mild
purgative, it increased the strength, and very often superseded the use of any
other tonic.

In the latter stages of the complaint an infusion of snake-root was also made
use of with advantage. On many occasions it composed the stomach, supported the
strength of the patient, without exciting him, and seemed productive of very
happy effects.

Much has been said and written respecting the use of the lancet, and the
effects of bleeding in this disease. On this part of practice I shall advance
nothing, but what is the result of experience and observation. In general, the
indications of cure were not supposed to include this operation; it was,
therefore, but seldom had recourse to. In some of those cases, in which the
lancet was used, the good effects of bleeding were obvious, more especially in
relieving the distressing pain in the head; whereas in other instances, and,
where the symptoms seemed to render it peculiarly proper, it did not afford the
relief that was expected from it; but, on the contrary, although the quantity
of blood drawn was copious, and the bleeding frequently repeated, the patient
sunk under the disease.

If I were to say in what cases bleeding would probably be useful, it would be
where the fever seizes upon healthy, robust constitutions, where the pain in
the head was extremely violent, and where the eyes, (to use a frequent
expression of the sick) seemed ready to leap from their sockets, and especially
if such a subject had just arrived from the purer and cooler air of the
country. In a person of this description, the attack, and all the subsequent
symptoms, are commonly violent indeed; to moderate, therefore, the excessive
action of the system, bleeding would probably be necessary and useful. Under
circumstances like these, I have accordingly bled, and to good purpose; but I
have, previously to blood-letting, directed my patient to drink freely of warm
water; by which means I have observed, that not only the action of the vascular
system was much abated, but also that the whole body more readily yielded to a
copious perspiration. But if a person is attacked with this fever, whose body
has been previously debilitated, perhaps by a sedentary manner of living, and
from having resided some time in the epidemic constitution of the air, it could
hardly be supposed that the same remedies would be required as in the former
instance.

An attention to the above distinction of causes, as far as respects the remedy
of bleeding particularly, may be of greater importance in the treatment of this
disorder, than has been commonly imagined.

Opium was rarely admissible in this fever, and never in the first stage of it.
But after the contents of the stomach and bowels were freely evacuated, and the
excessive action of the system moderated, the use of it was justified in many
instances of successful practice. Indeed, particular cases occurred, in which
great irritation, restlessness, and want of sleep, could by no other means be
so well alleviated. When given under such circumstances, it was commonly
conjoined with some sudorific, and most frequently with sp. mind. When, also,
in the advanced stage of the disease, the vomiting became excessive, opium was
administered with the best effects.

Blisters were occasionally employed; they were found most useful in removing
local affections. If the headache continued severe, after free evacuations, a
blister, applied between the shoulders, often removed the pain. When the
sickness at the stomach was great, attended with oppression and pain, a blister
to the praecordia has often proved of advantage. Doctor Blane found nothing so
successful in removing irritability of the stomach, as a blister applied
externally to the part. When there has been a general soreness and fullness of
the abdomen, which has not subsided after a free use of purgatives, the
application of a blister has produced the happiest effects. A friend of mine
had a young clergyman under his care, whose disease, from its continuance, had
become very formidable. He was covered with petechiae; his stomach was easily
excited; his stools were generally of a dark color, and sometimes black. The
bark had been tried, but it did not agree with him. Upon examining the abdomen,
it was found universally tender to the touch, but not painful. A large blister
was applied to the affected part, the operation of which put an immediate check
to the progress of the disease. His drink was porter, to which water was
occasionally added; and with the assistance of an easy diet, such as sago,
gruel, etc. his recovery was soon completed.

The drinks which seemed the most grateful to the sick, and were considered as
the most proper during the fever, were lemonade, water with toast in it, water
alone, molasses and water, balm-tea, etc.

The diet commonly recommended was sago, tapioca, panado, and occasionally weak
broths. The latter, however, frequently produced uneasiness at the stomach,
which made it necessary to desist from their use. A gruel made with
Indian-meal, or oat-meal, appeared, upon the whole, to agree better with the
sick than any other food; and, in many instances, it constituted the whole diet
and drink of the patient.

The use of animal food was uniformly attended with bad effects; the smallest
quantity, taken in the intermission, has hastened the accession of fever, and
increased its violence. Even after the disease had entirely subsided, and
debility only remained, a too early recurrence to animal food has brought on a
renewal of fever.

I shall only add, that through the whole course of the disease, the strictest
attention was paid to cleanliness, especially to the immediate removal of all
excrementitious matter. The patient's linen, bed-cloaths, and often the bed
itself, were frequently changed, and the refreshment it always afforded was a
sufficient proof of its utility.

The foregoing exhibits an unvarnished view of the history of the late
epidemic, as far as it came under my notice; and of the practice, as far as it
seemed rational, and was successful under my management: and I have purposely
avoided, as much as possible, all theoretical or controversial grounds.

Indeed, I have been anxious about nothing so much as to fix upon the mind, the
great and obvious distinction betwixt contagious diseases, and those which,
under very peculiar circumstances, may assume much of that character.

The utility of this distinction is so well shown by Doctor John Hunter, in his
Enquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Remittant Fever, that I cannot do
better than give his own observations upon the subject. There is hardly any
part of the history of a disease (says the Doctor) which it is of more
consequence to ascertain with accuracy, than its being of an infectious nature
or not. Upon this depends the propriety of the steps that should be taken,
either to prevent it, or to root it out. It is productive of great mischief to
consider a disease as infectious that really is not so; it exposes such as
labor under it to evils and inconveniences, which greatly aggravate their
sufferings, and often deprive them of the necessary assistance: they are
neglected, if not shunned; and at the time they require the greatest care and
attention, they have the least. I have had occasion to observe, that the
remittant fever, whether with its usual, or more uncommon symptoms, with the
yellow color of the eyes and skin, or without them, was never found to be
infectious. The strongest proofs of this, in my opinion, were to be met with in
private families, where the son, the brother, or the husband, laboring under
the worst fevers, were nursed with unremitting assiduity, by the mother, the
sister, or the wife, who never left the sick by day or by night, yet without
being infected. That such near relations should take upon them the office of a
nurse, is matter of the highest commendation in a country, the diseases of
which require to be watched with greater care and attention than can be
expected from a servant.

Why the late epidemic, in many instances during its destructive progress in
this city, wore the dreadful aspect of contagion, may be gathered, in a good
degree, from the few following particulars, within the knowledge of us all,
viz. The last summer, and a great part of the autumn, were marked by an
uncommon degree of heat, combined with moisture. The atmosphere, which, at that
season, is ordinarily loaded with the electric fluid, seemed destitute, for
weeks together, of this vivifying principle. The intense heats which we often
experience in the forenoons of July and August, are generally allayed by
thunder and lightning, and the refreshing rains, which follow toward the
evening; but in the season referred to, this precious relief from the languor
induced by a verticle sun, was seldom felt.

Now, when we reflect that a great majority of those who fell victims to the
late epidemic fever were not only foreigners, but poor persons, many of whom
had been only a few weeks in the country, arrived after a long voyage, and
predisposed to sickness by hard and scanty fare; huddled together, in a great
many instances, in the most uncomfortable apartments, and these situated in the
most unhealthy parts of the city; frequently without the early attention of a
physician, destitute of friends, and often without the most common comforts of
life; under such distressing circumstances, notwithstanding the humanity of the
citizens, were numbers placed; and what consequences, but those which followed,
could reasonably have been expected? In the former part of this essay, we
enumerated many circumstances which tended to show, that the season of the late
epidemic more especially, was attended with an uncommon constitution of the
air. Since these observations were put together, I have been favored with a
letter from Mr. Gardener Baker, proprietor of the Museum in this city, who
mentions several occurrences illustrative of the same thing. He observes, Books
in my library, and those that were in daily use, were covered with mould. All
the preserved animals in the Museum, that were not contained in glass cases,
were injured very much by the long continued atmospheric moisture, and some of
them quite spoiled; particularly a very finely preserved buffaloe, which had,
in the course of twelve years, been exposed to every climate on the continent,
without showing the least disposition to decay. But, in the month of August
last, upon applying my hand under the belly, I found it as wet as if taken out
of water, and soon after this part of the animal began to fall, piece by piece,
as large as my two hands, until the whole of the belly had fallen to the floor.
Fish that had been well preserved for several weeks, had collected so much
moisture from the air, that drops of water fell from them.

I have a very excellent electrical machine, and have been in the daily habit
of using it; but during the sickness, when the appearance of the atmosphere was
the most favorable, I could not, with all my art or industry, excite it, so as
to answer any purpose in experiment* etc. when, in the ordinary state of the
atmosphere, four or five revolutions of the cylinder, will give as hard a shock
as a man can bear with convenience.

The foregoing observations of Mr. Baker prove, in a remarkable degree, that
there was a prevailing property in the air, viz. extreme moisture. The annexed
table will exhibit the degree of heat, which appears, upon an average, to
exceed the usual temperature several degrees.

Meteorological Observations for 1795, made by G. Baker. THERMOMETER.
Months. High. Low. Weather. No. of Rains. January. 44 50 8 Very variable. 6
small quan. February. 46 5 Not very variable. 2 very little. March. 62 23 Not
very variable. 9 small quan. April. 74 28 50 Variable. 12 large quant. May. 81
48 50 Not very variable. 14 large quant. June. 87 57 Very variable. 6 small
quan. July. 89 63 Not variable. 9 considerab. August. 93 50 57 50 Not very
variable. 11 large quant. September. 87 48 Not variable. 8 small quan. October.
75 38 50 Not very variable. 8 small quan. November 67 20 Not very variable. 9
considerab. December. 54 37 Not variable. 8 small quan. BAROMETER.
Months. High. Low. January. 30 20 29 30 February. 30 5 29 45 March. 30 30 29
15 April. 30 17 29 35 May. 30 15 29 65 June. 30 40 29 60 July. 30 11 29 55
August. 30 5 29 50 September. 30 8 29 25 October. 30 28 28 80 November. 30 23
28 95 December. 30 6 28 85

It is very remarkable, that for near three years there has been but a very
small quantity of thunder and lightning. In the month of May last it thundered
and lightened three times, and there was no more until October, when we had a
very distant thunder, and some lightning, and this was the last for 1795.




APPENDIX.
INTRODUCTION.
THOSE who have inclination, and have not perused the writings of some authors
justly distinguished for their talents in medicine, and who have written
professedly on the fever in question, (for I pay no regard to the various names
by which it is known) may find in the annexed pages, a very circumscribed view
of their opinions of right practice, as far as respects the most efficacious
remedies employed against it. Those who have more leisure, and more curiosity,
will, of course, consult the originals from whence they are taken; for my own
part, I have by no means intended, by this selection, to strain any part of
their practice, with a view to strengthen, or give consequence to my own
opinions, or to fix a methodus medendi, which, it will occur to every
intelligent practitioner, obtained under circumstances, in many instances, very
dissimilar.

HILLARY.
THE first indication of cure, Doctor Hillary observes, is to moderate the too
great and rapid motion of the fluids, and abate the heat and violence of the
fever, in the two first days of the disease. Wherefore bleeding, in the
beginning of the first stage of this fever, either to a greater or less
quantity, accordingly as the following symptoms and circumstances indicate, is
always absolutely necessary: and the quantity to be taken away should always be
as the age and strength of the patient, the degree of the plethora, and the
greater or less elastic state of the solids, the fullness of his pulse, and the
violence of the fever and its symptoms. For which reason, when I have been
called in time, (which is too seldom the case) I generally order 12, 14, 16,
18, or 20 ounces of blood to be taken away on the first or second day; but
always, as the above symptoms and rules indicate and direct: and if the
patient's pulse rises after the first bleeding, or if the fever continues to be
still high, and the pulse full, (for it is never high in this fever) I repeat
the bleeding once, in the first or second day of the disease, if the above
mentioned symptoms indicate it; but bleeding a third time is seldom or never
required, neither is bleeding on the third day almost ever required; and when
it is performed on that day, it ought not to be advised without great caution
and judgment; neither should a vein be opened after the third day in this
fever, unless some very extraordinary symptoms and circumstances require it,
which very rarely or never happen. I have always found that taking away a
moderate, but sufficient quantity of blood on the first or second days, has
rendered the fever more moderate, and abated the putrescent diathesis
afterward. But as to the quantity of blood to be taken away in this case,
either the first or second time, or on the first or second days, it is
impossible to ascertain it, since that must be different, in different
patients; because some constitutions can better bear the loss of fifty ounces
of blood than others can the loss of eight or ten; therefore, the only rules
that can be given are those laid down before.

The irritable state of the stomach, Doctor Hillary says, forbids the use of
emetics; but to carry off the contents of this organ, a liberal use of warm
water is recommended, which greatly relieves the patient. In the next place, in
order to gain a truce, and some respite from the anxiety, and almost continual
reaching, vomiting, and sickness, which are not increased, but somewhat
relieved by drinking the warm water, I usually give extract* thebaic. g. I vel.
g. I ss. and order them to take nothing into their stomachs for two hours after
it, that they may retain it; and it being in so small a compass, they scarce
ever reject it. By this method the poor distressed patient gets some rest and
respite, and all the symptoms are generally considerably abated, the reaching
and vomiting either totally ceases, or do but seldom return; so that other
medicines may be given and retained on the stomach, which it would not retain
before; such as cooling acid juleps, or other antiphlogistic and antiseptic
medicines.

The evacuation of the bowels is the next circumstance to which Doctor Hillary
directs our attention. He attempts this first by glysters, and after six or
eight hours rest and respite, he orders a gentle antiphlogistic and antiseptic
purge.

Or if the patient has a purging before, which sometimes, though very seldom
happens, I order a gentle dose of toasted rhubarb to be given, and an
antiseptic anodyne, after it has operated, to abate and check the too much
purging, but not to stop it, as I have always observed it to be of service in
this case, provided that it is moderate, and not too violent: and I observed
that all those who had this purging, generally did well with it, if the
patient's strength was but properly supported with suitable nourishment, and
proper antiseptic medicines, which last are always absolutely necessary in this
fever.

And though purging in many other fevers, may be deemed bad practice, yet in
this fever, as nature indicated it, I have always found it of singular service,
and the patient not only greatly relieved by it, but the disease always
rendered more moderate and manageable afterward.

Doctor Hillary not only purges in the beginning of the disease, but, says he,
and I most commonly find it necessary to repeat this purging every second or
third day, for two or three times, and sometimes, when the symptoms are very
bad, and have not much abated upon taking the first and second purge, and the
patient has not been treated in the method before described, or I have not been
called in till late in the disease, I have found it necessary to repeat the
gentle purging every day, for four or five days successively, and with the
desired success too.

In the latter stages of the disorder, when, (according to Doctor Hillary) it
might be supposed that antiseptics were necessary to put a stop to the
putrescent disposition of the fluids, and prevent gangrenes coming on, our
author found the cort. peru. though a medicine of the nature indicated, so
disagreeable to most palates, and the stomachs of the sick, in this disease,
are so much affected, and so weak, and so subject to reject every thing, even
the most pleasant and innocent, that they can very rarely take it in any shape,
and still much fewer can retain it, when they have got it down.

As a substitute for the bark, Doctor Hillary used an infusion of snake-root,
to which Madeira wine and elixir of vitriol was added, and with much better
success than he could hope for, or dare expect. If this medicine required "more
warming," the quantity of rad. serpent. was increased, or vin. croc. or confec.
cardiac. or some such medicines were added.

Those symptoms, viz. low pulse, coma, delirium, coldness of the extreme parts,
tremors, convulsions, spasms, etc. which might be supposed to indicate
visicatories, have not only not been relieved by their application, but have
been increased thereby, and the haemorrhage which usually attends this fever
has been hastened on, or if come on before, it has been increased by their
application.

HUME.
The first patient I was called to, was one Andrews, a plethoric, muscular man,
about twenty-five years of age: he had not complained three hours when I saw
him, about ten in the forenoon; yet the oppression on the praecordia, and the
bilious vomitings had already seized him. His pulse was full and strong, and I
took sixteen ounces of blood from his arm immediately, and ordered a laxative
clyster to be injected as soon as it could be got ready, and enjoined him to
drink plentifully of barley water, acidulated with the juice of the lime. I
called upon him at noon, and was much disappointed to find the ardent symptoms,
and the oppression on his breast both increased: his vomitings were almost
continual, and he complained much of distress on breathing, and of the burning
of his eyes. The reasons for bleeding him still continuing, I took fourteen
ounces of blood from the same orifice, and ordered him, the same evening, a
scruple of ipecacuanha at six o'clock, and at ten applied a large blister
between his shoulders, in hopes of relieving his chest.

He continued to vomit, with but short intermissions, from the time he took the
emetic, although he discharged a great deal of bile by stool. He had a very
restless night, and continued through the second day, vomiting, and laboring
under the oppression of his breast, till about twelve at night, when he died;
about forty hours from the time of his being first seized.

At this time the practice in Barbados was, to use large and repeated
bleeding, vomiting, and blistering, as recommended by Doctor Town, which method
I, as a stranger, thought myself obliged to follow.

Before Andrews died, several others were taken ill, and, except the second
bleeding, which was omitted, they were treated the same way, with no better
success.

Doctor Hume next relates the morbid appearances exhibited upon opening the
bodies of the two first men who died. There were an enlarged liver, and evident
marks of inflammation on the lower extremity of the stomach, and likewise on
the superior part of the duodenum.

No marks of mortification were found on the internal or external surface of
the stomachs of either of these men; but I opened two not long after, who died
in a more advanced state of the disease, and found one of them, who had vomited
the black matter, in a state of mortification every where, and some coagulated
blood in it; the internal coats of the other were covered with livid spots of
different sizes, and, externally, toward the bottom, there were large black
spots of the size of a crown piece.

Having observed, with much regret, the bad success I had from bleeding and
vomiting, and that the first man who died evidently sunk after the first
bleeding, I bled the rest but once; and when the patients were not plethoric, I
have frequently omitted the operation altogether, as I sometimes did when I had
not seen them within twenty-four hours of being taken ill.

I have seen some subjects opened, on whose stomachs no marks of inflammation
could be discovered, yet even these had excessive vomitings.

The state in which I found the stomachs of the two first men who died,
deterred me from giving any more vomits; and I have ever found that bowel so
delicate and irritable, that I have never since ventured to give any emetic
whatever. There seems, however, a necessity to evacuate the bile by the
stomach, by the intestines, and by the skin, when there is a tendency to sweat.

After bleeding, I used to order a clyster of etc. and for common drink, I
ordered a pleasant sherbett made of fresh, ripe limes, etc.

I found this not only a pleasant drink for the sick, but looked upon it as the
most powerful antiseptic, and antiemetic I could give them. It is true that on
first using, it was thrown up as fast as water, when an emetic is given; but
such as had resolution to persevere in drinking it, soon found their sick fits
less severe; and, after the first three or four draughts, every succeeding one
remained longer on the stomach than that before it, so that, in a few hours,
the intermissions between the fits of vomiting came to be so lengthened, that I
could attempt giving some mild purgative medicine. I commonly ordered two
ounces of manna, and one of cream of tartar, dissolved in three pints of
lemonade. Of this I gave them a few spoonfuls, or a tea-cup full, at such
distances of time, as I thought their stomachs could bear.

Manna and cream of tartar was continued occasionally, through the whole course
of the disease, only it was sometimes changed for tincture of rhubarb, drawn in
weak cinnamon water, to render it more grateful to the stomach. When these
failed of producing frequent bilious stools, glysters were injected; but the
heat, frequency, and acrimony of these bilious stools, often deprived me of
this resource, for the extremity of the rectum, many times, became so tender as
not to be able to bear the introduction of the smallest and smoothest pipe.

When I observed any tendency to sweating, I always discontinued the laxative
medicines, and gave six drachms, or an ounce of the sp. mind. and repeated the
dose in five or six hours, if the sweat continued so long, encouraging the sick
to drink a weak infusion of sage, acidulated, if they desired to have it so.

Doctor Hume recommends the application of blisters to the thighs, to relieve
the severe vomitings. "When," says he, the sick complained much of the blisters
of their thighs, the vomiting usually began to abate, and to cease entirely, as
the irritation and inflammation increased.

This fever, like some others, often ends in scabby eruptions about the mouth
and nose, and sometimes I have seen small biles, from the size of a common pea
to that of a horse-bean, break out on the breast, sides, shoulders, or hips,
and prove critical.

There is one critical appearance, which I do not remember to have seen taken
notice of by any writer on the bilious fever, and which, I believe, has been
observed by few practitioners, (it sometimes happens in the third stage, and
sometimes in the course of it) which is, one or more clusters of small florid
eruptions on or near the pit of the stomach, not larger than measles, and from
three or four to seven or eight in a cluster.

In whatever state of the disease, the sick are relieved, whether by sweats,
bilious stools, biles, eruptions, or by blisters, and it is evident from the
cessation of the vomiting, from the load at the breast being removed, and from
the respiration becoming easier, that the fever is giving way, we should
attempt to give the bark: sooner would be to no purpose, for it would hurt the
patient, by exasperating the symptoms.

To the infusions of bark, used by Doctor Hume, snake-root was added.

Speaking of opiates, Doctor Hume says, it does not seem probable that they can
be of any use in this disease, if it is considered, that the principal
intention of cure is the evacuation of the offending bile, by every outlet; and
to attempt confining it by opiates, is to counteract that intention.

DOCTOR JACKSON ON THE FEVERS OF JAMAICA, etc.
Doctor Jackson, after dividing the yellow fever into three species, and giving
the symptoms attending each form, proceeds to the method of cure.

Treatment of the first species.
"The species of the yellow fever," says he, which I have now described, is
universally allowed to be a terrible disease; and there are few, I believe, so
uncandid as to boast of general success in the manner of curing it. A road is,
therefore, left open, not only for improvement, but almost for total
innovation. The only author I have read on the subject, or the practitioners
with whom I am acquainted, do not seem to have extended their views beyond the
symptoms of the disease. There are some, who, from observing that there is pain
in the head, and flushing of the face, recommend bleeding; others, from the
presence of nausea, or inclination to vomit, make trial of emetics; and many,
from various causes, insist on the indispensible use of cathartics. My views, I
must confess, are different from those of preceding authors. Bleeding was
employed occasionally; emetics were cautiously avoided; but time appeared to be
too precious to be spent in attending to the effects of cathartics, which
cannot often be known in less than twenty-four hours; and which at best are
precarious and feeble. Instead, therefore, of attempting to evacuate redundant
bile, or to correct it when supposed to be vitiated, I exerted myself from the
first moment that I was called to the patient, to change the genius and natural
temper of the disease; or, if I may be allowed the expression, to take the
business, as speedily as possible, out of the hands of nature.

I remark, in the first place, that I generally began the cure of this species
of the yellow fever with bleeding. Bleeding was employed in the present case,
chiefly with a view of paving the way to remedies of greater efficacy. It was,
however, found to moderate the violence of local pain, particularly the
violence of the headache, and to be not altogether without effect in retarding
the usual rapid progress of the disease. It has hitherto been thought
necessary, indeed almost indispensible, to empty the first passages in this
species of fever; but time is short, and the good which accrues from such
evacuations, is not very certain, and often not essential. It was, therefore,
thought sufficient to trust this intention, for the most part, to laxative
glysters; after the employment of which, (bleeding having been premised in such
quantity as was deemed proper) the patient was washed clean, and bathed in warm
water, in as complete a manner as the circumstances of situation would permit.
It is needless to mention that this was done with a view to increase the
mobility of the system, and to remove spasmodic stricture from the extreme
vessels of the surface; in consequence of which, greater benefit was expected
from the application of cold salt water, which was dashed suddenly from a
bucket on the head and shoulders. This practice may appear hazardous to those
who argue without experience; but I can vouch for its general safety, and bear
testimony to its good effects. Sweat, with perfect relief from all the feelings
of anxiety and distress, was generally the consequence of this mode of
treatment. If employed within the first twelve hours from the attack, it seldom
failed of removing all the symptoms of danger; or of affecting a total and
complete change in the nature and circumstances of the disease; but if the
progress was more advanced, though the same rule of practice might still be
proper, the execution required more boldness and decision. It is only possible
to judge from the circumstances of the case, at this period, of the necessity
or propriety of bleeding, and of emptying the lower intestines, by means of
glysters; but when business shall have been accomplished, in such manner as
shall have been deemed right, or conducive to the main view, it will be
advisable to shave the head, to bathe the whole body in warm water, and
instantly to dash cold water from a bucket on the head and shoulders. I have
even sometimes, where there was an appearance of greater obstinacy, ventured to
wrap the whole body in a blanket soaked in seawater, or in water in which was
dissolved a large portion of salt. If anxiety was great, or nausea and vomiting
troublesome, I have also observed benefit from the application of a blister to
the epigastic region. Opiates, joined with remedies which had a tendency to
determine to the surface, were found to be serviceable; and wine, with a supply
of fresh and cool air, in most cases was highly necessary. This method of
proceeding will, perhaps, be thought unwarrantable, but I can speak confidently
of its safety; and I may further add, that unless some decided steps are taken
to change the nature of the disease, during the continuance of this stage, our
future endeavors to do good will generally be in vain. I have hitherto
promised success in the cure of this fever, with a good deal of confidence; but
if it should so happen, that we are not called to the patient till the
yellowness has spread over the whole of the body, or till the black vomiting
has begun to make its appearance, the prospect, I must confess, is then very
dark. The ordinary resources of our art are feeble; and if good can be done at
all, it can only be done by means, which, in the common opinion of
practitioners, border on rashness. In this latter stage of the complaint, so
great a degree of torpor overwhelms the powers of life, that remedies do not
produce their usual effect, and our labor is often the same, as if we
attempted to resuscitate a corpse. I have, however, seen instances of such
unexpected recoveries, from the most hopeless state in fevers, that I seldom
totally despair as long as life remains. I know that death may be prevented,
even after black vomiting has appeared, with all its terrors, if a remedy can
be found powerful enough to excite the action of the extreme vessels, and to
recall the determination to the surface of the body. For this purpose, I have
employed alternately, warm and cold bathing, with success. I have even wrapped
the body, as I mentioned before, in a blanket soaked in water, in which a large
portion of salt was dissolved, or which had been steeped in brandy or rum,
enjoining, at the same time, the liberal use of wine, or even more powerful
cordials. I have heard of some well attested instances, where plentiful
draughts of rum and water have checked the vomiting, and apparently saved the
lives of patients, after the medical people had given them up for lost.

Treatment of the second species.
The cure of this species of the disease, though by no means easy, was less
difficult, upon the whole, than that of the former. Instead of the torpor and
insensibility, which prevailed in the latter periods of the proper yellow
fever, (for Doctor Jackson considers the first described species as the true
yellow fever of Jamaica) the mobility of the nervous system was so much
increased in the present species of disease, that remedies seldom failed of
producing sensible effects: and wherever remedies produce effects, it is
generally in our power to manage the business in such a manner, that some good
may arise. It may be observed in the first place, with regard to the cure, that
bleeding, which frequently was useful in the former species, was generally
hurtful in the present; and that, instead of retarding, it oftener accelerated
the progress of the disease. Emetics were employed, very commonly, by the
practitioners of the West Indies, in this as in other cases of fever; but I
cannot help remarking, that languor and debility, frequently yellowness, and
sometimes a continual vomiting, which no remedies could restrain, were often
the consequence of antimonial emetics of severe operation; and I have no doubt
in saying, that the approach of death was actually hastened, in several
instances, by this method of treatment. Laxatives were occasionally of service;
but the stronger purgatives frequently hurtful. Blisters were often extremely
beneficial; but it requires care and discernment to apply them in the proper
circumstances, so as to reap the full advantage. Opiates were sometimes
serviceable; and bark and wine, in most instances, were remedies of great
value; but the principal trust was placed in warm and cold bathing, which,
under proper management, seldom failed of answering every expectation
completely, or speedily of removing the chief symptoms of danger. Sometimes it
appeared to cut short the course of the disease abruptly.

In the next place, as introductory to the symptoms and method of cure, of the
third species of yellow fever, Doctor Jackson observes, I have now described
two species of fever, which seem to be, in some degree, peculiar to the natives
of northern regions, soon after their arrival in the West Indies. In the one, a
determination to the alimentary canal and biliary organs, with marks of
putrescent tendency, in the general mass of fluids, was discoverable at an
early period; in the other, the brain and nervous system were more particularly
and principally affected; while the species of which I now attempt to give some
account, exhibited strong marks of vascular excitement, with a very high degree
of apparent inflammatory diathesis. This was more irregular in its appearances,
and more complicated in its nature, than the others. The marks of inflammatory
diathesis were generally very apparent in the beginning; but they usually gave
way, or became complicated in the latter stages, with symptoms of putrescency
or nervous affection.

Speaking of the cure of this species, he says, if we proceed on the first
obvious view of the disease, we shall often do irreparable mischief, by copious
and repeated evacuations; yet there will not be less danger, on the other hand,
if, regardless of the present degree of excitement, we indulge freely in the
use of stimulants. It is necessary to observe a middle course; and, I must
confess, that it is sometimes difficult to do any thing without doing harm.
Bleeding was frequently employed in the cure of this disease, and, in most
cases, it was an useful remedy, though less perhaps from its own effects
merely, than from paving the way to other more powerful applications. It is,
however, capable of being easily carried to excess; and ought not to be trusted
to wholly for the removing the irritability, and high degree of excitement,
which prevail so generally in the beginning of this disease. After bleeding,
emetics and cathartics are employed very freely. I have always professed myself
an enemy to the practice of giving emetics in the fevers of Jamaica; yet I must
confess, that antimonials were not only safer, but of more particular (...) in
this, than in any other species of fever where I have seen them tried. Among
the great variety of forms which have been recommended by practitioners, for
the purpose of emptying the first passages, I have not found any one answer so
well, as a thin solution of the sal catharticum, given at different intervals,
with a small portion of emetic tartar, and sometimes with the addition of
laudanum. The operation of this remedy was extensive. It might be so managed as
to promote nausea, or vomiting, sweat, or moderate evacuations downwards; at
the same time, it proved very powerfully sedative. I may likewise add, that I
have sometimes found benefit from nitre, camphor, and opium, given in pretty
large doses, and accompanied with plentiful dilution. But though these remedies
were often serviceable, and contributed, in many cases, to moderate the high
degree of irritability; yet the chief dependence of the cure was much better
trusted to cold bathing. After the surface of the body had become sufficiently
relaxed, by the previous use of warm bathing and fomentations, the effects of
cold bathing were wonderful. The excessive irritability was moderated or
removed, and the powers of life were invigorated, in a very singular manner, in
consequence of it.

MOSELY ON TROPICAL DISEASES.
It is unnecessary to fill many pages with a long catalogue of prescriptions
and medicines in the treatment of this fever, for it is comprised in a few
words, and almost as few medicines; and requires only care and attention, that
those moments do not slip away, that the occasion is forever lost, when
Bleeding, Purging, Baths, Diaphoretics, Blisters, and Bark,
ought to have been timely used, for the salvation of the patient's life; and
that afterward they are not untimely employed for its destruction.

If a person, newly arrived in the West Indies, has subjected himself to any of
the causes which may produce this fever, previous to the attack he has
sufficient warning given him, if he will attend to it, and time enough, in
general, to cure it by anticipation. For, as soon as any heaviness, or
restlessness, or lassitude, or stretching and yawning is perceived, he has
reason to expect that they are the harbingers of this tragedy, and he should
immediately be blooded, and take a dose of salts, and dilute plentifully, and
keep himself quiet and cool; and after the operation of the salts, he should
take small doses of James's powder, live low, and drink barley-water. After the
body is well evacuated, and cooled, it is always prudent to take the bark.

In the first stage of the fever, when it has made a regular attack, when these
precautions have not been used, or when they have failed, and the patient is no
longer able to abstain from his bed, he should be kept in a large room, as cool
as possible, covered lightly with bed-clothes, with a circulation of air
admitted into the room, but not directly upon or near the bed: and this must be
observed through the whole of the disease.

Bleeding must then be performed, and must be repeated every six or eight
hours, or whenever the exacerbations come on, while the heat, fullness of pulse,
and pains continue; and, if these symptoms be violent and obstinate, and do not
abate during the first thirty-six or forty-eight hours of the fever, bleeding
should be executed usque ad animi deliquium.

The blood taken away in the beginning is very florid, and of the arterial
blood color; and the surface never sizy, and seldom contracted.

The intention of bleeding can be answered only by performing it immediately,
and in the most extensive manner, which the high state of inflammation, and the
rapid progress of the disease, demand, Taking away only six or eight ounces of
blood, because the patient may faint, which is a symptom of the disease, is
doing nothing toward the cure. Where bleeding is improper, no blood should be
taken; where it is proper, that quantity cannot relieve -- and it is losing
that time which can never be regained.

Bleeding, it is evident, must not be performed in any other stage of the
disease than the first, or inflammatory stage; but this has been injudiciously
done, which has given rise to the notion, that a patient will seldom bear more
than two bleedings.

Many practitioners have been deterred from bleeding their patients from the
depression of the pulse, and from the faintness which sometimes accompanies the
very first onset of this fever; but here the pulse always rises, and the
faintness disappears, as the heart is relieved from its oppression by the loss
of blood.

Faintness and depression of the pulse here are not to be considered like those
circumstances where putrefaction has commenced, or where there has been long
and fatiguing illness: they are symptoms here of plethora, the reverse of
inanition; and bleeding is advised for such syncopes by two of the greatest
physicians the world has produced.

Nor is fainting, during the operation, any reason for not repeating it, in the
first stage of the fever; for I have often cured it by bleeding only: and it
has frequently happened in the West Indies, that accidental bleeding from the
orifice, when a patient has fallen asleep, to far greater quantities than has
ever been directed to be taken away, has carried off the fever entirely; and
the surprise on discovering a profusion of blood in the bed, has been changed
to joy for the alteration it has produced in the patient.

The effects of nature would be oftener successful than they are, were not her
powers totally overcome in hot climates. Bleeding at the nose, in the first
stage of this fever, has sometimes removed it; and it is as certain a solution
of this fever, as it is of the causus in Europe.

In the early part of the disease spontaneous haemorrhage is always critical,
and should never be suppressed; afterward it is symptomatical, and if not
stopped, the patient soon sinks under it.

Eruptions about the lips and nose, painful biles, or phlegmons about the body,
which always suppurate unkindly, or an abscess forming, are also critical, and
generally terminate the disease.

Sweating, in the first stage of the disease, is seldom critical. Whenever
sweats are critical, which may happen very early in the disease, if the patient
has been well evacuated, they are accompanied with a cessation of vomiting, and
a change in the appearance of the urine; the sweating is then to be assiduously
promoted, and if preceded by a bleeding of the nose, it is a complete crisis.

The sickness of the stomach, and disagreeable taste in the mouth, indicate the
quality, and not the quantity of the offending secretions. The vomiting is from
irritation in the stomach, and not from plenitude; therefore vomits are never
to be given, though strongly advised by Town: no, not so much as warm water,
recommended by Hillary, for fear of exciting and stirring up that terrible
operation, which, when once begun, no art can sometimes allay.

When a sufficient quantity of blood has been taken away, which is never done,
let the patient's habit be what it may, while the heat, reiterated
exacerbations, flushings in the face, thirst, pains in the head, and burning in
the eyes remain, the step is to evacuate the contents of the bowels, and turn
the humors downwards.

But if large and repeated bleedings, during the two first days, should not
remove the thirst, pains, flushings, and heat in the eyes, and the state of the
stomach should be such as to reject every thing that is taken, so that there is
no chance of procuring evacuation by stool, the patient should have repeated
purgative glysters, and be put in a tepid bath.

The bath should be composed of a very weak decoction of camomile flowers, in
which a little nitre may be dissolved, and a little vinegar added.

This will often remove every symptom at once, and dispose the patient to a
diaphoresis, which must be promoted until a sufficient quantity of some
purgative medicine can be taken, so as to make an effectual operation downwards.

There is seldom a necessity to repeat the bath, as the strictures and tension
generally yield to the first immersion. The patient should not remain long in
the bath, nor should it be deferred till late in the disease, for it can be of
no use when the stomach is destroyed.

Soft, smooth drinks, free from any stimulating tendency, such as barley-water,
always answer best for common drink, and are no impediment in the way of
medicine.

Glysters are to be frequently given in the beginning of the disease,
particularly where the patient is costive, and to precede the use of
cathartics, and assist their operation.

The purging medicine to be used in the yellow fever, is the tartarum,
vitriolatum chrystalisatum, or sal polychrestus, dissolved in equal parts of
simple cinnamon and common water, or in simple cinnamon water alone. It must be
given in small doses every hour, until it operates; and the patient is to
dilute copiously while it operates, with very weak chicken broth. The quantity
of the salt is four drachms, to six or eight ounces of water, (as much as the
water will dissolve) and the dose of it may be two table spoonfuls. In defect
of this medicine, soluble tartar, or sal catharticus amarus, or manna and cream
of tartar, must be used. But let me caution practitioners against adding tartar
emetic, in order to quicken the operation of their medicines; which, however
useful it may be in bilious diseases, may be fatal in this.

Purging generally completes the suppression of the fever, and carries off the
vomiting; but it must be continued while the stools remain bilious, or foetid,
otherwise the fever will rise, and the vomiting return.

In case the fever still continues, the stomach settled, and the bowels well
evacuated, recourse must be had to sudorifics: repeated doses of James's
powder, effervescent draughts, and plentifully diluting with barley-water, or
balm, or mint-tea, generally soon remove it.

An intermission being procured, bark, in substance, is immediately to be
given, and repeated every hour, in dram doses, if the stomach will bear it,
until twelve drachms have been taken; which is generally a sufficient security
against the progress of the disease: but it must still be continued, at longer
intervals, for many days; interposing mild cathartics, such as an infusion of
rhubarb and tamarinds, with, or without a small quantity of sal polychrest, or
by keeping the body from a costive state by glysters.

In the second stage, or metaptoses of this fever, which I believe will seldom
happen, where the preceding directions have been faithfully pursued, we must
draw a distinct line, or boundary, in the very beginning of it, and put a final
period to bleeding. In this alarming state, all the skill and power of physic
must be summoned up, and quickly too, to oppose the various breaches which the
disease is now making, for the entrance of death.

The strength now begins to fail; the pulse is sinking; the suffusion of
yellowness is perceived in the eyes, neck, and breast; the vomiting incessant,
and the stomach rejects every thing that is swallowed. A coldness here, not
succeeded by sweat, or bilious discharges, is almost a certain mortal symptom.

In this state nothing but purging can remove the vomiting, and save the
patient's life. Here the corruption of the humors begins, and the stools are
acrid, corrosive, and foetid, to an extraordinary degree.

The misfortune here is, that the stomach, retaining nothing, without great
difficulty, opposes all our attempts. The tartarum vitriolatum, or sal
polychrest, is a nauseous medicine: but there is no other proper medicine, of
which a small quantity will purge, which is the objection against tamarinds,
cream of tartar, and manna; nor is there any other that I have ever found
equally cooling and attenuating. It must be given; and though part of it will
be returned, yet some of it will remain; and by repeating a very small quantity
every hour, stools will, in time, be procured, and generally urine plentifully.
If the patient have five or six stools, the vomiting will cease. He must dilute
with weak chicken broth.

Glysters may assist, with warm fomentations frequently applied to the region
of the praecordia, which sometimes bring out a crop of acrid eruptions about
the pit of the stomach, on which the vomiting generally ceases; but in case
these attempts fail, the patient should be put into a tepid bath, and have a
blister applied to his back, or to the inside of his thighs, or, what is more
effectual, to the region of the stomach; and a diaphoretic treatment adopted,
with James's powder, in order to relieve the internal irritation by revulsion,
and enable the stomach to bear purgatives, which alone can carry off the
offending humors, and remove that perversion, as it were, of the peristaltic
motion, which is the ungovernable symptom, and, by its continuance, the most
certainly mortal symptom of this fever.

As to what is called fever, there is nothing after the first stage of the
disease that deserves that name. Therefore, after the first stage, bark is
always to be given, when the stomach will bear it. The worst evil that
generally attends the giving of bark here a little too early, is oppression and
load at the stomach; which, if glysters do not remove, the purgative solution,
or a watery infusion of rhubarb, will; or the uniting some purgative medicine
with the bark.

Sometimes, soon after the first attack of the fever, an abatement of every
symptom is obtained; and those who are not well acquainted with the pulse, and
the extensive evacuations this fever demands, conclude that a remission, or an
intermission, or a solution of the fever is decided. But when this happens
before the third day, a strict attention to the pulse, and the excretions, will
discover the deception, and show, by their disagreement with those symptoms
which appear favorable, that they appear so without a proper cause, and cannot
be lasting.

They who unfortunately make any dependence here, desist from further
evacuations, and proceed to giving bark, and cordial nourishment. Every body
about the patient is filled with flattering hopes of his recovery. But the
evacuations have been discontinued too soon, and have not been sufficient to
extinguish entirely the inflammatory disposition of the disease; which, now
aggravated, breaks out and rages with redoubled violence, and hurries the
patient into the second stage of the disease, and then soon out of the world.

A yellow suffusion may be either critical, or symptomatical. Critical, as
Town supposes; but it must be when there is a tranquil cessation, without
languor, of all the other symptoms, with warm perspiration; and symptomatical,
as Hillary supposes, when accompanied with lassitude, nausea, or vomiting,
colliquative sweats, and sunken pulse.

Great disputes have arisen in this part of the disease, concerning the
application of blisters. Blisters, however, according to Doctor Mosely, are
found to be a safe and powerful remedy. Natives, and long residents in the
West Indies are seldom disturbed by inflammatory diseases, and blisters can
scarcely ever be applied amiss. They give a stimulus to the languid vessels,
and form a drain for the acrid serum of the blood, which often keep up
disorders from debility, obstruction, and irritation.

If bleeding, purging, baths, and diaphoretics, do not remove the fever in its
first stage:

If purging, baths, diaphoretics, and blisters, do not remove it in the second
stage:

If the vomiting cannot be suppressed, and the bark retained:

The last stage of the disease appears with its direful vomiting; which at
first has generally the appearance of the grounds of coffee; then that of a
slate color, and then dark, thick, and grumous. The interior surfaces of the
body are oozing out blood into their cavities. Every excretion is corrupted
blood.

I have seen people recover after the vomiting has resembled coffee grounds,
when any purgative medicine, united with a decoction of bark, could be made to
pass downwards.

I should not have thought it necessary to mention even the name of opium in
this fever, had not Hillary advised it, and others rashly followed his advice
in giving it, to check the vomiting in the beginning of this disease.

In a fever so highly inflammatory, with the stomach in a constant state of
inflammation, and the contents of the whole alimentary canal so hot and acrid,
it must be, what I believe it often has been, a fatal medicine.

In regard to regimen, during the first three or four days, thin, soft, cooling
drink, emulsion, and chicken broth, besides the medicines, will be as much as
the stomach can sustain, even were any thing else necessary. After the crisis,
or after the first stage of the disease, panado, sago, and gruel, are the most
proper articles of nourishment, with the addition of a spoonful of Madeira
wine, where the patient is weak, languid, and exhausted. Wine cherishes the
stomach, and acts as a cordial, mixed with these nourishments; but if it be
given in any other way, it affects the head, and heats the patient. Wine, where
it is necessary, should be used in the same manner in all fevers.

THE CURE OF THE REMITTENT FEVER. By JOHN HUNTER, M. D. Observations on the
Diseases of the Army in Jamaica.

In treating of the cure of the remittent fever, I shall give an account of the
remedies, in the order in which they were administered when the fever had its
most usual appearance; and shall afterward enumerate the means that were found
most successful in removing, or palliating particular symptoms, etc.

No disease requires more speedy assistance; for the efficacy of the medicines
employed depends, in a great measure, on their being given early.

If I see a patient during the first fit, I direct an ounce of Glauber's salt,
or the same quantity of the bitter purging salt, to be dissolved in half a pint
of water, to which two drops of the oil of peppermint being added, four table
spoonfuls of the solution are given every half hour, till it operates, or be
all taken. As there is generally much sickness at the stomach, it is given in
small doses, lest it should excite vomiting. The essential oil covers the taste
of the salt, and renders it less offensive to the stomach.

It is probably of no great consequence, what kind of purgative medicine is
given, provided it operates effectually, and without violence.

After a few stools having been procured, the patient generally feels himself
much easier, and a remission often ensues. This is to be carefully watched for,
and immediate advantage is to be taken of it, for administering the Peruvian
bark. The common dose of this medicine is a dram, which may be repeated every
second hour; and as a general rule in giving it, this is perhaps the best; but
both the quantity and interval must often be varied, according to
circumstances. Where the preceding fit has been uncommonly severe, and there is
reason to fear that the succeeding one will be still more violent, and where a
long remission cannot be depended upon, the dose may be increased to two
drachms, which may be given every hour. But few stomachs will bear so much, and
sometimes the bark cannot be given at all, in substance. In such a case
recourse must be had to a decoction, or an infusion.

In severe attacks of the fever, in which it is absolutely necessary to watch
for the remission, in order to make the best advantage of it, whenever the
pulse becomes a little flower, and the heat begins to abate, a dose or two of
the infusion may be given, and the powder added afterward, as soon as the
stomach will bear it. This I found the most certain way of moderating or
preventing the next paroxysm.

The vehicle in which the bark is given, must, in many cases, be suited to the
patient's stomach. It will sometimes sit easy on the stomach, when mixed with
coffee, with wine and water, or with wine alone, if the remission be
considerable; in some cases, it answers the same purpose to mix it with milk,
or with a weak infusion of camomile flowers. By these expedients the stomach is
reconciled to the medicine, is enabled to receive a larger quantity of it, and
to retain it better.

It will sometimes happen that the bark purges strongly, and passes through the
body almost unchanged. This is not an unfavourable symptom, and the remedy is
easy, for three or four drops of the tinct. thebaic. added to each dose, soon
put a stop to the purging.

When the method of cure laid down above is carefully put in practice from the
beginning, it will, in many cases, prevent a return of the fever; in general,
however, a sufficient quantity of bark cannot be given on the first remission,
nor is there time for it to produce its effects upon the body, so as to prevent
a second paroxysm.

The heat, restlessness, anxiety, and indeed all the symptoms usually
accompanying the second paroxysm, are more violent than in the first, if
nothing has been done in the remission to stop the progress of the fever; but
if the length of the remission, and the state of the stomach have admitted of
the liberal use of the bark, it has a considerable effect upon the ensuing fit.
The symptoms run high, but the strength of the patient appears more equal to
the struggle; the paroxysm is sharp, but it is of short duration, and the
remission that follows is of the completest kind.

The medicine that I have found most considerably to relieve the symptoms
during the paroxysms, and promote a remission, is James's powder. It is given
in small doses, seldom exceeding five grains, and is repeated every three or
four hours. If the stomach be in an irritable state, the dose is often not
larger than half the quantity just mentioned; for, as has been observed before
no symptom of the disease is more troublesome or dangerous than vomiting; in
the cure, therefore, care must be taken to avoid every thing that might induce
or aggravate any tendency that way. The most salutary operation of James's
powder is, either to excite a sweat, or gently open the body. There is seldom
occasion to give James's powder in the first paroxysm, that being occupied by
the purgative medicine; but if the fit continues as long as forty-eight hours,
and the purge has been given and produced the full effect, and still there is
no remission, James's powder may be given in the manner just mentioned, and by
exciting a sweat, or further gently opening the body, it promotes a remission
of the fever.

In subsequent attacks, the same course is to be followed; that is, small doses
of James's powder are to be given during the paroxysm, and the bark in
remissions.

If James's powder does not keep the body open, which it seldom fails to do,
laxative glysters are of use; for it is to be observed, that one or two stools
in the twenty-four hours, greatly relieve the sick, and promote the good
effects of the bark. This is particularly the case in the fevers subsequent to
the rains in September and October, which are of the worst kind. In such it is
frequently advantageous to join four or five grains of rhubarb, to each dose of
the bark, in order to procure two or three motions in a day.

I have had occasion to mention, that no symptoms are more dangerous than
violent retching and vomiting, and nothing can be more pernicious than the use
of emetics in such circumstances. If there be sickness and vomiting at the
beginning of the disease camomile-tea, or warm water, are sufficient to cleanse
the stomach. If the vomiting or retching still continues after making use of
them, which they will often do, and harrass the sick, even during a remission
of the other symptoms, saline draughts, in a state of effervescence, repeated
every hour, or oftener, will frequently allay this distressing symptom. The
stomach is also relieved by opening the body, which further tends greatly to
check the vomiting; but as cathartic medicines would be immediately thrown up,
purgative glysters are the only means that can be employed for that purpose,
and it is necessary sometimes to repeat them several times. In this way the
vomiting is often quieted, and the stomach enabled to retain the bark.

It will sometimes, however, happen, in the worst fevers, that the retchings
are not abated by the effervescing draughts, which are themselves thrown up. In
such cases I have had recourse to opiates, and generally with success. From
fifteen to twenty drops of the tinct. thebaic. may be added to an effervescing
draught, or given in a little Bristol water, and repeated in two or three
hours, according to the exigency of the symptoms.

The vomiting being overcome, the bark must be given with diligence, yet with
caution at first, by beginning with the infusion, or decoction, and adding the
substance as the stomach will bear it.

During the accession of fever there is commonly more or less of headache,
which sometimes becomes extremely violent, and greatly distresses the patient.
A blister, applied between the shoulders, seldom or ever fails either to
relieve, or entirely remove this symptom.

In the very low state that was mentioned sometimes to succeed violent
paroxysms, especially in those fevers that were attended with yellowness of the
skin, nothing was so useful as cordials; for, though the bark was not entirely
laid aside, yet the quantity the stomach would bear, in any form, was so small
that little could be expected from it. Wine and nourishment were the best
cordials.

The nourishment which Doctor Hunter recommends, consists of chicken broth,
panado, sago, salop, thin gruels, and tea, in which bread has been soaked. To
all these, except the broth and tea, wine may be added, with sugar and nutmeg,
or any other spice that is more agreeable. It is of the utmost consequence in
giving both nourishment and wine, that it be repeated often, and that only a
little be swallowed at a time; for the stomach is easily overloaded, and
provoked to vomit.

When the sick are greatly reduced, after two or more paroxysms of fever, wine
and nourishment become more essential than medicine.

In treating the sick, I have supposed the method of cure to be put in practice
from the beginning of the disease; but this cannot always be the case, as, for
various and obvious reasons, a first, or even a second paroxysm may have passed
before any thing is done toward the cure. In this situation, if there be a
remission, and the preceding fit has been violent, and there is reason to
believe that the succeeding one will be more so, it is not advisable to lose
three or four hours in giving an opening medicine, which must therefore be
omitted, and the bark administered directly. In order, however, to prevent any
sense of fullness, either in the stomach or bowels, which might arise from that
medicine, and likewise to promote the operation of it upon the constitution,
some opening medicine is joined to it, so as to procure three or four stools in
the twenty-four hours. With this view, four or five grains of rhubarb may be
added to each dose of the bark.

If a delirium, with a considerable degree of wildness and agitation, which
sometimes prevail during the paroxysm, continue after the usual evacuations, an
opiate, given in a moderate dose, and repeated after two or three hours, will,
in some cases, have a good effect in quieting it, and thereby promote a
remission of the fever.

Doctor Hunter, in his observations on the effect of remedies, remarks;
Blood-letting well deserves to be considered. In such cases as seemed most to
require it, for example, where the patient was young, strong, of a full habit,
and lately arrived from Europe; where the pulse was quick and full, the face
flushed with great heat and headache, and all these at the beginning of the
fever, bleeding did no good. It neither diminished the symptoms for the time,
nor procured a speedier remission. I cannot say, however, that it did that
mischief that has been imputed to it by some; for, provided it were a moderate
quantity, it could hardly be said to produce any ill consequences. But if it
were copious, or repeated a second time, it was always hurtful, and rendered
the recovery of the patient extremely slow, if not attended with worse
consequences. This effect it had in the inflammations of the lungs that
sometimes happened, in which it was necessary to bleed freely. It will not be
considered as a recommendation of bleeding to say, that there were some cases
in which it did little or no harm, if used moderately; yet such is the
conclusion, to which the observations I had an opportunity of making lead me.

IT will be recollected that I set out with a resolution, from which I am
unwilling to depart, to make no comments on the doctrines, or method of cure,
of those authors who have written largely and learnedly on the bilious
remittent fever; but I cannot forbear making a remark or two on the practice of
administering of bark. My own experience authorizes me to say, as in page 105,
that I never knew it safe or useful, until an entire solution of the disease
took place; or at least when no symptoms of importance remained, except the
consequence of severe fever, viz. mere debility. That the bark is too
indiscriminately given, and without due regard to the condition of the first
passages, cannot have escaped the notice of the most inattentive; and to me it
appears evident, that in those cases where it is given in the early stages of
the disease, unless it acts as a gentle purgative, it seldom fails to do
mischief, particularly if the pain be considerable in the head, or any tension
or sense of fullness remains in either of the larger cavities. To throw in the
bark, as the phrase is, after the first obscure remissions in fevers of the
bilious sort, particularly in these northern climates, is a practice, in my
judgment, if not calculated to endanger the life, of the patient, at least such
as to protract, in many instances, the continuance of the most formidable
symptoms. This fact is correspondent with the observations and experience of
several practitioners of medicine in this city, who stand deservedly high in
their profession. The celebrated traveller Bruce, who was also a physician,
informs us, that in Masuah, on the coast of the Red Sea, a certain species of
fever prevails, which, in that country, is called nedad, and which, when it
terminates fatally, is generally on the third day. In this fever there is no
remedy so sovereign as the bark; but he positively asserts that it does not
succeed unless it acts as a purgative.

The second or third dose of the bark, (says he) if any quantity is swallowed,
never fails to purge; and if this evacuation is copious, the patient rarely
dies, but on the contrary, his recovery is generally rapid.

He further adds, bark, I have been told by the Spaniards, who have been in
South-America, purges always when taken in their fevers. A different climate,
different regimen and habit of body, or exercise, may surely so far alter the
operation of a drug, as to make it have a different effect in Africa to what it
has in Europe. Be that as it may, still I say bark is a purgative, when it is
successful in this fever, etc.

ERRATA.
Page 29, line 3, for "did not contract" read did contract.

Page 43, between the word "thought," at the end of the third line, and "that,"
at the beginning of the fourth, insert the word proper.

Page 55, line 4, for "first" read fact

Page 56, line 6, for "unsual" read usual.

Page 57, line 9, for "would" read could.

Page 102, line 11, for "poracious" read porracious.

Page 115, line 6, for "causes" read cases.

Page 124, line 6, for "that there was a" read one.

Page 129, line 10, between the words "required more" insert to be.

Page 130, last line but one, for "There" read These.

Page 133, line 6, for "of" read on.

Page 144, line 11, for "effects" read efforts.

FINIS.

