A VOYAGE TO New South Wales, etc.

A VOYAGE TO NEW SOUTH WALES; WITH A DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY; THE MANNERS,
CUSTOMS, RELIGION, etc. OF THE NATIVES, In the Vicinity of BOTANY BAY.

BY GEORGE BARRINGTON, NOW SUPERINTENDENT OF THE CONVICTS AT PARAMATTA.

PHILADELPHIA; PRINTED BY THOMAS DOBSON, AT THE STONE-HOUSE, No 41, SOUTH
SECOND-STREET. 1796.

TO MR. ****
DEAR SIR,
I EMBRACE the earliest opportunity of performing the promise I made you on my
quitting England; and should the contents of the accompanying sheets, collected
chiefly from personal observation, aided by the best local inquiries, acquit
me, in your mind, of a breach of that promise, I shall feel myself more than
happy: -- They had been more ample, but that I was impatient to pay a debt of
gratitude that would not brook the loss of an opportunity; consequently you
will find the conclusion rather abrupt; but by the next ship I shall, I trust,
make amends, having nearly transcribed some letters from my friend, Mr.
Wentworth, containing a pleasant narrative of the rise and progress of the
settlement at Norfolk Island; together with some farther particulars relative
to,

SIR, Your most obedient, And obliged, Humble Servant, G. BARRINGTON.
PARAMATTA, November 1793.
CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. AM ordered for embarkation -- Visited by my friends -- Receive many
presents -- Escorted from Newgate to Blackfriars-Bridge by the city guard, and
put on board a lighter -- Proceed down the river -- An accident alongside the
ship -- Receive great indulgence on board, through the interference of a friend
-- Situation of the convicts on board -- The ship drops down to Gravesend. --
The captain comes on board -- Proceed to the Downs, and from thence to the
Mother Bank -- Join several transports for the same destination -- The agent
for transports comes on board -- Makes the signal for sailing -- Get under
weigh, and run through the Needles -- Lose sight of land -- A violent gale,
Page 1 CHAP. II. Conspiracy of the convicts -- daring attempt to seize the ship
-- The mutiny quelled -- Gain the captain's friendship and confidence by my
behavior during the mutiny -- Arrive at Teneriffe -- Description of the town
and harbor of Santa Cruz -- Indulged with permission to go on shore -- Visit
Oratava, a town in the vicinity of the Peak -- Account of the country
surrounding that mountain -- Return to the ship, 7 CHAP. III. Leave Teneriffe
-- Shape our course for Saint Jago -- Prevented from anchoring in Port au Prayo
Bay by a contrary wind -- Sail to the southward -- Pass the Equator -- Ceremony
of ducking and shaving -- Make Cape Frio -- Anchor in the harbor of Rio
Janeiro -- Refreshments of all kinds brought on board -- Fruit served to the
convicts -- Description of the town and harbor -- Produce of Rio Janeiro, Page
15 CHAP. IV. The signal made for failing -- Get under weigh -- Squally weather,
with thunder and lightning -- Clears up -- Series of fine weather -- Arrive at
the Cape of Good Hope -- Rewarded by the captain with a hundred dollars for my
services during the insurrection of the convicts -- Permitted to go on shore --
Some account of the manners of the people of Cape Town -- Dine at a Table
d'Hote -- Fall in with an entertaining Frenchman -- His account of the slaves
-- Of the colonists in the environs -- Of the country of the Auteniquas, 21
CHAP V. Hunting the Elephant -- Wars of the Caffres -- Atrocious behavior of
the Colonists -- Their cruelty exemplified in the murder of a young prisoner --
Singular encounter with a Lion -- Courage, and tragical death of a widow,
attacking a Lion in defense of her cattle -- Description of the Black Eagle --
Accounts of various customs of the Hottentots, 28 CHAP. VI. Departure from the
Cape -- Gale of wind -- Part company with the rest of the transports --
Superstition of the seamen -- Story of the Flying Dutchman -- The boatswain
alarmed -- The gale subsides -- The phenomenon accounted for -- Sea birds make
their appearance about the ship -- Make Van Dieman's Land -- Beautiful
appearance of the Aurora Austrealis -- A number of seals alongside, 39 CHAP.
VII. Make the land of New South Wales -- Pass Botany Bay -- Come to an anchor
in Port Jackson -- Convicts ordered on shore -- Attend the governor, kindly
received, through the favorable report of the captain -- The governor promises
me his protection -- Return on board -- Take leave of my messmates -- Receive
orders to go on shore to Sydney Cove -- Accompanied by the captain -- Appointed
superintendent of the convicts at Paramatta -- Dine with a sergeant of marines
-- Wall round the cove -- Description of the settlement -- Sleep at Sydney --
Embark my effects and accompanied by the sergeant proceed to Paramatta --
Arrive at Rose-Hill -- Take possession of my habitation, account of the
settlement -- Wait on the commanding officer -- Receive instructions for my
future conduct, Page 45 CHAP. VIII. A general muster of the convicts -- They
are made acqainted with my situation among them -- Their behavior --
Avocations -- Hours of labor -- Attend public worship -- Get perfectly
acquainted with my duty -- Singular imposture of one of the convicts --
Encouragement given to the convicts to become settlers on the expiration of
their sentence -- Description of the kangaroo and of the native dog -- Get
acquainted with the natives -- Description of them -- Their weapons -- Manner
of painting themselves when going to battle, 50 CHAP. IX. Campaigns generally
settled by negotiation -- Their habitations -- Wonderful dexterity in climbing
the cabbage and palm trees -- Their method of hunting small animals --
Description of various Quadrupeds -- Curious similarity of the different
species -- Fish -- Birds -- Insects -- Plants and fruits, 62 CHAP. X. The
smallpox makes its appearance among the natives -- Dreadful ravages of it -- A
native boy and girl found laboring under that disorder, taken to the hospital
at Sydney Cove, and cured -- Seize a native who becomes tolerably civilized:
taken with the smallpox and dies -- Governor Philip gets two more of the
natives into his possession -- Are treated with the greatest kindness -- Their
escape from the settlement; are seen by the fishing parties -- The governor
desirous of a reconciliation, goes among the natives unarmed -- The interview
with Banalong, etc. -- One of the natives throws a spear and dangerously wounds
the governor, Page 72 CHAP. XI. A shooting party fall in with some of the
natives, who give information of the man who speared the governor -- Araboo
wants to be married -- Governor Philip has an interview with Banalong, and
makes him some presents, Barangaroo his wife introduced -- A second interview;
Banalong prevailed on to visit the settlement -- Curious behavior of his wife
on the occasion, repeats his visit with several of the natives -- Friendly
intercourse with the natives established -- Banalong's extraordinary behavior
to a native girl, 89 CHAP. XII. The governor goes to Paramatta, is accompanied
by Banalong -- Stop by the way to take up his wife, who refuses to go, and
prevails on her husband to quit the boat -- Fall in with a party lamenting the
death of a brother killed by the Camaragals -- The natives very alert in saving
a boat that had been taken away by some convict deserters, and cast on the
rocks in bad weather -- Banalong again prevented from accompanying the governor
by his wife -- His excellency's gamekeeper mortally wounded by the natives: --
A strong party sent out to punish the offenders -- Banalong plunders some of
the fishing-boats -- His behavior on being accused of the theft, Page 104
CHAP. XIII. The natives continue their visits to Sydney -- Banalong's
reconciliation -- Ceremony of cutting off the finger of female infant --
Curious method of curing disorders -- One of the natives' canoes stove by the
convicts -- He applies to the governor -- The offenders discovered and punished
-- A convict speared by Balderry, the owner of the canoe -- Governor Philip
sends a party of marines to take Balderry, who is advertised of his danger by
Nanbarre, the native boy -- The marines fire among the natives -- Banalong
brings his wife to Sydney to lie-in -- Her preparations for that occasion --
Governor Philip forgives Balderry at the intercession of Banalong, 115 CHAP.
XIV. Religion of the natives -- their superstition -- Preparations for a ball
-- Manner of dancing -- Their method of fishing; of procuring fire -- Their
courtship, 127 CHAP. XV. Land in cultivation at Paramatta -- Vicissitudes of
the weather -- Mortality of the convicts -- Investigation of their treatment on
board the transports -- Desertion of the convicts -- Stock my farm yard --
Governor Philip pleased with my superintendence -- Lose myself in the woods --
Interesting adventure -- Conducted to Paramatta by a native boy -- Visit my new
acquaintance -- Governor Philip departs for England. 133
A VOYAGE TO NEW SOUTH WALES.
CHAP. I.
Am ordered for embarkation -- Visited by my friends -- Receive many presents
-- Escorted from Newgate to Blackfriars-Bridge by the city guard, and put on
board a lighter -- Proceed down the river -- An accident alongside the ship --
Receive great indulgence on board, through the interference of a friend --
Situation of the convicts on board -- The ship drops down to Gravesend. -- The
captain comes on board -- Proceed to the Downs, and from thence to the Mother
Bank -- Join several transports for the same destination -- The agent for
transports comes on board -- Makes the signal for sailing -- Get under weigh,
and run through the Needles -- Lose sight of land -- A violent gale.
IT was with unspeakable satisfaction that I received a summons to be ready
early the next morning for my embarkation, agreeably to my sentence. I
instantly made the most of my time, and, by the assistance of a friend,
procured a few pounds' worth of necessaries for my voyage; government allowance
being extremely slender, especially for one like me, who had hitherto been
accustomed to most of the luxuries of the table. The news of my speedy
departure brought several of my acquaintance to bid me adieu, and, with
gratitude, I recollect that not one of them came empty handed; for, before the
time of locking-up, I had such a collection of ventures, that I doubted whether
I should be permitted to take them all on board: had each of my shipmates been
as well stocked, it would have needed a ship on purpose.

About a quarter before five a general muster took place; and, having bid
farewell to my fellow prisoners, we were escorted from the prison to
Blackfriars-bridge by the city guard, where two lighters were waiting to
receive us. This procession, though early, and but few spectators, made a deep
impression on my mind; and the ignominy of being thus mingled with felons of
all descriptions, many scarce a degree above the brute creation, intoxicated
with liquor, and shocking the ears of those they passed with blasphemy, oaths,
and songs, the most offensive to modesty, inflicted a punishment more severe
than the sentence of my country, and fully avenged that society I had so much
wronged.

Absorbed in the most humiliating meditation, the objects we passed going down
the river were totally unnoticed by me; nor was I roused from my lethargy till
I received a violent blow on the head, which I took at first for a stroke with
a stick, but on looking around me found we were alongside the ship, and that
the injury I had sustained proceeded from the boatswain, who, standing on the
gangway, had thrown a small coil of rope for some one on board the lighter to
take hold of, to bring us alongside, and which unluckily came in contact with
my head; this circumstance occasioned a laugh at my expense: but as I have
always found that chagrin and illhumour increases the mortification, I stifled
my real sensations, and seemed to join in the mirth. In my turn I ascended the
ship's side, and, to my great satisfaction, the first person I cast my eyes on
was my particular friend, whose generous exertions not only procured me stowage
for my packages, but also the liberty of walking the deck, unencumbered by
those galling and ignominious chains which my past conduct had consigned me to.
Not content with these services, he prevailed on the boatswain to admit me into
his mess, which was composed of the second mate, carpenter, and gunner, who
cheerfully acquiesced, on receiving my proportion toward defraying the extra
requisites for the mess during the voyage. My benefactor, having rendered my
situation thus comfortable, bade me farewell, and left me: my heart swelling
with gratitude, was too full, and interdicted all verbal acknowledgments; but
the remembrance is too strongly engraven thereon for the most distant time to
effect the slightest eradication.

My fellow prisoners, to the amount of upwards of two hundred, were all ordered
into the hold, which was rendered as convenient as circumstances would admit,
battens being fixed fore and aft for hammocks, which were hung seventeen inches
apart from each other: but being encumbered with their irons, together with the
want of fresh air, soon rendered their situation truly deplorable. To alleviate
their condition as much as was consistent with the safety of the ship, they
were permitted to walk the deck in turn, ten at a time: the women, of whom we
had six, had a snug birth made for them, and were kept by themselves.

My messmate, the boatswain, had provided me with a neat slung hammock, and
gave me a birth next his own; at the same time addressing some of his shipmates
who were present, with, Lookee, my hearts, as I know you are all above
distressing a gentleman under misfortunes, I Am sure you will consent to his
having this here birth; but if so be as how any of you don't like it, why, you
may have mine -- It is not the first time I have pricked for the softest plank.
Where from the oratory of my new friend, or the insinuating appearance of a
large can of slip, produced from a ample liquor-case, which promised a
succession of the same arguments, the iron muscles of his auditors were
softened down to a significant smile, and universal nod of assent. The settling
of this important business afforded me great satisfaction, as it not only
assured me a comfortable birth for my hammock, but a place also for my little
property, which I could have immediately under my eye.

We lay about a week at Long-Reach, when we dropped down to Gravesend: here the
captain came on board, and some soldiers of the New South Wales corpse; we got
under weigh the next morning, and proceeded to the Downs, it blowing strong to
the westward, we came to an anchor. The wind veering about, at daybreak we
were again under sail, and arrived at the Mother-Bank, where lay several other
transports for the same destination.

It was about ten days before we were ready to sail from hence, the interval
being employed in getting fresh stock, and replenishing our water. On the
report of our being ready for sea being made to the admiral, a lieutenant of
the navy came on board, as agent of transports, and immediately made the signal
for the masters of the other ships to come on board, to whom he delivered their
sailing instructions; and on the following morning made the signal to weigh: by
a quarter past nine we were under an easy sail; and it blowing a stiff easterly
breeze, we ran through the Needles: it was delightful weather, and the prospect
on each hand must have afforded the most agreeable sensations to every
beholder, and is, perhaps, as rich and luxuriant as is any where to be met
with; but, alas! it only brought a fresh pang to the bosom of one who in all
probability was bidding it adieu for over.

The weather continuing moderate, and the wind fair, we imperceptibly glid down
the Channel, and had lost sight of Old England before I turned out the next
morning. My frequent trips from Ireland to England had, in some measure, inured
me to salt water, nor did I want my sea-legs in a most violent gale, which took
place the third day after we lost sight of the land, and which for near ten
hours baffled the skill of all hands: two men were blown from the main*top-sail
yard, and the sail split to ribbands; all our endeavors to save the men proved
ineffectual. Soon after our fore-top mast went over the side, and carried four
men and two boys with it; but they were providentially taken up, having kept
fast to the wreck. By the indefatigable exertions of the seamen, the remainder
of the sails were handed, and the ship greatly eased, carrying only a storm-
staysail; the sea running very high and irregular, rendered it (...)
^^comfortable; and not being capable of any service upon deck, I retired to my
hammock, where I buried all thoughts of the contentious ocean in a sound sleep,
from which I was awaked by the shrill whistle of my messmate, piping all hands
to breakfast; the cheering sound of "steady" from the helmsman, saluting my
ears, and the quietness of the ship assured me the gale was past. Having
huddled on my cloths, I found on my ascending the deck, the storm had subsided,
the wind perfectly fair, and the ship jogging on under an easy sail, at the
rate of about seven miles an hour.

CHAP. II.
Conspiracy of the convicts -- daring attempt to seize the ship -- The mutiny
quelled -- Gain the captain's friendship and confidence by my behavior during
the mutiny -- Arrive at Teneriffe -- Description of the town and harbor of
Santa Cruz -- ludulged with permission to go on shore -- Visit Oratava, a town
in the vicinity of the Peak -- Account of the country surrounding that mountain
-- Return to the ship.
THIS danger was succeeded by one that had nearly proved much more fatal: the
captain, with great humanity, had released many of the convicts who had been in
a weakly state from their irons; and, as I have before observed, they were
allowed alternately, ten at a time, to walk upon deck. Two of them, Americans,
who had some knowledge of navigation, prevailed upon the majority of their
comrades to attempt feizing the ship, impressing them with the idea that it
would be easily effected, and that they would carry her to America, where every
man would not only attain his liberty, but receive a tract of land from
Congress, besides a share of the money arising from the sale of the ship and
cargo.

These arguments had the desired effect, and it was determined the first
opportunity that a part of those on the deck should, while the officers were at
dinner, force the arm-chest, which was kept on the quarter deck, at the same
time make a signal to two of them, who should be keeping the sentinels in
discourse, to attack them, get possession of their arms, and pass the word for
those below to rush upon deck.

This conspiracy was conducted with the greatest secrecy, and put in execution
with equal spirit and audacity. A favorable opportunity presenting itself, the
captain and most of the officers being below, examining the stowage of some
wine, a cask having leaked out in the spirit room, I was the only person on the
deck excepting the man at the helm; hearing a scuffle on the main-deck, I was
going forward, but was stopped by one of the Americans, followed by another
convict, who made a stroke at me with a sword he had wrested from one of the
sentinels, which was put aside by a pistol which the other had just snapped at
me; I snatched up a handspike luckily in my reach, and brought the foremost to
the ground: the man at the helm had quitted the wheel, and called up the
captain. I still kept my situation, guarding the passage of the quarter deck,
my antagonists having retreated a few paces, but being joined by many others,
were rushing on me, when the discharge of a blunderbuss from behind me among
them wounding several, they retreated, and I was immediately joined by the
captain and the rest of the officers who, in a few minutes, drove them all into
the hold. An attempt of this kind required the most exemplary punishment;
accordingly two of the ringleaders were instantly hung at the yard-arm, and
several others severely flogged at the gangway.

As soon as the conspirators were re-ironed, and the tranquillity of the ship
restored, the captain paid me many handsome compliments, in having, as he was
pleased to say, saved the ship, and assured me that when we arrived at the Cape
he should, on the part of his owners, think it his duty to reward the service I
had, by my courage and presence of mind, rendered them; at the same time he
gave his steward orders to supply me with any thing I might have occasion for
from his store-room during the voyage.

I soon experienced the good effects of my late behavior, as seldom a day
passed but some fresh meat or poultry was sent me by the captain, which
considerably raised me in the estimation of my messmates, who were no ways
displeased at the substitution of a sea pie made of fowl or fresh meat, to a
dish of lobscouse, or a piece of salt junk.

With a settled north-westerly breeze we gradually proceeded to the southward,
at the rate of between eighty and one hundred miles in twenty-four hours: we
soon reached the island of Teneriffe, and came to an anchor in the bay of Santa
Cruz, which is defended by several batteries of three or four guns each, at
certain distances from each other, round the bay, and close to the water's
edge; their principal fort is near to the landing-place, and mounts a number of
heavy cannon; it is a strong work, but there being a good depth of water close
in shore, it could not sustain the attack of two ships of the line, though the
whole of, the batteries mount more than one hundred pieces of cannon.

The town of Santa Cruz is very irregularly built, the principal street being
so broad, that it looks more like a square than a street: the house of the
governor, which is at the upper end, is a very indifferent looking building,
and has more the appearance of an Auberge than the palace of a Spanish grandee;
at the other end is a square monument, commemorating the appearance of Our Lady
to the Guanches, the Aborigines of the island. The outskirts appear like a
deserted village rather than a place of trade, many of the houses being either
half built, or fallen to decay from some cause or other; and the stone walls,
which were their principal fences, are broken down and in ruins.

Some of the officers having obtained leave from the agent of transports to
visit the town of Oratava, a few miles from Santa Cruz, we having completed our
water and fresh stock, and waiting for the other transports who had not been so
alert; on my expressing a desire to see the town, I was permitted to be of the
party. The country is exceedingly beautiful and fertile, notwithstanding the
frequent convulsions of the neighboring volcanos: we arrived at Oratava about
noon, and by signs, for none of us were masters of the language, we got a few
eggs, and plenty of small wine. We had scarcely taken our seats, when we were
relieved from the inconvenience attending our not being acquainted with the
language, by the arrival of an old Spanish soldier, who had been some time a
prisoner in England, and spoke our tongue tolerably well: we informed him we
had come from Santa Cruz to take a nearer view of the Peak, and, if time would
admit, to ascend it. He said it was impossible at this time of the year, as no
guides would undertake to accompany us, and that several of the goatherds who
had ventured after their goats, had perished from the intenseness of the cold,
but that he would take us as far as was prudent for us to venture. We thanked
him for the offer, and accordingly walked about a league from the town into the
plain, which extends to the base of the Peak, and had a full view of this
stupendous mountain. Immense quantities of lava, and huge fragments of rocks,
evidently vomited from the crater of the volcano, covered the plains, and
nearly reached the town: we gathered some small pieces which had been sparred
off, and found them impregnated with inflammable matter, and as hard as flint.
I measured one of the pieces of rock with some twine I had about me, and
afterward found it was near seventy feet in circumference. Our time being
short, and the weather intensely cold, we returned to Oratava, and got some
salt fish, with a few hard eggs for supper, to which our old soldier invited
himself, but amply repaid us for his intrusion by a lively and humourous
description of the squabbles of his neighbors, the knavery practiced by the
mountaineers on the curious and exploring stranger; his own heroism against the
Moors, and at the siege of Gibraltar, where he was taken prisoner, with his
amors while in England: the intervals were supplied by several songs from a
company of muleteers, who, by their extreme vociferation entirely discomposed
the serenity of our loquacious guest, and, but for my mediation, would have
produced a serious quarrel between them. Our leave of absence from the ship
extending till sunset the succeeding day, we enquired of our interpreter if we
could be provided with beds; he gave us to understand that a bed was an article
of luxury little known to the generality of the Oratavians, but he would get us
mats to sleep on, which we were fain to be contented with; and in spite of the
indefatigable labor of myriads of every species of vermin, I enjoyed as
profound a sleep as though I had rested on a bed of down. A little before
sunrise we were waked by the veteran, who had come to partake of our breakfast,
and show us the town. Not having stripped, we soon made our appearance at the
table, were he had provided half a dozen small loaves, some baccalo, and a
quantity of dried grapes; he had also boiled a large iron kettle of coffee, but
there being no sugar or milk at hand, we were glad to substitute some flasks of
Teneriffe for our beverage.

Oratava is situated on the declivity of a rugged hill, gradually sloping to
the sea, and commands a fine view of the bay, which, from the number of shoals,
will only admit ships of a small draught of water, and here merchantmen of this
description generally anchor, as wine, fruits, and vegetables, are procured at
oratava much cheaper than at Santa Cruz. It is certainly the most fertile side
of the island, and, in a great measure, supplies all the rest. Nothing can be
more charming or romantically situated than this delightful spot: the houses
are low, but remarkably neat, and of white stone. On one side of the street
runs a pleasant rivulet from a copious spring of the clearest and sweetest
water, which, in its progress over a rugged pavement, murmurs most agreeably
along. Hills rising above hills, crown with woods of the most luxuriant
foliage, and beautifully canopied with variegated clouds; and the stupendous
Peak, towering its majestic head above the whole, forms a prospect most
sublimely interesting.

The surrounding valleys, adorned with vineyards, and watered by innumerable
steams, forming natural cascades, complete the picture.

At noon we began to think of returning to the ship; and taking leave of Don
Gasparo, the old soldier, we reached Santa Cruz by sunset, and, one of the
boats being luckily on shore, immediately went on board, highly gratified with
our excursion.

CHAP. III.
Leave Tencriffe -- Shape our course for Saint Jago -- Prevented from anchoring
in Port au Prayo Bay by a contrary wind -- Sail to the southward -- Pass the
Equator -- Ceremony of ducking and shaving -- Make Cape F^i^ -- Anchor in the
harbor of Rio Janeiro -- Refreshments of all kinds brought on board -- Fruit
served to the convicts -- Description of the town and harbor -- Produce of Rio
Janeiro.
THE ships having completed their watering, fire signed was made for every
person belonging to the fleet to repair on board their respective vessels, and
the next morning the signal to get under weigh: with a pleasant breeze, we soon
lost sight of land. We steered to the south-west till we were in the meridian
of Saint Jago, when we shaped our course with an intention of coming to an
anchor in Port au Prayo Bay; but when we opened the bay were taken aback, and a
stiff breeze blowing direct in our teeth, it was thought that an attempt to
gain the bay would be attended with some risk and much loss of time, it was
therefore determined to give up the idea, and a signal was made for that
purpose. We then shaped our course to the southward, and as we crossed the
Equinoctial Line the ceremony of shaving and ducking was punctually observed:
at noon, a hoarse voice bailed the ship, as from the sea, with "Ho! the ship,
ho!" which was answered by one stationed for the purpose, with "Hallo! what
ship's that?" "The Albermarle." I don't recollect her passing this way before
-- I shall come on board an examine her. Upon which half a dozen most grotesque
figures entered the ship, as if from the bosom of the deep; having previously
slung a grating under each bow as a stage to ascend from; with great solemnity
they proceeded to the quarter deck: the principal personages were Neptune and
Amphi^rite, attended by their nymphs and neriads, personated by the oldest
seamen in the ship, but so disfigured with red ochre, robes, and wigs, made of
ravelled spun yarn, that it was a difficult matter to recognize their persons.
After receiving a double toll from the captain, it being the first time of the
ship's crossing the line, consisting of half a gallon of liquor, and two pounds
of sugar, they, in turn, questioned every person on deck. When any one said he
had crossed before, and had pot, his watery majesty, with great dignity, turning
to one of his attendants, who held a large book, said, Look if you have this
gentleman down in my log book? which being answered in the negative, the rum
and sugar was instantly demanded. When it came to my turn, my friend, the
captain, desired them to put my quota down to him. Having finished with the
quarter deck, they proceeded to the examination of their own comrades, after
having prepared for the ceremony of treating those who could not pay with a
view of Neptune's cellar; for this purpose they had made a tackle fast to the
main yard-arm, through which they rove a rope, with an iron crow made fast to
the end for a seat. The only exhibition was on the person of the cook, who not
being of the most conciliatory disposition, most of the ship's company owed him
a grudge; and as he peremptorily refused to pay, although in his power, they
placed him on the crow, and brought the yard rope between his legs, making
another fast round him, to prevent a possibility of his falling; they then
swung him off, and running him close up to the yard, soused the poor devil from
the height of near fifty feet into the water; this they performed thrice: when
they took him on board he was so much exhausted that his life was thought in
danger, which put an end to this part of the ceremony, and the other defaulters
were let off with only a shaving, performed by Neptune and his assistants: the
party was seated on a piece of board placed across a large tub; the razor part
of an iron hoop, and the soap not the finest Windsor, but a composition of tar,
tallow, and every filth they could collect: the disagreeableness of this
operation exclusive of the smart, the hand of the shaver not being of the
lightest, occasions a struggle to get from under it, in which the board whereon
he is seated gives way, and poor pilgarlick is unexpectedly emerged over head
and ears in bilge water. Those destined for this operation are kept close
prisoners, so that they are totally ignorant of what they are to go through,
but when the ordeal is once passed they think no more of it, but shake their
ears, and assist in carrying on the joke. The forfeits made them all as merry
as grigs, and the day closed with dancing and songs on the forecastle, and
every body, the cook excepted, forgot their temporary mortifications, and
joined in the evening's conviviality.

A most favorable breeze wafted us pleasantly along till we made Cape Frio: at
midnight we were abreast of the Cape, which is a small island, distant two or
three miles from the main land. We had very*little wind and variable weather
between the Cape and Rio Janeiro, a distance of fifty or sixty miles. A spurt
of wind from the sea carried us within the islands, when we came to an anchor
off the harbour's mouth. The next morning the agent went on shore to wait on
the viceroy, and in the afternoon we weighed and sailed into the harbor; as we
passed the fort we saluted them with thirteen guns, which was returned by
eleven (we not being a man of war) and came to an anchor abreast the town. The
ships in general were remarkably healthy, and had hitherto buried but few of
the convicts: in our passage from Teneriffe to this place we lost only four men
and one woman, which is a very inconsiderable number, considering their
confined state, change of climate, and unwholesomeness of living so long
entirely on salt provisions. Fresh meat and vegetables were brought from the
shore immediately on our coming to an anchor, and several country boats, with
pines, bananas, oranges, and every species of tropical fruits, came alongside,
of which the convicts had a certain proportion served them; the fruits being in
such plenty that the expense of distributing a few to each individual every
morning was very inconsiderable.

The harbor is very commodious, and will contain almost any number of ships,
where they may ride in perfect security from bad weather. The city of Saint
Sebastian is tolerably large, and regularly built; but from its being situated
on low swampy ground, surrounded by high hills, which entirely exclude it from
the refreshing sea and land breezes, so that in the summer months it is
insupportably hot, and of course very unhealthy. Some few of the streets are
pretty wide, but in general they are rather too narrow; the square opposite the
landing-place is spacious, and on the south side stands the palace of the
viceroy, a very handsome stone building, and is said to be very richly
ornamented within. The inside of the churches are decorated with the utmost
profusion, and most of them furnished with an excellent organ, and tolerable
good pictures over the different altars.

Here mechanics and tradesmen carry on their business in distinct parts of the
town, particular streets being appropriated for particular trades: here you
will find a whole street of un-smiths* another of tailors, a third of
carpenters, etc. etc.

The numerous forts and batteries which surround Saint Sebastian give it an air
of strength, but an enemy getting possession of the island of Cobres, which is
very near to, and overlooks the town, assisted by a few large ships, for which
there is plenty of water, would soon oblige it to capitulate.

The produce and exports of Rio Janeiro are gold, sugar, rice, coffee, and most
off the valuable drugs: we took a collection of seeds, and some young shoots of
the tamarind, banana, orange, lemon, and guava trees, in order to try them on
the soil of New South Wales.

CHAP. IV.
The signal made for sailing -- Get under weigh -- Squally weather, with
thunder and lightning -- Clears up -- Series of fine weather -- Arrive at the
Cape of Good Hope -- Rewarded by the captain with a hundred dollars for my
services during the insurrection of the convicts -- Permitted to go on shere --
Some account of the manners of the people of Cape Town -- Dine at a Table
d'Hote -- Fall in with an entertaining Frenchman -- His account of the slaves
-- Of the colonists in the environs -- Of the country of the Auteniquas.
WE lay here about three weeks, when the sick being pretty well recovered, the
ships replenished with water, and loaded with vegetables and fruits of all
kinds, the signal was made for sailing, and for the first three or four days we
proceeded-with a brisk north-easterly wind, when suddenly it became dark and
cloudy, with tremendous peals of thunder, and vivid flashes of lightning, from
every part of the horizon, attended with violent squalls, of wind, but of no
long continuance. At day break the wind shifted to the southward, and we had a
series of fine weather till we arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, on the
twentieth of July, and about sunset came to an anchor in Table-Bay.

This being the last port we could touch at for refreshments during the
remainder of the voyage, all hands set to work to procure such articles as they
might stand in need of, as well for their present consumption, as for their
future comfort in the new colony.

Early in the morning the captain ordered the pinnace to be manned, and went on
shore; from whence he returned about noon, and sending for me aft, gave me an
order on a merchant in Cape Town for one hundred dollars; at the same time
telling me that I might at any time take the opportunity of the boats going on
shore, to visit the town as often as I pleased, only speaking to the officer on
deck when I was so disposed. The confidence he reposed in me struck me more
forcibly than the money, and I was really so confused that I could scarcely
articulate my acknowledgments.

During our stay here I visited the town almost every day, taking care to be on
board by sunset; and laid out the money I had received in such articles as were
most in request in New Holland.

On entering a house in Cape Town, you are always presented with a sopi, that
is to say a glass of arrack, geneva, or, perhaps, French brandy: Geneva,
however, is the common morning dram. Before they sit down to table the
etiquette is to offer a sopi of white wine, in which aloes or wormwood have
been steeped, to create an appetite: at table they drink beer or wine
indiscriminately. The beer is much esteemed, but they place a higher value on
English porter. After the desert, which is always plentifully supplied, they
bring pipes and tobacco, and continue drinking and smoking till late in the
evening. This is their usual manner of living, with the exception of those in
indifferent circumstances, who drink their own wine; but in this particular the
vanity of the inhabitants is often highly ridiculous: one day as I was walking
with an acquaintance I had made at the Cape, he made me observe a man seated at
the door of his house, who seeing we were near him, began calling to his slave
to bring him some red wine, though he assured me he had not a single drop in
his house, and that most likely he had not tasted wine ten times in his life.
When we had passed a little way, I turned and saw that his slave had brought
him a glass of beer, which he with great ostentation deliberately drank off.
For twelve miles round the Cape the colonists do not employ the Hottentots,
choosing rather to purchase negroes, who are more industrious and trustworthy.
The Hottentots, careless and inconstant by nature, often go away from their
master on the prospect of hard work, and frequently leave them in
embarrassment: the negroes desert also, but vain are their efforts to regain
their liberty; they are soon retaken, and sent to the bailiff of the canton,
from whom they are redeemed by the proprietor for a small sum. Their correction
is much less severe than one would expect; indeed there are few places where
slaves are treated with more humanity than at the Cape.

The Creole slaves are most esteemed at the Cape, and fetch double the price of
any other: if they are initiated in any business, their price is exorbitant. A
good cook is worth from eight to twelve hundred rix-dollars; mechanics, double
that sum; and others in proportion. They are commonly neatly dressed, but walk
barefoot, as a mark of slavery. There are none of that insolent tribe called
footmen; luxury and pride not having yet introduced that useless lumber in the
antichambers of the opulent.

The negroes of Madagascar and Mosambique are looked upon as the most ingenious
and best workmen; they are also the most affectionate and faithful to their
masters: when they are first landed at the Cape, they usually sell for one
hundred and twenty to one hundred and fifty piastres a head. The Indians are
more employed in household work in the town; there are also some Malayans, but
they are the most subtle and dangerous of all other slaves, frequently
assassinating their masters or mistresses. When taken they go to execution with
the greatest indifference. I heard one of these wretches publicly declare, at
the place of execution, that he was glad he had committed the crime, as they
were only going to send him to his native country: it is a matter of wonder
with me, that these ideas are not productive of much greater mischiefs.

I frequently dined at a Table d'Hote, or ordinary, where I fell in with a very
intelligent Frenchman, who had traversed great part of the interior of the
country, and from time to time related many entertaining particulars; from
among which I selected the following account of one of his journies to the
country of the Auteniquas, which I hope will not appear tedious to my readers:

A traveller having arrived at the Cape, and signifying his intention of
visiting the interior of the country, I immediately offered him my services.
The bargain was soon struck, and I instantly set about procuring the necessary
articles for the journey. We set out on our expedition in the middle of
December, when I led the way toward Dutch Hottentote, our company consisting
of four horses, two of which were mounted by my master and myself, the others
by two Hottentots, in case any accident should befall ours; there were three
other natives, and each his dog: we stopped at the decline of day at the foot
of those high mountains that border the east of the Cape.

After two days journey we passed a little rivulet, and arrived at a wood
called Le Bois de Grand Pere, near the country of the Auteniquas, which we
found inhabited from the summit of the mountains to the water's edge by the
colonists, who breed vast quantities of cattle, make butter, gather honey, and
cut wood for fuel, as well as for the mechanic; these articles are all sent to
the Cape. It is astonishing that these people who have such plenty of timber,
do not build themselves tenable houses, instead of being content with miserable
huts, formed of hurdles covered with earth. The skin of a buffalo, stretched on
four stakes, serves for a bed; a mat closes the door-way, which is also the
window; two or three clumsy stools, some pieces of plank joined together make
their table, and an illmade box, off about two feet square, compose the whole
furniture of one of these dens. In other respects these people live
luxuriously; they have plenty of game and fish, and enjoy the advantage over
the other colonists, in having all the year without interruption their gardens
well stocked with all kinds of vegetables.

These advantages are owing to the goodness of the soil, and the natural
waterings from the various rivulets that wind and cross each other in a
thousand different directions, laying under contribution, if it may be so
expressed, the four seasons of the year.

In searching for a Touraco, which Monsieur may master had shot, he fell into a
pit upwards of twelve feet deep, which had been dug by the Hottentots, to
entrap wild beasts, particularly the elephant. Fortunately the hole was empty,
and he had the good fortune to escape being impaled alive on the pointed stakes
fixed at the bottom of these pits: they are generally slightly covered over
with slender branches of trees, and the interstices filled with turf and moss;
the roots most anxiously sought after by the elephant are strewed on the
surface, and the unweildy animal eagerly pressing forward after his favorite
food, is easily entrapped by the wily Hottentot into the snare: being wounded
by his fall, he is soon dispatched.

After many fruitless efforts to extricate himself, I being at some distance
with the Hottentots, he fired his fusee, and by that means brought us back to
his assistance. This accident, however serious, did not prevent him pursuing
the wounded bird, which at length he found, and considered the acquisition as a
full compensation for all his perils. The Touraco is as agreeable in its form,
as in the sweetness and melody of its notes; it is of a bright green, a tuft of
the same color, bordered with white, adorns its head; its eyes a sparkling
red, with a streak over them of the most dazzling white; its wings are a
beautiful purple, varying to the violet, according to the point of light in
which it is viewed. It is reckoned by the naturalists a species of the Cuckoo;
but they have been much mistaken, as it has not the least affinity wi^^ that
bird. The Cuckoo, in every part of the world, subsists on snails and insects,
but the Touraco is fruvigorous. In whatever part of the world the Cuckoo may
be, it is remarkable that she never builds a nest, but lays her eggs in those
of other birds, and by this means saves herself the trouble of rearing her
young; the Touraco, on the contrary, is careful of its family, builds a nest,
and hatches her own eggs: this difference in their disposition is, I think, a
sufficient reason to prove them a particular species.

CHAP. V.
Hunting the Elephant -- Wars of the Caffres -- Atrocious behavior of the
Colonists -- Their cruelty exemplified in the murder of a young prisoner --
Singular encounter with a Lion -- Courage, and tragical death of a widow,
attacking a Lion in defense of her cattle -- Description of the Black Eagle --
Accounts of various customs of the Hottentots.
WE had scarce recovered from this accident when one of the Hottentots came
running up to me, and said he had discovered the haunt of an elephant. After
some hours fatigue, painfully tracing him through a thick part of the wood,
rendered almost impassable from the thorns and briars, we arrived at an open
part of the forest, in which was a clump of shrubs and underwood: here we
stopped while one of the Hottentots ascended a tree; after looking round him,
he clapped his finger on his mouth as a token for us to be silent, then by
opening and closing his hand several times(a signal before agreed upon) gave us
to understand how many elephants he had discovered.

We now held a council of war, the result of which was, that the person who had
seen them from the tree should lead us as near as possible through the bushes
to the spot where he had discovered them. In a few minutes I was very near one
of those enormous animals, which I did not immediately perceive, not that fear
had fascinated my sight, but that I could scarce believe that the prodigious
immovable mass beneath me was the animal we had so much wished to encounter.
It should be observed we were on a hillock which raised us above the back of
the animal: I still kept looking farther on, and rather took what was so near
me for a fragment of rock than a living creature. The Hottentot now cried out,
"See, see there! there he is," with a tone of the utmost impatience. At length
a slight motion caught my eye, and immediately after the head and tusks, which
the enormous body had in part concealed, were turned toward me: Monsieur, who
was close behind me, without losing time, let fly at him; I immediately
followed his example, and both shots took place in his head; he staggered and
fell: the noise frighted the rest, and they, to the number of thirty, scampered
off as fast as their unweildy corporations would permit them. This was but a
prelude to a more animated scene.

While we were examining the animal we had killed, another passed just by us,
which was fired at by one of the Hottentots, and by the blood that trickled
down his huge shoulders I imagined he was mortally wounded, and immediately
pursued him. He would have laid down, but was prevented by our repeated firing;
he then took to the thickest part of the wood; we followed him into a thicket,
in which was a number of decayed trees that had fallen through age. The beast
now became enraged from the number of his wounds, and made furiously at a
Hottentot who had just discharged his piece at him, and in an instant trod him
to death, and thursting one of his tusks into the body, with a toss threw it
upwards of thirty yards from him. We were about five-and-twenty paces from the
poor fellow, my master a few paces behind me; I was too much encumbered for
speed, my carabine being very heavy, and having a good deal of ammunition,
together with a net containing several large birds, slung across my shoulder: I
ran with all my might, but the enraged animal no sooner cast his angry eyes on
me, than he pursued me at a full gallop, and gained ground every instant. More
dead than alive through fear, abandoned by the Hottentots, who, checked by the
fate of their comrade, were less courageous than usual, the only chance I had
was to lie down close to the trunk of a large tree that was near me, which I
had scarce time to accomplish before the animal ran over it; but scared at the
hooting of the Hottentots instantly stopped, as it were to listen. I could
easily have hit him from my situation had I chose, but although my piece was
loaded, I restrained firing; for though he had received so many*wounds I
despaired to disable him by a single shot, so kept my situation, every moment
expecting to become a prey to the enraged beast.

The Hottentots, having lost sight of me, as I lay close under the tree, not
daring to stir, and not answering to their repeated cries, were persuaded I was
already crushed to pieces, made the woods re-echo with their shouts. The
elephant, turning hastily round, passed me a second time, and, stepping over
the tree not six yards from me, went off on a full gallop. I sprung on my feet
as soon as he had passed, and, showing myself to my companions, fired another
shot after him, which did not stop his career, but rushing into the thickest
part of the woods, he disappeared.

The report of my piece was an universal signal of joy. I was immediately
surrounded by the Hottentots, whose countenances beamed the most lively and
disinterested emotions of gladness: my master in the most affectionate terms
expressed his satisfaction at my escape, pressing me eagerly in his arms. Night
drawing on, we returned to find the elephant we had killed in the morning. The
carcass was already in the possession of several large birds of prey, who had
lost no time, having already made great progress in its dissection.

Fires were now quickly kindled; and our attendants, after having pitched the
tent, began to show their skill in cooking. They cut off several steaks to
broil for themselves, dressing a part of the trunk for us: it was the first
time I had ever tasted this kind of food, but I determined it should not be the
last, as I thought it delicious. Having settled the necessary preliminaries of
watching round the tent, we went to rest, with as much composure as though we
were at an inn; nor were we disturbed 'till sunrise, when we set forward on our
journey. As we passed a small river we met a company of Hottentots, of about a
score, who had fled from the wars of the Caffres. By our guides we learnt that
those people are most vilely calumniated: the perpetual vexations and tyranny
of the colonists gave rise to those wars, in which the Caffres have been
represented as ferocious animals, nurtured with human gore, sparing neither age
nor sex, and totally regardless of the rights of hospitality. The colonists
often form pretenses of losing their cattle, purposely to make inroads into the
Caffree settlements, exterminating whole hordes without distinction of age or
sex, carrying away their herds, and laying waste the country; this being an
easier method of obtaining cattle than rearing them.

In destroying a small settlement of Caffres, a child of about twelve years of
age escaped the general carnage, by concealing himself in a hollow tree, but,
unfortunately, was discovered by one of the Marauders, who determined to make a
slave of his prize. The commander of this barbarous detachment peremptorily
laid claim to the little trembling prisoner; the captor as firmly refused to
deliver him up, which so enraged the savage leader that he ran with the utmost
fury at the innocent object of the dispute, exclaiming -- "If I must not have
him, neither shall thou!" and accompanied these words with a blow of his sabre,
which laid the unfortunate victim dead at his feet.

About noon one of our people who had gone on some hundred yards before us,
came running back with evident maks of confusion: on enquiring the cause, he
told us there was a Lion couching in a thicket a little ahead of us, and that
he would certainly attack us if we proceeded. we immediately halted to consult
what was to be done. Monsieur, desirous of adding the spoil of the king of the
forests to his other acquisitions, decided on the attack. Accordingly the
horses and dogs were given in charge to one of the natives to keep them back,
and we, to the number of five, marched on, keeping a sharp look out. We had
proceeded near half a mile, and finding nothing, concluded it was an imaginary
lion only in the idea of Eaco (the name of the Hottentot who had given us the
intelligence), who having lately lost a very good mistress, killed by one of
those animals, was in continual dread of them.

Her habitation being on the skirts of a wood, one gloomy night the family was
awakened by the lowing of the cattle, in an enclosure at a small distance from
the house: they immediately seized their firearms, and running to the spot,
found a lion had broken through the fence, and was making terrible havoc among
the cattle. It was only necessary to enter the enclosure, and fire, to kill the
animal; but neither of her sons, servants, or slaves, had sufficient courage to
attempt it. The undaunted matron, therefore, entered alone, and, armed with a
musket, approached the scene of carnage: the darkness of the night prevented
her perceiving the animal till she was close to him, when she courageously
fired, but was so unfortunate as only to wound him; he instantly rushed upon
her: the screams of the unfortunate mother brought her sons to her assistance.
Furious -- desperate -- distracted -- they flew upon the tremendous animal, and
killed him, though too late to save her, and he fell breathless on the mangled
body of their parent. Exclusive of the deep wounds she had received from the
fangs and talons of the ferocious savage, he had bit one of her hands off at
the wrist. Assistance was ineffectual; she died the same night amidst the vain
lamentations of her pusillanimous sons and servants.

The remembrance of this scene had made so deep an impression on the mind of
Eaco, and filled him with such apprehensions, that he frequently teazed his
comrades with false alarms, of being near the dens of lions, and of being sure
of seeing him in such and such a thicker, so that at last they paid little or
no regard to his representations, and, in the present instance, acquainted us
with his disposition, and advised me to order the horses forward, and to
continue our route, as we were three days from any habitation, and our
provisions near exhausted. The trembling Eaco at this instant cried, "There,
there!" when hearing a rustling among the bushes I hastily looked round, and
(...) the beast in the act of springing upon his prey, one of the Hottentots
being within his reach: as swift as lightning he darted upon the poor fellow;
but rather overleaping himself, in bringing him to the ground his fore-quarters
extended so far over him, that his antagonist, with the utmost intrepidity and
presence of mind, clasped him firmly round the middle, and pressing him to his
breast, the animal was so situated that he could do him little or no injury; at
this moment one of his comrades ran to his assistance, and clapping the muzzle
of his piece to his ear, dispatched him instantaneously, and thus
providentially delivered his fellow servant unhurt from this imminent danger.

"This narrow escape, added to the loss of our man killed by the elephant,
rather abated the ardour of our pursuit, and Monsieur began seriously to think
of returning to the Cape, which we reached without any remarkable occurrence
happening. In our way I shot an eagle of a species hitherto unknown, and
considered as a great rarity by my master: it was of a bright black, with a
ring of burnished gold round his neck, and seemed to resemble the vulture as
much as the eagle, though different in some instances. Hunger changes the eagle
into a vulture; that is to say, when it is hungry it will feed on putrified
carrion. It is a vulgar error that this bird only subsists by preying on
others; for I have frequently seen eagles, as well as other carnivorous birds,
attracted by the offal of the beasts we had killed." He also related some
particulars respecting the Hottentots, completely refuting the accounts of our
geographical writers, who describe a most filthy custom used by the Hottentots
at their marriage ceremonies; the priest being said to bestow publicly a
urinary stream on the bride and bridegroom, in presence of all the assembled
friends. The formalities of those marriages, he said, consisted in the promises
they made each other to live together as long as they may find it convenient;
the engagement made, the young couple, from that moment, are man and wife. They
then kill some sheep, sometimes an ox, to celebrate this little holiday. The
parents on both sides furnish the young couple with some cattle; they
immediately apply themselves to the construction of a hut, forming an
enclosure, and in getting together their little stock of necessaries. They live
together as long as a good understanding subsists between* them; for should any
difference arise, which is not likely to subside, they make no scruple of
separation, but part with as little ceremony as they met; and each, free to
form fresh connections, seeks elsewhere a more agreeable partner.

In cases of separation, the effects of the married pair are equally divided;
but should the husband, in his quality of master, insist on retaining the
whole, the wife never fails to find those who will assert and defend her right;
her family interests itself, nor are the friends of the man idle; so that,
sometimes, the whole horde is in a ferment; in the end they come to blows, and,
as in all other places, the conquerors give laws to the vanquished. The mother
always has the care of the younger children, especially if they are girls,
while the boys, who are able to follow their father, are sure to belong to him.
These disagreements, however, are far from being common; and it is equally
worthy of remark that they have no known law, or established custom, to which
they can refer for the termination of their differences.

Among those Hottentots who are the most distant from the colonists, conjugal
fidelity is held more sacred than among the polished offspring of refinement;
though polygamy is not repugnant to the customs of the Hottentots, it is by no
means common among them. They may take as many wives as they please; but
whether from a love of peace, or any other motive, seldom have but one. Women
are never known to cohabit with two men. Nature, that would ever have a man
able to ascertain his own offspring, has wisely planted in the heart of a
female Gonaquais Hottentot, an invincible aversion from such infamous
prostitution; nay, so disgusting is it to these people, that a husband, on a
knowledge of the most trifling infidelity of his wife, might kill her, without
fear of incurring the reproach of his horde.

With ideas of honor such as these, the reader will the more easily be induced
to discredit the assertions of many writers; that the Hottentots indulge in
connections of an incestuous nature. It being hinted that strong suspicions of
this sort had been entertained of them, they showed signs of the greatest
detestation. "Do you take us for brutes?" said they, and immediately broke off
all farther converse; nor could all we had to say prevail on them to forget the
offense.

CHAP. VI.
Departure from the Cape -- Gale of wind -- Part company with the rest of the
transports -- Superstition of the seamen -- Story of the Flying Dutchman -- The
boatswain alarmed -- The gale subsides -- The phenomenon accounted for -- Sea
birds make their appearance about the ship -- Make Van Dieman's Land --
Beautiful appearance of the Aurora Austrealis -- A number of seals alongside.
HAVING completely stored the ship with provisions and water, taken in six
hundred casks of flour for the colony, and various other stores, the signal was
made for the transports to be in readiness to get under weigh. I bade my new
friend adieu, hastened on board, and the next morning we worked out of the bay.
We had scarcely got a tolerable offing when a very heavy gale blew from the
northward, and the sea soon ran mountains high. The vessel being deep loaded,
we shipped some very heavy seas, which obliged us to lay to near
four-and-twenty hours.

I had often heard of the superstition of sailors respecting apparitions, but
had never given much credit to the report: it seems that some years since a
Dutch man of war was lost off the Cape, and every soul on board perished: her
consort weathered the gale, and arrived soon after at the Cape. Having
refitted, and returning to Europe they were assailed with a violent tempest
nearly in the same latitude. In the night watch some of the people saw, or
imagined they saw, a vessel standing for them under a press of sail, as though
she would run them down: one in particular affirmed it was the ship that had
foundered in the former gale, and that it must certainly be her, or the
apparition of her; but on its clearing up, the object (a dark thick cloud)
disappeared. Nothing could do away the idea of this phenomenon on the minds of
the sailors; and, on their relating the circumstances when they arrived in
port, the story spread like wildfire, and the supposed phantom was called the
Flying Dutchman. From the Dutch the English seamen got the infatuation, and
there are very few Indiamen but what have some one on board who pretends to
have seen the apparition.

About two in the morning I was waked by a violent shake by the shoulder, when,
starting up in my hammock, I saw the boatswain, with evident signs of terror
and dismay in his countenance, standing by me. "For God's sake, messmate," --
said he -- "hand us the key of the case, for by the Lord I Am damnably
scarified: for, do you see, as I was just looking over the weather how, what
should I see but the Flying Dutchman coming right down upon us, with every
thing set -- I know it was she -- I could see all her lower-deck ports up, and
the lights fore and aft, as if cleared for action. Now as how, do you see, I am
sure no mortal ship could bear her lower-deck ports up and not founder in this
here weather: Why, the sea runs mountains high. It must certainly be the ghost
of that there Dutchman, that foundered in this latitude, and which, I have
heard say, always appears in this here quarter, in hard gales of wind."

After taking a good pull or two at the Holland's he grew a little composed,
when I jokeingly asked him, if he was afraid of ghosts? "Why, as to that, do you
see," -- said he -- "I think as how I Am as good as another man; but I Would always
a terrible antipathy to those things. Even when I was a boy, I never could find
it in my heart to cross a churchyard in the dark without whistling and
hallooing, to make them believe I had company with me, for I Have heard say they
appear but to one at a time; for now, when I called to Joe Jackson, who was at
the helm, to look over the weather bow, he saw nothing; though, as how, I saw it
as plain as this here bottle," taking another swig at the Geneva.

Having some curiosity to see if I could make out any thing that could take
such an appearance, I turned out, and accompanied him upon deck; but it had
cleared up, the moon shining very bright, and not a cloud to be seen; though,
by what I could learn from the rest of the people who were on deck, it had been
very cloudy about half an hour before, of course I easily divined what kind of
phantom had so alarmed my messmate. The sea running very high, and the gale
rather increasing, we continued to lay to, and in the morning found we had
parted company with the rest of the transports, not one being discernible from
the mast head.

The wind abating in the afternoon, and coming to the north-west, we bore away
under a reefed foresail: and it continuing to blow a very strong gale, we
jogged on in this manner about ten days, when the weather moderating we crowded
all the sail we could make from this time till we made Van Dieman's land, off
which we frequently saw in the night the sea covered with luminous spots,
resembling lights floating on the surface, and I immediately imagined that it
might have been some of these which the boatswain had seen through a passing
cloud, and which he magnified into lanterns on a ship's lower deck, as in some
points of view they had very much that appearance.

Whether these shining spots proceed from the spawn of fish floating in small
quantities, or from an animal of a jelly*like substance, called by the sailors,
blubber, is not determined, though I am of the latter opinion; vast shoals of
them surrounded the ship in the course of the day. Numbers of sea birds now
hovered over us, such as albatrosses, gulls of various species; and a large
black bird, greatly resembling a crow, but rather bigger. In the evening the
horizon was beautifully illumined by the aurora austrealis, or southern lights:
they were of a bright crimson, variegated with orange, yellow and white
streaks, continually changing their hues, and presented a most sublime and
animating picture.

The next morning at daybreak the man at the mast head cried out, "Land, hoa!"
which agreeable sound re-echoed through the ship; and it clearing up we found
ourselves close in with it. It appeared a bold even shore, with some hills
inland, pleasantly ornamented with tall straight trees, supposed to be cabbage
or palm trees, from their having branches only near the top.

We sailed along the coast for some leagues, in the course of which we saw some
pretty deep bays. We now stretched off in order to get a good offing, and to
weather some rocks about three leagues from the shore, being afraid of passing
too near them in the dark.

At daylight they appeared about six miles on our lee-beam. Here we perceived
a number of seals playing and sporting alongside: they were in general of the
size of a common dog, with a long head, tapered to the nose like a greyhound;
they frequently raised themselves half the length of their body out of the
water, turning round as it were to reconnoitre, and sometimes in their gambols
leaped entirely out. We took our leave of these sportive gentry, and, shaping
our course for New Holland, before sunset lost sight of the land.

CHAP. VII.
Make the land of New South Wales -- Pass Botany Bay -- Come to an anchor in
Port Jackson -- Convicts ordered on shore -- Attend the governor, kindly
received, through the favorable report of the captain -- The governor promises
me his protection -- Return on board -- Take leave of my messmates -- Receive
orders to go on shore to Sydney Cove -- Accompanied by the captain -- Appointed
superintendent of the convicts at Paramatta -- Dine with a sergeant of marines
-- Walk round the cove -- Description of the settlement -- Sleep at Sydney --
Embark my effects and accompanied by the sergeant proceed to Paramatta --
Arrive at Rose-Hill -- Take possession of my rabitation, account of the
settlement -- Wait on the commanding officer -- Receive instructions for my
future conduct.
A FAVORABLE slant of wind, enabled us to make the land of New South Wales on
the 12th of October, about eight leagues distant. -- We stood on till we were
within about six or seven miles from the shore, and then ranged along the coast
pleasantly. -- At noon we were abreast of a point of land, called red point,
only ten leagues distant from Botany Bay. -- About two leagues to the southward
of the Bay is a chain of chalky hills, overtopped by level land* -- On this
land is a clump of trees something like Postdown-hill in the neighborhood of
Portsmouth. The wind springing up to the eastward, we stood from the land,
under an easy sail, till daylight, when we were quite abreast of the bay; and,
at noon, on the 13th. came to an anchor in Port Jackson, about five or six
leagues to the northward of it.

At ten o'clock the next morning the convicts were all ordered on shore; their
appearance was truly deplorable, the generality of them being emaciated by
disease, and those who labored under no bodily disorder, from the scantiness
of their allowance, were in little better plight. The boats from all the ships
in the harbor attended in order to land them, there were in all two hundred
and fifty men, six women, and a convict's wife and child who had obtained
permission to accompany her husband. -- We lost, during the voyage thirty two
men. -- Upon their landing they were entirely new clothed from the king's
store, and their old things were all burnt, in order to prevent any infectious
disorder that might have been in the ship, from being introduced into the
colony.

From the report of the captain I had a most gracious reception from the
governor, he told me that on account of my behavior on board, he would place
me in a situation that should render my exile from England as little irksome as
possible, and that if I continued to deserve it I might rely on his favor and
protection: for the present I might return on board, and as soon as any boat
could be spared from the ship, it should convey me and what things I had up to
Paramatta, where a habitation should be provided for me. The next morning I
received orders again to attend the governor at Sydney Cove, and to put my
property in charge of sergeant of marines, who came off in a large boat, and
who was to see it safely lodged in the public store, till such time as I should
be settled, and able to take care of it myself.

I took leave of my messmates with unfeigned regret, the captain himself
accompanied me on shore, and waited on the governor with me. -- His excellency
said he had long wanted a proper person as superintendent of the convicts at
Paramatta, that he had appointed me to that office, and that I should take
charge of the farm-house there. -- When I was dismissed, the sergeant took me
to his house where I partook of a good fish dinner; and, it being some time
before we could set off for my future residence, we took a walk round the Cove,
where some considerable buildings have been erected, for the governor, the
lieutenant governor, the judge-advocate and the greatest part of the officers.

The governor's house is of stone, near seventy feet in front, and makes a very
handsome appearance. The houses of the officers are of brick, the rest are
generally log houses, plastered; the roofs are either shingled or thatched.
Here is also an hospital, a good temporary building, and also barracks for the
soldiers, and comfortable cabins for the officers, with gardens adjoining; but
unluckily these gardens are not very productive, as the soil is very
indifferent; and to this inconvenience must he added the depredations of rats
and thieves. A mile or two from the Cove, the soil is considerably better,
where the officers and others have little farms; there are also brick-kilns,
and a pottery, both of which articles they would bring to tolerable perfection,
where they possessed of the materials used to glaze their earthen-ware. I
wonder there are not more stone buildings here, stone, resembling that of
Portland, being at hand in great abundance, exceedingly soft, but hardens very
much after it is wrought, and exposed to the weather.

Not being able to proceed 'till the morning, I slung my cot in a corner of the
serjeant's house, and spent the evening with him; we rose at day break, and,
re-embarking my effects, left Sydney Cove about eight o'clock in the morning,
and arrived at Paramatta about noon. Two or three miles before you come to the
town, the river is quite narrow, not more than six or eight yards across, and
the banks so high that you can scarce see the face of the country. -- Where
they were lower it had very much the appearance of a park or a gentleman's
pleasure ground. In our progress we saw several kangaroos but had a very
imperfect glance of them; the grass being long, entirely hid them from our view
except when they were in the act of leaping.

We landed about a quarter of a mile from the town and walked up to it; it is
situated on an elevated spot in the form of a crescent; a strong redoubt is
constructed where there are very good barracks for a detachment of the
military, which is always on duty here; as well to preserve good order and
regularity among the convicts, as a check upon the natives, who from the
distance to Sydney Cove might be tempted to molest the settlers, were there no
armed force to protect them; they have little apprehension from the natives as
they have never shown any inclination to attack armed me; not that they are
destitute of courage, but that they are perfectly convinced of the great and
invincible superiority of our firearms. After a short walk we arrived at the
house appropriated for me, it is a compact little cottage with four rooms in
it; the situation is most delightful, being in the midst of pleasant gardens --
the convict's houses form a line in front, at some distance, they have each a
small garden and those who have been industrious seem very comfortable, as
their day's work is not so hard, as many working men's in England.

A servant who kept the house gave us some refreshment, after which I waited on
the commanding officer of the troops, on duty here, and presented a letter
given me by the governor; my reception was as agreeable as I could expect, he
told me that the next day he would cause the convicts to be mustered in my
presence, and inform them of my situation, as superintendent, and would then
give me some instructions necessary to regulate my future proceedings.

CHAP. VIII.
A general muster of the convicts -- They are made acqainted with my situation
among them -- Their behavior -- Avocations -- Hours of labor -- Attend public
worship -- Get perfectly acquainted with my duty -- Singular imposture of one
of the convicts -- Encouragement given to the convicts to become settlers on
the expiration of their sentence -- Description of the kangaroo and of the
native dog -- Get acquainted with the natives -- Description of them -- Their
weapons -- Manner of painting themselves when going to battle.
IN the morning a general muster took place; when the whole were assembled, to
the amount of near four hundred; they were informed by the officer of the trust
the governor had been pleased to repose in me, and that any misbehaviour or
disobedience of orders issuing from me would be as severely punished as though
they proceeded from the governor himself: they were then dismissed to their
several employments. I proceeded through the different gangs of people at their
respective occupations; and found them much more attentive to their business
and respectful to those over them than I could possibly have imagined. Some
were employed in making bricks and tiles; others, building storehouses, huts,
etc. a great number clearing the grounds, bringing in timber, and making roads,
Others at their different callings, such as smiths, gardeners, coopers,
shoemakers, tailors, bakers, attendants on the sick, etc. The hours of work are
from sunrise till half past seven, when they breakfast; at half past eight they
resume their work 'till half past eleven, when they are rung to dinner; at two
they recommence their labors, and the setting of the sun is the signal that
terminates their daily toil, and which is announced by the drum beating a
retreat. In order to encourage the cultivation of gardens, Saturday is
appropriated to clear away and cultivate spots of ground for themselves; and
those who have been industrious now find the benefit, by having plenty of
vegetables, which saves their salt provisions, and enables them to truck with
the natives for fish. Independent of this advantage, those who rear the
greatest quantities of vegetables and plants receive premiums from the
governor, who, at the proper season of the year, distributes seeds among them
for that purpose. The women sweep round the huts every morning, and cook the
victuals for the men, collect all their dirty clothes, and return each man his
respective linen, washed and mended, on the Sunday morning.

No person is excused from attending divine worship, which is performed every
Sunday morning at eleven O'clock, when all the convicts are obliged to attend
in clean linen, and, indeed, behave in a more orderly and devout manner than
would be naturally expected: indeed, the indefatigable zeal and wise measures
pursued by the worthy governor in the formation of this infant colony is beyond
all praise.

I had some apprehensions that from my former situation in life should have
been exposed to many mortification, although shielded by the protection of my
office; but I saw few faces who recollected me, and those who did behaved in
the most respectful manner. The greater part of those who came over with me
were sent to Norfolk Island, and those that were left remained at Sydney Cove.

My business was chiefly to report the progress made in the different works
carrying on at Paramatta; for which purpose I was furnished with abstracts from
a kind of overseers or head men of the various gangs; and in less than a week I
was as much at home, and as perfectly master of the business, as though I had
been coeval with the colony.

From a necessary and well regulated discipline, the convicts who had come over
in the first ships had been brought into the excellent order above described;
but many severe examples were made ere they were reduced to order, and various
knaveries and tricks played on the officers; but punishment never failed to
attend the detection of their frauds. In the infancy of the settlement a
convict had industriously spread a report that he had discovered a gold mine,
which at first gained credit, as the ore pretended to have been found had
something of the appearance of gold ore.

They circumstance was as follows: One Dailey, a convict, had, be pretended,
discovered a piece of ground which contained a considerable quantity of gold
ore, some of which was produced, tried, and found to contain a small portion of
gold. The governor was absent at this time on an excursion into the country:
the report coming to the ears of the lieutenant governor, he examined the
pretended discoverer, who told his story with the greatest plausibility, and it
was not doubted but an important discovery had been made. Dailey was
interrogated as to the place, but refused to give the necessary information
till the return of the governor, to whom he would give a full and satisfactory
account of the discovery, on a promise that he would grant him what he should
think equivalent to the importance of the discovery, and which he (Dailey)
conceived a small compensation for so valuable an acquisition: the demand was,
his own and a particular woman convict's enlargement, and a passage in one of
the first ships to England, together with a sum of money. The
lieutenant governor told him, that unless he pointed out the spot he should
consider him as an impostor, and order him to instant punishment, for daring to
impose upon those officers to whom he had related the business. The dread of
punishment disposed him to come to a little, though not without apparent
reluctance: he proposed to the lieutenant governor that an officer should be
sent down the harbor with him, for the treasure, he said, lay in the lower
part of the harbor, and near the sea shore; and he would show the officer the
exact spot: accordingly he was taken at his word, and an officer, with a
corporal, and two or three soldiers, were sent with him; he pointed out the
landing-place, whence he said it was but a short walk to the desired spot. They
entered the wood, but had scarce got among the bushes, which were very thick,
than he begged leave to turn aside as though he had a pressing occasion; this
was granted him: the officer continued waiting for him, but to no purpose; for
as soon as he had got out of their reach he pushed off toward Sydney Cove by
land, leaving the officer and his soldiers to beat their heels, and curse their
credulity in letting him out of their sight.

The officer having dispatched the boat back on their landing, intending to
return on foot, was left in no very enviable situation. Mr. Dailey reached
Sydney in the afternoon, and informed the lieutenant governor that he had left
those whom he had sent down with him in entire possession of the gold mine: he
then got a few things from his own tent, and disappeared. The party, after
searching some hours after the cheat, marched round to the camp, where they
arrived at dusk, heartily tired, and not a little chagrined at the trick the
villain had put upon them.

The want of provisions soon brought the discoverer back to the settlement, and
a severe flogging was the reward of his ingenuity; however he still persisted
in having made the discovery which he before had mentioned, and his reason for
quitting the officer who went with him was, that he was sure if he made the
discovery to the governor himself he should certainly get what he had demanded.

When the governor returned he was made acquainted with the business, and
another officer was sent with him, although there was not a person in the
colony who had the least faith in his assertions. The officer who now
accompanied him informed him, on landing from the boat, that if he offered to
quit him for an instant he would put him to death. This determination so
terrified the gold-finder, that he acknowledged the imposture: he was then
interrogated respecting the ore which he had produced. He confessed he had
filed down part of a yellow metal buckle, and had mixed it with some gold
filings from a broken ring, which he had got from one of the convict women, all
which he had blended with some earth, and made it hard. The man who tried the
ore had been a silversmith, and on separating the different parts he discovered
a small quantity of gold contained therein: the cheat received a second
punishment for his perseverance, and a recommendation to be very attentive to
his duty, and not attempt any more tricks as he valued his neck.

Having a good deal of time on my hands, my attendance and inspection being
generally finished in the forenoon, I frequently visited the farms of the
settlers: these in general were convicts whose term of transportation had
expired, and had had lands granted them, in the following proportions: thirty
acres to every single man; fifty to the married ones; and ten more for every
child: they received provisions and clothing from the public stores for the
first eighteen months: the necessary tools and implements of husbandry, with
seeds and grain to sow the ground the first year: two young sow pigs were also
given to each settler, and a pair or two of fowls. On those conditions
twenty-seven of them had commenced farming in the neighborhood of Paramatta,
Prospect-Hill, and at some-ponds about two miles to the northward. At this time
these settlements had little the appearance of farms; but as there were many
very industrious and careful men among them, their stock soon began to thrive,
and the face of the country show evident signs of culture.

In my walks I often fell in with the Kangaroos, of which there are great
numbers: they are about the size of a common deer, of a dark tan color; its
head, I think, resembles that of the mocock from the East Indies.

The hind legs are much longer than the fore, and with them they leap and
spring forward with amazing rapidity, their fore feet seldom being seen to
touch the ground; and, indeed, they are so very short, that it is not possible
the animal can make great use of them in running: they have prodigious force in
their tail, which is a principal part of their defense when attacked; they
strike a blow with this weapon sufficient to break the leg of a man, or the
back of a dog; it also assists them in their springs, which are truly
surprising. The native dog is much swifter than the kangaroo, and will attack
them with great courage; the chase is seldom of long duration, the kangaroo
being soon tired, and is generally overtaken in less than a quarter of an hour.
When seized, if he has no opportunity of using the tail to advantage, he turns
upon the dog, and catching hold with the talons of his fore-paws, he flies at
and strikes his adversary with those of his hindfeet, which are long, sharp,
and of great strength; and, if the dog is not assisted, it frequently happens
that he gets the better.

I have frequently seen the male kangaroos which, when sitting on their
haunches, would measure at least from five feet eight to five feet ten inches
in height; such an one would, I think, over-match any of the dogs; but I never
ventured to try them singly. Having had several young native dogs given me,
from time to time, I take great delight in kangaroo hunting; it is not only an
agreeable exercise, but produces a dish for the table, nearly as good as
mutton; and, in the present dearth of live stock, is not an unacceptable
present.

The native dog greatly resembles the Pomeranian breed: with their ears erect,
they have a remarkable savage look, and are not unlike a wolf, both in size and
appearance. There is no getting the better of their natural ferocity; for if
you take ever such pains in rearing them, they will, at every opportunity,
destroy the sheep, pigs, or poultry, nor do I think it possible to break them
of this savageness of temper, so that they are of little or no use, except in
hunting the kangaroo.

I had many opportunities of getting acquainted with several of the natives;
and, as I seldom saw them without giving them some trifle or other, soon became
a great favorite with them, and mostly had one or other of them with me in my
rambles. The men in general are from five feet six to five feet nine inches
high; are rather slender, but straight, and well made. The women are not quite
so tall, rather lustier, but are mostly well made. Their color is a brownish
black, of a coffee cast, but many of the women are almost as light as a
mulatto: now and then you may meet with some of both sexes with pretty
tolerable features, but broad noses, wide mouths, and thick lips, are most
generally met with; their countenances are not the most prepossessing, and what
renders them still less so, is, they are abominably filthy. They know no such
ceremony as washing themselves; and their skin is mostly smeared with the fat
of such animals as they kill, and afterward covered with every sort of dirt;
sand from the beach, and ashes from their fires, all adhere to their filthy
skin, which never comes off, except when accident, or the want of food obliges
them to go into the water. Some of the men wear a piece of wood, or bone thrust
through the septum of the nose, which, by raising the opposite sides of the
nose, dilates the nostril, and spreads the lower part very much. Many of them
want the two front teeth on the right side of the upper jaw; and I have seen
several of the women who have lost the two first joints of the little finger of
the left hand, a circumstance which I have never been able to discover the
meaning of. This want of the little finger I observed in elderly women; in
girls, of eight or nine years old; in young women, who have had children; and
in those who have had none. I have also observed that the singer has been
perfect in individuals of all ages and descriptions. They have, in general,
good teeth; their hair is short, strong, and curly; and they having no method
of combing or cleaning it, it is always filthy and matted: the men's beards are
short and curly like the hair of their heads. They all go entirely naked, men,
women, and children, and seem to have no fixed place of residence, but lay down
wherever night overtakes them. Cavities in the rocks on the sea shore, are
places they usually seek to shelter themselves from the wind and rain; and they
mostly make a good fire before they go to sleep, by which means the rock round
them becomes heated, and retains its warmth a considerable time, like an oven;
and spreading a little dried grass they lie down and huddle together.

The men are generally armed with a lance, and a short stick which they use in
throwing it; this stick is about a yard long, flat on one side, and a notch in
one end, the other is furnished with a flat shell fixed into a split in the
stick, made fast with a strong gum, which, when dry, is as hard as flint: on
the flat side of the stick they place the lance, the butt end of which rests
against the notch in the throwing stick; poising the lance thus fixed in one
hand, binding it with the fore singer and thumb to prevent its slipping off;
keeping fast hold of the throwing stick, they hurl the lance with considerable
force, and tolerably true, to the distance of seventy or eighty yards. Their
lances are in general about ten feet long; the shell fixed on the throwing
stick is intended for sharpening the point of their lance, and various other
uses. Although they throw their lances with considerable velocity, I should
think it no very difficult matter, being on one's guard, either to party or get
out of the way of them.

When they are upon any hostile expedition, they paint their faces and bodies
with red and white streaks, as if they intended to strike terror by their
death-like appearance: some are mere lines drawn without attention or method;
others with the greatest nicety and exactness. At a few paces distance some
have the appearance of being accoutred with crossbelts: others, with white
circles round their eyes, and several horizontal lines across the forehead;
others, again, have narrow white lines across the body, with a broad streak
down the middle of the back and belly, and a single line down the arm, thigh,
and leg. Being commonly marked with white, their black skins are seen very
conspicuously between the lines, and, at a short distance, takes very much the
appearance of a skeleton, and which, I suppose, is what they intend to
represent. The colors they use are chiefly red and white, the first of which
is a kind of ochre, or red earth, which is found here in abundance; the latter
is a fine pipe clay, great quantities of which are used in the potteries
established in the colony. The bodies of the men are much scarified,
particularly about the breast and shoulders; and although not very regular, yet
are considered as ornamental.

CHAP. IX.
Campaigns generally settled by negotiation -- Their habitations -- Wonderful
dexterity in climbing the cabbage and palm trees -- Their method of hunting
small animals -- Description of various Quadrupeds -- Curious similarity of the
different species -- Fish -- Birds -- Insects -- Plants and fruits.
THE warriors thus armed and painted range themselves in a line, with each a
green bough in their hand, as a token that they do not mean to use force,
unless obliged thereto, in their own defense, or in case their difference
cannot be settled by an amicable agreement: a long parley generally ensues, and
concessions on both sides for the most part terminate their bloodless campaign.

Building themselves habitations never seem to have entered their imaginations,
or any place to shelter them from the weather, though they have plenty of the
most inclement; their indolence and want of foresight in this particular would
be fatal to them, were it not for the liberal hand of nature, who has so
abundantly supplied the sea shores with soft crumbly rocks, which, for the most
part, are excavated by the washing of the sea, so as to form caves of very
considerable dimensions; sometimes fifty or more of them find a comfortable
lodging in one of these caves. In the woods where there are no rocks, they
strip the bark off several trees, and cutting them into slips, fasten and
enterlace them to four stakes drove in the ground, bending broad pieces of the
bark over the top to shelve off the rain: these commonly hold a family; and, as
the weather is very cold in the winter months, they find it necessary to huddle
very close for the benefit of the warmth to which each individual mutually
contributes a share. These huts are only used when they are out a kangaroo
hunting; for in that season they employ themselves wholly in the woods.

Most of the large trees are hollow, by decaying at the heart; and when the
opossum, kangaroo, rat, squirrel, and various other animals which inhabit the
woods, are pursued, they commonly take shelter in these trees. In order,
therefore, to make sure of them, wherein they seldom fail, when they find them
in the tree, one man climbs to the top, which is performed with wonderful
dexterity, in the following manner: they cut notches in the bark about an inch
deep, which is a kind of rest for the ball of the great toe; the two first
notches are cut before they begin to climb, the rest as they ascend, at such
distances from each other, that when both feet are in the notches, the right is
raised nearly as high as the middle of the left thigh; when they are raising
themselves the hatchet is held in their mouths, that they may have the use of
both their hands; and when making the notch the body rests on the ball of the
great toe; the singers of the left hand are also placed in a notch cut on the
side of the tree, should it be too large to admit their clasping it
sufficiently with the left arm to keep their body firm and close to it. In this
manner they ascend, with wonderful agility, trees fifteen or twenty feet in
circumference, sometimes sixty or seventy feet before they come to a single
branch.

Being arrived at the top, or the place he judges the most convenient, he takes
his seat with his club or stick in his hand, another person below makes a fire
and fills the hollow trunk with smoke, which obliges the animal to attempt its
escape, either upwards or downwards, but whichever way it takes, it is almost
certain of destruction, as they very seldom escape. In this manner they employ
themselves, and get a livelihood in the woods. They, sometimes, when many of
them are hunting together, set fire to the country for several miles in extent;
this is for the purpose of disturbing such animals as may be within the circle
of the conflagration: thus the affrighted animals, confounded, singed, and
half-smothered, fall an easy prey to their persevering and sanguinary
adversaries.

These fires, it is supposed, are sometimes intended to clear that part of the
country through which they have occasion to travel, of the briars and thorns,
from which, being naked, they suffer great inconvenience. The fires which are
frequently seen in the summer time account also for an appearance which very
much puzzled the first settlers; this was, that more than two thirds of the
trees in the woods were very much scorched with fire, some were burnt quite
black to the very top; the cause of this occasioned great difference of
opinion, but it is now evident that it was occasioned by the fires, which the
natives so frequently make, and which often reach the highest branches of the
trees; I at first conjectured it to be the effect of lightning, but upon
examining farther, it appeared too general to have been caused by such an
accident.

Opossums are very numerous here: they partake a good deal of the kangaroo, in
the strength of their tail, and make of their fore legs, which are very short
in proportion to the hinder ones; like that animal it is provided with a false
belly for the safety of its young in time of danger, and its color very much
resembles that of the common English rat; it is of the size of the small cat,
and very inoffensive. There are a variety of other animals of different sizes,
from the opossum down to our implacable enemy, the field rat, all of which, in
some shape or other, partake of the kangaroo and opossum, I have caught several
rats with their pouch full of young ones, formed exactly in their legs, claws,
and tail, as the above animals. One would almost conclude, from the great
resemblance of the different quadrupeds found here, that there is a promiscuous
intercourse between the different sexes of all those various animals. This
strange similarity does not attach solely to quadrupeds, for the finny
inhabitants of the sea are in the same predicament, their variety is truly
astonishing; most of them partake in some degree of the shark, and it is no
uncommon thing to see the head and shoulders of a skait to the hind part of a
shark, or a shark's head to the body of a large mullet, and what is more
astonishing, sometimes to the flat body of a sting ray or holibut.

Nature seems equally playful in the feathered tribe: the Parrot is the most
common. I have shot several, with the head, neck, and bill of the parrot, and
with the same beautiful plumage on those parts for which that bird here is
distinguished; a tail and body of a different make and color, with long
delicate feet and legs, which is quite the reverse of the parrot kind. There is
also a bird with the feet and legs of a parrot, whose head, neck, make, and
color, were like the common sea gull, with the wings and tail of the hawk.
Neither is this confined to the animal creation; for here are trees bearing
three different sorts of leaves; others bearing the leaf of the gum tree, with
the gum exuding from it, and covered with bark of a very different kind.

The country abounds in birds of numberless species: those of the parrot kind,
such as the macaw, cocatoo, lory, green parrot, and paroquets of different
species and sizes, are ornamented with the most gay and luxuriant plumage that
can be conceived. The common crow is no stranger here, but is found in
considerable numbers; the sound of their voice and manner of croaking is widely
different from those in Europe. Hawks are in great plenty; pigeons, quails, and
a great variety of small birds; but I have not seen any with an agreeable note.

There is also a very large bird, but it is not very common; at first they were
taken for the ostrich, as they did not fly when pursued, but ran so exceedingly
fast that a strong native dog could not overtake them: I shot one of them,
which measured upwards of two yards and a half from its feet to the upper part
of its head. The difference between this bird and the ostrich is in its bill,
which is narrower at the point, and it has three toes, which is not the case
with the ostrich, as I had an opportunity of seeing several of them at the
Cape. It possesses one singularity by which it cannot fail of being known,
which is, that two distinct feathers grow out from every quill. Its flesh,
though not the most tender grained, is far from unacceptable: it resembles,
when raw, neck beef; and a sidebone of this bird makes an excellent dinner for
half a dozen men. The crow, I think, relishes equally as well here as the barn
fowl in England. I have sometimes, when on a shooting excursion, fallen in with
the black swan: the extremity of its wings are white, and all the rest of its
plumage a bright black; its bill, a pale pink, or crimson: it is of the size of
the common white swan, and is a delicate appendage to the table.

A prodigious quantity of bats have made their appearance during these two last
years; they are generally seen about Rose-Hill toward the close of the
evening: the head of this bat very much resembles that of the fox; the wings of
many of them extend four feet from tip to tip. I have one of them that will eat
out of the hand, and is as domestic in the house as a cat. Their smell is rank
and offensive; and numbers having perished from the extreme heat of the
weather, and fallen into the water about Rose-Hill, rendered it undrinkable for
some days.

There are as many different species of insects as of birds; the centipedes
spider ant, and scorpion; the generality of these vary but little from those
described as inhabitants of most parts between the tropics: the ant possesses
not only the greatest portion of industry, but also of courage; an insult is
never offered them with impunity: they are of various sizes, from the common
European ant to near three quarters of an inch in length, they are also of
different colors, as black, white, yellow, and red; the most formidable of
which are the red-coated gentry: whenever it happens that they are disturbed by
any person or beast treading on their nests, which are constructed just beneath
the surface, with numberless small passages, or outlets, they sally forth in
myriads and attack the ill fated and unconscious offender with astonishing
intrepidity, and even continue their pursuit to a considerable distance; their
bite, if not venomous, is attended with the most acute pain for some time: one
species of them build their nests against a tree, of the size of a beehive;
another kind raises mounts of earth with prodigious industry to the height of
four feet.

The spider of this country nearly approaches the ant in point of industry; the
smallest of these are larger than any I ever saw in England; they spread their
web in the woods between the trees, generally to the distance of ten or a dozen
yards, and weave them so strong that small birds are frequently entangled
therein. The silk of which the web is composed, when wound off in a ball, I
think is equal to any I ever saw in the same state from the silkworm; it is of
the fame color, a pale yellow, or straw color; of reptiles, there are snakes
from the smallest I have ever seen in England to the length of eleven feet, and
as thick as a man's leg; also lizards of various kinds and sizes.

A great variety of beautiful plants and flowers abound in this country; but
being unacquainted with the science of botany I am consequently unqualified to
descant on their different properties; we find wild spinach, parsley, and
sorrel, but not in sufficient quantities to flatter ourselves with the hope of
deriving any considerable advantage to the colony therefrom.

Exclusive of the plantain, banana, and other tropical fruits, here are some
peculiar I believe to this country; that which they call the mizzabore greatly
resembles our cherry, its taste is very insipid, and it varies but little from
another fruit, similar in its appearance, but something smaller, and which is
also found in abundance; there is also a third sort, which also resembles the
former two; though there is so great a similarity between these fruits it is
remarkable that the trees which bear them are of very different kinds and
appearance. -- These berries have all the same insipidity, and are held in no
estimation by our people; but there is another berry, of about the size of a
current, and grows on a tree the leaves of which are much like the broom: the
juice of this fruit, when ripe is, perhaps, the purest acid in the world; it is
extremely pleasant to the taste, and by the faculty held in great estimation as
a most powerful antiscorbutic -- It is an excellent acquisition in making
tarts, jellies, and other delicacies in the confectionary and pastry
department. There is another species of berries, which when ripe, is a clear
red, of the size of a current, and shaped like a heart; it has a most pleasant
flavor, is a strong astringent, and if not taken in too great quantities is
not unwholesome, many of the people having eaten of them very freely without
any pernicious consequences.

Here is also a nut which acts as a violent purgative, and emetic, if eaten
unprepared: it must be soaked seven or eight days in water, taking care that
the water be changed every day. -- When it has been thoroughly soaked, it is
then roasted in the embers; and when done it is not unlike a chestnut, and very
palatable.

CHAP. IX.
The smallpox makes its appearance among the natives -- Dreadful ravages of it
-- A native boy and girl found laboring under that disorder, taken to the
hospital at Sydney Cove, and cured -- Seize a native who becomes tolerably
civilized: taken with the smallpox and dies -- Governor Philip gets two more
of the natives into his possession -- Are treated with the greatest kindness --
Their escape from the settlement; are seen by the fishing parties -- The
governor desirous of a reconciliation, goes among the natives unarmed -- The
interview with Banalong, etc. -- One of the natives throws a spear and
dangerously wounds the governor.
ABOUT a twelvemonth before my arrival, the smallpox made its appearance, and
occasioned a terrible havoc among the poor natives. It was truly shocking to
find the coves of the harbor, which were formerly thronged with numerous
families in tempestuous weather, now strewed with the dead bodies of men,
women, and children. No vestige of this cruel disorder being visible in the
countenances of any of the natives, it was reasonable to suppose they were
never before infected with it, and of course ignorant of the method of treating
this cruel ravager of the human species. The various attitudes in which the
dead bodies were found, afforded reason to believe that when any of them were
indisposed, and the disorder assumed the appearance of the smallpox, they were
immediately deserted by their friends and left to perish, in their helpless
situation, for want of sustenance. Some have been found sitting with their
heads reclined between their knees; others were leaning against a rock, with
their head resting upon it. Two children, a boy and a girl, the boy about nine,
the girl about two years older, were picked up during the prevalence of this
disorder, laboring under it* dreadful effects. Two old men, who were supposed
the fathers of the children, were picked up about the same time, and carried to
the hospital, where they were taken all possible care of; the men survived but
a short time, but the children both recovered, and appeared perfectly satisfied
with their change of living.

About this time a native, who I saw frequently at the governor's, and who was
now as perfectly at his ease in company as if he had been in England, being
decently clothed, and managing his knife, fork, cup, and saucer with great
dexterity, was entrapped from his friends. Some officers were sent down the
harbor with two boats for the purpose of seizing any of the natives they could
lay their hands on; the governor having found that no encouragement would
induce them to pay a visit to the colony of their own accord; he therefore
determined to get some of them into his possession, and by kind treatment
prevail on them to bring their countrymen to repose more confidence in us --
Arabanoo, the name of the native above alluded to, was taken in the following
manner:

Being enticed near to the beach, by the display of various articles calculated
to excite his curiosity and desire, and busily employed in admiring the
presents that were given him, one of the seamen, stationed for the purpose,
threw a rope round his neck, and, in a moment dragged him to the boat; his
cries brought a number of his friends to the skirts of the wood, from whence
they threw several spears but without effect. To pourtray the terror and dismay
depicted in the countenance of this poor creature, would require the hand of an
able artist: he believed he was to be put to instant death; but when he was
assured by the officers that his life was safe, and they at the same time
casting off the rope they had bound his neck, fixing it to his leg, treated him
with so much kindness that he gradually became cheerful. On his arrival at the
governor's house he had an iron shackle put round his leg to prevent the
possibility of an escape; this he was taught to consider as a bang ally, a term
in their language, used for a decoration of any kind; and it was no very
difficult matter to bring him into the belief of this, as it was not uncommon
to see some of the convicts ironed in the same manner, as a punishment for the
crimes they had committed in the colony.

Arabanoo, from the kind treatment he experienced, was soon reconciled to his
situation, and the iron becoming troublesome, galling his leg, it was taken
off, and he was permitted to go where he pleased. The names of the different
gentlemen who took notice of him were soon familiar to him, and he could call
them with great facility -- He was a very good tempered fallow, of about thirty
years of age, well made, and on the whole not an unhandsome figure.

The intentions of the governor was however frustrated for a time, poor
Aarbanoo, ere he could bring about a good understanding with his countrymen,
was attacked with the small pox, which notwithstanding every possible means
were used by the faculty for his recovery, he only lived till the crisis of his
distemper.

Frequent indications of hostilities, as well as the missing of several of the
convicts, who were supposed to have been murdered by the natives, made the
governor exceedingly regret the fate of poor Arabanoo, who, had he lived, might
have prevented much of this hostile disposition toward us, as he would soon
have understood enough of our language to have communicated whatever we
desired; he could have made them understand that we wished to live with them on
the most friendly footing, and to promote, as much as in our power, their
comfort and happiness.

The children had recovered from the smallpox, and were perfectly happy in
their situation, but were then too young to be of service in reconciling their
countrymen to us; they very soon understood almost every thing that was said,
and could also make themselves tolerably well understood; but the governor was
still determined, if possible, to get a man or two into his possession, who
might be taught enough of the language to render them useful negociators.

Accordingly some officers and a party of men were sent on this expedition, in
an armed boat; they proceeded to the north side of the harbor, where they saw
two of the natives walking on the beach: a plan was soon formed to entice them
to conversation; a few large fish were held up, and an officer who spoke some
words of their tongue, hailed them, which had the desired effect. The men
advanced, unarmed, with much confidence, and readily took the fish that was
presented them. The boat was lying afloat, and five or six seamen on the beach,
nearly surrounding them; when the officer in the boat, observing the
opportunity favorable, made the signal to secure them; in an instant they were
tripped up, and tumbled into the boat, ere they had time to look around. They
called out to their friends the moment they recovered their recollection, and a
considerable number appeared from the woods, and many spears were thrown, one
of which pierced through the gunwale of the boat: the party pulled off
instantly, and the people presenting their firearms, they halted, not daring to
venture any farther attack. The two prisoners were made fast to the thwarts of
the boat on being put on board; but having got a good distance from the shore,
their hands were loosed, and they were only secured by one leg. When they were
landed at Sydney Cove, the residence of the governor, many people, prompted by
curiosity, went to see them; among whom were Arabaroo, and Nambarre, the two
children before mentioned: the moment they saw them their eyes sparkled with
joy; they called them by their names; the children were also known to them; and
by their easy and apparently satisfied behavior tended greatly to calm their
apprehensions.

They discovered that one of the men they had taken was a chief of the tribe of
Cadigal, named Coalby; he was about thirty-five years of age: the other, about
twenty-five, was called Banalong: he was a smart, active, good looking young
man, of a lively, pleasant disposition. His fellow-prisoner appeared a check
upon the volatile temper of Banalong, who, in his presence, was always sedate
and grave, and paid great deference to him; but no sooner was Coalby out of
sight, than all his gravity forsook him, and he was as merry and good humoured
as though he had been all his life in the colony. They were treated with the
utmost kindness; but lest they should attempt an escape, they wore each of them
an iron on one leg, with a piece of rope spliced to it, and a man was ordered
for each, who was to be responsible for their security. Wherever they went they
were accompanied by their leaders, holding one end of the rope.

They had been taken near three weeks, when they appeared so well satisfied
with their treatment, that their keepers began to be under very little
apprehensions of their attempting to get from them; this security they did not
fail to avail themselves of: accordingly one evening about dusk, their guards
sitting within the door of their hut, eating their supper; Banalong being also
in the hut in like manner employed: Coalby seated without the door, pretending
to be also eating his supper, unspliced the rope from the shackle, leaving the
other end fast in the keeper's hand, who had not the least suspicion of what
was going forward: he was over the paling of the yard in an instant. The noise
he made in leaping the paling roused those within, but too late; the fugitive
gained the wood in spite of an immediate pursuit, and joined his friends.
Banalong was much more cheerful after Coalby's departure, which confirmed the
conjecture, and the children's report, that he was a chief, and consequently
Banalong stood in great awe of him.

This man had several names; but the one he usually went by was Banalong: he is
a stout well made man, about five feet six inches high; he is dark black, large
featured, and has a slat nose; his hair is the same as the Africans, but very
coarse and strong; he is very good humoured, of a lively and pleasant
disposition, and seldom angry at any jokes that are passed on him: he readily
imitates the actions and gestures of every person in the governor's family, and
generally sits at table with the governor, whom he calls Beanga, or father, and
he, in return calls him Doorow, or son: he is under no restraint, nor does he
appear awkward in eating; and considering the savage state from which he has so
recently emerged, he may be deemed a polite man, as he performs the ceremonies
of bowing, drinking healths, returning thanks, etc. with the most scrupulous
exactness. He is very fond of wine, but cannot bear the smell of spirits,
although they have often tried to deceive him, by mixing very weak rum or
brandy and water, and giving it him for wine and water, but he instantly
discovers the deception, and is very angry on these occasions: he generally
accompanies the governor in his walks, who, to inspire him with confidence,
always takes off his small sword, and pats it on him, and he is much pleased at
this mark of distinction. His dress is a jacket, made of coarse red kersey, and
a pair of trowsers; but on Sundays he is dressed in nankeen. The governor's
reason for making him wear the thick kersey is that he may be so sensible of
cold as not to be able to go without clothes. He sings when asked, but in
general his songs are of the mournful strain; he keeps time by throwing his
arms backward and forward. Whenever desired to dance, he does it with the
utmost readiness; his gestures at first are very slow, and regulated by a low
dismal tune, which quickens as the dance advances, 'till at length he throws
himself into the most violent attitudes, shaking his arms, and striking the
ground, with great force, which gives him the appearance of a madman. It is
very probable that this part of the dance is used as a kind of defiance, as all
the natives which were seen when the governor first landed at Port Jackson,
always accompanied this sort of dance to their vociferations of "Woroo, Woroo!"
"Go away, Go away."

The kind treatment, and air of satisfaction which Banalong manifested for the
space of a year after Coalby's flight, determined the governor to trust him
with his liberty. Accordingly the shackle was taken from his leg, nor did he in
the least seem disposed to leave the governor's house, or desert his new
friends: he continued this behavior with great success for several days, so
that no person had the least suspicion of his leaving the colony; he, however,
one evening, just as it was dark, stripped himself, and leaving the clothes
that had been given him behind, beat his march into the woods.

Both he and Coalby were frequently seen by the boats employed in fishing, and
would even converse with the people, who earnestly invited them to return to
Sydney; but no entreaties could prevail on them to accept the invitation.

The governor having received information that they were seen in a cove at the
entrance of the harbor, he went thither, attended by several of the officers,
but they were all unarmed, which ill-judged piece of confidence had like to
have proved fatal to the governor. The particulars of this expedition were
related to me nearly as follows:

The governor, with some of the gentlemen of the colony, went down to the mouth
of the harbor, in order to pitch on a spot proper to erect a landmark, to
enable strangers the more readily to ascertain the harbour's mouth when at sea;
on their return they were met by a boat, which had just landed a party of
officers, who intended to take a survey of the shore as far as Broken bay: the
cockswain of the boat informed the governor, that one of the party (Mr. White,
the surgeon) had seen Coalby and Banalong, and had had some conversation with
them; that they enquired after every person they had any knowledge of in the
colony, and particularly the governor, and that they said they would go up to
Sydney if he would come for them.

In consequence of this information, his excellency returned to the Core, got
some few presents for them, which he supposed would be acceptable; he also
ordered four muskets into the boat, and immediately repaired to the spot where
these men had been seen. When they arrived at the place, they sound a number of
the natives sitting round a fire, and near them lay the remains of a dead
whale, which had been thrown ashore in a hard gale, and on which they had been
heartily feasting. As soon as they were within hail, the governor stood up in
the boat, and called for Banalong, and in their language asked where he was.
Banalong instantly answered, "Here I am." His excellency then said, "I am the
governor, your father;" which title he always gave the governor when he was at
Sydney. After desiring two gentlemen to remain in the boat, and to have the
muskets ready, upon examining which, two were found unprovided with flints,
his excellency landed, and walked toward them with his arms extended, to show
them he was unarmed, and that they might be under no apprehensions for their
safety: they appeared very backward in coming to a nearer conference; however
he continued approaching them till he entered the wood; one of them, possessed
of more assurance than his comrades, after frequently repeating the words
"Governor, father," ventured to shake hands in a friendly manner. His
excellency then returned to the boat, and ordered one of the people to bring
some wine, beef, bread, and a jacket or two which had been brought on purpose,
and returned to them with these presents. On his showing a bottle, one of them
called out, "Wine! wine!" two of them immediately advanced, took the things,
and drank a little of the wine; the governor also gave them two or three
knives; he then returned to the boat, and told the gentlemen that remained in
her that he had not seen either Coalby or Banalong, and that his mind was not
altogether satisfied with regard to their pacific intention; at the same time
desiring them to stay by the boat, and give a good look, and be ready in case
of alarm. He then went toward them, accompanied by captain Collins. The
officer in the boat frequently heard one of the natives call to Banalong, and
acquaint him with the observations he made upon those who were in the boat,
which was kept afloat upon her oars; presently after one of the people came
down from the governor, and acquainted Mr. Waterhouse, the officer left in the
boat, that both Coalby and Banalong were among them, had asked for him, and
that governor Philip desired he would join them. He immediately accompanied the
messenger to the governor, whom he found, with captain Collins, in close
conversation with two of the natives, who were unarmed: Mr. Waterhouse went up,
but did not recognize Banalong till he was pointed out to him, so much was he
altered; nor could he then persuade himself that it was the same. On the
question being repeatedly asked, where was Banalong, he grew rather impatient,
and was going off: however a bottle being shown him, and being asked the name
of it, he readily answered, "The king;" having observed, when at the governor's
house, his majesty's health drank in the first glass after dinner, and had been
taught to repeat the word before he drank his own glass, he imagined the liquor
was called the king; and when he afterward came to know it was wine, yet he
would frequently call it king. This convinced the gentlemen that it was no
other than their old acquaintance Banalong; and every method was tried to
induce him to go down to the boat; but he always retired when any one
approached nearer than he wished, so that they gradually got out of sight of
the boat, when about a dozen of the natives placing themselves in a situation
to prevent any surprise, Banalong and Coalby came among the gentlemen, and
asked various questions relative to different transactions which had occured at
the settlement during their residence there. Banalong took Mr. Waterhouse round
the neck, Coalby shook them all by the hand; a jacket being presented to him he
was puzzled how to put it on, and begged one of the gentlemen to do it for him:
Banalong had a very fine spear in his hand, which the governor asked him for,
but he would not part with it. During all this time the most perfect harmony
and friendship seemed to subsist among the whole party; but the governor,
perceiving upwards of twenty of them closing round his party, proposed
returning to the boat, telling Banalong that he would shortly return, and bring
him and Coalby a couple of hatchets, which pleased them extremely. The governor
then went down to the beach, and the officers left in the boat came on shore;
the boats crew with the arms remained in the boat: as the natives, by
continuing their position, indicated some remaining symptoms of distrust, his
excellency was afraid of alarming them. Banalong was very cheerful, and
appeared transported at the sight of so many of his dear friends, as he termed
them; incessantly shaking hands all round. He pointed out a small fire near
them, and said he would sleep there till their return. They were very merry on
their escape, and told them how Coalby got rid of the shackle by which he had
been secured when at the settlement, and that if they had meant to keep them,
should never "Nangora," -- Fall asleep.

The governor and his party now began to move toward the boat, when a stout
native, who had been seen standing at a distance, approached; at first he
showed strong indications of fear, which soon subsided on his being treated in
the same familiar friendly manner as Coalby and Banalong, and he became
tolerably conversable. He showed a wound which he had received in the back with
a spear; this also put Banalong upon showing that he had also been wounded in
different parts of the body since he quitted the settlement; one was through
the left arm, made with a spear; another dangerous one over the left eye, not
healed: these wounds, he said, were received in a rencounter with a
neighboring tribe near Botany Bay.

The party still proceeding toward the beach, were detained by Banalong, who
continued teazing them about the hatchets that were to be sent him; and he
pointed out the stout native, who had retired about thirty yards distance, whom
he appeared anxious should be noticed: the governor advanced toward him, and
upon the savage indicating that he would not be approached, he laid down his
sword, still going forward with extended arms, to assure him he was unarmed.

As the goveanor drew near the native seized a spear that lay concealed in the
grass, fixed it in his throwing stick, and for some moments appeared to stand
on his defense. There being not the least reason to suppose he would throw it
without provocation, his excellency continued to advance, calling out "Weree,
Weree," a term used by them when they wish a thing not to be done which
displeases them: notwithstanding which the native discharged the spear with
surprising velocity, and immediately ran off. In their retreat to the woods
many spears were thrown, but the only one which took effect was unfortunately
the first, which struck our much loved governor: it entered his right shoulder
just above the collar bone, and came out behind, about three inches lower under
the blade bone.

The gentlemen near the governor concluded he was mortally wounded, and feared,
from the number of armed men that began to show themselves from the woods, that
it would be impracticable for them to reach the boat. The governor, holding up
the spear, which trailed on the ground, endeavored to make his way to the
beach, but its great length frequently stopped him; in this situation he
desired some one to endeavor if possible to draw the spear out of his body,
but it being barbed, it was found impracticable; they then with great
difficulty broke it, and disembarrassed him from the greater part; he then drew
a pistol from his pocket, and discharged it at them, who, from the apprehension
of there being more firearms among the party, kept a respectful distance; and
the governor, carried between two of the people, reached the boat without any
farther molestation.

Immediately after their arrival at Sydney, the surgeon was sent for, Mr.
Balmain, the first who arrived at the governor's house, after examining the
wound, relieved every body from the most painful suspense, by assuring them,
that alarming as the situation of the governor might appear, he did not
apprehend any fatal consequences from it: he extracted the point of the spear,
dressed the wound, and, to the admiration of every body, in six weeks he was
enabled to go about.

CHAP. XI.
A shooting party fall in with some of the natives, who give information of the
man who speared the governor -- Araboo wants to be married -- Governor Philip
has an interview with Banalong, and makes him some presents, Barangaroo his
wife introduced -- A second interview; Banalong prevailed on to visit the
settlement -- Curious behavior of his wife on the occasion, repeats his visit
with several of the natives -- Friendly intercourse with the natives
established -- Banalong's extraordinary behavior to a native girl.
GOVERNOR Philip still desirous of being reconciled with the natives, did not
harbor any resentment toward them on account of the late transaction, which
he construed to have proceeded from a sudden impulse of fear rather than
treachery, and had given the necessary directions that none of them should be
sired at, or any ways molested, unless they provoked it by the throwing of
spears or other hostilities.

Nanbarre, the boy, who had now become a tolerable interpreter, attending some
of the officers, who were on a shooting excursion, near the spot where the
accident to the governor had happened, a number of natives appeared on an
eminence at a short distance; being asked who it was that threw the spear at
the governor, they named a man of the tribe who dwelt to the northward; that
his name was Carrigal. Nanbarre was also desired to enquire after Banalong and
Coalby, when they pointed to some people at a distance -- One of whom threw a
spear at an officer who asked for it; but evidently with no mischievous design,
as he took care it fell where nobody was standing.

The girl Araboo was in the boat, and pointed to one of the natives said it was
her father, and was very desirous of going with them; she had arrived at an age
when her inclination began to tend toward the other sex, and with great naivete
and innocence told the officers that she wanted to be married -- As she had no
opportunity of a connection of that kind in the clergyman's house where she
dwelt, and it would be a difficult matter to keep her against her will, it was
judged most prudent to permit her to go where she pleased, and she was told
that as soon as some new clothes could be made for her, she should take them
with her, with which assurances she was perfectly satisfied to stay some time
longer; during which great pains were taken to instruct her in English, that
she might be enabled to explain our intentions toward her countrymen.

The governor being sufficiently recovered to venture in a boat, went to the
place where Banalong and his wife lived -- he found several natives on the
spot, who told him that they were out a fishing. Araboo was in the boat, and
her father being among them, a hatchet and some fish were given him, and he
gave the governor a short spear in return; as the boat was pushing from the
shore they perceived four canoes paddling toward them, in the foremost they
perceived Banalong; the boat lay to on her oars, and they landed from the
canoes; as soon as Banalong had secured his, he approached the boat, holding up
his hands to show he was unarmed.

Upon which the party landed from the boat, and he very readily joined them; he
asked the governor where he was wounded, and said that he had quarrelled with
and beat the man who had wounded him -- being told that he would be killed if
he was caught, he seemed no ways concerned, but desired it might be done --
several presents were made him, and he wanted some also for his wife; but being
told that if she wanted them she must come and fetch them herself -- in about
half an hour she made her appearance; she was called Barangaroo and appeared
older than him; a petticoat and several little presents were given to the lady,
and a red jacket with a silver epaulet, which Banalong used to wear when at the
settlement, was given him, which delighted him exceedingly; he was asked if he
would come and dine with the governor the next day, to which he readily
assented, and said that he would bring his wife and some friends with him.

Notwithstanding Banalong did not visit the governor according to his promise,
he frequently joined the different parties he fell in with, although they were
well armed, and would without the least fear go to the long boat, though he
always saw muskets in her: his wife was generally with him in the canoe, and
he intimated that he still intended paying the governor a visit, but his
suspicion of being detained apparently had not been entirely done away; however
the governor did not choose to take him a second time by force; as he still
entertained hopes that he would be soon reconciled to pass some of his time at
Sydney, when he could be assured of being his own master, and go and come when
he pleased.

At length his excellency's wishes were accomplished; as he was going to
Paramatta, a native was seen standing on one of the points of land, and as they
rowed past him he was asked where Banalong was, when he pointed to an island
called Memill, to which they rowed; as they drew near the rocks he came down to
the boat accompanied by his wife, without the least signs of fear or distrust.
They greedily took some bread that was given them, and the boat soon after
pushed off and left them: from the confidence now evinced by this man, there
was little doubt but he would shortly trust himself at Sydney. Accordingly a
few days after, as the governor was passing in his boat, Banalong called to him
repeatedly from the opposite shore where he was with some of the officers; and
the surgeon, in whom he placed great confidence, persuaded him to go over to
the governor; he took three natives with him, who were exceedingly pleased with
the presents made them. It seems that Banalong's wife opposed his coming, and
finding her tears and entreaties of no avail, flew into a violent passion, and
broke a very fine fish-gig of her husband's for which she would have received a
hearty drubbing had it not been for the interference of the surgeon, who took
them back to their residence on the North shore.

Banalong appeared quite at his ease and not under the least apprehension of
being detained; he promised when he went away to bring his wife over, which he
did two days afterward, accompanied by her sister and two other natives; they
were followed by a third -- Blankets and clothing were given them and as much
fish as they could eat. Banalong dined with the governor, and drank his wine
and coffee as formerly -- his excellency bought a spear of one of them, and
gave them to understand, that spears, lines, birds, or any thing they brought
should always be purchased; and at the same time promised him a shield, for
which he was to bring a spear in return -- The next day a large party came over
for the shield, but it was not finished; two of these men were owned by Araboo,
as her brothers, and for whom she procured two hatchets, the most desirable
present that can be given them -- Banalong came the next day for his present;
several of his comrades who accompanied him went away in a short time, but he
staid to dinner, and left Sydney Cove, highly delighted with his shield, which
being made of a good substantial hide and covered with tin, was likely to
resist the stroke of a spear. It being late in the afternoon before he thought
of returning, his wife and sister, with two men came over in their canoes to
fetch him.

The girl who had been near eighteen months in the colony with the clergyman's
wife, was so impatient to get away that at last it was consented to; and the
very next day after she had left the settlement she was seen in the canoe
naked, however she put on her petticoat before she joined the clergyman and
some others who went to visit her: she appeared much pleased with her liberty,
and the boy Nanbara, who was of the party, wished to stay with the natives all
night; he was accordingly left behind, but the next morning returned to the
settlement, and having fared but indifferently did not seem inclined to repeat
his visit.

The natives now visited the colony daily; one morning Banalong came very early
and breakfasted with the governor, and on taking his leave told him he was
going a great way off, but should return in three days with two young men who
were with him; and it was conjectured that they were going to fight with some
other tribe.

When Banalong returned from his expedition, he immediately waited on the
governor, with whom he dined according to custom: after dinner he related the
cause of his absence; that he had been to fight a man who had formerly wounded
him; he said his shield was a good one, and that his spear had pierced the
shield and arm of his antagonist; he also said that the people he had been to
fight with had killed one of the convicts, who had been some time missing.

Governor Philip conjectured that the women were not treated with the greatest
deference, in which conjecture he was certainly not much mistaken for Banalong
frequently beat his wife with great severity, although he professed great
affection for her. He was often told that it was wrong and unmanly to beat a
woman; but he only laughed at these remonstrances, and continued daily to visit
the settlement, with his wife, children, and half a dozen of his friends:
Coalby was generally one of the party.

Banalong, with his wife and children, now lived in a hut which the governor
had built for them on the eastern point of the cove; they constantly had a
number of visitors many of whom came daily to the settlement; and all of them
becoming very fond of bread, which they got in exchange for any trifling
articles they brought, they soon found the advantage of coming amongst the
settlers.

It had hitherto been the opinion that the custom of losing the front teeth was
confined to the men, but a woman was also seen with the same mark, and two of
them had the bottom of the gristle which parts the nostrils perforated; one of
them was Barangaroo, the wife of Banalong, who never considered herself dressed
but when her nose was dilated with a small stick, thrust through the septum or
gristle of the nostrils. She is very strait and well formed, her features well
proportioned and pleasing, and, though she goes entirely naked, there is such
an air of innocence about her that clothing scarce seems necessary.

Araboo, the native girl, returned to the colony, after a few weeks absence,
with some officers who had been down the harbor, and seemed perfectly happy in
the opportunity of getting from the party she had been with. She said that she
had lived three days with the young man she wished to marry, but that he had
another wife, who was jealous of her, and had beat her; indeed evident marks of
ill usage appeared about her head, which was so much hurt that she was put
under the surgeon's hands. Her favorite, it seems, had taken her part, and
beat his wife in return; but matrimonial squabbles, which are always settled by
the exercise of the cudgel, are very frequent, and the women in general treated
very roughly.

Sixteen of the natives paid a visit to the governor one morning, and were
regaled with fish for breakfast, to which they sat down in the yard in the
utmost good humor: those who had not been there before were highly delighted
with the novelties that surrounded them. Banalong, who had been absent for some
days, was of this party, and brought his wife with him; she appeared very ill,
and had a fresh wound on her head, which he gave the governor to understand was
because she had behaved ill, and her ill humor had broken a fish-gig and a
throwing stick. The governor again reasoned with him on the subject of beating
his wife, but to no effect; he said she was wicked, and therefore he had beaten
her. When they had finished their breakfasts, his wife and another woman, a
stranger, who had also been wounded by some of the men, went to the surgeon to
have their heads dressed; when they returned, Banalong missing the governor,
enquired for him, and said that he wanted to see him; upon which he was taken
to his excellency, who was writing. Banalong seated himself, and appeared very
much out of humor, frequently saying that he was going to beat a woman with a
hatchet, which he held in his hand; it was impossible to divert him from his
purpose, and, after some conversation, he was going to take his leave, excusing
himself from dining with his excellency, as he was going to beat the woman;
upon which the governor insisted on accompanying him; he made no objection to
the proposal, though he was told that he would not be permitted to beat the
woman. They set off for the hut, the governor ordering a sergeant and a couple
of marines to attend him, and the judge advocate coming in at the time, went
with them.

Though Banalong had said he would kill the woman when they were endeavoring
to persuade him not to beat her, it was not supposed that he harbored any such
intention, nor was it thought there would be much trouble to prevent his
beating her; but lest he should in his passion strike her with the hatchet,
which might be fatal to her, it was taken from him before they got to the hut,
and, as he appeared reluctantly to part with it, the governor gave him his
cane; but his menaces and countenance made them believe even that too dangerous
a weapon to trust him with, and it was accordingly taken from him.

When they came to the hut they found several men, women, and children
assembled; and notwithstanding governor Philip endeavored to single out the
object of Banalong's displeasure, whom he was determined on protecting, the
furious savage seized a wooden sword, and darted on his victim, a fine girl of
about fifteen, who, on seeing him coming had hid her face in the grass; he
struck her several blows on the head before the weapon could be wrested from
him; he then seized a hatchet, but was prevented doing any farther mischief.

The fury which took possession of him when he found himself prevented from
beating the girl is indescribeable; the poor creature lay trembling in the
grass, not daring to stir, and in momentary expectation of being put to death:
he had got another sword, and was preparing to repeat his violence, but was
laid hold of by the judge-advocate and the sergeant. The fracas being observed
by the officers on board the Supply, they instantly went on shore armed, and
took the poor girl, without any opposition from the natives, who had all armed
themselves the moment they saw the governor and his party interfere.

When the boat had taken the girl on board the Supply, the party returned to
the governor's house, where they were joined by several of the natives;
Banalong was of the number: after some time his passion subsided, and he grew
calm. He was then given to understand that the governor was very angry with him
for endeavoring to kill a woman; that it was a cowardly and unmanly action,
and should it be known that he did kill her, or even beat her any more, he
should be put to death himself; but threats had no greater effect on him than
entreaties, and he complained bitterly of the injury done him by depriving him
of his victim; saying, that she was his, that her father had wounded him over
the eye, that she was of a wicked tribe, and that they should see he would kill
her. When he was talked to by the judge advocate, and told that if he killed
the girl the governor would kill him, he pointed with his forefinger to the
parts of the head, breast, and arms, where he said he would wound her before he
cut her head off; in this resolution he returned home, and the girl was brought
from the Supply to the governor's, accompanied by a young man whom Banalong had
desired to remain with her. The attention paid her by this young native made
every body conclude he was her husband, though he had not been seen to murmur
or express any signs of dissatisfaction when her life was in danger.

Two days after Banalong returned to Sydney, apparently in great good humor;
he said he would not beat the girl any more, but that he had been obliged again
to chastise his wife, and had wounded her on the head, and that he had received
a wound on the shoulder from a club in return. On being told to go to the
hospital to have it dressed, as well as his wife's head, he refused, saying,
that the surgeon would kill him, and that he was afraid of sleeping in his hut,
lest he should shoot him in the night: though, to show he was not afraid of
meeting him openly, he went once or twice into the room where he had left his
spear, brought it, and shook it by way of defiance. Governor Philip assured him
that no harm was intended him, unless he killed the girl, or threw spears at
the English. As soon as he was satisfied that the surgeon was still his friend,
he agreed to go to him for a plaster for his shoulder; but his excellency,
desirous of being present at their meeting, sent for Mr. White; Banalong
received him as usual, giving him part of what he was eating, and went with him
to the hospital; after which he went to his house, and the girl being there
against whom he had lately been so incensed, he took her by the hand, and spoke
to her in a friendly manner. Barangaroo, who was present, was so exasperated at
her husband's attention to the girl, that it was with great difficulty she
could be prevented from doing her a mischief with a club she had snatched from
one of the bystanders; nor did Banalong seem disposed to prevent her, till
desired by Mr. White, when he gave her a sound slap on the face: she not being
able to vent her passion on the girl, burst to tears, and went to the
governor's; the girl was taken there for greater security, and was followed by
several men.

Governor Philip ordered her to be put in a room occupied by one of his maid
servants, at which Banalong seemed greatly pleased, and begged him to let the
same young man stay with her; in the mean time his wife grew quite outrageous,
and used many threats; she had got her husband's spears, which she would not
part with, till forced from her by one of the soldiers, from whom Banalong
wanted to take them, saying he would give them to the governor himself; upon
which they were delivered to him, and he immediately gave them as he promised,
begging that they might be lodged in the house: this showed he placed some
confidence in governor Philip, notwithstanding he was very violent against
those who prevented him entering the house, and threatened to knock them down
with his club, though a file of soldiers was drawn up in the yard, and he knew
that they had orders to fire on the least violence being offered. One of the
natives, who was generally his companion, seemed ready to support him in any
attempt he might be disposed to make. They were all turned out of the yard
except Banalong -- Barangaroo was also turned out with the rest -- but he staid
dinner, and behaved with as much indifference as if nothing had happened. In
the evening, when they were going, an unexpected scene took place; the native
who had remained with the girl would stay no longer, and the girl forced her
way out of the room to go with Banalong; she was brought back, and told she
would be beat if she went with him; but he said he would beat her no more, and
begged she might be permitted to accompany him: that Barangaroo would be
reconciled to her, as her passion was over, and she was now very good.

The governor was fully persuaded that Banalong would keep his word, but the
general opinion was against him, and that the girl would be sacrificed; but the
next morning he returned to dinner, and said he had sent her to her friends,
which was afterward confirmed. How he got this girl into his possession could
never be learnt; she appeared about fifteen, and when she went away her wounds
were in a fair way of doing well; fortunately for her the weapon Banalong first
caught hold of was a boy's wooden sword, and made of very light wood; but they
pay little attention to wounds, and even those which have been deemed dangerous
by the surgeons, do not seem to require the common attention of closing and
keeping them clean; which shows that they must be of an excellent habit of body.

CHAP. XII.
The governor goes to Paramatta, is accompanied by Banalong -- Stop by the way
to take up his wife, who refuses to go, and prevails on her husband to quit the
boat -- Fall in with a party lamenting the death of a brother killed by the
Camaragals -- The natives very alert in saving a boat that had been taken away
by some convict deserters, and cast on the rocks in bad weather -- Banalong
again prevented from accompanying the governor by his wife -- His excellency's
gamekeeper mortally wounded by the natives -- A strong party sent out to punish
the offenders -- Banalong plunders some of the fishing-boats -- His behavior
on being accused of the theft.
SHORTLY after, the governor having occasion to visit Paramatta, Banalong said
he would accompany him; accordingly they set out, and stopped at the point, in
order to take his wife into the boat, but she refused, and also persuaded him
to change his mind. On his excellency's return to Sydney, he was told that this
party had been lamenting the loss of a brother, who had been killed by one of
the Camaragals; the women cried violently, but their grief was of no long
duration; and Banalong went away with the officers, who, hearing the cries of
women, had gone to the hut to learn the cause. As they proceeded down the
harbor, looking after a small boat that had been lost with five convicts, he
begged them to land him on the north shore, in order, it was supposed, to
collect his friends, to go and revenge his brother's death. They found the
wreck of the boat, and one of the bodies: and being seen under sail when it
blew a gale of wind, it was supposed that the people were ignorant of the
management of her, and she had been driven ashore among the rocks. The natives
were very alert in saving the oars and other articles that were driven ashore,
and Coalby exerted himself greatly on the occasion, and saved the seine which
was entangled among the rocks, for which he was rewarded with some clothes, and
a couple of blankets; the rest of them had also some small presents; but let
you clothe these people ever so well, they generally return naked the next day;
for of all the things that had been given to Banalong, very little remained in
his possession; he had, he said, sent his shield, and most of his clothes, a
long way off; but whether he had given them away, sold, or lost them, was
equally uncertain.

The governor had built a small house at Paramatta, (the one I now occupy) and
was going to remain there some time, when several of the natives were desirous
of accompanying him, among whom were Banalong and Coalby. His excellency took
three of them in his boat; but Banalong going to fetch his cloak, was detained
by his wife; but as they were going out of the cove he appeared on the rocks,
and got into the boat, in spite of her threats and entreaties. No sooner was
the boat put off, than she went to her canoe, which was a new one, and stove
it, and breaking the paddles, threw them into the water; she then went to the
hut, probably with the intent of committing more mischief. Banalong endeavored
to pacify her, telling her he would not be more than one day absent; but all
would not do, and he was put on shore. The party then proceeded to Rose-Hill,
with Coalby and two other natives, none of whom ever opened their lips during
the altercation; indeed they are never known to interfere in any dispute which
does not immediately concern themselves.

The natives slept that night at Paramatta, and though they wanted for nothing,
yet the next morning were very anxious of returning; a boat was accordingly
sent down with them, by the return of which it was generally expected that news
would be received of Mrs. Barangaroo's being again under the hands of the
surgeon for her freaks; but, to the surprise of every body, the next day they
both made their appearance, and it seemed he had not beaten her: but whether he
had withheld the usual correction from what had been formerly said to him by
the governor, or from some other cause, could not be discovered; however a
reconciliation had taken place, and they both dined with his excellency, in
great good humor. Every thing they desired was given them; but no sooner was
the dinner ended than the lady wished to return, and Banalong said she would
cry if they detained her, so that they were obliged to send a boat down in the
evening with them.

On the return of the governor to Sydney, he learnt that his gamekeeper had
been dangerously wounded by the natives with a spear. It appeared that he went
out with three others, one of whom was a sergeant, and in the heat of the day
had retired to a hut they had made with boughs, and laid down to sleep. One of
them waking, heard a noise in the bushes which he supposed to be some animal;
but, on waking his comrades, and coming out of the hut, four natives started up
from among the bushes, and ran away with all their speed; the gamekeeper,
thinking he knew one of them, who had been at Sydney, followed them without his
gun, notwithstanding positive orders had been given for no one to trust himself
with the natives unarmed, calling on them to stop, and he would give them some
bread; and observing one who followed him to have a gun in his hand, desired
him to lay it down, as it only frightened the natives, and they would do them
no harm: he had now advanced about fifty yards before his companions, and was
not ten paces from one of the natives, who stopped short, and finding they were
unarmed, fixed his spear on the throwing-stick in a moment, and threw it at the
man nearest him; it entered his left side, and penetrated the lower lobe of the
lungs: it was barbed, and consequently could not be extracted till a
suppuration took place. Immediately after throwing the spear, the native fled
into the woods, and was seen no more.

They were eleven miles from Sydney when this accident happened, and it was
with the greatest difficulty that the wounded man could be brought to the
settlement. Being questioned whether he had provoked the natives to this
violence, he desired to have the clergyman sent for, to whom he confessed he
had been a very bad man; but at the same time declared that he had never killed
or wounded any native, except once; when having had a spear thrown at him, he
discharged his piece, loaded with small shot, and wounded the man that threw
the spear; this declaration added to the testimony of those who were with him,
left no room to doubt but that the native had taken advantage of his being
unarmed.

Banalong and Araboo repeatedly said that it was the tribes which lived about
Botany Bay who threw the spears, and killed the white men, yet as it was
evident that they generally received some provocation from our people, the
governor was loath to proceed to extremities whilst there was any possibility of
avoiding it; especially as he had been at so much trouble in bringing them to
repose some confidence in him; and a good understanding with them was
essentially necessary to the happiness and prosperity of the colony.

Many of the natives now daily visited the settlement and were all well
received; it was no unusual thing for the mothers to leave their children
behind them for several days, without ever enquiring after them; and if any of
them were going where the children would be an encumbrance they made no scruple
of leaving them at Sydney; Banalong, Coalby and two or three others took up
their quarters there four days in a week, and all joined in the same story, and
desired those natives might be killed who threw the spears; but governor Philip
had his suspicions that there was a great deal of art and cunning in Banalong;
he had lately been seen among those people he now wished to be killed, where he
said they danced, and that one of them had sung a song in praise of his house,
the governor and the white men at Sydney; and he said those people would throw
no more spears, as they were now all friends; this was but a few days after he
was so solicitous with the governor to kill them all.

What was rather extraordinary they all knew the man that threw the spear; they
said his name was Pemulaway, of the Bejigal tribe; Banalong and Coalby said
they would bring him to the governor; and went off the next day, as it was
supposed to Botany Bay; and his excellency, upon a report that a number of
natives had been seen armed about the mouth of the harbor, went down to the
lookout; he met Coalby there, who returned to Sydney with him, but did not seem
inclined to give himself any trouble about Pemulaway, but after dinner took his
leave, saying he was going to Botany Bay to meet his wife. Banalong was absent
several days; they said he was gone to assist at the ceremony of drawing a
front tooth from some young men, among the Camaragals, which gave rise to the
idea that the tooth is extracted as a kind of tribute.

Araboo, now resided with the Camaragals; when she left the clergyman's she
promised to return with her sweetheart, and his wife; hence it appears evident
that when they can procure two wives, the custom of the country does not
prohibit their having them; though this custom seems very unreasonable, as the
women bear no proportion to the men in point of number. It is generally
believed that most of their wives are taken by force, or surprise, from the
tribes with which they are at variance; consequently, their enemies retaliate,
and from the disproportion of the females to the males must have been more
successful in their Sabinical expeditions.

Spears being frequently thrown at the settlers; it became absolutely necessary
that a stop should be put to it, though his excellency wished to do it with as
little severity as possible, yet he was convinced that a severe example must be
made to have the desired effect. Accordingly a party was sent out consisting of
fifty privates, besides officers; they were directed to proceed to the spot
where the man was wounded; and to search for the natives who dwelt thereabouts,
some of whom were to be secured and brought prisoners; or if it was found
impracticable to take them alive; they were to put half a dozen of them to
death -- Spears, and all other weapons, which they happened to meet with were
ordered to be destroyed and left on the spot, that they might see it was
intended as a punishment inflicted on them -- Particular attention was to be
paid to the women and children, who were not to be molested on any account
whatever; and as the governor wished to impress the idea that no deceit was
ever practiced, and that they might depend on having protection whenever it was
offered; he ordered that none of the party should hold up their hands, which is
the signal of friendship; nor to answer such signal if made them by the
natives; they having lately behaved with great insolence on several occasions;
and a punishment inflicted on a few, might in the end be an act of mercy to
many.

Notwithstanding the most vigilant endeavors, the party was not able to get
near any of them, as they made off at their approach, and eluded the pursuit.
They saw Coalby near Botany Bay, where he was fishing, at whom they fired
several shot. They returned to Sydney without any success; but the governor
being determined if possible to make an example of some of them, again sent the
party with the same orders they had before received -- They left Sydney toward
evening with the hope of surprising some of the natives at their fires, but
were disappointed, not a single native being seen during all the time they were
out.

It was near a fortnight before Banalong made his appearance, when he brought
his wife with him; he said he had been with the Camaragals, that several young
men had undergone the operations of having their front teeth drawn, and
tattowing, which is making those scars which are considered as ornamental by
the natives -- These scars are made by cutting two lines through the skin
parallel to each other, with a sharp shell or flint, and then stripping off the
intermediate skin; the operation is repeated till the wound rises considerably
above the surrounding flesh, when it is suffered to heal over. These painful
embellishments are not very common among the women; Banalong showed a throwing
stick which had been cut for the purpose of knocking out the front teeth; and
it was generally supposed he had been employed in that office. He was on good
terms with the Camaragals, and he said they were all good people; when he was
asked if he had seen the man who threw the spear at the governor, he said yes,
and had slept in the same cove with him; so that his former account of having
quarrelled with, and beat him, was not believed. Barangaroo, who had been with
him on this occasion, was painted in a different manner from what she had been
before, and there appeared to have been a great deal of attention bestowed on
her; her cheeks, nose, and upper lip, were rubbed over with red ochre, on
which, and under the eyes, were laid spots of white clay; the small of her back
was likewise rubbed with ochre, and by her deportment seemed desirous of
showing that she was finer than common. Shortly after, two of the convicts
being fishing, Banalong, finding they had no arms in the boat, went alongside
in his canoe, and robbed them of the fish they had taken: his wife and sister
being in the canoe, and having several spears, the convicts were deterred from
making any resistance. In consequence of this robbery, orders were given that
no boat in future should go out of the cove unarmed.

The next time the natives came to the settlement, they were told, that if any
more spears were thrown they would all be killed; but these threats did not
seem to make the smallest impression on them. Banalong coming soon after, he
was charged with taking the fish from the two white men; he denied the charge
with great assurance, asserting that he was a great distance from the place at
the time; but when the people were confronted with him, he endeavored to
justify himself, but with so insolent an air, that he rather aggravated than
excused the offense: he frequently mentioned the man who had been wounded, and
threatened revenge; but on recollecting himself he offered his hand to the
governor, which being refused, he grew violent, and seemed inclined to make use
of his stick: a sentinel was called in, as it was feared he might commit some
extravagance that would oblige his excellency to order him to be put to death;
for his behavior was savage and insolent in the extreme, and would have met
with instant punishment in any other person; but they wished to bring him to
reason, without having recourse to violent measures; and the governor was very
unwilling to destroy that confidence he had been at so much pains to create in
Banalong, which the slightest punishment would have done: he was therefore
desired to come near the governor, but he refused, turned upon his heel, and
went away. As he passed the wheelwright's shop, the workmen being at dinner, he
stole a hatchet, with which, he got clear off.

CHAP. XIII.
The natives continue their visits to Sydney -- Banalong's reconciliation --
Ceremony of cutting off the finger of a female infant -- Curious method of
curing disorders -- One of the native's canoes stove by the convicts -- He
applies to the governor -- The offenders discovered and punished -- A convict
speared by Balderry, the owner of the canoe -- Governor Philip sends a party of
marines to take Balderry, who is advertised of his danger by Nanbarre, the
native boy -- The marines fire among the natives -- Banalong brings his wife to
Sydney to lie-in -- Her preparations for that occasion -- Governor Philip
forgives Balderry at the intercession of Banalong.
THE natives continued to visit Sydney after Banalong's recent behavior, and
conducted themselves in such a manner as gave great reason to suppose he would
never return: this, however, was not the case; for having previously visited
the fishing boats, to know if governor Philip was still angry with him, and if
he would shoot him; he appeared very desirous of knowing if he might go to the
governor's house, at the same time naming a man who had stole the hatchet, and
denied having used any threats; however not being pleased with the answers that
were given to his questions, he went away, but returned in a few days, and went
to the governor's who, happening to see him come to the gate, ordered him away.
He was seen soon afterward; and seemed very desirous of being received again
into favor; he disclaimed any knowledge of the hatchet, or any intention of
revenging the death of a man who had been shot. Governor Philip appeared to
believe him, and he was suffered to go into the yard, which was always open to
the natives; some bread and fish were given him, but he was not permitted to
enter the house as usual: though this degradation did not a little hurt his
pride, he frequently repeated his visits.

Governor Philip had been very desirous of learning the reason that the females
had two of the joints of the little finger out off, and of seeing in what
manner that operation was performed; he had now an opportunity of gratifying a
part of his wish: Coalby's wife coming to the settlement with a newborn
female, brought her infant to the governor's house; and being told that his
excellency would be present at the operation, it was accordingly performed. A
ligature was applied round the little finger at the second joint; but two days
afterward they brought the child again, the ligature was either broken or
taken off; this being told the mother, she took some hairs from the head of an
officer who was present, and bound them very tight round the finger; after some
time a gangrene took place; and though the child seemed uneasy when it was
touched, it did not cry, nor was any attention paid to it after the ligature
was applied. This operation had always been performed on the left hand, but
this child was an exception, for it was the little finger of the right hand
which underwent the operation: this bandage was continued until the finger was
ready to drop off, when its parents took it to the surgeon, who, at their
request, separated it with a knife.

Banalong, after an absence of three weeks, during which time he had been
particularly active in rendering services to a boat's crew, several of whom
would have been lost but for his exertions, which were considered as a full
atonement for his past behavior, add he was admitted again into the favor of
the governor. In consequence of this reconciliation the number of visitors
increased, and the governor's yard became their head quarters.

Their medical operations partake more of the juggling than the Esculapian
system. Coalby had formerly been wounded by a fish-gig below the left breast,
and though it must have been done many years, as it was extremely difficult to
perceive the scar; yet it was supposed that he felt some pain from the straps
of a knapsack, which he carried when out on an excursion with the governor: he
had traveled two or three days with it on his shoulders, and the straps
pressing against his breast, he complained of pain there.

He applied to an old man and his son, who had joined them in the excursion,
for relief, and they prepared to perform the cure: the son began the ceremony,
by taking a mouthful of water, which he spirited on the part affected, and then
applying his mouth, began to suck as long as he could without taking breath,
which appeared to make him sick, and when he rose up (for his patient was
extended at full length on the grass) he walked about for some minutes; he then
repeated the suction three times, and he appeared, by drawing in his stomach,
to feel the same pain he pretended to extract from the breast of his patient;
and having picked up a bit of stick or stone, but with so little sleight of
hand that it was obvious to the whole party, he pretended to throw something
which he had taken out of his mouth into the water. He undoubtedly threw
something away, which must have been what he picked up; but Coalby, after the
ceremony was over, said it was what he had sucked out of his breast; which was
understood to be barbs of a fish-gig, as he made use of the word Buller dooul;
but the governor was of a different opinion, and thought he meant two pains.
Before this business was finished, the doctor felt the patient's back below the
shoulder, and seemed to apply his fingers as if he twitched something out;
after which he sat down by the patient, and put his right arm round his back;
the old man, at the same time, sat down on the other side of the patient, with
his face the contrary way, and clasped him round the breast with his right arm;
each of them held one of the patient's hands; they continued in this situation
several minutes, straining him very close, and thus ended the ceremony; when
Coalby said he was perfectly well. He gave his worsted nightcap, and a share
of his supper, as a fee to his doctors; and being asked if they were both of
the faculty, he said yes, and a little boy that was with them was a doctor too;
from whence it was supposed that the power of healing is hereditary, and
descended from father to son.

As the natives frequently caught more fish than they could immediately use,
great pains had been taken to induce them to barter them with the settlers at
Paramatta for bread, vegetables, etc. Several of them had carried on this
traffic, and there was reason to hope that a tolerable fish market would soon
be established: among those who brought their fish was a young man that had
lived some months with the governor, but had lest the settlement, from time to
time, to go a fishing: his canoe was a new one, and, being the first he had
ever been master of, he was not a little proud of it, and accordingly valued it
highly.

Strict orders had been given that their canoes should never be touched; and,
indeed, the interest of the marines and convicts should have secured them from
insult; the traffic and intercourse tending much to their comforts, the balance
being greatly in their favor; but in a very short time this amity and good
understanding was interrupted by some villains, who had stove the canoe of the
young man before mentioned. The moment he discovered the injury done him, he
flew to the governor's in a violent rage, said the white men had broke his
canoe, and that he would kill them; he had his throwing-stick, and several
spears in his hand, and his hair, face, arms, and breast were painted red,
which is a sign of the most implacable anger. It was not till the governor
assured him that he would kill those who had destroyed his canoe, that he would
listen to any thing tending to divert him from his purpose of killing the white
men; he promised, at last, that he would leave it to the governor to punish
them.

The offenders were soon discovered, and were severely flogged in the presence
of Balderry; but he was far from being fatisfied, till he was told that one of
them had been hanged. During their examination he appeared very impatient, and
said that it belonged to him to punish the injury he had received. About a
month after, when it was thought he had been amply compensated by various
presents which the governor had given him; by seeing the offenders punished;
and by supposing one of them had been hanged, yet he took the first opportunity
of revenging himself, which plainly shows that these people do not readily
forgive an injury. A convict who had strayed from the settlement, was met by
two of the natives; and he had scarce passed them when he was wounded in the
back with a spear, and before he could recover himself he received a second
wound in the side; however he got away; and as they did not attempt to stop him
to get his clothes, or take any thing from him, there was no doubt but the
destruction of the canoe was the cause of this attack; especially as the same
evening several natives were seen round a fire, and being asked who it was that
had wounded the white man, they immediately answered, "Balderry." It is not a
little remarkable that these people always tell the names of those who have
thrown spears at the colonists, or who have stolen any thing from the
settlement, if they are asked, though they are conscious that you mean to
punish them: it might be thought to proceed from a principle of adhering to
truth, did they not destroy this opinion by invariably denying any thing they
may be charged with, though you see them commit the offense, and lay the blame
on another who is not present; it is not only surprising that they always
discover the offenders, but this they do openly, without any fear or dread of
the consequence.

The destruction of this canoe was a most unfortunate accident, as it prevented
the natives from carrying their fish to Paramatta; and no canoe visited the
settlement for some time after; and, besides, the governor wished to attach
Balderry to himself, intending to take him to England when he returned. After
absenting himself about a month or five weeks, Balderry began to make enquiries
of the various parties he met, whether Beanah, the governor, was still angry;
he was answered in the affirmative, and told that he would be killed for
wounding a white man; yet this did not deter him from coming into the cove in a
canoe, and the governor, upon being made acquainted with his appearance,
ordered a party of marines to go and secure him. Banalong, who was present,
seeing the soldiers go toward the point, gave him the alarm, and he got off.
Governor Philip saw Banalong speaking to the young man in his canoe, and gave
him to understand that Balderry should be killed; upon which he called out that
the governor was still very angry: on hearing this Balderry paddled off pretty
briskly to the opposite side of the harbor, and appeared to set their threats
at defiance, and talked of spearing; but whether it was the governor or the
soldiers that he threatened could not be distinguished, he being at too great a
distance to be heard distinctly. These people are very resolute, and when
provoked set little value on their lives, so they can be revenged; they ever
contrive to be even with you, whether you praise or threaten, and whenever a
blow is given they are sure to return it, though their lives should pay for it.
A number of natives having arrived at Sydney, amongst whom there was upwards of
thirty women and children; they were treated with bread and rice as usual: they
informed his excellency that Balderry was on the opposite side of the cove,
with a party of his friends, armed. Whether his coming after what had passed
proceeded from a supposition that he should not be punished, or that he was
safe whilst surrounded by so many of his countrymen, it was thought necessary
to order him to be taken, as soon as the visitants should be gone; for as
Balderry could not be seized without their bearing the dispute, it was probable
they would suppose themselves in danger, and make use of their spears in
defense of their countryman, in which case many of them must have been killed;
and this was the more likely, as many of the guests were strangers, and this
was their first visit to the colony.

As soon as they had taken their leave, a party of soldiers were ordered after
the delinquent, but before they got sight of him, he had been advertised of his
danger by Nanbarre, who hearing what was going forward had left the place; a
sergeant and a party were sent after him: in their way they met several of the
natives, who joined them in a friendly manner, but, while they were talking to
the sergeant, one of them had the audacity to attempt to wrest a sirelock from
one of the soldiers; however, he failed in the attempt, but immediately after a
spear was thrown, supposed to be by Balderry: two muskets were now fired among
the natives, which wounded one of them in the leg, but, unfortunately, neither
of the offenders. A strong party was immediately ordered to some brick fields,
where a pretty numerous body of them had assembled; but Nanbarre, ever faithful
to his countrymen, on seeing the soldiers form on the parade, took to the
woods, and stripping himself, that he might not be known, joined the natives,
and put them on their guard; after which he returned, and saw the governor pass
with some officers whilst he was hid in a bush: he afterward met an officer's
servant, and asked where the governor and soldiers were going; on being told,
he laughed, and said they were too late for the people were all gone.

Banalong came in soon afterward with his wife; and though he was told that
the soldiers were gone out to take Balderry, yet the intelligence did not
prevent him from eating a hearty dinner, and when he went away he left a large
bundle of spears, fish-gigs, and various other articles, under the care of the
governor. As the natives knew that the governor only meant to punish those who
threw the spears, the late disagreements did not in the least interrupt their
visits, and they called upon their friends with the same familiarity as if
nothing had happened. They were asked what became of the wounded man; they said
he was gone to his tribe; that the wound was but of little consequence, and
soon would be healed.

Barangaroo was now near her time of lying in, when the colonists had an
opportunity of seeing their preparations on the occasion: she had two nets
hanging from her neck, one of which, being new, the governor was desirous of
obtaining, and it was given him, after she had taken a large piece of the
tea-tree out of it, nicely folded up, and which was intended to lay her infant
upon, and which is the only preparation previous to the ceremony of an infant's
introduction into the world, that is made by lying-in women in this country.
The bark of the tea-tree is thick in proportion to the size of the trunk, and
is composed of a great number of layers of very thin bark, not unlike in
appearance to the birch-tree, but so exquisitely soft, that nothing this
country affords can be better calculated for the purpose for which it is
intended. Banalong, however, desired to have a blanket for the child, which was
given him, and next day a net made in the English manner, which was more
acceptable to his wife than the one she had given the governor. Banalong
informed the governor that his wife intended to do him the honor of lying-in
at his house; this favor his excellency declined, telling him that she would
be so much better accommodated at the hospital, that he could not think of
risking her health, by suffering her to be any where else, which compliment
highly gratified both husband and wife, and they accordingly took up their
quarters there. Banalong had frequently solicited the governor to receive
Balderry again into favor, but was always refused; however, on being told that
the poor fellow was extremely ill, the surgeon was desired to go and see him:
he found him in a high fever, and the first question he asked was, whether the
governor continued angry with him, and if he would let him go to the hospital
to be cured. Banalong, who went with the surgeon, returned to the governor, who
told him he was not angry now, and that he might bring his companion to the
settlement, he said he would, and early the next morning, Balderry made his
appearance: at first he was under great apprehensions, but on the governor's
taking him by the hand, and promising that when he was recovered he should live
with him again, his fears subsided: he appeared very ill, and went with the
surgeon and Banalong to the hospital.

CHAP. XIV.
Religion of the natives -- their superstition -- Preparations for a ball --
Manner of dancing -- Their method of fishing; of procuring fire -- Their
courtship.
I HAVE been thus minute in detailing the behavior of the natives, and the
persevering diligence and inexhaustible patience of the governor Philip, in
conciliating and familiarizing them, in the infancy of the colony, that, should
they hereafter attain any degree of civilization, posterity may know to whom
they are indebted for the extrication of numberless tribes from the rudest
barbarism, thereby adding to society the inhabitants of a country which
occupies a section of the globe of greater extent than all Europe, and capable
of becoming a great and powerful empire.

With regard to religion, they sing an hymn, or song of joy, from daybreak
till sunrise; but we have not been yet able to discover whether they have any
particular object to whom they pay adoration; neither do any of the celestial
bodies seem to occupy more of their attention than any of the animals which
inhabit this extensive country; yet they do not appear entirely ignorant of a
future state, as they say the bones of the dead are in the grave, and their
bodies in the clouds; or may probably have been misunderstood, and mean that
the soul is in the clouds. They most certainly burn their dead; for on opening
a new made grave, a quantity of white ashes were found, which appeared to have
been but lately deposited there; among the ashes were found part of a human
jaw bone, and a piece of a skull, which had not been sufficiently burnt to
prevent its being perfectly ascertained, The grave was not a foot deep, but the
earth was raised as high round it as are the common graves in England. The sun,
moon, and stars, they call were (bad). Araboo once went into fits on seeing a
falling star, and said that every body would be destroyed; although some who
were present insisted that she particularly alluded to the "Murray nowey," the
Sirius, which was lost some time after at Norfolk Island. From Banalong we
understood that they believe in apparitions, which they call "Mane," he
describes them as ascending from the earth with a horrid noise, seizing any one
in its way by the throat: he says these apparitions single the hair and beards
of those to whom they appear, which he said was a very painful operation;
rubbing the face after every application of the firebrand.

Their principal diversion is that of dancing, for which ceremony they prepare
themselves with more than ordinary attention; they are all in their birthday
suits, like so many Adams and Eves, without even a fig leaf to parry the
inquisitive glance of the curious European. The young women employ all their
art in decorating the young men, who are chiefly ornamented with streaks of
white, drawn with pipe clay, and in different forms, according to the taste of
the man himself, or to the lady who adorns him. They are as en^^^ us of
appearing fine as the most finished petit-maitre preparing for the birthday
ball of his favorite mistress. Their paint cannot be applied without
moistening, and the lady, in drawing the streaks down the face, which is the
most essential part of the decoration, spits in the face of her friend whom she
is adorning, from time to time, as the ochre or clay get dry. Their dances are
always at the close of the day, as they prefer fire-light to that of the sun on
these occasions.

The dance begins by a few young boys, and is increased by the men and women
gradually falling in, to the number of thirty or forty, but mostly men: it is
truly wild and savage, yet in many parts order and regularity are very
apparent. One man would frequently single himself out from the rest, and
running round the whole of the performers, sing out in a loud voice, some
expression delivered in a peculiar tone of voice; he would then fall in with
the rest of the dancers, who alternately led forward in the center, and there
exhibit their utmost skill and dexterity in the most difficult contorsions of
the body, which, in their opinion, constitute the principal beauties of
dancing: one of the most striking is, that of placing their feet very wide
apart, and, by an extraordinary exertion of the muscles of the thighs and legs,
move their knees in a trembling and very astonishing manner, such as no person
in the colony could any ways imitate; of course much practice is required to
arrive at any degree of perfection in this singular motion. There is great
variety in their dances; sometimes they dance in pairs, and frequently turn
back to back, then suddenly turn and face each other; sometimes they all sit on
the ground, with their feet under them, in the manner of the Chinese, and at a
particular word or signal they are on their feet in a moment, which they
perform without any assistance from their hands; they then run back in rows,
and again advance in the same order. Sometimes they form a circle with some
distinguished person in the center; at other times all the dancers have green
boughs in their hands: in all the different figures they generally finish by a
certain number of their principal dancers advancing to the front, and go
through the difficult part of the dance, the quivering motion of the knees,
upon which the whole company faces to the front, and go through the same
motions, the most expert being generally in the center. Their music consists of
two sticks of very hard wood, one of which the musician holds to his breast in
the manner of a violin, and strikes it with the other, in tolerable good time.
The performers sing the whole time of the dance, assisted by several boys and
girls who are seated at his feet, and by the manner of crossing their thighs
form a hollow between them and their belly, upon which they beat time with the
flat of the hand, which makes an odd though not disagreeable sound. They are
very prone to flattery, and if any strangers are present always ask for their
approbation, and appear highly delighted if you say "boojerie cariberic," a
very good dance -- which never fails to produce more than ordinary exertions.

They are very dexterous in striking fish: the spear of the gig with which they
take them is about ten feet in length, but they can increase it by joints as we
do our fishing rods in England; they have several prongs barbed with the bone
of a fish, or of some animal. The fisher lies across the canoe, his face in the
water, and his fish-gig ready for darting; thus he lies motionless, and by his
face being beneath the surface, he can see the fish distinctly; in this manner
they strike the fish with great certainty. The women are chiefly employed with
lines and hooks; the lines manufactured from the bark of trees, the hooks
commonly of the pearl of different shells: the talons of birds of prey they
sometimes make use of, but the former are most esteemed. The women are
frequently seen in a miserable canoe with two or three children, fishing the
whole day, in the edge of a surf that would terrify an old seaman to trust
himself near in a good stout boat. The men are excellent diverse, and remain a
surprising time in the surfs where their canoes cannot live: whatever they
bring up to the surface they throw on shore, where their comrade attends to
receive it. Having fire ready kindled for cooking, they broil or roast all
their food; they have not the least conception of boiling, for one of the
natives watching an opportunity when nobody was attending to the kettle,
plunged his hand into the boiling water to take the fish; of course, to his
utter astonishment, he was terribly scalded. They procure fire with great
labor, by fixing the pointed end of a round stick into a hole made in a flat
piece of wood, and whirling it round swiftly with both hands, sliding them up
and down till the operator is fatigued, when he is relieved by some of his
companions; each takes his turn till the sire is produced: from the labor
attending this process, it is no wonder that they are seldom seen without a
piece of lighted wood in their hand. When they mean to evince a partiality to
any stranger, they immediately assume his name, calling him by theirs; this
they consider as the highest compliment they can pay an Englishman, and are
highly pleased at being called by their new name. Of all their customs, that of
making love would be the farthest from meeting the approbation of my fair
countrywomen; that ceremony being, in this country, always prefaced by a sound
beating, which the lady receives, as a matter of course, with all the meekness
imaginable.

CHAP. XV.
Land in cultivation at Paramatta -- Vicissitudes of the weather -- Mortality
of the convicts -- Investigation of their treatment on board the transports --
Desertion of the convicts -- Stock my farm yard -- Governor Philip pleased with
my superintendence -- Lose myself in the woods -- Interesting adventure --
Conducted to Paramatta by a native boy -- Visit my new acquaintance -- Governor
Philip departs for England.
WE had now upwards of a thousand acres of cleared land at Paramatta, three
hundred and fifty of which were in wheat and maize; but though we had frequent
showers of rain, yet not in sufficient quantities to compensate for the
excessive drought which had been experienced in the preceding months; and from
the ground being new, and requiring more work than was in the power of the
settlers to bestow on it, the grain in general had a very unpromising
appearance. There are about two hundred acres laid out in gardens, as much more
prepared for turnips and potatoes, and the remainder closed in for feeding
cattle. We are very badly off for manure, and ere the colony can properly
floursh it must be stocked with cattle, the ground being infinitely too poor of
itself ever to produce crops sufficient for us to depend on it, solely, for
subsistence. The sudden vicissitudes of the weather must also render our
harvests very precarious, as well as prove injurious to the health of the new
comers; it often happens that there is a change of from forty to fifty degrees
twice in one day. It is no unfrequent circumstance to see the country strewed
with numbers of birds, fallen from the trees, unable to support the intense
heat of the meridian sun. Numbers of convicts fall victims, but it must not be
wholly ascribed to the weather, as the debilitated state in which they are, for
the most part, landed, would, were it a more favorable climate, be attended
with a considerable mortality; and they are generally so weak that they cannot
be put to any kind of labor, but are employed in weeding and pulling grass for
the purpose of thatching: we have frequently four or five hundred on the
doctor's list, who are individually-visited daily by the surgeon: upwards of
fifty have died in a month, in the generality of whom nature appears entirely
exhausted, and many of them were so fairly worn out, that they expired without
a groan, and to all appearance did not experience the smallest degree of pain.

From a most humane suggestion of Captain Parker of the Gorgon, the governor
issued orders for a regular survey to be taken of the condition of the convicts
on their landing from the different transports; and a strict investigation
taking place, it appeared that some of the captains had very much abridged
their unfortunate passengers of the allowance stipulated by government for
their subsistence; and this inhuman practice had been carried to such an extent
in some of the ships, that it appeared many had been literally starved to
death. A strong and pointed representation of the circumstance was sent home to
government, which will, I hope, put an effectual stop to such nefarious
proceedings.

Some of the convicts had entertained an idea that they could range along the
coast till they reached some of the Chinese settlements; subsisting themselves
on oysters and other shellfish, having been told that there was a copper
colored tribe one hundred and fifty miles to the northward, who were much more
civilized than the natives they were with, and who trafficked with the Dutch
from Timur, where they would be free. With these notions several parties set
off from Sydney Cove and Rose Hill, but after some days straggling some were
taken, and others returned of their own accord, induced by the imperative
command of hunger; and as some were supposed to be still lurking in the woods,
afraid of returning lest they should be punished for leaving the settlement,
the governor, less inclined to punish than to convince them of their error,
promised a general pardon to every one who should return within five days; at
the same time declaring that an exemplary punishment would be inflicted on
those who should be taken after that period. Accordingly several returned, and
appeared sensible of the lenity shown them, but some of them appeared capable
of the most desperate attempts, and even talked of repelling force by force;
they were however given to understand that no mercy would be shown them on the
least disposition to mutiny, and that any who were near those that might be so
disposed would be considered as principals, and treated accordingly. Almost all
the deserters returned, and those who were still missing, were supposed to be
murdered by the natives; and the miserable state of those that returned would,
it was thought, most effectually prevent any more excursions of the like nature.

The purchases I had made at he Cape, as well as the presents I brought from
England, enabled me to furnish the officers and settlers with various little
articles, which in general were not to be had by the ships, so that in a short
time I had collected the following valuable stock for my farm yard: a sow in
pig; two fine porkers; a young she goat and two kids; and English dunghill
cock, three laying hens, and one with a brood of chickens and young ducks;
these, with a young kangaroo, which I had been at infinite pains in rearing,
three native dogs, myself, a convict woman servant, and her son Timothy, a
youth between twelve and thirteen, a tractable and useful lad, comprised the
whole family. Having always had a strong predilection for horticulture, the
garden employed great part of my time, and is now as prosperous and flourishing
as any in the colony. Governor Philip, when he visits Rose Hill, takes great
delight in it, and gives me much credit for its improvement, as well as for the
appearance and spirit of industry manifest in the convicts under my
superintendence.

Having contracted an intimacy with a young man who had taken one of the farms
on the northern boundary, about four miles from Paramatta, I generally walked
over once or twice a week: as I was returning from thence one afternoon, with
no other company but my boy Tim, who, having evinced a great partiality for me,
was now my constant companion; a large male kangaroo crossed the path just
before us; I immediately took my gun from the boy, fired at the animal, and
disabled one of his hind legs, which very much impeded his flight; however he
preserved his distance for near an hour, when, getting a fair shot at him, I
lodged a ball in the back part of his head, which effectually did his business.

Upon examining our prize, I found it would be impossible for us to get it home
without help; we therefore searched for a place to conceal it till the next
afternoon, when I meant to return for it with a couple of men: a few paces from
where it lay we perceived a cavity on the slope of a deep ravine, to which we
dragged the carcass, and covering it with stones and grass, began to think of
making the best of our way to the settlement.

The sun was now sitting, and I began to be alarmed at being so far from home:
in the eagerness of our pursuit I had forgot to take any bearings by my pocket
compass, and the day closing ere we had reached any known path, increased my
apprehensions in the extreme. Poor Tim, though half dead with fatigue,
endeavored to keep up my spirits, which he perceived were much agitated: "He
was certain sure" -- he said -- "that we were in the right road, and that we
should get home time enough to muster the people at nine, the hour fixed for
that purpose; and that if we were obliged to sleep in the woods, why, he would
cut some grass for my bed, and stand sentinel with the gun while I lay down,
for he was not afeard to fire: and besides, my dear master," -- added he --
"you know the natives are so 'feard of guns, that should they come I only need
show it, and they will be off like a shot." The boy's courage and fidelity
charmed me; and put me to the blush to think I had so little command of myself
as not to conceal my uneasiness from him.

After rambling for near two hours, we could not perceive that we were any
nearer home than at sunset, but rather conjectured we had taken a different
rout, as we did not recollect a single object that now presented itself; it
being a fine starlight night, we could distinguish the river at times through
the trees at some distance; but presenting a different appearance to any part
we had ever seen; we quickened our pace with the hope of speedily reaching its
banks, when, to my great mortification, we were stopped by a deep ravine. I now
abandoned all hopes of reaching the settlement; and, as the poor boy was almost
exhausted with fatigue, made up my mind to pass the night on the spot.

With this determination we began to cut grass, and pull some boughs, in order
to make a fire; for although it had been intensely hot in the middle of the
day, I could now very well have enjoyed a great coat. While I was thus
employed, Tim, who had got some distance from me, came running back, saying I
might save myself the trouble, for he had found a snug place for us, with
plenty of dried wood for a fire, I followed him to the spot, and found it was a
hut inhabited by the natives when hunting; as I had no apprehensions of their
returning, the hunting season having just closed, I got a light from a flash of
powder, and in a few minutes kindled a comfortable fire. In one corner of the
hut was a bundle of grass ready dried which we spread to lie down on; but I
could not prevail on the boy to think of sleep; no, if I would trust him with
the gun he would keep watch. Not being inclined to sleep myself, I took a book
from my pocket, and, by fire light, endeavored to amuse myself till daybreak.
I had scarce perused half a dozen pages, ere poor Tim had sunk into a sound
sleep; how long it was before I followed his example, or how long I should have
continued it, is difficult to determine, had I not been waked by an acute pain
in one of my hands, which I found was occasioned by the bite of some ants, whom
I had accidentally molested in my sleep: I called Tim, and sallied forth;
following the winding of the ravine, about a mile, we arrived at its
termination, and perceived a break in the high lands before us, through which I
distinctly saw Rose Hill, about six or seven miles distant; this prospect
revived our spirits, which were beginning to flag, with the reflection that if
we escaped every other danger that of being starved to death was inevitable,
unless we could extricate ourselves from the labyrinth in which we were
involved. Having set the spot by my compass, I found it bore W. S. M.; as we
descended to the plain we lost sight of the object, but continued our course in
that direction till we arrived at a swamp, which cost us some time in getting
round, there being no possibility of crossing it: we had now got to a part
almost impassable from the quantity of underwood, and the trees were so close
together that we could scarce see three yards before us, and were proceeding
very slowly through a thicket, when we were alarmed by a deep groan, apparently
but a few paces distant; a sound so unlooked for, for some moments rivetted us
to the spot. Not being immediately able to perceive from whence the groan
issued, I advanced with great caution about a dozen paces, when I discovered a
cave in the side of a rock; I was at first for retreating, but on recollecting
that perhaps I might render some service to the afflicted, and that I equally
stood in need of assistance, or perhaps might perish with hunger, I examined
the priming of my gun, forced Tim, with some difficulty, behind me, and
approaching the entrance of the cave, a most interesting scene presented itself
to my view: a young creature seated on a jut of the rock, mournfully
contemplating the extended body of a man, whose expiring groan had just pierced
our ears; all her faculties were so absorbed with grief that we were yet
unnoticed: a sympathizing sorrow pervaded all my frame; I gave my gun to Tim,
and made signs for him to retire, lest the sight should alarm her; when she
perceived me she uttered a faint shriek, and sunk motionless on the body.
Observing a small pond a few paces from the cave, I sent the boy to bring some
water in his hat, and gently moved her from the body to the mouth of the cave,
raised her up, and supported her in my arms; the water soon brought her to,
when she raised her head, and regarded me with a look blended with grief and
terror; I endeavored, by every sign I could suggest, to do away her fears, and
retired a few paces, leaving her at liberty to go from the cave had she chosen.
Gaining confidence by my behavior, she made me understand that the deceased
was her brother, who, faint with the loss of blood, could not reach their
habitation; and night approaching they had turned from the road to shelter
themselves in this cave. On examining the body I found a deep wound under the
left pap, made with a spear, part of which, being barbed, remained in the
wound: I made her understand, partly by signs, and partly by some words I had
picked up, that I had, unfortunately, lost my way, and had been all night in
the woods: she shook her head, and pointed to her brother, signifying that she
could not leave him; but that their habitation was not far off, and making me
observe a hill about two miles distant, gave me to understand it was in their
neighborhood. I made signs to her, that if she would go and acquaint her
friends with her situation, I would watch by her brother till her return: her
eye glistened with joy as she gathered my meaning, and with an assenting
inclination of the head, more eloquent and expressive of her feelings than in
the power of the most refined language to convey, she quitted us with a
celerity quickened by fraternal love, and in a few moments was out of sight.

This interesting and pathetic scene had so wholly absorbed all my faculties,
that not a single reflection of danger had occurred to me in the approaching
interview, when Tim, who had been witness to several instances of the perfidy
of the natives toward the settlers, strongly urged me to leave the body, and
make the best of our way home. Roused by his solicitations, a momentary impulse
of fear came over me, and my mind had half yielded to his importunity; when
casting my eye on the body methought I perceived it heave; a feeble sigh
convinced me that life was yet unextinguished, and the imperative call of
humanity decided my operations: a death-like dew had bespread his face and
limbs, which I dried with my hand. Tim most readily bore his part in this act
of humanity, and a returning warmth encouraged us to redouble our efforts: in a
few moments we perceived a faint pulsation, which gradually increased: at this
juncture we were surprised by the return of his sister, accompanied by her
father, another elderly man, and a boy about twelve years of age; seeing us
busied about the body, they stopped short at the entrance of the hut, seemingly
at a loss for our conduct.

I beckoned my young friend, who advanced with the utmost confidence, and
giving her the hand of her brother, she exclaimed, with great emotion,
"Didgerry-goor didgerry goor," I thank you, I thank you; -- and turning to her
father, called him to her: I immediately quitted my station, and resigned him
to their care; the old man examined the wound, and with great seeming skill
extracted the barb. During the operation the youth lifted up his eyes, and
observing his father, a glance of filial affection beamed forth. Hope now
tranquilised the boding fears of the little group; Yeariana, his sister,
supported him while the father and his friend were contriving how they should
remove him to their dwelling; finding it necessary to dispatch some one for
their canoe, the river which passed their habitation winding within fifty paces
of us, and which was the safest and only conveyance he could bear; Yeariana
proposed going for it; and it being our direct road to Paramatta, I seized the
opportunity of accompanying her; in less than an hour we arrived at the foot of
a small mountain, when Yeariana, like an arrow from a bow, abruptly quitted us:
leaving her brother, the boy before mentioned, as our guide, we were not long
before we discovered near a dozen natives, with Yeariana at their head, waiting
our arrival; she had sent off the canoe for her brother, and had got some dried
fish, which she presented us, and led us to her hut or cave, which was a large
excavated rock on the bank of a very pleasant branch of the river. The
reception we met with from this grateful people almost bordered upon adoration;
the mother of Yeariana was quite troublesome with her caresses for my services
to her son; and I could perceive in the mild eye of her daughter that it
anxiously sought a farther acquaintance. Upon enquiry I found we were near five
miles from Paramatta, but that none of them had ever visited the settlement;
however, Batcherry, her brother, offered to be our conductor, provided I would
take care of him, and see him part of the way back next day; promising to see
her again shortly, I took my leave, and arrived at Paramatta about noon,
heartily fatigued. My absence had not caused any alarm at the settlement as
they thought I had gone to Sydney Cove, which I had done twice or thrice, and
staid there all night.

Every object that presented itself to Batcherry filled him with surprise and
astonishment, and the poor lad had scarce time to eat or drink, so much was he
taken up with admiration of the wonders that surrounded him. The next morning I
set him on his way home, giving him a hatchet for himself, and a string of
beads for his sister, whose image had made a strong impression on my mind,
being the most interesting I ever saw: with a form that might serve as a
perfect model for the most scrupulous statuary; her face and hair unlike any
thing I had ever seen in this country; the first of a perfect oval, or Grecian
shape, with features regularly beautiful, and as fine a pair of eyes as can be
imagined; the latter long, and of a shining black; she was likewise of a much
lighter color than any of her countrywomen, and might easily have been taken
for a beautiful Oriental Creole.

Taking three men and the boy Tim, we went in search of the spot where we had
concealed the kangaroo, and with some difficulty found it; we cut a couple of
stout slicks, and laying the animal across it, took spell and spell till we
reached home, when I rewarded the men with a fore quarter for their trouble.

It was more than a week ere I could spare time to pay a visit to the abode of
my charming Yeariana; when arranging my business so that, should I be detained
all night, my absence would be of no material consequence, I took Tim with me,
and with much more facility than I expected found my way to Paculbenah, the
name of the place where the family of Yeariana resided; Batcherry saw us as we
turned the foot of the mountain, and running back to the cave, gave notice of
our coming; the whole family, except Palerino, who was not sufficiently
recovered, were ranged at the entrance of their cave; their joy at seeing me
was evident in their countenances; the old man took me by the hand, and led me
to his son, who was now out of danger; he expressed his thanks by a hearty
squeeze of the hand, and a look that amply explained his meaning; his sister
was not deficient in expressions of satisfaction, by every little attention in
her power. Having brought plenty of beef, bread, and a little brandy with us,
lest we might stand in need of refreshment, we seated ourselves in a circle on
the ground, and spread our fare on a piece of canvas which had contained it;
every eye was fixed on me, and every motion gave fresh cause of wonder. There
being no knives among them, I carved the meat for them all, and gave to every
one a part; the beef they eat with great avidity, but did not relish the bread,
and rinsed their mouths several times after it. When the meat was all eaten,
they produced some dried fish, roots, two or three kind of berries, and a nut
resembling the Chestnut in taste: every person having finished eating,
Wanjarkoo, the father, clapping his hands thrice they all started upon their
feet, and prepared to resume their usual avocations; the old man and his wife
went to the canoe to finish their day's fishing; Batcherry to cut grass; and
Yeariana was left to attend her brother, Palerino, who lay on a bed of dried
grass in one corner of the hut; she, after some minutes pause, took my hand,
and drawing me toward Palerino, joined it with his, and whispering something
to him, he cried "Boodjerie, Boodjerie," Good, good, Palerino. -- and by signs
asked my name, when I repeated "George." two or three times; then squeezing my
hand to his breast, he made me understand that he would change names with me,
and I must call him George, and he would call me Palerino, and that he would
come and bring Yeariana with him to the settlement, as soon as he was well:
this ceremony was finished by his sister kissing us both, repeating "Boodjerie
Palerino, Boodjerie George," Good Palerino, good George, -- and appeared quite
overjoyed. They now made me understand, that the day before I found them, as
they had been out together, searching for a kind of grub, which is a part of
their food, they were surprised by two of the tribe of Wangal, their mortal
enemies, one of whom her brother had killed with a fish-gig; during the
conflict she had thrown a stone at the survivor, which so disabled him that he
retreated with difficulty to his canoe, and rowed off with precipitation:
Palerino, faint with the loss of blood, could not reach their habitation, and
night approaching they had turned from the road to shelter themselves in the
cave where I found them.

Highly pleased with my visit, I took leave and hour before sunset, when they
repeated their assurances of coming to the settlement, which was what I
ardently wished for, as I flattered myself that I should be able to persuade
them to stay some time with us, and thereby cement that friendship which had
just taken root, and might eventually prove beneficial to the settlement, as
well as promote certain views just dawning on my mind with respect to Yeariana.

Mr. Wentworth, who resides at Norfolk Island, had been appointed to the same
station there that I occupy at Paramatta, which, joined to his skill in
surgery, renders him an invaluable acquisition; and, as we frequently
correspond, he has kindly promised me an account of the rise and progress of
that settlement: he speaks with rapture of the urbanity of governor King to all
ranks and descriptions, and whose unremitting attention to the clearing and
cultivating the land, already enables the settlers, of which there are between
forty and fifty sailors and marines, who have parcels of land allotted them of
sixty acres each, and about twenty convicts, who have ten acres each, not only
to support themselves, but to have something to spare: indeed, they have
greatly the advantage of those settled at Sydney and Paramatta, the ground
being much more fertile; the wheat frequently producing an increase of twenty
fold, and it is conjectured that future harvests will be more productive.
Potatoes thrive exceedingly, upwards of an hundred having been seen to a single
root; and every kind of garden vegetables shoots up in abundance, and in the
greatest perfection.

To ascertain in what time a man might be able to cultivate ground sufficient
to support himself, the governor, about a twelvemonth ago, ordered an acre of
ground to be cleared in a good situation; it was then given to a very decent
steady convict, who was told, that if he was industrious, in order to prove the
experiment, he should have thirty acres given him, cleared in like manner. He
was very assiduous, and, at the expiration of six months, requested another
acre to be cleared for him, which was granted; and he is now able to support
himself, without drawing any assistance whatever from the public stores.

The declining health of our worthy governor rendering his return to England
indispensable for its re-establishment, he made the necessary arrangements for
the future government of the colony; and having persuaded Banalong and another
native to accompany him, embarked on board the Atlantic transport, and, with
the benedictions of every person in the settlement, proceeded on his voyage to
England.

THE END.
BOOKS Published and for sale by THOMAS DOBSON, At the Stone-House, No 41, So.
Second-street.
ALPHONSO and Dalinda, or the Magic of Art and Nature, Price 67 cents.
Adventures of Alphonso, by himself, 20 System of Anatomy, from the
Encyclopaedia, with twelve large copperplates, 2 dolls. Beattie's Evidences of
Christianity, 50 cents. Beattie's Poems, 50 Booth's Apology for the Baptists,
25 British Embassy to China, 1 doll. Burke's Reflections on the French
Revolution, 1 doll. Campbell on Miracles, in answer to Hume, 80 cents. Clark's
AEsop's Fables, Latin and English 33 Cornaro on Temperance, Health, and long
Life, 40 Crawford on Animal Heat, 50 New Dispensatory of Edinburgh, 2 dolls. 50
cents. Medical and Philosophical Commentaries, eighteen volumes in nine, 2
dolls. and 50 cts. per vol. Fordyce's Sermons to Young Women, 80 cents.
Goldsmith's Deserted Village, 14 Comprehensive English Grammar, 25 Grave, a
poem, by Dr. Blair, 14 Collins' Poems, with Hammond's Love Elegies, 50
Hamilton's Outlines of Midwisery, 80 Hopkinson's Works, 3 vols. 5 dolls.
Jenyn's Disquisitions, on various subjects, 25 cents. Life of Joseph, by
M'Gowan, 62 More's Fables for the Ladies, with Langhorne's Fables of Flora, 50
More's Sacred Dramas for young persons, common paper 62 cents, fine do. 70
More's Search after Happiness, 20 ^emprier's Tour in Morocco 87 Medical
Transactions of the Philadelphia College of Physicians, 1 doll. Nicholson's
Natural Philosophy, illustrated with twenty-five copperplates, 2 vols. 4 dolls.
Opinions of the Federal Judges on the Suability of a State, 50 cents. Paley's
Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy, 2 dolls. Paley's View of the
Evidences of Christianity, 1 d. 75 c. Percival's Moral Tales, and Fables for
Youth, 50 cents. Percival's Moral Tales, fine, 67 Chesterfield's Advice to his
Son, 50 Pope's Essay on Man, 13 cents. fine do. 20 Present for an Apprentice,
20 Price's Sermons, 75 Rigby on Uterine Haemorrhagies, 50 Memoirs of the Year
2500, 1 doll. System of Mineralogy and Metallurgy, from the Encyclopaedia, 1
doll. 33 cents. Rowe's Devout Exercises of the Heart, 37 cents, fine ditto, 50
Dr. Rush's Medical observations and Inquiries, 2 vols. 3 dolls. Dr. Rush on the
Yellow Fever, 1 doll. 50 cents. Selectae e Profanis, 80 Selectae e Veteri, 80
Shipwreck, a Poem, by Falconer, 44 Sherlock's Trial of the Witnesses of the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 20 Smith's Wealth of Nations, 3 vols. 3 dolls.
Smith's (Charlotte) Elegiac Sonnets, 14 cents. System of Chemistry, from the
Encyclopaedia, quarto, 2 dolls. 50 cents. Taplin's Farriery, complete, 2dolls.
25 cents. Tables of Logarithms, Sines, Tangents, etc. Underwood on the Diseases
of Children, 1 doll. Water's System of Surgery, abridged from Bell, 2 dolls. 50
cents. Winchester's Dialogues on Universal Salvation, 62 cts. Truxtun's
Remarks, Instructions, and Examples, relating to Latitude, Longitude, Variation
of the Compass, etc. with the Chart of the Globe, etc. 3 dolls.
Also an Extensive variety of Books and STATIONARY.


