MR. BENTLEY's ARTILLERY ELECTION SERMON.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE ANCIENT AND HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY, IN
Boston, JUNE 6, 1796, BEING THE ANNIVERSARY OF THEIR Election of Officers.

By WILLIAM BENTLEY, A. M. PASTOR OF THE SECOND CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH IN SALEM.

(...). MAX. TYR. BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING. 1796.

A SERMON.
PROVERBS xxx. 5, 6. EVERY WORD OF GOD IS PURE:
HE IS A SHIELD UNTO THEM THAT PUT THEIR TRUST IN HIM.
ADD THOU NOT UNTO HIS WORDS;
LEST HE REPROVE THEE, AND THOU BE FOUND A LIAR.

THIS valuable fragment from the records of ancient wisdom, comprehends this
useful truth, that from experience are all our safe conclusions, respecting the
character of society, and the happiness to be attained in it. The resolution
formed upon this maxim, has been more celebrated, than the maxim itself. It is
experience which recommends moderation in our desires, and in our expectations,
but facts, in all ages, are more easily communicated by words, than the maxims,
which justify the conclusions of our highest wisdom. The writer affirms, that
independent of every advantage from genius and education, this truth of our
text is established. The whole paragraph contains an appeal There is a
different preface in the Vulgate.
of a man to his neighbors, or an inquiry which may be thus represented.
Indeed, should I have no uncommon natural powers; or should I not have
cultivated my understanding; should I not have been a man of deep reflection,
or should I not have the secrets of inspiration; tell me, whence could I get
wisdom? Am I first to comprehend all creation? Who has done this? Who has
ascended into heaven, or who has descended? Who has gathered the winds in his
hand, or confined the waters in his garment? Who has established all parts of
the earth? What is the name of this man, or what is his son's name? Can any man
tell? Is not every truth of God approved, when it has been safe to those who
trust in it? Add thou not then rashly to his words; affirm only from
experience; lest thy folly be exposed, and thou lead other men into error. He
then proceeds to his conclusion. He had considered affluence, and poverty, and
had devoutly observed how far they contribute usually to happiness, and he
tells us, that experience and observation had reconciled his mind to the nature
of human life, and had taught him to acquiesce in those moderate desires, which
are much more adapted to health, and contentment, and have their objects
commonly within every man's reach. Experience has continued to decide in favor
of this choice, and to render it happy. Our text then assures us that the laws
of God are known from experience, and from the safety and happiness men find in
them; that every advantage beyond past experience, should be pursued with the
greatest caution; that attempts at higher happiness have been made with
frequent disappointments; that reformations have been urged, but not
accomplished; and that the many disappointments should be lessons of the
highest wisdom to mankind.

This sentiment accommodates itself to the present solemnities. The horrors of
war are to be deprecated. Benevolence teaches us to avoid them; sound policy to
prevent them by all reasonable measures; and religion to abhor the occasions of
them. But the world is not in our power. Passions exist every where, beyond
control from principles within, and from fears without. General happiness is
the best object of political economy, and should be regarded in all laws and in
every community. But it is not what exists, but what is to be pursued. It is to
the mind, an assemblage of all those blessings, which have been reported among
men, but which have never existed together, or in perfection. The picture is
bold. It may fill the mind, and inspire sublime hopes. But steadily viewed, and
without fair comparison with nature, it may distract the imagination, make men
forget the proportions of nature, and leave them dissatisfied with the real
objects before them, and with that happiness, which is their best, because
their highest attainment. But even this happiness is unequal in different
nations, and in different ages. Its progress in society resembles the progress
of all our knowledge from experience. It is gained by slow degrees and calm
inquiry, and it is accompanied with unavoidable prejudices. Nations like men
have a resemblance in their general character, but their manners may be
distinct. The reestablishment of any police has been found to be impracticable,
because the habits, which formed it, are unattainable. Nations may profit by
the resemblance, because they knew from it the object of government and the
character of mankind. But no hopes from experience will rise above the
condition of human nature. From the wisdom of preceding ages, Spencer.
Moses supplied the principles of his government, and the lessons of morality
which accompany his laws. He did not institute wars, but he found them in the
order of our world. He did not reason about their nature, but their coincidence
with his political hopes. The political existence of his nation began, when
they were in arms. The principles upon which they were taken at first, were
never unnecessary, nor was their influence upon the national character ever
lost. They reduced moral life below the standard of an happy government, but
the people had not the spirit of such a government. There are in times of
peace, institutions of as active virtue, and of as high spirit of honor, as
can exist in war. There may exist a generous emulation in the arts, and of
civil honors, which may command all the resources of human genius. And there
are the endearing manners of domestic life to sweeten the temper, and to
conciliate the affections. It was not, because upon fair comparison, war could
be preferred, but because war was more congenial with the prevalent character
of mankind. The spirit of war speaks in the devotion of David. But his sublime
thoughts could not inspire those emotions, which compose the description of
wisdom by his successor. It was in the quiet of a peaceful establishment, that
the age became enlightened, as well as great. But in our world, we have not
been able to provide the events, which combine empires, and preserve their
existence, otherwise than by the active and contending passions of mankind.
These events have not only given being to all great nations, but they have
aided the triumph of every religious establishment. Even religious wars have
ever been worse than those of princes for civil causes, or political fame,
because they have more passion, and it is determined from the origin and nature
of the establishments, consequent upon them, that they cannot be the foundation
for the hopes of a perpetual peace. The difference of motives professed in
them, has made no difference in the enormities, they have occasioned. It then
remains a question, since such a state of the passions has ever existed, as is
a self-exciting cause of war, and therefore as its incentives cannot fail from
the present constitution of the human mind, whether a state of constant
preparation, be not the only state of safety, to nations, and to mankind.

To examine a subject of this interesting nature, we must not propose a
favorite theory of the passions, but some example of the most happy conduct of
them. If we cannot find a successful experiment, we should produce the best
effects in circumstances, most indulgent to our hopes. We should examine the
minds of men, when most detached from the political views of their age, simple
in their manners, elevated beyond the love of fame, or wealth, and in their
maxims pure, peaceable, and submissive. Too humble to hope for preferment in
the state, and too devout to refuse the most severe restraints upon their
passions. From the conduct of such men, we may judge of the influence of
condition, of the progress of society, of the motives of prosperity, and of the
nature of a religious or civil establishment. And our conclusions from such an
example, may be as safe, as the nature of human knowledge will admit.

And what history can be better adapted to a Christian assembly, than the
history of their own religion? Christians being in civil society, did not
refuse obedience to the laws. The right of war was not denied, or maintained.
The manners they associated with their religious profession, were governed by
the love of peace. From the absence of power, and the full strength of mutual
dependence, their habits were more social and more pure. The most offensive
part of their lives was obliged by persecution, and their unkind opinions of
mankind; but this assisted them in their resistance to the habits of civil
society, and for a long time preserved them from the compliances, which
gradually obtained from pretended regard to convenience and to duty, and the
supposed obligations of different circumstances, but really from the
assimilation of their manners and character to that of human nature, and the
order of our world. This expediency was disclosed in a letter, or in some
guarded expression; was betrayed in confidence, and employed with fear; was
adopted with caution, and confessed with diffidence; was opposed by restraints
and qualifications; before it was established in belief, boasted of as just,
and maintained by violence. Christians, after long depression, voluntary
mortifications, and arbitrary rules upon the passions, and even under the
belief of a speedy and a miraculous change of condition in our world, at last
claimed and exercised all the rights of war. They borrowed in their earliest
prosperity from every institution, which could unite with the prejudices of
their converts. We look not then at their primitive morals, but at the
character of man: not at professions, but at actions. Mahomed adopted war, but
the Christians had practiced it. Christians yielded to its expediency, but
Mahomedans profiting by experience, entered upon the world in triumph.

To trace this history may not be without instruction. The Author of our
religion has reported by his disciples, his own convictions of the right of
war. Jesus discovered to his friends, before his entrance upon the garden, in
which he was apprehended, that he was determined to resist. But the prudence of
a disciple could not be as easily under the command of his master, as his zeal.
The reproof assures him, that his resistance was unseasonable, not unlawful;
because he went armed by his authority, and with his knowledge. His followers
were thus taught to employ prudence with the lawfulness of war: And as the
destruction of the country was impending, they were not taught to contend in
its battles. This ingenuous temper was not lost in the primitive ages. To our
own times, the records of men, who were governed by their religion, rather than
education, have been carefully transmitted. A work attributed to one Clement.
of the first Christians, dissuades from sedition and schism, from moral
motives, rather than from express and religious prohibition. And from military
arrangements, he happily illustrates the common interest, which comprehends
what is useful to the strength and defense of their cause. A care for personal
safety induces another Ignatius.
to advise to appease the people, from a knowledge of their passions, which
precipitate human affairs. While a third Polycarp.
qualifies his obedience to civil authority by the protection, he receives; and
from the indignation which rises against insult and oppression, he claims the
right to question their power, who do public wrongs. The character and the
justice of these feelings, in our free government, it is not necessary to
vindicate, or describe. They belong to the best part of human nature.

In the next period we see less simplicity of heart, and less ingenuous
sentiments. When Christianity had a public form, and a rising interest, it
speaks in flattering apologies, from its more learned friends, the language of
the laws, and the subordination of the empire. Thus while one Athenagoras.
acquiesces in the laws of slavery, and the full authority of reason, and
government in the concerns of life, another Justin.
to quiet the state, ascribes false honors to his religion, and professes to
prefer prayers to arms, and in the apparent piety, though error of his
address, he opposes active duty to devotion, and the order of civil society, to
the hopes of a divine religion. While a third, Irenaeus.
more sincere, than discerning, dares to anticipate a triumph over the laws of
nature, from an authority not established in these laws, but formed in a
religion too pure to exist in the present order of our world. But the patrons
of the Christian cause, were not all of this character. They had refined their
taste by the elegance of Rome, and had imbibed the manners of society with the
best knowledge of its laws. They were not so ignorant as to plead for war from
virtue, or religion, nor so superstitious, as to subvert society, by refusing
it the necessary defense. To the passions of life, and to the habits of civil
society, they imputed the convulsions of empires, and the defense of the sword.
To meliorate human condition, it was taught, Lactantius.
that the passions must be governed. That from their natural character, human
genius was displayed in the arts of military defense, as well as in the maxims
of virtue. The disputes of the age Tertullian.
for power, and the vile services of faction were stigmatized, as unlawful to
Christians from a regard to reputation and the public peace, while Roman
eloquence in the school of Christ, taught the philosophy of reason and
religion. "Nor do I refuse," says an enlightened Christian, Minutius Felix.
"to confess, that it is the duty of man to know himself in all the relations
of his being. What he is, whence he is, and why he exists. This duty he cannot
perform, without an inquiry into all things around him, for they are so
associated, connected, and united, that an ignorance of them involves an
ignorance of himself, and disqualifies him for every civil obligation. Where is
society formed on virtue," he appeals, "or dissolved without blood? Wars
throughout the world, disunite the dearest kindred, and the greatest empires
report not the same history of their fate!"

A cause, which could admit such rational views of society, must have already
risen into reputation, and its friends must have had an acquaintance with the
world. We may then soon expect to find its power and its influence employed in
public affairs. When Christianity had thus prevailed, its friends had interest
at court, and in the armies. It had a command among parties in the state.
Experience has told us, what to expect. Let us hear, how the Fathers reason,
what the councils publish, and the civil laws ordain. Let us listen to
Chrysostom, who exalted the glory of a Christian prince, and to a Gregory who
pleaded with bold imagination and genius against an apostate. We may find
perpetuated the prosperity of an establishment, by all the means of civil
power, till a Bernard displays to us the full force of prosperity upon a long
continued superstition, which had established itself upon the purest religion
ever professed among men. We behold at length a war which armed Europe, and was
the boldest effort of passion in religion. Conquest was authorized in the cause
of religion, and the power of war, the conduct of armies, and the control of
the civil government were surrendered to its claims.

At first, to engage Christians in war, the cross was displayed in their
banners. This was not so great a struggle with former prejudices as we might
imagine. No sect had prevailed, which had been under the imputation of making
war unlawful. All reports leave reasonable fears of misconstruction upon their
opinion. The mystic sects in their infancy might favor or incline to it.
Christians sought, at an early period, promotion to civil and military honors,
and gradually acquired their influence in the empire. Even the dignities in the
church did not extinguish all claims, or prove sufficient to gratify their
ambition, and the excess of panegyric, was the reward of the civil Fathers for
distinctions, which they readily bestowed. A canon early imposed a restraint
upon this ambition. From the modest vindication of self defense in former
apologies, the eloquence of Chrysostom proceeds to compare the mind under its
passions, to a body in a fever, in which safety directs the remedy. To a
Christian teacher he not only insinuates, but recommends an address devoid of
Christian simplicity. The power of princes was an emblem of spiritual dominion,
too flattering not to be indulged. The Christians had fought too many battles,
and with too great success, to doubt of the divine right of power, or the
lawfulness of war. And, though Christian teachers were professed friends of
peace, they had profited enough from affairs of state, to know what the Bishop
assured them was true, that excellence in political knowledge was a commendable
qualification. An emperor averse from the power and name of a Christian soon
found the reluctance with which honors were abandoned. Panegyric was converted
into the most bitter invective. The praises of Constantine from Chrysostom may
be opposed to the talents of Gregory against Julian. Whatever could irritate by
comparison, or be hateful in its motives, or injurious to reputation was
pronounced without reserve. A spirit so freely encouraged in the primates of
any order, cannot be restrained by any institutions. Neither the habit of a
recluse, nor his vows will confine his ambition. The pride of opinion is not
obstinate against the temptations of power. Enemies are more easily silenced by
authority, than argument. The great Augustine encouraged the temper. In defiance
of his first maxims, he passed from a vindication of war, to the command of God
in it. He pronounced that the general, or the soldier were not so much authors
of war, as the ministers of God, and that they might exult, Blessed be the
Lord, who teaches our hands to war, and our fingers to fight.

Thus at last orders established to exhibit the virtues of retirement and
silence, became powerful associations in the church, and were transformed into
standing armies, to instigate resentment, and to interfere in the political
concerns of princes. When the church became established, there were few fears
entertained upon the subject of war, among the ruling ecclesiastics. The former
doubts arose in private condition, in humble sects, and in times of
persecution, but they disappeared among even good men, when they were
acquainted with the necessity imposed upon our world, whatever peaceful
dispositions they wished to cultivate in it. They found it vain to struggle
against the order of events, and that their prudence and their strength
consisted in that constant preparation, which could render them formidable to
their enemies. The same extensive views of life, which exalt the hopes of
virtue, obliged those guards against the passions, which appear as clearly in
the laws, the polity and education of every country, as they do in their
military arrangements.

We may then consider the experiment upon the Christian world as fairly made,
and believe that no means have been found, to render its true principles so
general and active, as to render our preparations for war unnecessary. And no
success will justify our expectations of universal peace till public order, is
public sentiment, rather than law, which at present appears to be a period, as
remote from this, as any former age. Nor is the Christian a solitary
experiment. The military is the best defined part of the institution of Moses.
The equestrian order of Rome is better understood than the Senate; and the
abuse of the military power, is the most notorious error of the feudal system.
An order of patriots Cincinnati.
arose out of our late revolution, whom our national honor and safety teach us
to reverence. And the institution we honor this day, reminds us of a more
early military association. And such parts of our excellent federal
constitution have proved to be the most sound, which have wisely regarded
principles, it was obliged to admit and indulge, more from the wisdom and
experience of nations, than from our own immediate preference or choice.

But lest we should distrust the zeal of ancient times, and presume upon modern
wisdom, we have before us in our own country, the most bold experiment, ever
made in favor of perpetual peace, and it was conducted upon the Christian
motives of piety and benevolence.

A sect established upon the lovely plea, that it was practicable to live
without war, originated a state of civil society in a new country. The power of
the magistrate, it did admit, and did attempt to define. Says the most able
apologist Barclay.
of the sect, "Let it be admitted that the magistrate may lawfully use his
authority to preserve moral and perpetual statutes." He then presumes that
every thing is granted, which ought to be required. But if laws may require the
virtues of obedience, they must defend the obedient. And the means of defense
must be as extensive as the evils of opposition. The means must be adequate.
But in what does any penalty differ essentially from a war? To find the point
at which men may desist, short of the extent of their power, is difficult. If
the individual may be defended, the state must be, which unites its safety with
the multitude of the people. Civil society involves then the right of war. But
when we observe the expedients to promote this false security of society; when
we see its abject dependence; when we behold the character of interest in it;
the limited power, or rather equivocal nature of its government, depending on
private manners; the superior strength of private will; the discouragement of
knowledge to preserve it, the dangers of ambition; and the reluctant
acquiescence in this state, the sordid interests it creates in multiplied
private views, and when we add an impartial Smith's Letters on Pennsylvania.
view of facts, which are of the greatest consequence, the experiment appears
contrary to nature, to civil government, and to personal safety.

But while we confess the necessity of war, and of a state of defense, we ought
to be cautious not to propose too freely political advantages from war, or to
encourage a disposition to provoke it, without a sacred regard to all the
motives of an honorable peace. There is an ambition, which may be awakened in
great revolutions, but it should have urgent and noble occasions. Dangers may
provoke rashness, rather than courage. Wars are easily converted into real
evils. Conquests have been faithfully reported, and history dwells upon them,
but ambition for war has been often fatal. If wars can raise the fame of
nations, they can as powerfully concur with the means of their destruction. The
consequences of the Peloponnesian war upon the Grecian states, have been
confessed, and deplored. The state in which Grecian arts flourished, was of
peace.

The ambition of Rome under a military government employed a rivalship, which
had glory, but not victory, and shows how powerfully the self inspiration of
liberty unites with excellence in the arts beyond the love of the arts, when
aided only by power. A more generous emulation and friendship of the arts in
Europe prevented the recurrence of the same events. Independent nations
produced a principle more active than any motives of government, and genius
employed the most splendid advantages, and was triumphant. And we ought on this
occasion, to pay a just tribute of respect to that patriot, JOHN ADAMS.
who justly holds a distinguished office in our federal government, for that
seasonable work, in which he has placed before us, the political experience of
our world. Could the highest wisdom have chosen a subject, could it have chosen
a better for the instruction and glory of our country? It affords a review of
the difficulties of civil government, and of the endless expedients to maintain
the prosperity of states. Convinced of the nature of war, men in all ages, have
imagined, that they could act upon their sober convictions: They have attempted
to institute an higher order of things, and to create an influence of opinion
over the passions of the world.

But they who consider the present state of our world, and our constant
experience in it, may find the necessity of that sublime religion, which
instructs our prudence in this world, but establishes our best hopes upon our
qualifications for a better life, and they may increase their esteem of that
revelation upon which all our hopes of happiness must rest. Our highest duty is
to guard against impending evils, while we endeavor our to preserve from a
love of the public happiness, for our own times, the sweet intervals of peace,
in tho wisdom of our laws, and in our constant preparation for a most active
defense.

To correct the vanity of our expectations from the greater wisdom to prevail
in our world from any causes, which now exist in it, let us only recollect the
causes, which have already proved insufficient to establish a more happy order
of things. Genius has in every country had its opportunities, to assist a
flourishing age, and to plead with mankind, in favor of the blessings of
peace. When princes have contributed to the lovely purpose, the public
sentiment of joy has been addressed to them in the boldest panegyric. But the
ambition of statesmen, the corrupt manners, and turbulent passions of men have
interrupted and frustrated every generous design to establish, what men have
professed to believe to be the dignity of life and the end of government.
Religion also has given its friendly assistance. But violence has been nursed
even at the altars, and they who for one age associated religion with peace,
have resigned it to those, who have made it the incentive of war. The human
faculties continue to develop unequally. Ambition is not less strong, as the
advantages of education are extended. Natural and untutored passions with all
their incentives, every where exist. War has yet all its causes. The passions
which excite it, it can inflame. Little durable happiness then can we hope from
the enthusiasm of mankind in the most ardent love of liberty. They feel their
native claims on liberty, but command not for a long time, the wisdom to
preserve it. In the means of bold resistance nations become formidable, and
restrain their enemies.

With sincerity then, we congratulate the Members of this ANCIENT AND
HONORABLE ARTILLERY COMPANY assembled this day, in the spirit of our
ancestors, who were urged by a love of liberty and religion to establish
themselves in these remote, and uncultivated regions. The rigor of their
manners formed by persecution, and confirmed by habits of suffering, and
danger, did not instruct them, with an ingenious modern, Soame Jenyns.
that the history of the Jews was not an example to them, or that local manners
were the true principles of Christian morality. They conceived that their
future hopes did not refuse them the best means to secure their present safety,
and they associated the use of arms, with their purest doctrines. Like Moses,
they supplied laws from experience, and like the great teacher of their
religion, they provided principles of active virtue in the most humble
condition. In this institution and school of arms, we recover the history of
their best families, as well as principles, and the names of the officers lead
us to the recollection of men, who have been conspicuous in the successive
generations from the plantation of the colony, to the present flourishing state
of our commonwealth. It transmits the character and the sentiments of
Massachusetts. As a very early institution it demands our veneration. In its
freedom from innovation it is a memorial of the stability of the public opinion
regarding the use of arms; and even with its interruptions, it records its
intimate connection with the liberties of the people. During the last efforts of
the House of Stuarts to perpetuate their power, it ceased to enjoy its
privileges, and in our late war with the parent country, it gave place to the
establishment of an army. Its members saw at these memorable periods, the
boldest attempts for freedom. In the first, the spirit of revolution was
directed by an ambition devoid of principle, and by an enthusiasm which could
command, but not enjoy victory. Its strength proved the terror of a
government, it was not able to reform, and fear qualified a power, which was
not absolutely withdrawn. But in the other we beheld, the mild virtues inspired
by the love of liberty and mankind, and guarded by prudence and fortitude,
conducted to victory by the laws of a free people. Our General became immortal,
and our cause yet triumphs in the federal constitution, and in the peace and
prosperity of our country. Thus have the absent years of the history of this
institution been supplied from the records of our nation, as sacred to courage,
and to a glorious defense of arms in the hands of a free people. Its present
worthy members, and officers Q. M. Genesis AMASA DAVIS, Commander of the Company.
J. EATON, Lieutenant. JER. KAHLER, Ensign.
its active patriots, and the commanders of our late army perpetuate its same.
The names of a HULL, a BROOKS, and a LINCOLN will be reverenced in future ages.
May our national defense be as perfect, as it is necessary, and just.

But mankind are yet in a state of war. How terrible has been the havoc among
the most enlightened nations of Europe! We confess the melancholy truth. And we
will not fall a willing sacrifice to the passions of angry nations. We love
peace, but we will render it safe and honorable. We desire to possess the best
blessings of civil government, but we will be able to defend it. To restrain
the passions of men, we must be a terror to them. We will love peace, but we
will defy ambition, hate oppression, and die for our laws and our liberty. Pure
religion will teach us to love peace, and experience will teach us, how to
preserve it. But we will never forget that the good citizen is a good soldier.
Able to defend, as well as sure to deserve his liberty. He hates faction, but
he is not afraid of war in defense of his country. He loves peace, because it
preserves the highest value of freedom. He rises to conquer perverse passions,
not to employ them in his own cause. He appears to support the laws, not to
triumph over them. His victory is for good government, and to God, with a pure
conscience, he can commit his cause.


