THE CAUSE OF MAN: AN ORATION: TOGETHER WITH VALEDICTORY ADDRESSES, PRONOUNCED
AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF RHODE ISLAND COLLEGE, SEPTEMBER 7, A. D. 1796.

By TRISTAM BURGES.

Say rather Man's as perfect as he ought.

POPE. THE CAUSE OF MAN.
HUMAN nature has been a theme of much discussion. Among the ancients, some
railed at man, and some ridiculed his imperfections. Certain modern
philosophers make depravity Critics may remember, that depravity, through the
whole of this piece, signifies such a disposition of heart as wishes universal
diffusion of wretchedness.
a part of their creed; and assign the most elevated seat in Paradise to those,
who feel the most perfect contempt for human nature. The catechisms of these
sages inform us, that man is malevolent; that his passions hurry him into
wretchedness; and that his understanding is only another name for imperfection.
Should individuals offer this for a description of their own minds, perhaps
justice might read the character with silent approbation. When it is produced as
the picture of man, the same justice commands to wipe the aspersion from the
portrait of our common nature.

If exalted actions flow from elevated sentiments, then, to establish human
dignity, and reason man into approbation of himself, must be among the first
advancements toward virtue.

Be it, therefore, our task, to plead the cause of man.

Let us examine his disposition; consider the utility of his passions; survey
the perfection of his understanding, and observe how far surrounding creation
stands as monumental testimony of human greatness.

From the situation of man, we may argue the necessity of benevolence in his
disposition. He was, doubtless, formed for happiness. His desire of bliss, and
his powers of fruition, evince the truth of this assertion. His felicity
depends, almost entirely, on social intercourse. Solitary, man is in want, in
fear, in disconsolation. A reciprocation of beneficence alone can make him
happy. This he must be disposed to perform, or he cannot fulfill the final cause
of his nature. Man's destination for happiness, and his mutual dependence,
therefore, clearly originate the necessity of human benevolence.

Feeling and experience evince the benevolent disposition of man. A sight of
distress wounds the heart. A view of joy warms the soul with gladness. We are
pleased to remove pain. We rejoice to communicate delight. These things we
could not perform without a disposition to diffuse felicity. This disposition
is all we mean by benevolence.

Suppose the heart of man malevolent, he must then lose every social
satisfaction. For who could receive those mutual favors, which none were
disposed to bestow? Man must be condemned to solitary misery. Never would he
wipe a tear from the eye of sorrow; never would he pour the balm of consolation
into the bosom of grief. Nay, he would grieve at the appearance of joy. He
would eagerly disseminate wretchedness. Every benefaction of Providence would
swell the tide of human misery; and man could never smile undisturbed, while
one joyous emotion existed, even in the bosom of Deity. Must we believe man
endowed with such a disposition? Yes, if we believe him malevolent. But can our
reason, our feelings, our experience, subscribe to such a creed? No. For
necessity and sympathy both evince man benevolent. Nor could he be otherwise,
unless his soul were blacker than the dunnest fiend that fear-distempered fancy
ever generated in the dark regions of mythology.

Though man stands vindicated from the charge of malevolence, yet has calumny
blackened his character with other accusations.

Human passions have often been a mark for the arrow of contumely. Austerity
condemns them, because they are sometimes irregular. As well might the same
austerity curse the elements of nature, because the thunder, the earthquake, or
the hurricane, sometimes rend an oak, split a mountain, or sweep a kingdom into
the ocean.

If we impartially look on our own nature, the utility of our passions must
appear.

Man is, at times, in danger. Danger originates the necessity of caution, and
caution is secured by the passion of fear.

Unresisting innocence invites the hand of oppression. To prevent a repetition
of injury, omniscient Deity planted the seed of anger in the bosom of man.

Self love, to some the most odious of all the passions, is still an emanation
of benevolence. Like that, it has for its object the diffusion of felicity. It
first secures our own enjoyment. It then offers our bosom to a parent, to a
friend, to our country, to the indiscriminate citizens of the world. Thus on
self love are grafted philanthropy, patriotism, friendship, and all the tender
growths of domestic charity.

A love of glory is the most violent, extensive and durable, of all the
passions. For glory, men encounter toil, danger, and death itself. No pain, no
labor, no toilsome virtue, no arduous heroism, can be a price too dear to
purchase immortal renown. A passion which thus disposes men to sacrifice ease,
safety, and life itself, to gain the applause of their fellow men, must
inviolably unite mankind, and lodge in every breast a pledge for the social
exertions of each individual.

Let the votaries of apathy decry the passions. What can be the felicity, what
the virtue, of their passionless philosopher? If man were void of self love,
would the voice of native want rouse him from the sleep of indolence? What
would shield his bosom from danger, what would arm his hand with power, if fear
did not teach him caution, and anger learn him to resist the aggressions of
violence? Who would toil for man? who, with a smile, would bleed on the altar
of emancipation, if the God of nature had not with love of glory warmed the
bosom of man? Destitute of passions, man had stood, like the marble statue,
without a motion; and eternally worn the same smile or frown which the last
touch of nature's hand left impressed on his countenance.

Understanding claims our next attention. This forms a splendid part of human
nature. By this man perceives, remembers, reasons and imagines. Perception and
memory principally subserve the operations of reason and imagination.

Guided by reason, man has traveled through the abstruse regions of the
philosophic world. He has originated rules by which he can direct the ship
through the pathless ocean, and measure the comet's flight over the fields of
unlimited space. He has established society and government. He can aggregate
the profusions of every climate, and every season. He can meliorate the
severity, and remedy the imperfections, of nature herself. All these things he
can perform by the assistance of reason.

By imagination, man seems to verge toward creative power. Aided by this, he
can perform all the wonders of sculpture and painting. He can almost make the
marble speak. He can almost make the brook murmur down the painted landscape.
Often, on the pinions of imagination, he soars aloft where the eye has never
traveled; where other stars glitter on the mantle of night, and a more
effulgent sun lights up the blushes of morning. Flying from world to world, he
gazes on all the glories of creation: or, lighting on the distant margin of the
universe, darts the eye of fancy over the mighty void, where power creative
never yet has energized, where existence still sleeps in the wide abyss of
possibility. By imagination he can travel back to the source of time; converse
with the successive generations of men, and kindle into emulation while he
surveys the monumental trophies of ancient art and glory. He can sail down the
stream of time until he loses sight of stars and sun, by wandering into those
retired parts of eternity, when the heavens and the earth shall be no more.*

To these unequivocal characteristics of greatness in man, let us adduce the
testimony of nature herself. Surrounding creation subserves the wants and
proclaims the dignity of man. For him day and night visit the world. For him
the seasons walk their splendid round. For him the earth teems with riches, and
the heavens smile with beneficence.

All creation is accurately adjusted to his capacity for bliss. He tastes the
dainties of festivity, breathes the perfumes of morning, revels on the charms
of melody, and regales his eye with all the painted beauties of vision.
Whatever can please, whatever can charm, whatever can expand the soul with
extacy of bliss, allures and solicits his attention. All things beautiful, all
things grand, all things sublime, appear in native loveliness, and proffer man
the richest pleasures of fruition.

Can he then raise his feelings too high in the scale of self approbation? Can
he sufficiently abhor that contumely which perpetually babbles of human
depravity? In man, is it not calumny against heaven? Is it not pointing the
arrow of ingratitude against the munificent bosom of a God?

If man can rejoice in diffusion of felicity, is he not, like his Creator,
benevolent? If his passions urge him to embrace the common interest of man, are
they not useful? If his understanding guides him down the career of existence,
is it not perfect? If surrounding creation waits on his wants, does it not, in
the language of its Creator, talk aloud of human greatness? Do not all these
shining tints brighten on the portrait of man? Yes. He rejoices in munificence;
he toils for universal felicity; he developes the mysteries of nature; he
aggregates the goods of space, of duration, and even arrests the attention of
earth and heaven.

This thought elevates man high on the theater of existence, and places him
full in view of a surrounding universe. It gives him an important part in the
great drama of being. It tells him all intelligence are interested in the
success of his performance.

Yes, my countrymen, you arrest the attention of shining millions. On you are
fixed the eyes of all that bright throng of departed patriots, philosophers and
philanthropists, who measured their achievements by the dignity of their
nature; and whose beatified spirits, now leaning from the azure battlements of
heaven, allure their followers up the shining road to glory. You they hail as
their genuine descendents; as the patrons of science; as the votaries of
virtue; as the candidates of immortal beatitude.

ADDRESSES.
I. To the CORPORATION.
THE rites of this anniversary first call our attention to the Honorable
Corporation. You, Gentlemen, are the founders and guardians of that seminary to
which we owe our education. You majestic edifice you raised and hallowed to the
genius of science. This commands our thanks.

Our fondness for this institution, and our knowledge of the liberality and
pecuniary powers of its founders, give us a most pleasing anticipation of its
future greatness. Under your auspices, this seat of literature may flourish
long after the republican glory of Columbia has eclipsed the splendor of
eastern empire. By your munificence, the name of Rhode Island College may be
handed to posterity, when the Cambridge and Oxford of Britain shall have faded
from the page of history.

Then shall your reward be the reward of beneficence. The votaries of science
shall sprinkle the tear, and burn the incense of gratitude, over the tombs of
their departed patrons.

II. To the PRESIDENT.
Reverend Sir,
WE know you are persuaded that custom alone does not give birth to this
address. We claim the privilege of telling the world how much we feel obliged.
Gratitude cannot be refused this small indulgence.

On this occasion, should we attempt to narrate the merits of our benefactor,
modesty might raise a suspicion of adulation; envy would deduce our panegyric
from the partiality of our hearts; while the world would inform us, that the
science, knowledge and philanthrophy, of the man who has obliged us, are now
become a theme of common conversation. We can, therefore, express our gratitude
only; and ardently wish that others, in pursuit of science, may have the same
director who has guided our steps.

Yes, if ever our souls, in the silent moments of devotion, have dared to heave
a wishing sigh to heaven for a single favor on ourselves -- often, when we
behold his face no more, often shall that wish be repeated, for the health and
felicity of him, whom generations yet unknown shall learn to call their
benefactor. The world shall join in our devotion: a prayer so benevolent must
ascend grateful to the ear of heaven; and the immortal spirit of great MANNING,
the immaculate companion of the LAMB, shall, with a smile of gratulation,
behold you still the Father of his orphan seminary.

III. To the TUTORS and PROFESSORS.
Honorable Tutors and Professors,
YOUR care, tuition and tenderness, have generated in our breasts something
like filial affection. Far as recollection can extend its eye, we behold each
of your actions toward us rising up, like the kindness of a parent, and
irresistibly charming us into gratitude. From you we have received the precepts
of science. From you we have learned the philosophy of morals. While the lore
of wisdom has flowed from your tongues, your examples have allured us into love
of virtue and religion, or left us wicked beyond the reach of palliation.

We know your bosoms throb with parental anxiety for our prosperous reception
in life. We are assured we shall have all the favors of your friendship, all
the blessings heaven can bestow on your prayers.

Each of our good deeds will seem a kind of reward for your many favors. Each
of our digressions from virtue, will wear the fable complexion of ingratitude.

Accept, generous Sirs, this little tribute of our thanks; and suffer us to
soothe our hearts with unceasing remembrance of your kindness.

IV. To the UNDER GRADUATES.
Fellow-Students,
I AM unwilling to leave the stage at this time, without addressing a few words
to you. You are still in the career of collegiate acquisition. Still you enjoy
those means of information which are now forever secluded from us. Pant not
with too much eagerness for the day of emancipation. On that day, you will
think the moments of your collegiate existence have been few.

College is the world in miniature. There you may learn, not science only, but
man himself. There you may examine each principle which actuates the human
heart. There you may trace every passion from its first dawn, involved in the
shades of kindred emotions, through all its various phases, until it blazes out
in all the meridian glow of action.

The votary of that science which does not mend the heart, is, by its
influence, transmuted into tenfold more a child of reprobation. Keep,
therefore, your bosoms alive to all the exquisite emotions of virtue.

Suffer not a noble emulation, by eagerness of pursuit, to be degenerated into
envy. Envy triumphs only in the expiring agonies of merit.

Beware of that passion which throws the dun mantle of suspicion over the white
bosom of innocence.

Listen not to the whisper of slander. Slander involves merit in darkness; as
the black cloud of the north rolls over the brightness of heaven.

My good friends, live without a fault, and you shall live without a sigh,
unless it be the sigh of sympathy.

Vth ADDRESS.
My Classmates,
OFTEN, on similar occasions, from this place, the world has heard the pathetic
narration of collegiate joys that are past. I will not pretend to determine why
this has been done. This narration may be all reality. It may be a customary
story, told to lure from the eyes of pitying spectators the tear of sympathy,
as a tribute grateful to valedician eloquence. It may be an ingenious artifice,
woven to conceal the loathsome visage of classical animosity.

Far from me be a wish to disguise the truth. Yet, if we have had enmities, why
may we not cease to feel them? Why may not the white hand of charity throw the
veil of forgetfulness over those parts of our classical existence, which we
cannot recollect without a painful emotion? Never will our bosoms soften with a
warmer glow of forgiveness. Never, perhaps, shall we all meet again, till we
meet beyond the narrow sea of time. Let us, therefore, on this day, solemnize
the funeral of expiring enmity. Let us plant on its tomb the green olive of
friendship. Let us part as brothers.

Must we then part? Yes, the dark curtain of separation is now drawing between
us. In a few hours we behold each others faces no more. Tomorrow's sun shall
see us scattered over the face of the world. We must now reciprocate a last
adieu before a gazing multitude. This task is ungrateful. Parting friends, like
parting lovers, wish to lean on each others bosoms, and sigh a fond farewell in
some sequestered shade, where no grief-unhallowed eye can violate the tender
intercourse.

Are not we of that description? Are not we friends? Can it be otherwise?
Memory is witness too faithful. Never, never can he who now addresses you,
cease to feel the obligations of gratitude. When pale disease The speaker,
while in College, was sick of a fever. During his illness, his classmates and
fellow-students were his constant attendants.
and excruciating pain stretched him on the restless couch for many a sleepless
midnight, you watched his wants through all the tedious hours; you offered the
cordial to his expiring spirits; you, with tender assiduities, soothed his
groans, and cheered him back again to life. O my God! with thy tremendous bolt
transfix this heart, if ever it cease to glow with joy at the joy of these my
friends, or to melt with sorrow at their woes.

My good brothers, we this day launch out on the billowy ocean of life. A world
lies before us. He who smiles away the terrors of the tempest, is our Father.
These two sentences are an imitations of Milton, b. 12, l. 646 and 647.

The world was all before them, where to choose
Their place of rest, and Providence their guide.



Let all our exertions ultimate on the felicity of our brother men. Then shall
a heart, which never can reproach us, be our eternal companion. Then, when the
grim messenger of fate shall point his iron shaft full at our breasts, with a
magnanimous smile, we will meet dissolution; sleep undisturbed the sabbatism of
death, and wake to ceaseless raptures beyond the regions of time. The latter
part of this sentence is an imitation of Pope, vol. iii. 12mo, p. 158.

Peaceful sleep out the sabbath of the tomb,
And wake to raptures in a life to come.



FINIS.

