Miscellaneous Trifles IN PROSE. By MATTHEW CAREY.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, BY LANG AND USTICK, M.DCC.XCVI.

CONTENTS.
Shipwreck, 5 Columbian observer,
No. I, 14 No. II Modern Improvement, 23 No. IV. Hist. of Mrs. Winthrop, 39
Funding Bill, 55 Life of General Green, 68 Thoughts on the policy of
encouraging Migration, 110 Theatricus,
No. I. Mr. Chalmers, 125 No. II Mrs. Whitlock, 133 No. III Mrs. Harwood, 141
No. IV. Mrs. Marshall, 149
Advantages of over-trading, 158 Observations on the badness of the Times, 167
THE SHIPWRECK. I wish I could soothe the reader's humanity, by informing him
that this fragment is not the child of a sportive imagination. Unfortunately,
it is literally (...). The facts I had from one of the (...). The dr^ss alone
is mine.

A FRAGMENT.
TIRED with oppression in our native land, and in hopes of a better situation
in America, two hundred of us, hale, hearty, and industrious, besides women and
children, embarked at Londonderry, on board the ******, bound for Philadelphia.

From the outset untoward accidents awaited us. We had not been ten days at
sea, when our vessel sprung a leak, which, for a long time, baffled all our
endeavors. At length, being discovered, it was stopped, and we esteemed
ourselves secure. -- Thougtless mortals! the disappointment of today never
produces the effect of preparing us for the calamity of tomorrow!

A gust arose! the elements warred together, as if it were the "last groan of
expiring nature." The floodgates of heaven seemed loosed! dreadful peals of
thunder rattled on the ear. The stoutest hearts were appalled. The forked
lightning struck our mast, and set the vessel on fire. Beset by two raging
elements -- the roaring billows, which lashed her sides, and seemed ready to
swallow her and us, though they had appeared so terrific before -- now lost
their horrors, and were regarded -- melancholy alternative! -- as a less
tremendous enemy than their new auxiliary.

With vast difficulty, the flame was extinguished -- but not until it had
rendered our vessel scarcely manageable. To complete the measure of our woes,
our provisions fell short. A biscuit and a pint of water, fetid and almost as
dense as glue, was the daily portion of each! Every morning saw two or three
miserable wretches heaved overboard, into a watery grave, in the presence of
their dejected friends and relatives, each hourly expecting the hand of death
to close his eyes, and free him from his abyss of misery.

"Father! father!" cries a once beautiful, but now emaciated child, whose
visage bore irresistible evidence of near-approaching mortality, get me a
drink! I faint -- I die! -- for God's sake let me have a drop of water to
quench my thirst!

Captain, I beg a little water to save my child from death, -- You have had
your share for today, and shall have no more.

Brute! stranger to the tender feelings of nature -- had you a child -- but you
are not worthy of having one -- you would pity my present situation, and
relieve me.

The mother of the child, who had swooned away, just came to herself. She heard
his plaintive cries. She joined her voice to his, and besought the father to
procure the water.

Melancholy, anguish, and torture, seized the tender husband's -- the tender
father's soul. The big tear rolled down his cheek. Gracious and allpowerful
God! why visit your children with such calamities? Presumptuous man! added he,
recovering himself, are you to dare scrutinize the ways of unerring Providence?
Not my will, O Lord, but thine be done!

He returned to the scene he had just quitted. His beloved child lay breathing
his last. His wife had swooned away again. The sight was too afflictive. His
agonies overpowered him. He went to the captain, whom he quarrelled with,
struck. The blows were returned. He seized a sword; and the captain, rushing
forward, received it in his breast. He closed his eyes for ever.

Disorder and confusion ensued in the vessel. The sailors plundered every thing
they could lay their hands upon: and such was their irregularity and
carelessness, that they ran the vessel aground at Synapuxent, in the state of
Maryland.

The sea ran mountains high. A skiff, with about twenty persons on board, was
overset by an enormous wave. The shrieks and piteous cries of men, women, and
children, soon died away. They were swallowed up in one common grave. Most of
the remainder were drowned in endeavoring to swim to land.

About thirty miserable wretches of us, gained the shore, some fortunate enough
to save their property. We expected there to meet with relief and comfort.
Fatal delusion! Had we been thrown ashore among the New Zealanders, among the
swarthy sons of Guinea, or among the rapacious Algerines, our fate could not
have been more severe. We were cruelly plundered. Not a valuable article was
left us -- and we were reduced to beggary in a strange land, without a hope of
redress.

Man! man! wretched, infatuated man! Can a sordid trifle tempt you thus to
violate every rule of right and justice -- to steel your heart against the
feelings of humanity -- and to be more cruel and noxious than the raging
elements! Short is your day -- and then all the vanities of this world will
pass away -- the veil that prevents your regarding objects in their true light,
will be removed -- keen remorse will prey upon your tortured soul, and be an
earnest of your future never-dying woe!

Rulers of America! Guard against this barbarity! make severe laws to punish
the miscreants who may be guilty of it -- and let a civic crown be awarded the
man who ventures his own life to save that of a fellow creature in the direst
distress!

[From the Columbian Magazine, for September, 1786]

THE COLUMBIAN OBSERVER. From the American Museum, for Feb. 1791.

FIRST NUMBER.
'To catch the living manners as they rise.'
EVERY writer, who has followed the career of the great Addison, has begun his
numbers with a description of himself, his views, situation, etc. in order, at
the commencement of the journey, to ingratiate himself into the favor of his
fellow travelers. From this custom it would be considered equally improper to
depart, as for a clergyman to begin a sermon without taking a text. To show my
respect, therefore, for the reader of my lucubrations, I shall give a prologue
to the entertainment I am about to provide for him.

I am of a very ancient family, and have the honor to have some of the inca
blood in my veins -- being descended from the unfrotunate Atabaliba, who so
miserably perished through the avarice and ignorance of Pizarro. By the female
line I boast of an ancestor, the great Owen Roe O'Nial, the asserter of Irish
liberty. My great grandfather, by the mother's side, came over to this country
with the divine Penn, whose humane and tolerant spirit laid the foundation of
so much happiness for the people of his province.

Notwithstanding the grandeur of my parentage, I drew my first breath in a
small cottage at the foot of the Alleghany mountain. There, free as air, I
imbibed from my early age all the ardour and patriotism of spirit usually
generated by independence: for it is but too true, that Haud facile emergunt,
quorum vir tutibus obstat
Res angusta domi.


With a few books, but those judiciously chosen by a watchful parent, I
acquired a sense of the "Dignity of "human nature." I saw, with religious
gratitude and reverence, the vast and unparalleled advantages of our western
hemisphere. I learned to despise the sopperies, the follies, and the pretended
refinements of the old world. I enjoyed, with rapture, the boundless prospects
of happiness and virtue, destined, as I hoped, for remote posterity, in these
extensive regions.

From Alleghany's foot I removed to the metropolis of America, as Philadelphia
proudly vaunts herself. I here observed manners prevailing, which, when I had
read of them, as European, I had despised. I saw a few, whose example must have
a powerful influence, giving a taint to the general mass, and appearing anxious
in endeavoring to accelerate the arrival of that degeneracy, which the patriot
endeavors to delay as far as possible. These observations, it may be
reasonably presumed, gave me pain. I dreaded that the asylum, so much boasted
of, would be destroyed -- and that from a spreading depravity, the state of
America, the revolution of which had revived the hopes of good men, and
promised an opening to better times, would become a discouragement to future
efforts in favor of liberty, and prove only an opening to a new scene of human
degeneracy and misery.

And is there, thought I, no person to step forward, and endeavor to stem the
torrent that is gradually sapping the foundation of morals and manners, and
which, if suffered to proceed uninterruptedly, will bear down every things
valuable in its progress?

As I have ever conceived, that even the attempt to accomplish great objects is
laudable, I chose rather to expose my own weakness, than be wanting to the
public interest. I determined to communicate to my fellow citizens the
observations I might occasionally make, in hopes of being serviceable to the
cause of virtue, Happy, too happy shall I be, if I become the humble instrument
of shaming out of countenance any single one of the follies or vices, which are
so carefully transplanted from their native soil, and which, like other ill
weeds, flourish apace, and threaten to choke up the valuable plants.

Conscious of my inability, unassisted, to accomplish, to the extent I desire,
the grand object I have in view, I have enlisted into the service a few aids de
camp who will occasionally furnish their speculations. Hence will arise an
agreeable diversity of style and sentiment -- and that sameness, so liable to
disgust the reader, be provented.

I invite every man, who is desirous to advance the best interests of society,
to cooperate in this undertaking. -- Personality and scurrility I despise, and
shall avoid. But general satire however severe, if calculated to answer good
purposes, shall be always acceptable.

So many times have periodical essayists assumed the pen, and so great is the
sameness of their subjects of discussion, that most of them are nearly
exhausted: -- and therefore much novelty is hardly to be expected. Terence said
nearly two thousand years ago,

"Nullum est jam dictum, quod non dictum sit prius."

If this were true them, the reader will probably excuse the want of very novel
matter in his friend,

SIMON SPECTACLES.
Philad. Feb. 19, 1791.
SECOND NUMBER. MODERN IMPROVEMENT.
When flattered crimes of a licentious age Reproach our silence, and demand our
rage; When purchased follies from each distant land,
Improve so fast in young Columbia's hand -- To chafe our spleen, when themes
like these increase,
Shall panegyric reign, and satire cease?
POPE.
THE liberality of manners and customs, daily introducing into our country,
must afford the highest gratification to every lover of elegance and
refinement. We are as repidly as happily dissipating the rust and prejudices of
past times, and, with a spirit of emulation beyond our years, copying the
graces and virtues of England, France, and Italy. To particularize every
instance, in which we excel our ancestors, would require more time and room
than I can now devote to the purpose -- indeed, it would be beyond my
abilities, to do justice to so capacious a subject. I shall, therefore, for the
present, confine myself to one leading feature in modern manners, wherein their
superiority to those of old times is too obvious not to command the assent of
the most superficial observer.

The feature I mean, is the relaxation of the odious restraints so extremely
disagreeable in the married state. Heretosore, when a man or woman made choice
of a partner for life, that partner was considered as entitled to the chief of
his or her cares and attentions. Any breach of this rule was ridiculously
regarded as a violation of the laws of decorum and propriety, which entailed
discredit on the offending party. The husband gallanted his wife, to the
theater, to balls, to assemblies, to concerts, and to private parties. The
insipid monotony of such a life must be to the last degree irksome and
disgusting; as one of the highest gratifications of human nature is variety.

Behold! what a charming contrast is exhibited at present! In the fashionable
world -- (and must we not expect, that this refinement will, in due season,
like every other, descend to the lower classes?) -- a man is proscribed from
attendiing on his wife, or appearing in public with her. He may gratify his
passion for variety by taking a new lady under his protection every day of his
life. How ineffably agreeable, how delightful a change!

This will introduce, among its other advantages, an unusual degree of harmony
in the married state. The chief cause, if we believe the writer of that moral
and edisying comedy, the school for scandal, why ladies are so refractory and
unmanageable with their husbands, is the consciousness of possessing -- what?
why that ridiculous old fashioned quality, called chastity -- a quality, which,
however suitable to the days of ignorance and barbarism, on the first
settlement of this country, ought to be entirely laughed out of countenance at
present. Every thing, therefore, that has a tendency to extirpate this
troublesome quality, must be productive of peace and harmony. And I believe no
man in his senses will deny, that the improvement in question will have the
happiest tendency that could be wished, to banish chastity and all her
troublesome retinue from our shores. Perhaps, they may fly for refuge among the
Creek Indians, to the court of the puissant prince, Alexander M'Gillivray. Such
antiquated beings are fit only for the uncultivated savages -- they ought not
to disgrace such an advanced state of civilization as we can boast.

"When a lady," says Mr. Sheridan, the author of that valuable comedy I have
already mentioned, "commits a TRIFLING faux pas, she grows cautious, and ready
to humor and agree with her husband.' School for Scandal -- page 40, American
edition.
This excellent and religious maxim, which I hope no person will controvert,
establishes beyond a doubt my position, that this new mode will be productive
of matrimonial concord.

Another of the benefits of this expansion of the human mind, is the
catholicism it will introduce with respect to children. As a husband will not
in future have the same degree of certainty, that his wife's children belong
properly speaking, to himself, he will be no longer so contemptibly and
illiberally contracted in his regards and cares of them, as parents used to be,
in times of prejudice. Moreover, it is to be hoped and expected, that he will
confer the same favors on his neighbors, as they on him. Hence, a community
of children will be introduced among us, in a much more agreeable way, than
that attempted in one of the old republics. How charming, then, will it be,
that a man may point out likenesses of himself in the houses of almost all his
acquaintance! The political good tendency of this is equal to its beneficial
moral effects.

Among the French, that nation of gallantry and refinement, the stiff starched
manners that have hitherto prevailed in this country, have been long exploded.
A lady's bed-charmber, which here has been too generally considered as her
sanctum sanctorum, impervious to every one but the privileged husband, there
yields to the superior influence of fashion and gallantry. A gentleman has free
access to it in the morning, before the lady rises, and chooses it as the most
proper place for making enquiries after her health. As the ladies universally
paint there, perhaps this fashion was introduced in order to give the gentlemen
an opportunity of seeing, before the application of the colors, what could not
be seen afterward -- that is, the ladies' faces in their natural state. A
lady, without the smallest embarrassment, " when from her sheets her lovely
form she lifts,
" She begs, you just would turn you, while she shifts."
Young's love of same.


This elegant, unconstrained trait of manners, will, it is hoped, be adopted by
our great people, who have so long and so happily distinguished themselves in
the honorable, independent, and patriotic art of imitating the modes and
manners of Europe, -- which are so wonderfully calculated for this hemisphere.

The next step we have to take -- and which will naturally follow -- is the
introduction of ^^ces^eism from the Italians. I have been much surprised that
the French, who have always paid such particular attention to the refinement of
morals and manners, have never borrowed this admirable custom from their
transalpine neighbors. This is the more singular, as it is materially
connected with, and seems a necessary consequence of, the leading features of
their matrimonial system. This is one proof, among thousands that might be
produced, of nations in a progressive state of improvement, stopping short,
before they arived at the acme of perfection. But I hope our moral and
political career will not be thus disgracefully marked. I trust, as we receive
here the hardy German, the vivacious Italan, the volatile Frenchman, the grave
Englishman, the hospitable Irishman, and the industrious Scotchman; that we
shall cull from the manners of these various nations, and form one national
system superior to that of any of them.

Consistently with this idea, from England we shall borrow the mode of
facilitating divorces, from which the French and Italians are in some degree
precluded, by a tenet of their religion, which prohibits a second marriage,
until the death of one of the parties. But our mother country (mother let her
be, in dictating our manners, as well as in having settled the continent) has
rendered separation in the fashionable world as easy as could reasonably be
desired. Thus, for instance, when a married pair become tired of each other,
and the lady has chosen, among her male friends, a future help-mate, with whose
talents she is well acquainted, the three agree, that the wife and her gallant
shall be found in such a situation, as to warrant a suit for divorce; which is
immediately commenced -- the parties are separated -- and the lady triumphantly
led to the altar by her paramour.

This is, in my humble opinion, the ne plus ultra of improvement in this way.
Any attempts to change the system henceforward, must proceed in a retrogade
direction. I am lost in astonishment and admiration at this important secret,
reserved for this age of discovery. What inestimable consequences it must have,
in a political moral, and religious point of view, is very evident to even a
Baeotian capacity.

One of the good effects of the modern system, which had almost escaped my
notice, is the encouragement it will afford to the honorable and useful state
of celibacy, which has so often mistakenly been the object of legislative
vengeance, among nations of contracted manners. Many jealous pated fellows, who
are incapable of sacrificing their squeamish sentiments at the shrine of
fashion, will doubtless be fearful of embarking on the hymeneal ocean, left, A
brace of proud antlers their brows 'should adorn.'


And thus we shall have a hardy race of bachelors, ready for any service their
fair country-women may impose on them. The advantages arising hence, are too
self-evident to require illustration. Many married men of my acquaintance can
bear feeling testimony on this subject.

It is a distressing reflection to me, that I know not to whom the credit of
introducing this fashion is justly due. Were I acquainted with the parties, I
should pay them that tribute of honor and reverence which their conduct so
richly deserves. But an enlightened posterity, while enjoying the benefits of
this new system, will not be unmindful of them. Their reputation will survive
to the latest times. They will be classed with the exalted, characters of other
nations, who have had the undaunted resolution to desy the shafts of ridicule
and satire, and spurn the shackles of shame, religion, morals, and manners.

Philadelphia, Feb. 21, 1791,
THE COLUMBIAN OBSERVER. FOURTH NUMBER. No. III. was written by a friend, and
is therefore omitted.

To Mr. Simon Spectacles.
I HAVE read in your second number the ironical defense of the prevalent
fashion in high life, of husbands not appearing in public with their wives.
This fashion, which deserves the utmost reprobation, is pregnant with more and
greater evils, than almost any other known in our country. I am happy you have
animadverted on it -- and hope it will, by the efforts of our writers, be
proscribed from these states.

I beg leave to communicate to you a story, for the truth of which I pledge
myself. It will place in a striking light the consequences to be dreaded from
this pernicious custom, which we have but lately imported from the old world.
It may happily open the eyes of some of our deluded people of rank, and enable
them to discover the precipice they are preparing for the virtue and happiness
of their country.

Maria Arnold was the daughter of a respectable merchant at Hartford, in
Connecticut, and was, by bounteous providence, endowed with every
accomplishment of head and heart, that could qualify her to act in the most
exalted station. When arrived at sixteen years of age, her hand was sought
after by numbers of the first rate characters in the city. Among the rest was
Mr. Henry Winthrop, an eminent merchant, whose congeniality of disposition soon
acquired her esteem and regard. After an acquaintance of a year, she received
him on the footing of a lover; and in some months afterward, they were happily
united together, at the hymeneal altar.

Become the wife of Mr. Winthrop, her virtues had a more extensive sphere of
action -- and expanded into the warmest affection for her husband -- tenderness
for her children (of whom she presented one to her husband every thirteen or
fourteen months) -- charity and regard for her domestics -- benevolence and
friendship for the circle of her acquaintance.

When she was in her twentyseventh year, the happy mother of six children,
esteemed and respected by all who knew her -- beloved by her husband and
children, the late war broke out by the fatal engagement at Lexington. Mr.
Winthrop, attached to the British government, and accustomed to look up to
Great Britain with awe and reverence, could not relish the idea of resisting
her power, which he regarded as a political sacrilege. He determined to make
sale of his property, and retire to England. This design he speedily carried
into execution -- and arrived there early in the year 1777.

Possessed of an immense fortune -- fond of high life -- and allured by the
attractions of the fashionable world, he commenced a career of gaiety and
dissipation. The mutual attachment between him and his wife, which had
subsisted uninterruptedly, and had indeed acquired new force every year of
their connection, while they remained in this country, was gradually weakened
by the course of life they led in London. On his arrival, he paid the same kind
of attention to his beloved partner, that he had been accustomed to. But he was
told that it was a mere bore for a married man to gallant his wife -- that he
would be considered as a most unfashionable monster, should he be seen in her
company in public -- and that any appearance of fondness for her, if
discovered, would subject him to the sneers and scorn of his acquaintance.

These lessons he found it very difficult to digest. His ardent love could not
brook such disguise and dissimulation. For a long time, therefore, he remained
unfashionable in this particular, and in sometimes bringing his children into
company. But as incessant exhortations and incessant ridicule will turn almost
any mortal from a purpose, however fixed; he at length gave way to fashion, and
as cautiously avoided his wife's company in public, as he would the society of
one of the furies.

Among the gentlemen who bestowed their cares and attentions on Mrs. Winthrop,
whose beauty shone with most distinguished luster, was Sir Joseph Middleton, a
man whose sole rule of conduct was the refined subtle system of Chesterfield.
He had, on the plan of his master, sacrificed largely to the graces; and his
sacrifices had not been in vain. To the attractions of a fine person, and
enchanting address, he added a most refined and highly cultivated
understanding. He had traveled -- and engrafted the most elegant of the
manners of France and Italy on those of England. Had not his heart been
depraved by the seductions of fashion, he would have been an incomparable
character. But into most of the vices of the times he entered -- more, however,
from a determination to be a fashionable man, than from the impulse of
inclination.

From the moment that Sir Joseph singled out Mrs. Winthrop as the object of his
gallantry, she rejected the rest of the surrounding crowd. To Vauxhall, to
plays, to assemblies, to court, he daily led her, and, before many months had
elapsed, almost entirely eradicated from her mind every trace of love or
affection for her husband.

still was she virtuous even in thought. She did not know, or allow herself to
believe, the hold Sir Joseph daily gained on her affections. He saw clearly,
that to proceed with any hopes of success, it would be necessary to proceed
with caution. Had he, in an early stage of their acquaintance, even hinted at
his real intentions, she would have spurned him from her with the most profound
disdain and contempt. But this he carefully avoided, until he was fully assured
of his conquest. When this was the case, he only lay in wait for an opportunity
to perpetrate his black designs.

And here, Mr. Observer, allow me to pause for a moment, and recall your
attention to the former situation of this lovely but falling angel. When
possessed of virtue, she would have been an ornament to a throne -- for as the
poet justly observes, Virtue is beauty -- but when charms of mind,
With elegance of outward form are joined --
When youth makes such bright objects still more bright --
And fortune sets them in the strongest light --
It Is all below of heaven we may view,
And all but adoration is their due.


But now her mind is in part depraved -- the remainder of Sir Joseph's vile
triumph will cost him little trouble.

One night at a masquerade ball, he artfully prevailed on her to drink pretty
freely of an intoxicating cordial, which, aided by the heat and inflammation of
her blood, occasioned by dancing, soon ascended her head, and deprived her of
her faculties. On her return homewards, he gave the coachman directions to stop
at the house of an infamous minister of his pleasures. Here, taking advantage
of her helpless situation, and vowing eternal love and secrecy, he robbed her
of that inestimable jewel, which no tears, no repentance can ever restore to
lost, undone woman.

Sunk now into the depths of infamy, she felt, for a time, the keenest remorse
for the crime she had been guilty of. But Sir Joseph took too much pains, not
to remove her anxiety. Frequent repetitions rendered her so callous and
unconcerned, that her guilt soon became public, and at length reached Mr.
Winthrop's ears. This roused him from the lethargy into which his blind pursuit
of a preposterous fashion had thrown him. By the agency of a trusty servant, he
gained information of an assignation between them. He went to the place, and
was on the point of surprising them, but, notwithstanding all his vigilance, a
confidante of his wife's gave her notice of his approach, so early as just to
allow Sir Joseph time to escape by a back window. However, he left behind him
his hat and part of his clothes, which afforded sufficient proofs of his
villainy, and of the guilt of Mrs. Winthrop.

The injured husband, in the first moments of his rage, was on the point of
sacrificing her to his just resentment. But an instant's reflection made him
determine not to imbrue his hands in female blood. He resolved to take
vengeance of the adulterer -- and next morning sent him a challenge, which was
accepted. They met. They fought. Mr. Winthrop received a mortal wound -- and
expired, expressing his sorrow at having launched into such a scene of
dissipation, which had destroyed his happiness -- blasted his wife's reputation
irretrievably -- and hurried himself into an untimely grave.

This dreadful catastrophe nearly brought her to a sense of her infamy. -- She
cast a retrospective eye on the scenes which she had passed through -- she
bewailed the deplorable gulf in which she was swallowed up -- and made many
strong resolutions of reformation, which, for a short time, she endeavored to
carry into effect. But Sir Joseph renewed his efforts to replunge her into her
former condition. For a time he was unsuccessful. But at length, when the
poignancy of her grief was somewhat abated, and her contrition proportionably
diminished, she listened again to his insinuations -- and was prevailed upon to
accept the hand of the murderer of her husband, who now calls her his. They are
immersed in all the scenes of profligacy and vice, which the capital of England
affords -- and I think you will allow, they furnish an awful lesson of the
danger of adopting modish manners, and of departing from the paths of honor
and rectitude.

L. M.
March16, 1791. P. S. I should have mentioned to you, that her eldest daughter,
neglected and forsaken by her parents, was last year seduced by a lord, with
whom she lives as his mistress -- her second ran away with a dancing master,
and her third with a hair-dresser.



{From the Pennsylvania Evening Herald, April 2, 1785.} FUNDING-BILL.
-- "Constable shall seize, and take into his possession, such and so much of
the goods, chattles and effects of said delinquent, as shall be necessary." --
"And if sufficient effects cannot be found, whereon to make distress, such
constable shall take the body of any such delinquent, and deliver him of her to
the sheriff, or keeper of the country jail, who shall detain such delinquent in
close custody, without bail or mainprize, until payment made."

See the funding-bill of the state of Pennsylvania, section 39.
-- "Is this, good God!" exclaimed I, "is this freedom? Is this what we have
been so long contending for? Is this the fruit of a seven years war? Farewell
to heaven-born Liberty!" --

A cynical old man, who sat in a corner, his eyes half shut, and enveloped in
the smoke which he emitted from his mouth, in large volumes, knocking the dust
out of his pipe, and staring me steadfastly in the face, asked me if I had read
Sidney, Lock, Price, or any of the other celebrated writers on the subject of
liberty, and if I understood what was the real import of the word? My mind
being somewhat untuned, and not choosing to enter the lists of controversy with
a genius who had so forbidding an appearance as that which presented itself to
my view, I replied in the negative. He then entered into a most elaborate
disquisition on the nature of liberty -- said that self-taxation was its very
sum and essence -- and was proceeding in a most copious and fluent harangue,
when, wishing to indulge a little reflection, I called the waiter, desired him
to pay himself out of a dollar, for the coffee I had just drank -- wished the
haranguer a good day -- and returned home --

Here, when I became a little composed, I endeavored to picture to my
imagination the numbers who must inevitably taste of the bitter cup of misery
"by virtue of this act." Scizures, vendues, imprisonments, crowded on my mind
without end -- While I was in this sympathetic frame of thought, the case of an
unfortunate soldier, my bosom friend, my Pylades, suggested itself to my
perturbed imagination.

My Pylades, as I used to call him, in return for the name of Orestes, with
which he honored me, had borne the fatigues and hardships, the hunger and
thirst, of a seven years war -- had been in almost all the principal
engagements -- had been several times taken prisoner, and put on board
guard-ships, where he experienced what would have destroyed perhaps any other
man -- In all these various scenes, these vicisstudes of fortune, he had
conducted himself with a heroism, a magnanimity, which would put to shame the
vounted fables of antiquity -- After having undergone all this, he had, a few
days previous to the termination of the war, fallen in defense of that country,
whose rights and liberties he prized more than existence itself. -- A tender
spouse and six lisping children, the eldest not eight years old, would, in a
short space, have been blessed with his presence, had not a siend, in shape of an
Indian, cut short his precious life --

Isabella, ill fated Isabella, the partner of all his joys, and solace of all
his cares, was panting in hourly expectation of his long wished for return: --
her tender heart throbbed with every breath of wind, and the smallest motion,
which flattered her with the delusive hope of embracing once more the lord of
her soul; -- never! never! to be realized! --

Notwithstanding every possible precaution was taken to prepare her for the
direful news, in order to avoid the consequences to be feared from an abrupt
disclosure of her woe, she sunk lifeless on her couch, when the luckless
tidings reached her ear, doomed never to hear a sound of joy! -- One fit
followed close on the heels of another for two days successively -- and at
length, the extreme violence of her grief having somewhat subsided, she fell
into that state of torpor and apathy, which too often succeeds the paroxysms of
madness and despair.

Her only not-adored Pylades had expended the little patrimony he was in
possession of, in support of the cause of freedom and America -- She was
therefore left, in every sense of the word, desolate; and the small provision
she was entitled to, as a recompense for his services, was totally inadequate
to the support of herself and tender offspring! --

And perhaps, says I, in some short time hence, the amiable, the engaging
Isabella, with accomplishments to adorn a crown, and to soften and harmonize
barbarity itself in human shape, perhaps she shall feel the relentless hand of
some harpy catchpole, "by virtue of the funding bill" -- The melancholy train
of reflection into which this threw me, made me sink into a reverie, in which I
conceived Isabella was assessed at a sum, trivial indeed to persons in
affluence, but enormous to her -- I beheld her borne down by the weight of
affliction, lying on the bed of sickness, without a being to administer comfort
to her, except her dear children, the only objects of her care, on whom she
cast many a wishful eye, recommending them to the care of her omnipotent
Creator --

Thus afflicted, thus sorlorn, thus woe begone, a man of uncouth form, in the
guise of a COLLECTOR, made his appearance -- "Madam," he says, " I come for ten
dollars, the sum at which you have been assessed by virtue of a late act of
assembly" -- With faultering accents, and pallid countenance, she articulated
an assurance, that "if her life was at stake for a tenth of that sum, she must
incur the forseit" -- Well, madam," said he, "with a perfect sang froid,
darting a most ferocious look at the heartbroken mourner, you must abide the
consequences."

After a tedious interval of forty days, the collector made his return to a
justice of peace, who directly, without enquiry, issued his warrant to a
constable to distress and distrain, and in default, to take the body of the
DELINQUENT into custody --

Methought I beheld this stonehearted constable possess himself of every
article the house contained -- while Isabella lay dissolved in a trance into
which his unseasonable appearance, and rough, savage behavior had cast her --
the two eldest of her young ones, wailing and lamenting around her, and the
others gazing, with childish astonishment, at a scene, the horrors of which
they were totally incapable of conceiving.

A few days after seizure, a public vendue converted her little furniture to
money, but so destitute had she been, that there was a deficiency in the sum at
which she had been assessed. --

My heart sunk within me, on contemplating the dreadful catastrophe, which
closed the melancholy tragedy: --

The constable, with a posse, came and seized the unfortunate delinquent! He
dragged her, half dead with affliction, distress, and despair, through the
streets, to a loathsome jail. Here she was reduced to have recourse to a bed of
straw! She, who had been accustomed to the endearments, the care, the
attention, of a fond, an adoring husband, whose chief study had been to
anticipate her every wish, was now, sad reverse! without a being to hand her a
draught of water, to allay the burning heart of a fever, which had seized and
was preying on her -- And in a few days, DEATH came to her relief, and called
away her angelic soul, to those regions of never-ending happiness, which God
has prepared for those he loves. Her breath was closed in prayers for her
infants, and for the forgiveness of her persecutors!

Gracious Power! (ejaculated I) that watchest over the transactions of this
sublunary world, how many such scenes will a short time realize, perhaps in
every corner of the state! -- Is the "asylum" which, we fondly slattered
ourselves, had been prepared "for the distressed and persecuted of "all
nations," destroyed? -- Is the pleasing illusion vanished? Have we been but
dreaming of felicity, and do we now awake to mere "vanity and "vexation of
spirit?" -- Have we all this while been but making a transition, from one
tyranny to another -- And is there to be no freedom, no happiness, this side
the grave!

HIBERNICUS.

[From the Columbian Magazine, Sept. 1786.] SKETCH of the Life of the late
NATHANIEL GREEN, Major General of the Forces of the United States of America.
THIS gallant officer, whose death is so generally and so justly regretted, was
born in the town of Warwick, Kent county, Rhode Island, in or about the year
1741, and was the second son of a respectable citizen of the same name,
(descended from one of the first settlers of the colony) who was extensively
concerned in lucrative iron-works, the property of which, at his death, (prior
to the war) he left to his children.

The General was endowed with an uncommon degree of judgment and penetration,
which, with a benevolent manner and assable behavior, acquired him a number of
valuable friends, by whose interest and influence, he was, at an early period
of life, chosen a member of the assembly of the then colony of Rhode Island.
This trust, in which he gave the highest satisfaction to his constituents, he
continued to possess, until, and at, the period, when the folly and madness of
England severed a world from her empire.

After the skirmishes at Lexington and Concord, when a spirit of resistance
spread, like wildfire, over the continent, Rhode Island was not deficient in
her contributions for the general defense. She raised three regiments of
militia, the command whereof was given to Mr. Green, who was nominated
brigadier-general. The liberty, safety, and prosperity of his country being
exposed to imminent danger, the pacific principles of quakerism, in which he
had been educated, proved insufficient to repress the ardent spirit of liberty
with which his bosom glowed.

He led the troops under his command to Cambridge, and was present at the
evacuation of Boston by a force which, in England had been vauntingly stated as
treble the number that would be requisite to dragoon America into unconditional
submission.

General Greene's merit and abilities, as well in the council as in the field,
were not long unnoticed by general Washington, who reposed in him the utmost
confidence, and paid a particular deference to his advice and opinion, on all
occasions of doubt and difficulty. This excited the jealousy of several
officers, of older date and higher rank, who were not wanting in endeavors to
supplant him: but in vain -- the commander in chief knew and prized his worth
as it deserved.

He was appointed major general by congress, the 26th of August, 1776. Toward
the close of that year, he was at the Trenton suprize; and, at the beginning of
the next, was at the battle of Princeton, two enterprises not more happily
planned than judiciously and bravely executed, in both of which he displayed
his talents, serving his noviciate under the American Fabius.

At the battle of Brandywine, general Green distinguished himself by
supporting the right wing of the American army, when it gave way, and
judiciously covering the whole, when routed and retreating in confusion; and
their safety from utter ruin was gennerally ascribed to his skill and
exertions, which were well seconded by the troops under his command.

At the battle of Germantown, he commanded the left wing of the American army
-- and his utmost endeavors were exerted to retreive the fortune of that day,
in which his conduct met with the approbation of the commander in chief.

In March, 1778, he was appointed quartermaster general, which office he
accepted under a stipulation that his rank in the army should not be affected
by it, and that he should retain his right to command in time of action,
according to his rank and seniority.

In this station, he fully answered the expectations formed of his abilities;
and enabled the American army to move with additional celerity and vigor.

At the battle of Monmouth, the commander in chief, disgusted with the
behavior of general Lee, deposed him in the field of battle, and appointed
general Green to command the right wing, where he greatly contributed to
retrieve the errors of his predecessor, and to the subsequent event of the day.

About the middle of the year 1778, an attack being planned by the Americans,
in conjunction with the French fleet, on the British garrison at Newport,
Rhode Island, general Sullivan was appointed to the command, under whom general
Green served. This attempt was unsuccessful. The French fleet having failed
out of harbor, to engage lord Howe's fleet, they were dispersed by a storm,
and the Americans were obliged to raise the siege of Newport; in doing which
general Green displayed a great degree of skill in drawing off the army in
safety.

After the hopes of the British generals to execute some decisive stroke to the
northward, were frustrated, they turned their attention to the southern states,
as less capable of defense, and more likely to reward the invaders with ample
plunder. A grand expedition was, in consequence, planned at New York, where the
army embarked on the 26th of December, 1779, and landed on the 11th of
February, 1780, within about thirty miles of Charleston, which, after a brave
defense, was surrendered to Sir Henry Clinton, on the 12th of May.

A series of ill success followed this unfortunate event. The American arms in
South Carolina were in general unsuccesful, and the inhabitants were obliged to
submit to the invaders, whose impolitic severity was extremely ill calculated
to answer any of the objects for which the war had been commenced.

Affairs were thus cicurmstanced, when general Washington appointed general
Green to the command of the American forces in the southern district. He
arrived at Charlotte, on the second day of December, 1780, accompained by genesis
Morgan, a brave officer, who had distinguished himself to the northward, in the
expedition against Burgoyne. He found the forces he was to command, reduced to
a very small number, by defeat and by desertion. The returns were nine hundred
and seventy continentals, and one thousand and thirteen militia. Military
stores, provisions, forage, and all things necessary, were, if possible, in a
more reduced state than his army. His men were without pay, and almost without
clothing; and supplies of the latter were not to be had but from a distance of
two hundred miles. In this perilous and embarrassed situation, he had to oppose
a respectable and victorious army. Fortunately for him, the conduct of some of
the friends of royalty obliged numbers, otherwise disposed to remain neuter, to
take up arms in their own defense. This and the prudent measures the general
took for removing the innumerable difficulties and disadvantages he was
surrounded with, and for conciliating the affections of the inhabitants, soon
brought together a considerable force, far infeerior, however, to that of the
British, who esteemed the country perfectly subjugated.

After he had recruited his forces, with all the friends to the revolution that
he could assemble, he sent a considerable detachment, under general Morgan, to
the western extremities of the state, to protect the well disposed inhabitants
from the ravages of the tories. This force, which was the first that had for a
considerable time appeared there, on the side of the Americans, inspired the
friends of liberty with new courage, so that numbers of them crowded to the
standard of general Morgan. He at length became so formidable, that lord
Cornwallis thought proper to send colonel Tarleton to dislodge him from the
station he had taken. This officer was at the head of a thousand regular
troops, and had two field pieces. He came up, on the 17th of January, 1781, at
a place called Cowpens, with general Morgan, whose force was much inferior, and
was composed of two-thirds militia, and one-third continentals. An engagement
was the immediate consequence.

The brevity of this sketch will not permit me to go into a detail of the
dispositions made on either side. Let it suffice to say, that the brave Morgan
gained a complete victory over an officer, the rapidity and success of whose
attacks, until that time, might have entitled him to make use of the
declaration of Caesar, "veni, vidi, vici." Upwards of five hundred of the
British laid down their arms, and were made prisoners -- a very considerable
number was killed. Eight hundred stands of arms, two fieldpieces, and
thirty-five baggage-waggons fell into the hands of the victors, who had only
twelve killed, and sixty wounded.

This brilliant success quite disconcerted the plan of operations formed by
lord Cornwallis. Having entertained no idea of any enemy to oppose in South
Carolina, the conquest of which he had deemed complete, he had made every
preparation for carrying his arms to the northward, to gather the laurels,
which he imagined awaited for him. He now found himself obliged to postpone
this design. He marched with rapidity after general Morgan, in hopes not only
to recover the prisoners, but to revenge Tarleton;s losses. The Americans, by a
rapidity of movements, and the interference of providence, The British urged
the pursuit with so much rapidity, that they came to the ford of the Catawba on
the evening of the same day on which the Americans had crossed it. Before the
next day, a heavy fall of rain rendered it impassable. -- Had it risen a few
hours earlier, the Americans would have had no chance of escape, and their
prisoners would have been retaken by the enemy. Some time after, the same
providential interference took palce in passing the Yadkin. A sudden and rapid
rise, after the Americans had crossed, prevented lord Cornwallis from getting
over. [Vide Ramsay, Vol. II p.206, 208.]
eluded his efforts, and general Green effected a junction of the two
divisions of his little army, on the 7th of February. Still was he so far
inferior to lord Cornwallis, that he was obliged to retreat northward, and,
notwithstanding the vigilance and activity of his enemy, he brought his men in
safety into Virginia.

In this state he received some reinforcements, and had the promise of more --
on which he returned again into North Carolina, where, on their arrival, he
hoped to be able to act on the offensive. He encamped in the vicinity of lord
Cornwallis's army* -- By a variety of the best concerted maneuvers, and by the
secrecy and promptitude of his motions, he so judiciously supported the
arrangement of his troops, that during three weeks, while the enemy remained
near him, he prevented them from taking any advantage of their superiority, and
even cut off all opportunity of their receiving succors from the royalists.

About the beginning of March, he effected a junction with a continental
regiment, and two considerable bodies of Virginia and Carolina militia. He then
determined on attacking the British commander without loss of time, being
persuaded," as he declared in his subsequent dispatches, that if he was
successful, it would prove ruinous to the enemy -- and, if otherwise, that it
would be but a partial evil to him. On the 14th he arrived at Guilford
courthouse, the British then lying at twelve miles distance.

His army consisted of about four thousand five hundred men, of whom near two
thirds were North Carolina and Virginia militia. The British were about two
thousand four hundred, all regular troops, and the greater part inured to toil
and service in their long expedition under lord Cornwallis, who, on the morning
of the 15th, being apprized of general Greene's intentions, marched to meet
him. The latter disposed his army in three lines; the militia of North Caroilna
were in front -- the second line was composed of those of Virginia, -- and the
third, which was the flower of the army, was formed of continental troops, near
fifteen hundred in number. They were flanked on both sides by cavalry and
riflemen, and were posted on a rising ground, a mile and a half from Guilford
Court House.

The engagement commenced at half an hour after one o'clock by a brisk
cannonade. After which the British advanced in three columns, and attacked the
first line, composed, as has been observed, of North Carolina militia. These,
who, probably, had never been in action before, were panic struck at the
approach of the enemy, and many of them ran away without firing a gun, or being
fired upon, and even before the British had come nearer than 140 yards to them.
Part of them, however, fired, but they then followed the example of their
comrades. Their officers made every possible effort to rally them -- but
neither the advantages of their position, nor any other consideration, could
induce them to maintain their ground. This shameful cowardice had a great
effect upon the issue of the battle. The next line, however, behaved much
better. They fought with great bravery; and after they were thrown into
disorder, rallied, returned to the charge, and kept up a heavy fire for a long
time, but were at length broken, and driven on the third line, when the
engagement became general, very severe, and very bloody. At length, superiority
of discipline carried the day from superiority of numbers. The conflict endured
an hour and a half, and was terminated by general Greene's ordering a retreat,
when he perceived, that the enemy were on the point of encircling his troops.

This was a hard fought action. Lord Cornwallis stated his losses in killed,
wounded, and missing, at 532, among whom were several officers of considerable
rank. To those who are used to consider the thousands killed in the plains of
Germany, very frequently without producing any visible consequence on the fate
of a war, the number here mentioned must appear insignificant. But this battle
was, nevertheless, decisive in its consequences. Lord Cornwallis was, three
days after, obliged to make a retrograde motion, and to return to Wilmington,
situated two hundred miles from the place of action. He was even under the
necessity of abandoning a considerable number of those who were most
dangerously wounded.

The loss of the Americans was about four hundred killed and wounded. However,
this was not so severely felt, as the desertion of a considerable number of
militia, who fled homewards, and came no more near the army.

Some time after this engagement, general Green determined to return to
South Carolina, to endeavor to expel the British from that state. His first
object was to attempt the reduction of Camden, where lord Rawdon was posted
with about nine hundred men. The strength of this place, which was covered on
the south and east sides by a river and a creek, and to the westward and
northward, by six redoubts, rendered it impracticable to carry it by storm,
with the small army general Green had, consisting of about seven hundred
continentals. He, therefore, encamped at about a mile from the town, in order
to prevent supplies from being brought in, and to take advantage of such
favorable circumstances as might occur.

Lord Rawdon's situation was extremely delicate. Colonel Watson, whom he had
some time before detached for the protection of the eastern frontiers, and to
whom he had, on intelligence of general Greene's intentions, sent orders to
return to Camden, was so effectually watched by general Marian, that it was
impossible for him to obey. His lordship's supplies were, moreover, very
precarious: -- and, should general Greene's reinforcements arrive, he might be
so closely invested, as to be at length obliged to surrender. In this dilemma,
the best expedient that suggested itself, was a bold attack; for which purpose
he armed his musicians and drummers, and every person capable of carrying a
musket. He sallied out on the twenty-fifth of April, and attacked general
Green in his camp. The defense was obstinate, and, for some part of the
engagement, the advantage appeared to be in favor of America. -- Lieutenant
colonel Washington, who commanded the cavarly, had at one time not less than
two hundred British prisoners. However, by the misconduct of one of the
American regiments, victory was snatched from general Green, who was compelled
to retreat. He lost in the action about two hundred killed, wounded, and
prisoners. -- Lord Rawdon lost two hundred and fifty eight.

There was a great similarity between the consequences of the affair at
Guilford, and those of this action. In the former, lord Cornwallis was
sucecssful -- but was obliged to retreat two hundred miles from the scene of
action, and for a time abandon the grand object of penetrating to the north
^ard. In the latter, lord Rawdon had the honor of the field, but was shortly
after reduced to the necessity of abandoning his post, and leaving behind him a
number of sick and wounded.

The evacuation of Camden, with the vigilance of general Green, and of the
several officers he employed, gave a new face to affairs in South Carolina,
where the British ascendency declined more repidly than it had been
established. The numerous forts, garrisoned by the enemy, fell, one after the
other, into the hands of the Americans. Orangeburg, Motte, Watson, Georgetown,
Granby, and all the others, sort Ninety-six excepted, were surrendered; and a
very considerable number of prisoners of war, with military stores and
artillery, were found in them.

On the 22nd of May, general Green sat down before Ninety-six, with the main
part of his little army. The siege was carried on for a considerable time with
great spirit: and the place was defended with equal bravery. At length, the
works were so far reduced, that a surrender must have been made in a few days,
when a reinforcement, of three regiments, from Europe, arrived at Charleston,
which enabled lord Rawdon to proceed to relieve this important post. The
superiority of the enemy's force, reduced general Green to the alternative of
abandoning the siege altogether, or, previous to their arrival, of attempting
the fort by storm. The latter was more agreeable to his enterprising spirit:
and an attack was made on the morning of the 29th of June. He was repulsed,
with the loss of one hundred and fifty men. He raised the siege, and retreated
over the Saluda.

Dr. Ramsay, to whom the writer of this sketch is indebted, for most of the
facts herein contained, speaking of the state of affairs about this period,
says, -- "truly distressing was the situation of the American army: when in the
grasp of victory, to be obliged to expose themselves to a hazardous assault,
and afterward to abandon the siege: when they were nearly masters of the whole
country, to be compelled to retreat to its extremity: after subduing the
greatest part of the force sent against them, to be under the necessity of
encountering still greater reinforcements, when their remote situation
precluded them from the hope of receiving a single recruit -- in this gloomy
situation, there were not wanting persons who advised general Green to leave
the state, and retire with his remaining forces to Virginia. To arguments and
suggestions of this kind he nobly replied -- 'I will recover the country, or
die in the attempt.' This distinguished officer, whose genius was most vigorous
in those extremities, when feeble minds abandon themselves to despair, adopted
the only resource, now left him, of avoiding an engagement, until the British
force should be divided."

Some skirmishes, of no great moment, took place between detached parties of
both armies in July and August. September the 9th, general Green having
assembled about two thousand men, proceeded to attack the British, who, under
the command of col. Stewart, were posted at Eutaw Springs. The American force
was drawn up in two lines: the first, composed of Carolina militia, was
commanded by generals Marian and Pickens, and col. De Malmedy. -- The second,
which consisted of continental troops from North Carolina, Virginia, and
Maryland, was commanded by general Sumpter, lieut. col. Campbell, and colonel
Williams; lieutenant colonel Lee, with his legion, covered the right flank; and
lieutenant colonel Henderson, with the state troops, covered the left. A corpse
de reserve was formed of the cavalry, under lieutenant colonel Washington, and
the Delaware troops under capt. Kirkwood. As the Americans came forward to the
attack, they fell in with some advanced parties of the enemy, at about two or
three miles ahead of the main body. These being closely pursued, were driven
back -- and the action soon became general. The militia were at length forced
to give way, but were bravely supported by the second line. In the hottest part
of the engagement, genesis Green ordered the Maryland and Virginia continentals
to charge with trailed arms. This decided the fate of the day. "Nothing," says
dr. Ramsay, "could surpass the intrepidity of both officers and men on this
occasion. -- They rushed on, in good order, through a heavy cannonade, and a
shower of musquetry, with such unshaken resolution, that they bore down all
before them." The British were broken, closely pursued, and upwards of five
hundred of them taken prisoners -- They however made a fresh stand, in a
favorable position, in impenetrable shrubs and a picquetted garden.
Lieutenant Colonel Washington, after having made every effort to dislodge them,
was wounded and taken prisoner. Four six pounders were brought forward to play
upon them, but they fell into their hands; and the endeavors to drive them
from their station being found impracticable, the Americans retired, leaving a
strong piequet on the field of battle. Their loss was about five hundred; that
of the British upwards of eleven hundred.

General Green was honored by congress with a British standard, and a gold
medal, emblematical of the engagement and success, "for his wife, decisive, and
magnanimous conduct, in the action at Eutaw springs, in which, with a force
inferior in number to that of the enemy, he obtained a most signal victory."

In the evening of the succeeding day, colonel Stewart abandoned his post, and
retreated toward Charleston, leaving behind upwards of seventy of his wounded,
and a thousand stands of arms. He was pursued a considerable distance -- but in
vain.

The battle of Eutaw produced most signal consequences in favor of America.
The British, who had for such a length of time lorded it absolutely in South
Carolina, were, shortly after that event, obliged to confine themselves in
Charleston, whence they never ventured but to make predatory excursions, with
bodies of cavalry, which in general met with a very warm and very unwelcome
reception.

During the relxation that followed, a dangerous plot was formed, by some
turbulent and mutinous persons in the army, to deliver up their brave general
to the British. This treasonable design owed its rise to the hardships, wants,
and calamities of the soldiers, who were ill paid, ill clothed, and ill fed.
The conspirators did not exceed twelve in number: and a providential discovery
defeated the project.

The surrender of lord Cornwallis, whose enterprising spirit had been by the
British ministry expected to repair the losses, and wipe away the disgrace,
which had been incurred through the inactivity and indolence of other generals,
having convinced them of the impracticability of subjugating America, they
discontinued offensive operations in every quarter. From the beginning of the
year 1782, it was currently reported, that Charleston was speedily to be
evaucated: it was officially announced the seventh of August; but did not take
place until the seventeenth of December.

The happy period at length arrived, when, by the virtue and bravery of her
sons, aided by the bounty of heaven, America compelled her invaders to
recognize her independence. Then her armies, quitted the tented fields, and
retired to cultivate the arts of peace and happiness. Among the rest, general
Green revisited his native country, where he proved himself as valuable a
citizen, as the Carolinas had witnessed him a gallant officer. Dissensions and
jealousies had extended their destructive influence among the Rhode Islanders,
whose animosity had arisen to such a degree, as to threaten the most serious
ill consequences: general Green exerted himself to restore harmony and peace
among them once more; and was happily successful.

In October, 1785, he sailed to Georgia, where he had a considerable estate,
not far distant from Savannah. Here he passed away his time, occupied in his
domestic concerns, until the hour of his mortality approached. Walking out one
day in June 1786, he was overpowered by the extreme heat of the sun, which
brought on a disorder that carried him off, a few days after, on the 19th of
the same month.

When the melancholy account of his death arrived at Savannah, the people were
struck with the deepest sorrow. All business was suspended. The shops and
stores throughout the town were shut: and the shipping in the harbor had their
colors halfmasted.

The body was brought to Savannah, and interred on the 20th. The funeral
procession was attended by the Cincinnati, militia, etc. etc.

Immediately after the interment of the corpse, the members of the Cincinnati
retired to the coffee-house in Savannah, and came to the following resolution:

"That as a token of the high respect and veneration in which this society hold
the memory of their late illustrious brother, major general Green, deceased,
George Washington Green, his eldest son, be admitted a member of this socity,
to take his seat on his arriving at the age of 18 years."

General Green left behind him a wife, and five children, the eldest of whom
was about 11 years old.

On Tuesday the 12th of August, the United States in Congress assembled came to
the following resolution:

"That a monument be erected to the memory of Nathaniel Green, esquire. at the
seat of the federal government, with the following inscription; -- Sacred to
the memory of NATHANIEL GREEN, ESQUIRE. who departed this life, the 19th of June,
1786, LATE MAJOR GENERAL in the service of the United States, and commander of
their army in the southern department. The United States in Congress assembled,
in honor of his patriotism, valor, and ability, have erected THIS MONUMENT.

THOUGHTS On the Policy of encouraging Migration.
AMIDST an exuberant variety of fanciful and newfangled opinions, lately
obtruded on the public, and defended with all the dexterity that casuistry can
afford, there is none more absurd than that of those persons who decry and
endeavor to prevent the migration of Europeans to America. A paragraphist, in
one of the late papers, in support of such conduct, tells us that water and oil
may as easily be made to unite as the subjects of monarchies with the citizens
of the republics of America. An intelligent reader must find it difficult to
decide which is the more contemptible of the two, the illiberality of such an
idea, or the gross ignorance of the writer, who dared to advance a falsehood,
which a schoolboy could detect. Under what form of government was the gallant
Montgomery born and educated? Under "a monarchy." The marquis de la Fayette,
the marquis de Rochambeau, baron Steuben, baron de Kalb, count Pulaski, count
d'Estaign, general Mercer, general Stewart, general Gates, and an innumerable
band of other heroes and patriots, whose exploits during the late war, have
immortalized their names, and must, in these states, render them sacred to the
latest posterity, have united with the citizens of these republics, and been
efficaciously instrumental in establishing their foundations, although they
were the "subjects of monarchies." Nine-tenths of the first settlers of
North America, and of all the emigrants who have since arrived here, were
"subjects of monarchies." To pass from this western hemisphere, let us touch
upon the bright constellation of worthies who grace the annals of liberty in
the old world -- Let us contemplate and emulate the virtues of Brutus, the
scourge of the Tarquins; Tell, the deliverer of Switzerland; Doria, the
deliverer of Genoa; Gustavus Vasa, the deliverer of Sweden; Paoli, the hero of
Corsica; Hambden, Sidney, Price, Montesquieu, Raynal, Bec^aria, and thousands
of others, whose bosoms have been warmed with as pure and hallowed a spirit of
liberty, benevolence, and philanthropy, as ever animated the (...) republican.
These have been the "subjects of monarchies,"or (still worse) archducal, ducal,
or aristocratical tyrannies, Yet who is there in "these republics," that would
not esteem it the summit of his ambition to merit and attain the reputation
they have justly acquired

This sage politician asks in a triumphant style, How few of the men who have
come among us since the peace, have assimilated to our manners and government?
With much more foundation and justice may it be demanded, how few are they who
have not thus assimilated themselves?...... Had "the subjects of monarchies,"
who have given this genius so much uneasiness, been excluded from these shores,
the aborigines would have possessed them to this day unmolested. If no plants
are to be grafted on the old stock, but such as "source" from republican
extraction, vain have been the endeavors of the American Solon and his
coadjutors, who framed the constitution, and wisely in that held out
inducements to migration. Few, alas! are the republics of Europe: and from
those few, emigration is extremely rare. And it may be made a question, whether
the abject slaves or lordly aristocrats of Venice or Genoa, would be much more
eligible persons to naturalize here, than the "subjects of monarchies," however
despotic. Those Germans to whom Pennsylvania owes so much with respect to
agriculture, improvements, industry, and opulence, were transplanted from the
most despotic soils. Here they became meliorated, and have furnished some of
the most active and zealous friends and supporters of America's independence.
The same will hold equally true of those numerous swarms of Irishmen, who both
before and during the arduous struggle, came into this country. -- Their valor
and conduct were displayed by sea and land -- and history will bear the most
honorable testimony of their heroism.

What then becomes of the random assertions of this writer? What end can he
propose to answer but to divide the people of this country, and create
dissentions and ill blood between the old citizens, and those who are on every
occasion spoken of with a kind of supercilious and impertinent obloquy and
contempt as new comers -- new comers? Are not the unhappy divisions between
constitutionalists and republicans, enough to impede and prevent the welfare
and happiness of the state? Must more distinctions and differences be created,
in order to counteract the efforts of true patriots to promote the common good?
The monitorial page of history warns mankind incessantly, to beware of the
shoals and quicksands to be dreaded from intestine divisions. The deathbed
maxim of Micipsa, given to Jugurtha, "By unanimity weak states gather strength;
by discord, powerful ones fall to ruin," has been wisely adopted as the motto
of the United Provinces, and is equally applicable to the United States. To
what was owing the fall of Carthage, of mighty Rome, of Mexico, of Peru? To
intestine divisions. What fixed the power of the Macedonians in Greece? -- What
established the Romans in Greece, in Gaul, in Britain, and in almost all their
conquests? What subjected Wales and Ireland to England? What crowned Henry the
fifth of England in Paris? What prostrated China to the Tartars? What enabled
three royal robbers to plunder Poland, and to strip it of some of its most
valuable territories, and five millions of people? The intestine divisions of
the inhabitants of those various countries. In sine, let history be carefully
examined, and it will appear, that few empires, kingdoms, states, or republics,
have ever been destroyed, without internal discord being one of the primary
causes. Surely, then, he must be a most dangerous enemy to this country, who
endeavors to excite jealousy and disunion here, from which so many evil
consequences must naturally and inevitably arise. Let all such persons meet
with the detestation and scorn they merit. Let the Americans, to use the words
of this paragraphist, "give a preference to our old citizens," whenever their
merit and abilities entitle them to it. But should the new comer be found to
possess those qualities in a higher degree, let him not be exposed to neglect,
abuse, or scurrility, merely because, actuated by a love of liberty, he has
given this country a preference to his own, and abandoned his friends and
relatives to coalesce with the inhabitants of America, who, as general
Washington declares in his farewell address, "HAVE OPENED AN ASYLUM FOR THE
OPPRESSED AND DISTRESSED OF ALL NATIONS."

As this is a subject on which many well meaning persons have been led to form
very erroneous opinions, by the artful insinuations of designing men, it will
be allowable to pursue it a little further. In Europe, the importance of
preventing emigration is fully understood; and in most states no pains are
spared to chain the inhabitants to the soil. To entice artists and
manufacturers from Britain is a high crime and misdemeanor: and, according to
Chambers, in the same country, artificers in iron, steel, brass or other metal,
or in wool, going out of the kingdom into any foreign country, without license,
are liable to be imprisoned three months, and fined any sum not exceeding one
hundred pounds. And those who go abroad, and do not return on warning given by
the British ambassadors, are disabled from holding lands by descent or devise,
from receiving any legacy, etc. and are deemed aliens. It is the same in
several other states of Europe. Edward the third who established the woollen
manufacture in England, effected it by enticing some weavers from Flanders.
Such was the origin of that trade which forms the basis of English opulence and
commerce to this day. May not some of the emigrants from Europe, establish
manufactures here which in time will prove equally lucrative and beneficial?
The impolicy of Lewis the fourteenth in revoking the edict of Nantz, and the
consequent emigration from France of hundreds of thousands of valuable artists
and manufacturers, imparted various arts to Germany, Holland, and England,
whereof France had had an almost entire monopoly. Among these we may enumerate
the manufacture of paper, silk, looking glasses, etc;. etc;. The expulsion of
the Moors from Spain tended greatly to the impoverishment of that country, and
to the abridgment of its manufactures, trade, and commerce. Are not these and
numerous other instances which might be adduced, sufficient to prove how far
sage policy requires America to hold out every possible encouragement to
industrious persons to migrate here, with their acquirements, their property,
and their families? What then shall we say of those who are incessantly heaping
scurrility and abuse on them? The answer is obvious. They must be either
ignorant, illiberal, and mean persons: or those who have some selfish or party
purpose to answer by such a vile conduct. If the former be the case, they claim
our pity or contempt: if the latter, our hatred.

" When caps among a crowd are thrown,
" Each man is sure to take his own."
Philadelphia, Aug.30, 1786.
[From the Philadelphia Gazette.] THEATRICUS.
NUMBER 1.
Careless of censure -- nor too fond of same,
Still pleased to praise -- yet not afraid 'to blame.
Averse, alike, to flatter or offend.
POPE.
Mr. CHALMERS.
THIS gentleman is, in some respects, the first performer in America. In
others, he is second to Mr. Hodgkinson, who, as a general actor, stands
undoubtedly at the head of his profession.

In genteel comedy, the palm must be given to Mr. Chalmers. In this department
he stands unrivalled. His Belcour cannot be excelled. He shines with
distinguished luster in this character, which is drawn in the happiest manner,
and with all the fire and animation of a Congreve or Farquhar. To the violent
passions -- the punctilious sense of honor -- the magnanimity of this son of
the torrid zone, Cumberland could not wish more complete justice done.

His Belville, in the school for wives, is nearly equal to Belcour, He assumes
the variety that marks this character, with the utmost ease and propriety --
and is by turns an affectionate, though a dissolute husband -- an abandoned
seducer -- and a man of such true honor, as to refuse to raise his arm, except
in self-defence, against him whom he has endeavored to injure in the tenderest
point, his sister's virtue.

His Modely, in the Farm House, gives the fullest expression to the author's
ideas. The licentious manners, the depravity of principle, the fascinating
affability of this well-drawn portrait, sit on him as easy as the dress he
wears.

In the Clandestine Marriage, he does ample justice to the excentricities of
that variegated character, Lord Ogleby -- to his gallant and amiable attentions
to the fair sex -- to his vanity -- to his generosity -- and to his affectation
of pristine vigor, while groaning under the excruciating tortures, arising
from his dissolute life.

His Vapid, in the Dramatist, is by no means inferior to the former. To this
character and that of Marplot, in the Busy Body, it may be objected, that they
are not within, they are beyond nature. They carry the improbable conspicuously
stamped on their foreheads. Mr. Chalmers, however, by his excellent
performance, almost induces the spectator to believe these personages not only
probable, but actually before his eyes.

In no character, perhaps, does he shine to more advantage, than in Peter Puff,
in the Critic. To equal him in this, is difficult -- to excel him, impossible.
This part requires incessant exertion; and the spectator is lost in
astonishment, at the unabated life and spirit, displayed for an hour and a
half, during which mind and body have hardly a moment's relaxation. The
humorous extemporaneous flights in which he occasionally indulges, give the
highest possible seasoning to the intellectual feast.

He has seldom attempted low comedy. But when he has, his success has been
considerable. His Trappanti, in She Would and She Would Not, is perfectly
natural, and puts in the most conspicuous light all the roguery, cunning, and
humor, that Cibber bestowed on the character.

I have but seldom seen him in tragedy, and am therefore, not fully competent
to pass an opinion on him as a tragedian. So far, however, as I have seen, his
abilities in this line are inferior to those he displays in the former. In
awful or terrific scenes, he verges toward rant -- he works himself into a
degree of violent passion, which often affrights, but sometimes fails of
exciting the sensibility of the spectator.

His Hamlet is, however, extremely well performed. In the interview with his
mother, he is truly great -- and likewise when the players represent their
tragedy before the king and queen.

His La Motte, in Fontainville Forest, is not equal to the former. This
character is hardly natural, and is therefore the more difficult to represent.
However, the storm of conflicting passions, by which he is impelled forward to
the perpetration of the crime that threw him into the power of Lord Montault,
is fully and forcibly expressed in his countenance and manner.

To conclude, Mr. Chalmers possesses all the essential qualifications that
constitute a capital performer. His address is easy and unconstrained -- he
hardly ever requires the Prompter's aid -- his delivery is equally becoming and
natural in the volubility of Peter Puff -- the airy flights of Belcour -- the
seductive sophistry of Belville -- or the tardy but monitory repentance of
Beverly.

March, 1795.
NUMBER II. Mrs. WHITLOCK.
PERHAPS I shall not be charged with injustice or partiality, when I venture to
pronounce this lady the first actress in America. In Tragedy, she stands at a
great distance from every rival; and her abilities in genteel comedy are very
great, far beyond what are usually met with in those who excel in the former
department. In the terrific, the awful, the pathetic scenes of highly finished
tragedy, she has an unlimited command over the feelings of the spectators. And
it not unfrequently happens, that hardy veterans, unappalled in the field of
battle, bear testimony, by the trickling tears, "coursing, each other down
their cheeks," to her astonishing powers. I have never seen a performer, not
even excepting the far-famed Mrs. Seddons, who has been able to excite in me
such highly pleasurable emotions, as I have repeatedly experienced from the
excellent performance of Mrs. Whitlock.

In that unfeeling character, Lady Macboth, she displays, in its genuine
colors, that headlong ambition, which stifles the voice of humanity, of
loyalty, of honor, and of female timidity, Her madness is admirably
counterfeited.

In Milton's Masque of Comus, she adds new dignity, by the force of the most
excellent delivery, to the exalted sentiments of that great writer.

Who, that has seen her Mrs. Beverley, in the Gamester, can withhold admiration
and applause, at the tenderness, the sensibility, the distress, the so
naturally exhibits in the various stages of this useful, this instructive
tragedy?

Eliza Ratcliffe, in the Jew, is by no means so interesting as the former
character; however, her sensibility and terror, on the rupture between her
husband and brother -- her perfect reliance on the honor of the former, when
he solemnly promises to avoid any further quarrel -- her respectful behavior
to Sir Stephen Bertram, in their interview -- her anxiety and suspense, when
she apprehends his congratulations on her supposed sudden good fortune, are
only ironical reproaches of her real poverty -- and her joy at the happy
reconciliation between her husband and his family, are expressed with great
justice and propriety.

In the Orphan, she performs Monimia, in a capital manner. Her well expressed
love for the gentle Castalio, and dislike for the brutal Polydore -- her
agonizing torture at the scorn and contempt she experiences from her husband --
her horror at the disclosure of the incestuous, but involuntary connections
with her brother-in-law -- and her subsequent madness and death, cannot fail of
receiving the loudest tributes of applause from every judicious spectator. And
could excellence of acting compensate for the grossest fundamental errors of a
dramatic composition, Mrs. Whitlock in Monimia, Mr. Chalmers in Chamont, Mr.
Whitlock in Acasto, and Mr. Moreton in Castalio, might warrant a repetition of
this tragedy. But the grossness of many of the sentiments expressed by polydore
-- the disgusting incident on which the entire interest of the piece turns --
and the multiplied butchery which closes it, ought to consign the Orphan to
eternal oblivion.

In that finished portrait, Lady Eleanor Irwin, in Every one has his Fault, she
appears to as much advantage, as in any of the characters she assumes, Filial
tenderness and affection spurned to the ground by an unrelenting and
hard-hearted father, cannot possibly find expression beyond what she exhibits.
The corroding cares of a tender wife, whose loved and loving husband is in
danger of an ignominious death, are most pathetically depicted in her
countenance, and by sympathy affect the spectators with a portion of her
distress. But what can be beyond the grand scene in which she discovers her
long-lost son, and struggles between her regard for him and her love for his
father, whether, at the expense of the former, she shall keep the fatal
pocketbook, or restore it, to the danger of the latter? This exquisite treat
for feeling minds is hardly equalled -- but certainly not excelled by any scene
ever written in our language; and to the praise of Mrs. Whitlock, it must be
said, that the merit of the actress is at least equal to that of the author.

To conclude. Mrs. Whitlock has a dignified carriage; her pronunciation is
animated; her voice and her countenance are capable of every inflection
necessary to express the most opposite emotions and passions, with the utmost
promptitude -- her memory is so good, and her application so assiduous, as to
leave her little indebt to the prompter's aid -- and, except her person, which
approaches toward the masculine, she has every qualification desirable in an
actress.

NUMBER III. Mr. HARWOOD.
THIS gentleman, who, perhaps, ranks next to Mr. Chalmers, among the male
performers, is in high favor with the amateurs of the drama. -- At his enter
here, he attracted little attention -- but suddenly came forward with great and
unexpected eclat.

The first character in which he made a considerable figure, was that of Dr.
Lenitive, in the prize, or 2, 3, 5, 8, in which he charmed the spectators, by
his humor and originality -- the avarice of this disciple of Galen, his gross
ignorance, his ridiculous pedantry, his upstart pride, on his supposed good
fortune, were most admirably personated. The spectator was led into that
agreeable delusion which deceives him into a belief, that the transient scene
is acting on the great stage of the world, which constitutes the chief merit of
a good performer.

His Fretful Plagiary is even superior to Lenitive. He does complete justice to
the testiness of this literary shark, and to his affected indifference for and
agonizing torture under the cauterizing criticisms of the newspaper writers.

His Walter in the delightful afterpiece of the Children in the Wood, is well
performed, but inferior to Hodgkinson's. -- However, he has improved
considerably in the successive representations. His song of "Dorothy Dump" is
extremely well sung, and accompanied with natural and highly humourous
gestures. In the interview with Oliver, whom he endeavors to dissuade from his
in^^^tion of murdering the infants, and in the scene where they are brought in
by their parents, he is equal to Hodgkinson. The parts in which he is inferior,
are, when he is discovered by Sir Rowland, and throughout in his courtship with
josephine, which Mr. Hodgkinson represents with more true nature and grace.

His Sir David Dunder, in Ways and Means, gives great satisfaction. His
articulation is particularly adapted to the volubility of this hospitable
knight; as likewise to that of

Prattle, in the Deuce is in Him, in which his performance was extremely
natural.

His Jabal in Cumberland's Jew, was received with great applause, as he filled
the character with perfect propriety.

In the Baron of Oakland, Haunted Tower, Fulmer in the West-Indian, and the
Planter in Yarico and Inkle, he appeared to no great advantage. In the first,
the affected dignity of the base usurper did not seem to become him.

In Old Barnacle in the Romp, he displays the rough noli-me-tangere manners of
a boisterous son of the waves, extremely well.

His Canton, in the Clandestine Marriage, is as good a representation of the
finicking, fantastic, and fawning manners, bestowed in most English plays on
French characters, as any I have seen. But it is to be hoped, that in "this
country of good sense," we will rise superior to the despicable and odious vice
of holding up the inhabitants of any country, or professors of any sect, as
objects of ridicule, to gratify our overweening vanity by the flattering
comparison.

His Mayor of Coventry and Jeffery Latimer are judiciously played and command
great approbation.

From his great success in humourous characters, it was hardly supposed that
his powers were calculated to do justice to the tenderness of conjugal love.
But who enjoyed the exquisite pleasure communicated by the interview with his
Sall in the Purse, that did not instantly acknowledge how egregious was the
mistake? Garrick himself could hardly have exceeded him in this scene, had he
played the part. It was affecting to the highest degree. The soul that can be
unmoved at such a capital display of the most interesting emotions of the human
breast, must partake largely of the nature of "the rugged rhinoceros, or the
Russian bear." Indeed, throughout the whole of the Purse, his performance is
highly just and natural.

To conclude. Mr. Harwood is an extremely valuable actor. His merits in many
characters are of the first rate. He can assume as great a variety of
countenance and manner as any performer in this city. His articulation is
either rapid as the falls of Niagara, or slow and stately as the meandering
Susquehanna, according to the characters he represents. He is, however, often
indebted to Mr. Rowson's aid -- which, whether it arises from defect of memory,
or want of application, is certainly a considerable drawback on the
gratification received from his performance. He is young, and improving, and
bids fair, at no very distant period, to arrive at a very uncommon degree of
reputation in his profession.

NUMBER IV. Mrs. MARSHALL.
THIS enchanting little actress possesses as high a degree of favor as any
performer that ever appeared in America. Nature has been uncommonly liberal to
her. She has a pleasing figure, and a prepossessing countenance, which, if any
dependence is to be placed on physiognomy, is "the title page to a most
captivating volume." Her voice is sweet and harmonious. She sings agreeably,
and more naturally, than some whose vocal powers and execution are far superior
to hers, in the opinion of the amateurs.

Her performance of the Country Girl has been pronounced by competent judges
nearly equal to that of the celebrated Mrs. Jordan, who, in England, is
regarded as having arrived at the acme of excellence in this character. The
craft and artifice, bestowed by native instinct, to counteract the selfish and
base designs of her superannuated guardian, are admirably covered by the most
natural and imposing simplicity.

Her Edward, in Every One has his Fault, is equal to any of her characters. She
divides with Mrs. Whitlock the merit of that most admirable scene, in which the
mother and son discover each other. Her wellsupported suspense and anxiety,
while torn with rival passions -- gratitude to her grandfather for his
protection, and irresistible silial love for her mother -- cannot be too highly
praised. The distress she displays, at parting with her grandfather, when love
triumphs over gratitude, is highly natural.

In the Spoiled Child, she is always received with unbounded applause. Never
did port ill-mannered boy with more nature, naivete, and spirit, harrass an
old-maidish aunt, or play on the foibles, and take advantage of the blind side
of a doting fond father, than this actress. She assumes the dress, and with the
dress the genuine manner of the young tarpaulin, with the utmost ease. And in
this disguise, one time of performance, she received as genuine a tribute, as
was ever bestowed. The story has been already told in the papers; but I shall,
I hope, be pardoned for repeating it here. A sailor in the pit, was so charmed
with the air, the manner, of her singing the song "Yo yea,"
that he emptied his pocket of his last dollar, which he threw on the stage, to
testify his satisfaction at the performance of "the little gem'man," as he
termed her. But, poor fellow, he was rather roughly handled; for the action
being mistaken for an insult, he was driven out of the house, amidst the hisses
and abuse of the spectators.

In Emily, in the Deuce is in Him, her performance is natural and spirited. But
nature, in choosing the materials for her composition, threw in an over
proportion of the risible. Humor and merriment are, therefore, her predominent
qualities. Nature sometimes triumphs, in spite of every effort to disguise or
counteract her. This was never more perceptible, than in the interview with her
limping lover, colonel Tamper, whose awkward and disfigured appearance so
completely tickled her fancy, that she could not resist the impulse to
laughter, at a moment when she wished to appear in the utmost distress. The
same circumstance has occurred on someother occasions. It is hoped the little
charmer will attend to this friendly hint, and in serious parts, lay in a
suitable stock of gravity.

In Priscilla Tomboy, she is hardly equal to Mrs. Hodgkinson, who shines in
this character.

Her Josephine is extremly well performed, and I think superior to Mrs.
Hodgkinson's. In the lover's altercation, and in pa^^ing with the children, her
merits are very great.

In India (...) she represents to advantage, the novel-reading miss. The
disappointment of her scheme of an elopement -- her chagrin at the mortifying
prospect of being thrice called in church, and kissed by the greasy
churchwarden -- and her resentment at the imposition practiced upon her, are
unexceptionably well played.

Her Moggy M'Gilpin, in the Highland Reel, is truly excellent.

Her Page, in the purse, is highly interesting. Her song of "When I was a
little he,"
is enchanting. The display of affection for her mother, on the perusal of her
letter, and the pathos of her entreaties for a continuance of her patron's
friendship, are chefs d'oeuvre.

In fine. Mrs. Marshall may, as a general actress, aspire at a first rank in
America. -- The degree of favor she acquired on her arrival here, being
founded on the base of intrinsic excellence, has gained additional strength in
proportion as she has been the subject of critical examination. She can with
equal ease, grace, and propriety assume the for ard, pouting airs of an awkward
countryminx -- the impertinence of a rude boy, better sed than taught -- the
staid manners of a well-educated lady -- and the softness and tenderness of a
Juliet. In all her extensively variegated line of acting, she meets with well
earned plaudits. And it is to be hoped, that she will ever bear strongly
impressed in mind the large share of esteem she has at stake -- and be as
careful in preserving, as she has been happy in acquiring, the unanimous good
wishes of her liberal patrons, the citizens of Philadelphia.

ADVANTAGES OF OVER-TRADING.
In a Letter to a Friend.
DEAR SIR,
YOU have asked my opinion respecting over-trading, of which you seem to be
highly afraid. But I hope so clearly to point out its advantages, as to remove
all your scruples, and to induce you to pursue the steps of so many of your
fellow citizens, who enjoy all the comforts and conveniences of this laudable
practice.

With all my partiality for it, I freely acknowledge, that its benefits do not
appear very evident, but at particular seasons, and during times of stagnation.
-- When business is brisk, one is tempted to overlook the advantages. But he
must be a most incorrigible skeptic, that can doubt its blessings, when money
is scarce, when trade is dull, when banks curtail discounts, etc.

In the first place, during the winter and summer months, when business is at a
stand, and nothing doing, what resource can a man have, who has not
over-traded, to keep himself employed? None. He is devoured by vapors, by
ennui, by listlessness. Time hangs on his hands a heavy burden.

But mark the contrast. The man who has run himself comforably in debt, to the
amount of 15, 20, or 30,000 dollars, has not an unemployed vacant hour, day or
night. As soon as he rises in the morning, he has to exercise himself in
walking over the city to borow a few dollars here and there -- What a charming
opportunity it gives a man to see his acquaintance! How acceptable must his
visits be, which are certain title-pages to a beggarly request for money! What
a touchstone he is to prove the sincerity of his friends! -- When he lies down
at night, slumber flies from his pillow, and his whole attention is turned to
devise siscal arrangements for the following day.

As times grow worse, these comforts increase. You have the pleasure sometimes
of borrowing daily, to pay the succeeding morning or afternoon. What a
respectable sight it is, to behold you or your clerk, sneaking to the bank
after the directors have gone away, to anticipate, by a few hours, the
knowledge of their decision upon the notes you have offered! What a mournful
countenance you exhibit, when your notes are returned to you, hanging out of
your book, with the mark of the beast on them! How you puff and blow running
about from street to street, to borrow money, and get into bank before three
o'clock! What a number of promises you make, impossible to be performed!

As the climax rises, new shifts open to your view. To over-draw is a most
capacious one. It stays for a while the impending torrent of distress. What a
charming exercise for your dexterity, to keep your book out of the hands of the
clerks, lest they should seize it, and expose how frequently the balance is on
the wrong side!

When borrowing is at an end, and the clerks of the banks grow too wary to
allow you to over-draw, a further advantage arises. You are introduced to the
acquaintance of that very worthy and conscientious race of men, who seem born
for the relief of persons in distress. I mean the friendly class of usurers.
You may at first hire money of them, at one per cent. a month -- afterward at
two -- and, as their charity grows with your distress, it will probably rise to
four or five, if your sufferings should be so great as to excite an
extraordinary degree of sympathy in their tender hearts.

You will probably think that this is the ne plus ultra of the advantages of
this mode of doing business. So did I at first. But I soon discovered my
mistake. Rats, they say, desert a sinking ship. They are warned by the instinct
bestowed on them by mother nature. The usurers possess an instinct similar to
this -- and generally smell out a sinking firm, from which they contrive to
make an early escape. Then your acquaintance extends further. A worthy man,
whom they call a notary public, kindly calls on you, brightens up your
recollection of a note you forgot to pay a bank, and demands payment, which you
are not able to make. This visit, supposing you are possessed of any
sensibility, displays your countenance to great advantage. The pleasing mixture
of charming red with which it suffuses your cheeks, heightens your natural
beauties to the utmost degree.

I have not noticed the amount of the interest you pay. Supposing you to have
the moderate sum of 12,000 dollars of bank money in trade, you do not pay much
more than 1,000 dollars a year. This is a mere bagatelle, unworthy of notice.
Indeed, were it not for some such drain as this, it would be impossible to find
employment for the immense profits of trade at present.

Another advantage which I passed over, is, the improvement in politeness and
good behavior, which you derive from your cringing visits to directors and
presidents of banks -- your dancing attendance at their levees -- your
requests, they will be so kind as to pay attention to your notes, etc.

I might extend the enumeration much farther -- but shall conclude for the
present with the observation, that the man who involves himself by
over-trading, has, in the fullest sense of the words, "taken up his cross" -- a
cross which half a life may be too little to enable him to lay down again.

I am, with esteem, Yours, etc.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE BADNESS OF THE TIMES.
Oct. 19, 1785.
ARE the present times, really and bona fide, as distressing and calamitous, as
they are universally said to be? This question, which to many will appear as
ridiculous as to demand, does the sun preside over the day, is asked with all
the coolness and gravity of a stoic, and a serious answer is requested. Lock
has somewhere observed, that a want of ascertaining with precision the ideas
conveyed by words in general use, is one of the most abundant sources of human
ignorance and error. Perhaps, without incurring the charge of paradox, it may
be added, that the most familiar terms are often least understood. The ignobile
vulgus, (with "reverence due and submission" be it said, five-sixths of
mankind) pick up a set of phrases, which they repeat, parrot-like, by rote,
without conceiving any clear idea of them, or being able, if required, to
define their meaning, -- Lest, therefore, our ideas of distress and calamity
should not coincide with those of our readers, we will ask a question or two.
-- What is distress? -- What is calamity? -- Some folk, very probably, think it
mighty distressing, that a man who begins business with a slender capital, or
perhaps on the broad bottom of a patchedup credit, cannot keep his country
house, his phaeton, his chaise, or even his pair of horses; that he cannot have
above half a dozen dishes smoking on his table every day -- nor entertain his
friends en homme comme il saul. This is all the fault of the damned bad times!
-- It is, indeed, mighty calamitous, that the blind goddess Fortune should have
been so unkind to many sunny boys, hearty fellows, jovial souls, sprightly
lads, and others of that noble fraternity, as to have made them sons and heirs
of poverty and empty purse, at the same time that Nature indulgently endowed
them with all the innocent desires, appetites, wishes and passions, of dukes
and earls; so that while they have all the faculties and talents requisite to
shine with wonderful eclat, in the sporting away some thousands per annum, they
are obliged to confine themselves to the obscurity and insignificance of their
stores -- What a pitiable case! -- It is also dreadfully distressing, that a
clerk or shopkeeper, who is charitably and innocently disposed to provide for a
female friend, in some retired country spot, such as Kensington, Germantown,
etc. -- ride out ten or a dozen miles to dinner on Sundays -- play a few games
at billiards now and then -- keep it up two or three nights in the week -- and
indulge himself in various other equally harmless modes of recreation, should
be obliged, by the general dullness of the times, to stupify himself plodding
over his waste-books, his journals and his ledgers, or warming his toes,
kicking the threshold of his employer's door -- and all this owing to the
deadness of the season, bad times, scarcity of money, stagnation of trade, etc.
-- Is it not also a most lamentable consideration, that an artizan or mechanic,
who could find a thousand laudable ways of recreating himself at billiards,
bowls, tennis, all fours, etc. or over his glass of cherry bounce, his
brandysling, or his bowl of bub, should be obliged, by the mere severity of the
times, to work six days in the week, at so very low a rate as five, six, seven,
or eight dollars? -- Hard must be the heart of him who can hear of all those
unparalleled miseries and distresses, without shedding -- tears of blood. -- We
may justly cry out with the Mantuan bard -- "Quis, talia sando, temperet a
lacrymis?"

A truce with irony -- or (as the four cynic will say) with nonsense. Do not
people in general live comfortably here? Have not bankruptcies (the most
insallible criteria of bad times) subsided for a considerable time past? Do not
manufacturers ordinarily find a ready vent for all the goods they make? Is not
the number of unemployed mechanics very small? -- If the intelligent reader
shall answer these questions in the affirmative, it is an obvious inference,
that the present times cannot, in strict propriety of language, be called
calamitous or distressing.

Whoever pursues this very interesting reflection to a greater extent, will
probably agree, that of the few who give themselves the trouble of thinking, by
far the major part have only confused ideas of even the most familiar terms;
whence all their premises and conclusions are involved in a chaos. This is the
only mode of accounting for the universality of the outcry against the misery
of the times. That there is vastly less money here at present than immediately
subsequent to the conclusion of the late war, is incontestible: but with
nations as with individuals, happiness depends not upon wealth. Is the cit,
possessed of his tens of thousands, or the planter, owner of boundless acres,
and numerous corpse of the swarthy victims of his avarice and pride,
intrinsically happier than the merry cobbler, who sits in his stall, singing, I
care for nobody, no, not I,
If nobody cares for me!"
Are the lazy enervate sons of Mexico and Peru, who annually deluge Europe with
their gold, silver, and precious stones, happier than the hardy, innocent, and
poor inhabitants of Switzerland? In the scale of reason and common sense,
doubtless not. To pursue this analogy: Reason's whole pleasure -- all the joys
of sense
Lie in three words -- health, peace, and competence."


So sung Pope, relatively to the happiness of individuals: what is true of them
will equally hold with respect to aggregate bodies -- for whatever constitutes
the happiness of one man, should equally conduce (whim and caprice excluded) to
that of his neighbor -- and so on, ad infinitum. It is unnecessary to add,
that if each member of a society be happy, the society itself must consequently
be so. What is deducible from this? -- That Pennsylvania, posessing a healthy
climate -- being in the enjoyment of peace -- and producing more than is
necessary to procure a supply of all those articles (if any such there be)
which she must have recourse to foreign nations for, [i.e. in other words,
being possessed of a (...)] if she be not really happy, she must charge it to
the account of her own folly, imprudence, and party squabbles.

THE END.

