PORCUPINE's POLITICAL CENSOR, For NOVEMBER 1796.

CONTAINING OBSERVATIONS ON THE INSOLENT AND SEDITIOUS NOTES, Communicated to
the People of the UNITED STATES BY THE LATE FRENCH MINISTER ADET;

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY, WILLIAM COBBETT, OPPOSITE CHRIST
CHURCH. Nov. 1796.

ADVERTISEMENT.
PERSUADED of the utility this Censor may be of, if extensively read, the
editor has printed a double edition of it, and by that mean has been enabled to
reduce the price to One Quarter of a Dollar.

The next Censor will contain a letter to the infamous Tom Pain, in answer to
the brutal attack, which the despots of France have certainly paid him for
making on General Washington, and on the government and Constitution of the
United States. -- This Censor will also begin remarks on the debates in
Congress.

TO CORRESPONDENTS.
As nothing is more gratifying than the applause, or profitable than the
admonition, of good men, I have reason to congratulate myself on an abundance
of both: but as applause ought never to be purchased with money, and as
admonition is a commodity that every one is ready to bestow gratis, I must
request that future communications of this kind may come to me post-free. -- I
also beg leave to hint to those who give me advice, which they wish I should
follow, not to do it in too dictatorial a style; for, if I have any good
qualities, docility, I am afraid, is not to be numbered amongst them.

THE POLITICAL CENSOR, For NOVEMBER 1796.
REMARKS ON CITIZEN ADET's NOTES TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE.
THE moment the Gallic usurpers had murdered their sovereign, and, from the
vilest walks in life, mounted into his seat, they assumed the tone of masters
to the government of the United States. Their style has sometimes softened, it
is true; but the general tenor of it has regularly approached toward that
loftiest note, that ne plus ultra of insolence, which it attained in Citizen
Adet's last communications.

In offering my sentiments on these arrogant effusions of upstart tyranny, I
feel an unusual degree of diffidence: a diffidence that does not arise from any
fear I entertain of the Citizen or his factious adherents, or even of the
"terrible nation," to use his own words, of which he was lately the worthy
representative; but from a consciousness of my inability to do justice to the
subject. The keenest satire, were I master of it, would fall blunted from such
hardened impudence, such pure unadulterated brass, as it would here have to
encounter. Terms of reproach are not yet invented, capable of expressing the
resentment that every man, who has the least respect for the government, ought
to feel on this occasion.

Thus voluntarily to interfere in a correspondence between a foreign minister
and the officers of state, might, under other circumstances, appear rather a
bold intrusion; but, the Citizen's having communicated his papers to the
people, at the same time, if not before, they reached the Secretary of State,
happily precludes the necessity of an apology.

The notes on which I am about to remark, and to which, collected together, I
have affixed the title of Diplomatic Blunderbuss, are intended chiefly to
notify to the people of America, that the French rulers are angry with the
Federal Government, and that, in consequence of this anger, they have ordered
Citizen Adet to suspend his functions as minister, till the government shall
alter its conduct, or, in the pedagogue style, mend its manners.

In the 44th page of the Blunderbuss, the Citizen makes a recapitulation of the
offenses that have brought on us this dreadful chastisement, this political
excommunication; and it will not appear a little surprising, that some of them
have existed ever since the birth of the French Republic, notwithstanding the
love and esteem this outlandish lady has ever expressed toward her sister
America.

These offenses amounting to seven in number, are as follows: 1. The Federal
Government put in question, whether it should execute the treaties, or receive
the agents of the rebel and proscribed princes. 2. It made a proclamation of
insidious neutrality. 3. By its chicaneries, it abandoned French privateers to
its courts of justice. 4. It eluded the amicable mediation of the French
Republic for breaking the chains of the American citizens in Algiers. 5. It
allowed the French colonies to be declared in a state of blockade, and allowed
the citizens of America to be interdicted the right of trading to them. 6. It
eluded all the advances made by the French Republic for renewing the treaties
of commerce upon a more favorable footing to both nations. 7. It anticipated
Great Britain, by soliciting a treaty, in which treaty it prostituted its
neutrality; it sacrificed France to her enemies, or rather, looking upon her as
obliterated from the chart [map] of the world, it forgot the services she had
rendered it, and threw aside the duty of gratitude, as if ingratitude was a
governmental duty.


These are the heinous crimes of which the Federal Government stands charged by
the sultans of France. Let us now, if they will permit us, examine these
crimes, one by one, and see whether the President, and Messrs. Hamilton, Knox,
Jay, Pickering and Wolcot, really deserve to be guillotined, or not.

1. The Federal Government put in question, whether it should execute the
treaties, or receive the agents of the rebel and proscribed princes.

The Citizen has made a small mistake in drawing up this charge, owing, I
suppose, to his ignorance of that excellent rule of the English language, which
requires every thing to be called by its right name. I would have worded it
thus: The Federal Government put in question, whether it should execute the
treaties, made between America and the king of France, with his rebel subjects
who had just murdered him, or receive the agents of his lawful successors, the
Princes whom those murderers had had the audacity to pretend to proscribe.

With this trifling alteration, I am ready to admit the truth of the charge,
but am very far from admitting it to be a crime. The king of France was
murdered on the 21st of January, 1793. Information of this event could not be
received here much before the 18th of April, and it was on that day the
President submitted to his council, the questions of which the above charge
forms the substance.

The treaties here spoken of, were made with Louis XVI. whose minister, at the
time these questions were proposed for consideration, was resident at
Philadelphia. The President knew, indeed, that the king was dead, but he, at
the same time, knew that the treaties were binding on the United States in
behalf of his lawful heirs and successors, and he certainly knew that Petion,
Danton, Roland, Claviere, Condorcet, Brissot, and the innumerable horde of
bloody usurpers who have come after them, were not those heirs and successors?
He also knew, that even the whole French nation, could not, in the sense of the
treaties, become the "heirs and successors" of Louis XVI. and, though treaties,
made with a monarch, may remain in force with the nation under a new form of
government, yet this is, as most assuredly it ought to be, entirely at the
option of the other contracting party. The American government had, therefore,
an indisputed right to refuse to execute, in behalf of the French nation,
treaties made with their sovereign alone.

If we turn back a little, we shall find this very audacious and unprincipled
Convention, whose minister was coming to Philadelphia, publicly deliberating,
whether the treaties, made with the tyrant Louis, were binding on the
regenerated nation, or not. This question was determined in the negative, and
accordingly the treaty with Holland was immediately violated. And yet they will
not permit the poor government of America to debate about any such thing, nor
even to talk of it in secret, though the result be in their own favor! Let it
be remembered too, that Genet came authorized to make new treaties, a pretty
certain proof, that the Convention did not call in question the right of the
government to refuse to adhere to the old ones. It is a proof of more; it is a
proof that they expected that it would make the refusal. Would to God their
expectation had been realized!

I will not go so far as to say, that the Federal Government was fully
justified in its decision on this important subject; but I insist that its
conduct evinced the utmost partiality for the new Republic. When Genet arrived
here, it was far from being ascertained that the whole, or even a majority, of
the French nation, approved of the murder of their sovereign, or had abandoned
the cause of his successors. The government of America, had, but a few months
before, beheld them raising their hands to heaven, and swearing to die, if
necessary, in defense of their king. Their constitution, establishing a
hereditary monarchy, had been voluntarily formed, and solemnly sanctioned by
the whole nation, amidst festivals and Te-Deums, and had been officially
communicated to the world. Each member of the Assembly, as well as every
individual Frenchman, had repeatedly sworn to maintain this constitution with
all his might. Laws had been made, punishing with transportation all who
refused to take the oath, and till then unheard of cruelties had been exercised
on the non-jurors. After all this, was it astonishing that the Federal
Government should, for a moment, hesitate to believe, that the nation was
really become a Republic, and that this constitution, about which there had
been so much noise and rejoicing and feasting and singing and swearing should
be so completely destroyed as to leave neither remnant nor rag visible? Must
they be looked upon as the enemies of France, because they did not yield
implicit credit to him who first told them, that the very men who had declared
the king's person to be sacred and inviolable, had dipped their hands in his
blood; and that the people, who had solemnly vowed to maintain the decree with
their lives, had basely applauded the sanguinary deed? -- It is not the final
determination of the American government, for that was in favor of the
Convention, but it is its hesitation, of which Citizen Adet complains; as if he
had said: How could you, for a moment, doubt of the faithlessness of my
countrymen? How durst you hesitate to think them, what they have since so fully
proved themselves, a horde of traitors, perjurers and assassins? -- If the
Citizen will but forgive the government this time, I will answer for them they
will never doubt on this subject again.

But, if it was so very natural for the Federal Government to view the French
in their true character, was not that a reason, on the other hand, for
deliberating whether their republican minister should be received in preference
to the agents of the Princes? The government had the interests of America to
attend to in this important decision, as well as those of France. A weighty
debt was due from this country, not to the regenerated nation nor to its
bloodthirsty tyrants, but to Louis XVI his heirs and successors. A minister
from the Republic once admitted, a claim of the interest of the debt could not
be refused; and if the volatile and perjured nation, had recalled the successor
of their sovereign, would not that successor have demanded, and with justice, a
second payment of such interest? This has not yet happened, but it does not
follow that it might not have happened. In the common affairs of men, he who
has been once convicted of perjury, is never after looked upon as credible; and
the same rule is applicable to societies. It is entirely owing to the want of
good faith among the allies, and to the dastardly conduct of the Princes
themselves, neither of which could well be foreseen at the time, that a Bourbon
is not now on the throne of France: so that, the Federal Government, instead of
discovering a hostile disposition toward the Republic, certainly hazarded much
in its favor.

But, considerations of this nature have no weight with the new sovereigns of
France. Their object in bringing forward the charge at this time, is, not to
impress on the minds of the people that their government acted unjustly or
unwisely, but that it leaned to the side of monarchy rather than to that of
republicanism. That this is false is clear from the result; but were the
insinuation just, had the government expressed a wish to see such a monster of
a republic as that of France crushed in its birth, the wish would have been a
most pious one.

Republicanism is become, for what reason I know not, synonymous with freedom
and happiness, and there are thousands among us who pretend to believe,
notwithstanding the terrible example before their eyes, that men cannot be
enslaved under a form of government that is called republican. Mr. Adams, in
his Defense of the American Constitutions, Vol. I. page 87, says: Our
countrymen will never run delirious after a word or a name. The name republic
is given to things in their nature as different and contradictory as light and
darkness, truth and falsehood, virtue and vice, happiness and misery. There are
free republics, and republics as tyrannical as an oriental despotism. -- How
fully is the truth of these observations exemplified in the republics of
America and France! But even this wise and deep-sighted civilian could not
imagine that his countrymen would ever run delirious after a name; much less
could he imagine, that he should live to see many of them extolling, as the
paragon of republics, a system of tyranny that has all the appearance of being
an instrument of the wrath of heaven.

I shall dismiss this first charge against the government, with observing, that
the meanness equals the impudence of making it. We have seen the French murder
their king, whose greatest fault was his confidence in their fidelity; we have
seen them drag his headless and bloody carcass from the scaffold, throw it into
a pit without the rites of sepulture, and, to deprive it of even the privilege
of rotting, consume it with hot lime. Yet, after all this, they are not ashamed
to complain, that they were not, without hesitation, admitted as heirs his
successors! They are not ashamed to enjoy the benefits resulting from a
contract, made with the very man the anniversary of whose murder they
celebrate! Like the treacherous laborers, they first slay the lord of the
vineyard and then seize on his possessions, his titles and his deeds. -- Men
may be unjust and tyrannical, they may even be cruel and ferocious, without
being mean. There are many assassins who would scorn to dress themselves in the
robes of their victim. But, to unite vices seemingly incompatible, is the
characteristic of the regenerated French: in all they say and do, there is such
a mixture of licentiousness and servility, of frivolity and ferocity, of
duplicity, insolence and meanness, that we know not whether to despise or hate
them most.

2. The government made a proclamation of insidious neutrality.

This charge is as false as it is rude. I would beg this well-informed and
polite citizen, to name one single instance of the insincerity of the Federal
Government, in enforcing this proclamation. As applied to the conduct of some
part of the people, indeed, the neutrality might be called insidious; but then,
this insidiousness operated in favor of the French and not against them. There
were many who highly approved of the proclamation, and who at the same time
actually made war upon the enemies of France. An army of Americans, under the
authority of Genet, invaded the Spanish territories, while privateers were
fitted out to cruize on the British; cargoes of ammunition and arms were
shipped off, and thanksgivings, and other public demonstrations of joy, were
heard from one end of the Union to the other. The bells of the good old
Christian church, opposite me, fired rounds to celebrate the inundation of the
Atheistical barbarians into Holland; and the English flag was burnt at
Philadelphia, on the public square, as a sacrifice to the goddess of French
liberty. These latter circumstances are trifling in themselves, it is true, and
certainly excited nothing but contempt and ridicule, in the minds of those whom
they were intended to insult; but, the question is (and it is to ask this
question that they are here mentioned), what would the French, that "terrible
nation," have said, had these insults, these marks of an insidious neutrality
been offered to them? Would they not have sent their fleets and knocked down
our towns and burnt our ships? No; the enemy would have stopped them on the
way; but they would have stirred hell to seek for the means of vengeance. What
they had wanted in deeds, they would have made up for in words. Every
opprobrious term in their newfangled vocabulary would have been heaped on our
heads. How many sacres matins and jean-f -- tres and f -- tus chiens and
libertecides and neutralitecides would they have called the poor
Anglo-Americans, in the course of a Decade! Instead of bell, book and candle,
they would have cursed us with all the gods of their heathenish calendar; and,
which would have been infinitely worse, they would have cursed us with the
teazing remonstrances of an impertinent minister.

Where a breach of neutrality, cognizable by the laws, appeared, the Federal
Government always did its utmost to bring the offenders to justice, and it is
for this very reason, that the late diplomatic Mounseer has dared to accuse it
of an insidious neutrality. After the proclamation was issued, and Genet saw
that there was no hope of setting it aside by inciting the people to rebellion,
he feigned an acquiescence, and declared that the Convention did not wish the
prosperity of their dear brethren of America to be interrupted by a
participation in the war. It entered into his delirious brain, that the
proclamation was to be a mere cloak, under which he thought to enlist as many
soldiers and arm as many privateers as he could pay for. Such a neutrality
would, indeed, have been more advantageous to France than an open declaration
of war on the part of the United States; but when he found that the government
was resolved to enforce the proclamation; when he found that his pirates were
not permitted to rob and plunder with impunity, and that the American harbors
were not to serve them as hiding places, whence they might sally out upon poor
old John Bull, as their great predecessor did upon the beeves of Hercules; then
he began to foam and sacre dieu against the libertecide government, for
neutralizing the zeal of the citizens, and punishing the generous children of
liberty, for flying to the relief of their mother, when she was upon the point
of violation by a horde of crowned monsters.

As Citizen Adet seems to have been furnished with memorandums concerning the
conduct of all the State Governments, with respect to the vessels of the
belligerent nations; as he must be in possession of the French archives, those
everlasting records of poor Mr. Randolph's precious confessions, and of the
services of all those who have deserved well of the terrible Republic, it was
rather ungrateful of him, to overlook the alertness of that vigilant and
virtuous and chaste and incorruptible republican, Governor Mifflin, at the time
of laying the embargo. That venerable old Democrat, the father-in-law of
Citizen Genet, who has happily given place to a better man, might also have
merited encomium on the same account. With what care did they watch! With what
zeal did they call out the militia, and man whale boats, and run and bustle
about, to prevent the escape of vessels bound to British ports! Their diligence
in the discharge of this part of their duty was not a whit inferior to that of
those useful auxiliaries of justice, which the rudeness of these latter times
has styled thief-catchers; while the vessels bound to the land of Messidor and
Floreal and Vendimaire, etc. slipped off "in a dark night;" and while, in
another quarter, a whole fleet sailed for this land of starvation, though the
embargo had been laid ten days before. Had the British minister complained of a
breach of neutrality here, he might have been heard with patience; but, if even
he had had the assurance to make use of the word insidious, he would have
merited a peremptory order to pack up.

The only breach of neutrality with which the Federal Government can possibly
be charged, is, the liquidation of the French debt. This favor, as beneficial
to France as it was apparently hazardous to the United States, would have been
acknowledged by Citizen Adet and his masters, had they not been as ignorant of
the law of nations as of the laws of politeness and decency. Citizen Genet,
when he opened the negotiation, promised that every farthing of the debt, if
liquidated, should be expended in the country, and, for once, I believe,
contrary to the German proverb, the Frenchman kept his word; for, except what
was retained for the unavoidable daily hire of Poor Richard, and some few other
items, I believe every single sous of it went among the Flour-Merchants. --
What think you, Mr. Dallas? Come now, d -- n it, tell the truth for once in
your life. Be frank with your countryman, and we'll make up all old grievances.
-- Well, you may be as fulky as you please: I believe it; or your friend
Fauchet never would have stood, like a bilked cully, with his pocket turned
inside out, when he could have purchased a delicious civil war with a few
thousand dollars. -- It is an old saying, and all old sayings are true; that
what is got over the devil's back is spent under his belly; and so it happened
with this debt. The givers and the receivers were just of a stamp, and one had
just as much right to the money as the other.

But, to return to my subject: whether this liquidation were a breach of
neutrality, in a rigorous sense, or not, every real friend of America must
rejoice at its being effected. It was one effort toward shaking off a
dependence that yet hangs about our necks like a millstone. One of our poets
has called a dun a horrid monster, hated of gods and men. Exactly such was
Genet, when he first arrived, and such would have been his successors, had not
the clamorous creditors (or rather claimants) been silenced by a discharge of
the debt. This the government undoubtedly foresaw, and therefore wisely
resolved to relieve us from their importunities. But there is another debt of
enormous magnitude, that still remains; I mean the debt of gratitude due from
this country to the regenerated French. This we shall never liquidate, while
there is a Frenchman left to ask, or an American to give. It is incalculable in
its amount, and eternal in its duration; we will therefore leave it to pass
down the stream of time along with the insidious neutrality.

3. The Government, by its chicaneries, abandoned French privateers to its
courts of Justice.

This is, I tremblingly presume, the "terrible" style, and is therefore looked
upon as sufferable in a minister from a "terrible nation;" but I am pretty
confident, it would be suffered with impunity in no other. Some writer on the
belles lettres, I believe it is Burke, observes, that terror is a property of
the sublime, and I am sure that insolence is a property of the terrible. I know
not precisely what punishment the law of nations has awarded for such language,
but I should imagine it can be nothing short of breaking of bones. A good Irish
sheeleley or Devonshire quarterstaff seems much better calculated for answering
a charge like this than a pen. -- The chicaneries of the government! --
Abandoning privateers to courts of Justice! -- If this does not deserve a
rib-roasting, I do not know what does. If this goes off so, then I say there is
no such thing as justice on this side the grave. Why, I have seen many as good
a man as Citizen Adet, aye and as faithful to his king too, flogged till the
blood ran into his shoes, for giving language, a hundred times less insolent
than this, to a lance corporal.

Does the General Government of America then act by chicane? Does General
Washington, whose integrity, whose inflexible firmness and whose undaunted
bravery have been acknowledged and admired as far as his name has reached,
merit to be put on a level with a miserable pettifogger? And is a cause
abandoned, because it is submitted to an American court of judicature? Are both
judges and juries in this country so very very corrupt, that no justice can be
expected from their decisions? Are we so nearly like Sodom and Gomorrah that
twelve honest men are not to be found among us?

An accusation may be so completely absurd and impudent, that no one can
attempt to refute it, without sinking, in some degree, toward a level with the
accuser; and, as I have no inclination to do this, I leave the present one to
be answered by the indignation of the reader.

4. The Government eluded the amicable mediation of the French Republic for
breaking the chains of the American citizens in Algiers.

Every one who recollects the anxiety which the President has ever expressed on
the subject of a treaty with Algiers, the innumerable obstacles he had to
surmount, and the enormous expense by means of which it was at last effected,
need not be told that this charge is as ill-founded as the preceding ones. But,
as it is intended to bring forward to the people a proof of the Friendship of
France, at the moment her hatred and hostility are evident to every eye, in
this point of view it may be worth while to hear what the Citizen has to say in
support of it.

He tells us ( Diplomatic Blunderbuss, page 66), that the French government,
zealous of giving to the United States proofs of its attachment, had commenced
negociations with the regency of Algiers, in order to put an end to the war
which that power was making on the commerce of the United States. That the
minister for foreign affairs instructed Fauchet (the very Fauchet who expressed
his regret that the Western rebellion did not succeed) to communicate to the
Federal Government the steps which that of France had taken in this respect,
which he did in the following terms, on the 4th of June, 1794.

I have already had the pleasure, Sir, to inform you, verbally, of the interest
which the committee of public safety of the national convention had early taken
in the truly unhappy situation of your commerce in the Mediterranean.

I now fulfill the duty imposed on me by the government, by calling to your
recollection in writing, the steps which are to be taken by our agent with the
dey of Algiers, for repressing this new maneuver of the British
administration, which has put the finishing stroke to its proofs of malevolence
toward free people. The dispatch of the minister communicating this measure to
me, is dated the 5th January, 1794, and did not come to my hands till fifteen
days ago; I do not yet know by what route; I could have wished it had been less
tardy in coming to me, that I might sooner have fulfilled the agreeable task of
proving to you by facts, the protestations of friendship of which I have so
often spoken in the name of the Republic of France.

The information which I shall receive from Europe in a little time, will
doubtless possess me of the success of those negociations which were to have
been opened in January last. If the situation of your affairs is yet such with
respect to that barbarous regency, as that our intervention may be of some
utility, I pray you to invite the president to cause to be communicated to me
the means that he will join to those of the committee of public safety, for the
greatest success of the measures already taken. It is in virtue of the express
request of the minister that I solicit of the president some communication on
this subject; I shall be satisfied to be able to transmit it by a very early
conveyance which I am now preparing for France.

The secretary of state replied to him on the 6th June, 1794, by a letter of
which the following is an extract.

Your other letter of the 4th of June, is a powerful demonstration of the
interest which the Republic of France takes in our welfare. I will frankly
communicate to you our measures and expectations with regard to Algiers; but as
you will so soon receive the detail of those measures, which your government
has pursued in our behalf, it will be better perhaps to postpone our interview
on this matter, until the intelligence which you further expect, shall arrive.

First, observe here, that Adet tells the people, that somebody in France, no
matter who, had actually commenced negociations with the regency of Algiers in
behalf of their countrymen. To prove this, he quotes a letter of Fauchet, in
which this latter begs to call to the recollection of the Federal Government
"the steps which are to be taken," and not the steps which are taken.
Afterward Fauchet, presuming upon what has been done since his latest
instructions came away, talks in the very same letter, about measures already
taken; but is unable to say any thing about the nature or success of them,
until he receives further information from Europe, which he makes no doubt is
upon the point of arriving. -- Now, is it not very surprising that this further
information never came to hand, from that day to this? And is it not still more
surprising, that no traces of this friendly mediation, of these steps that were
to be taken, and those measures that were already taken, should ever be
discovered by the American Envoy to Algiers? When the French do what they can
possibly construe into an act of generosity, they are not very apt to keep it
hidden from the world, or to suffer the obliged party to remain unreminded of
it.

But, let us hear how Master Adet accounts for his worthy predecessor's
receiving no further information relative to this generous interference in our
behalf. Fauchet told the government he was in daily expectation of it, and yet
it never came. How will Citizen Adet get out of this? We have him fairly hemmed
up in a corner here, and he has a devilish deal more wit than I take him to
have, if he gets himself decently out of it. -- He tells us that the French
government had taken measures for the relief of the captives, that the
mediation was in a charming train, that Fauchet communicated this pleasing
intelligence to the President, who waited with anxious expectation for further
information, which Fauchet hourly expected to receive, and that then Mr. Jay
was charged to negociate with the British government. -- Well; and what then?
-- Why, and then Citizen Fauchet did not receive any communication on the
subject. -- What? -- O, oh! and so then, it seems, Mr. Jay's being appointed to
negociate a treaty of amity and commerce with king George, prevented the
agreeable information, the facts proving the sincerity of the French
protestations of friendship, from being received! And did so completely do away
all those steps which were to be taken, and which were taking, and which had
already been taken, that they were never after heard of! Surprising, that the
United States should have chilled, should have perished even, the zealous
interest that France took in their distresses, merely because they wished to
avoid still greater distresses, by an amicable negotiation elsewhere!

Let us recur to time also. A lie that is bound down to dates is difficult to
be successfully kept up.

The committee of public safety (it should have been called the committee of
public misery) instructed Citizen Fauchet on the 5th of January, 1794, to
inform the American government, that they were about taking means for "breaking
the chains of our captive citizens in Algiers." This "proof of the
protestations of their friendship" did not come to Fauchet's hands till the 4th
of the ensuing June, just five months, to an hour; and when it did at last
arrive, Citizen Fauchet, could not tell by what route! -- A pretty story this,
and a pretty sort of Ambassador to receive dispatches of such importance,
without knowing by whom or by what route. Let Citizen Adet and his worthy
predecessor, Father Joseph, go and impose such humbug tales upon the poor
stupid enslaved Hollanders and Genevese, they will find few such gulls here.

Again: how could the appointment of Mr. Jay prevent the reception of further
information, if such information was daily expected? Robespierre and his bloody
colleagues, who felt such a tender concern for the captives, could not hear of
this appointment sooner than about two months after it took place; the
information, promised, as they say, on the 5th of January, must therefore have
been on the way, and what, then, I would be glad to know, prevented its coming
to hand? That it never did come to hand, Master Adet has confessed, and we must
inevitably conclude therefrom, that it was never either promised on that side
the water or expected on this. -- These dates form a net in which the Citizen
has hampered himself. He had got the Messidors and the Fructidors into his
brains, and could he have got them into ours also, could he have made us adopt
the beastial calendar of Poor Richard, we might have lost our account too, but
by sticking to the good old June and January we have caught him out.

The fact is, the committee of public misery never took any steps toward a
mediation, never wrote any letter to Fauchet on the subject, nor did this
latter ever expect any information relative thereto. The whole was a mere
trumped up story to induce the President to relinquish his purpose of a pacific
negotiation with Great Britain, by giving him a high opinion of the friendship
of France and leading him to depend on her for support. Had the President been
the dupe they expected he was, we might have bidden an eternal farewell to
independence. If Robespierre and the Convention had once got a hold of him, he
would in vain have struggled to get free: their fraternal hug would have been a
million times more fatal to us than the grapples of the Algerine galleys to the
crews of our ships. -- Observe how anxious Fauchet was to obtain some overture
on the part of the President: I pray you to invite the President to cause to be
communicated to me the means which he will join to those of the committee of
public safety. This was all Fauchet wanted him to do; to ask some favor or
other. I doubt not but they would have really interposed with their brother
barbarians for the liberation of the captives; but the chains which they would
have knocked off from a handful of Americans, would have been rivetted on
America for ever. The President saw the snare, and, with his usual sagacity,
avoided it; and thus preserved himself and his country from disgrace and ruin.

The motive for advancing the charge at this time, is, to instill into the minds
of the people, that the President felt extremely indifferent as to the fate of
the captives. This base, this calumnious, this insufferably insolent
insinuation, I leave to the resentment of those for whose sake he has undergone
every toil and every hardship, has a thousand times ventured his life, and,
what is more, has patiently borne the viperous bite of ingratitude. If there be
an American, who approves of the late revolution, and who esteems himself happy
under the change which it has produced, and who yet has not the courage to
resent this audacious aspersion of the character of General Washington, he
deserves to be curtailed of the signs of manhood: such a pusillanimous reptile
ought not to be suffered to propagate his breed.

5. The government allowed the French colonies to be declared in a state of
blockade, and allowed the citizens of America to be interdicted the right of
trading to them.

It is a wonder Citizen Adet did not swell the list here. He might, with equal
reason, have complained that the Federal Government allowed the British to
conquer the half of these colonies; that they allowed Lords How, Hood and
Bridport to destroy their fleets; and that they allowed Prince Charles to beat
and pursue their boasting army. He might have complained, that they are about
to allow the sans-culotte general Moreau to be Burgoyened, and the ruffian
Buonaparte and his wolfish comrades to leave their lank carcasses in Italy,
which I hope and believe will be allowed. Had he complained, that they allowed
it to rain, to snow and to thunder, his complaint would not have been more
absurd than it now is.

But, the government also allowed the American citizens to be interdicted the
right of trading to these colonies. -- As to the power of preventing this, the
same may be said as of the prohibitions above supposed; and as to the right of
preventing it, if the power had existed, nothing can be said, unless we knew
the exact state of the blockades, to which the Citizen alludes, but of which
his Blunderbuss gives no particular account.

When a place, or an island, is actually invested in such manner as to enable
the besieger to prevent neutrals from entering, he has a right, according to
the immemorially established law of nations, not only to exercise this power of
prevention, but to seize on, and confiscate, both goods and vessels; and even
to inflict corporal punishment on all those who transgress his prohibition.
That the British have sometimes declared places in a state of siege, which were
not really invested, has often been asserted, but never proved; but it is well
known, on the other hand, that they never went to the rigor of the law of
nations with those who had the temerity to disregard their prohibitions, in
attempting to enter places which were completely blockaded.

Numerous complaints of captures, made at the entrance of the ports of an
island, amount to a pretty strong presumptive proof, that the captor has formed
an actual investiture. If he has done this, he certainly has a right to declare
it, and it follows of course, that no neutral power has a right to take offense
at his declaration. When one of the neutral captains complained, that the
British intercepted, and seized on, every vessel that attempted to enter the
port of St. Pierre's, and, in the very same letter, inveighed against the
illegality of their declaring the place in a state of blockade, he talked like
a good honest tar; and when we hear a public minister echoing the complaint, we
may pardon his ignorance, but we cannot help wishing, at the same time, that he
had been sent to hand reef and steer, stew up lobscous, or swab the deck,
rather than to pester us with his boorish grumbling and tarpawling logic.

Where a merchant, or a mariner, through love to the besieged, or hatred to the
besieger, through avarice or through indiscretion, has lost his property by an
endeavor to elude the prohibition of trading to a blockaded place, it is very
natural, and therefore perhaps excusable, in him to be vociferous in complaint
against the injustice of the captor; but it is not quite so natural or
excusable in his government to participate in his resentment, and plunge the
nation into a war to avenge him. Were the harmony of nations to be disturbed by
the passions of individuals, peace must take her flight to heaven, for she
would never find a resting place on the face of the earth.

It is, however, certain, that very many of the captures, made by the British
cruizers, were contrary to the law of nations, and therefore called for the
interposition of the general government. And has not that government
interposed? Yes, and so effectually too, that a mode of indemnification, as
equitable and as honorable as either party could wish for, has been firmly
settled on. Supposing, then, for a moment, that France had a right to make
inquiries on the subject, what more does she want? Strange as it may seem, to
those who are inattentive to the intrigues of this at once volatile, ferocious
and artful republic, it is the success of the negotiation, by which this very
indemnification was obtained, that has occasioned the charge now preferred by
her minister! The French, or rather the French Usurpers, rejoiced at the
British depredations on the commerce of this country: nothing was farther from
their wishes than to see the sufferers indemnified. They were in hopes of a
rupture being produced between Britain and America, and they are now foaming at
their disappointment.

To this charge respecting blockades and the seizure of American vessels, may
be added that which Citizen Adet makes with regard to the impressment of seamen
from on board of those and other vessels.

The complaint against British impressments has so often been the subject of
public debate and private animadversion, that it would seem unnecessary to
dwell on it here; yet, as I do not recollect ever having seen it placed in a
fair point of view, to attempt doing it at this time can be productive of no
harm.

The impressed seamen were of two descriptions; British subjects and American
subjects, or (if my reader likes the term better) American citizens. Every man
belonging to a free state, whether monarchical or republican, may be called a
citizen, as a member of the society; but it is never improper to call him a
subject, when we speak of him as under subjection to the laws of the state. In
the present constitution of Massachusetts, the people are sometimes called
subjects and at others, citizens; and who is fool enough to believe, or
impudent enough to say, that they are less free than the people of the other
states?
This distinction is a very important one, because on it totally depends the
legality or illegality of the impressment.

It is an established and universally acknowledged principle, that, to the
lawful sovereign power of the state, or, in other words, the state itself, in
which a man is born, he owes allegiance to the day of his death; unless
exempted therefrom by the consent of that sovereign power. This principle is
laid down by nature herself, and is supported by justice and general policy. A
man, who is not dead to every sentiment that distinguishes him from the brute,
feels himself attached to his native land by ties but very little weaker than
those which bind him to his parents, and he who can deny the one will make
little scruple of denying the other. For the truth of the former remark, I
appeal to the heart of my reader, and for the truth of the latter, to his daily
observation. -- Who would not regard as a monster, the ungrateful wretch that
should declare he was no longer the son of his father? And yet this is but one
step from pretending to shake off his allegiance to his country. Such
declarations may be made, but the debt of duty and allegiance remains
undiminished.

And is it not just that the state which has bred, nourished and protected you,
should have a title to your allegiance? A fool might say, as I heard a
philosophical fool lately say, with Goodwin's political justice in his hand; I
could not avoid being born in your state. But, ungrateful fool, the state might
have avoided sheltering you under its wings, and suffering you to grow up to
manhood. It might have expelled you the society, cast you out to live among the
beasts, or have thrown you into the sea, had it not been withheld by that law,
that justice, which now sanctions its claim on your allegiance. To say, that
you "never asked for protection," is the same thing as to say, that you never
asked to be born. Had your very first cry been a renunciation of protection, it
would not have invalidated the claim of the state; for you were protected in
your mother's womb. Should the state now withdraw its protection from you, and
leave you to the mercy of the plunderer and assassin, or drive you out from its
boundaries, without any forfeiture on your part; would you not exclaim against
such a step as an act of brutal injustice? And yet this is no more unjust than
for you to withdraw your allegiance, cast the state from you, and leave it to
the mercy of its foes. The obligation here is perfectly reciprocal; as the
state cannot, by its own arbitrary will, withhold that protection which is the
birthright of every individual subject, so no subject can, by his arbitrary
will, alienate that allegiance which is the right of the state.

The general policy too, the mutual interest of nations, in supporting this
principle, is so evident, that nothing but the influence of the wild and
barbarian doctrines of the regenerated French can account for its having been
disputed. -- If men could alienate their allegiance at pleasure, they could
also transfer it at pleasure and then, into what confusion would not mankind be
plunged? Where should we look for the distinctive mark of nations, and where
find the standard of right and of duty?

Let us illustrate the excellence of this policy by an example of what might
result from its contrary, and at the same time bring the question home to
America. -- It is very natural that the people of this country should wish to
draw the seamen from other countries and claim them as hers, but let us see how
this doctrine would suit when brought into operation against herself. --
Suppose a war (which God forbid) should break out between America and Great
Britain, and that some of the citizens or subjects of these states should be
found on board the enemy's vessels making war upon their country; in this case,
America would have no right to punish them, according to the new doctrine, if
they declared that they had transferred their allegiance to Britain. We may
bring the evil still nearer to our doors, and assert, that even deserters to an
enemy, landed in the country, would also claim exemption from punishment. -- It
will not do to say, that this would be treason. If allegiance be transferrable,
the transfer may take place for all purposes, at all times, and in all places;
for war as well as for peace; in the hour of danger as well as in the hour of
security; on this side of the sea as well as on the other; in the camp as well
as in the city. -- This wild doctrine once established, treason would become a
duty, or rather there could be no such thing as a traitor in the world. The
barriers of society would be broken into shivers: the discontented of every
community would be tempted, and would moreover have a right, to abandon, betray
and make war upon their country.

Applying what has been said to the complaint now before us, we shall find,
that the people residing in these States at the time their independence was
acknowledged, and those who have been born in them since that time, are not
subjects of Great Britain; and that, all who have emigrated from the dominions
of Britain since that epoch are her subjects. It is very certain that nearly
all the impressed seamen were of this latter description, and were therefore
still subject to the laws of their country and the regulations of their
sovereign, when found in any part of his or his enemy's dominions, or upon the
high seas. These regulations authorized his officers to impress them, and
therefore they were impressed. That their impressment was frequently a very
great loss to their employers might be subject of regret, but the government of
the United States had no more right to complain of it, than that of Britain had
to complain of their being employed.

The heathenish French are certainly the last people in the world to hold up as
an example to Christian nations; but, where their practice is so exactly
contrary to the principles they pretend to profess, it is worth noticing. --
Let it be observed, then, that they have taken thousands of their emigrants,
without the limits of their territory, who had renounced their protection; yet
every soul of them were put to the sword; not as Austrians, English or Dutch,
but as Frenchmen, who still owed allegiance to France, and as such were dealt
with as traitors. Now I humbly request the Citizen minister of the "terrible"
bloody nation to tell me, what claim France had to the allegiance of these
emigrants, if Britain had none to her emigrated sailors? It will not serve his
turn, to say that they were found with arms in their hands, that circumstance
alone could not render them subjects of France; and besides, the British
sailors might have been found in arms too: a neutral allegiance is no
allegiance at all.

But, to come still closer to the point; the French seized several of their
emigrants without arms in their hands, on the high seas, pursuing their
peaceable commerce, on board of neutral vessels too, yea even on board of
American vessels. Every man of these they also put to death; some they dragged
on shore to the guillotine, others they threw into the sea alive, and others
they hewed down with their sabres. Therefore, unless Citizen Adet will frankly
declare, like a good full-blooded sans-culotte, that it is justifiable for a
nation to claim the allegiance and seize on the persons of its Emigrants, only
for the purpose of cutting their throats, I must insist that the practice of
his nation gives the lie direct to the principle on which his charge is founded.

It is a phenomenon in politics for a French minister to exert his humane
influence in behalf of British subjects. How kind it was of the Convention to
endeavor to extend their fatherly protection to these impressed seamen! With
what a philanthropic warmth they express their concern for them! They are
devilish careful of the bacon of a British tar, when they want to prevent him
from being brought into action against them; but when they have got him in
their clutches they are not quite so tender of him. They have starved thousands
of British prisoners this war. They were fed on rotten herbage for months
together. They crammed them into dungeons, or rather charnel houses, and gave
them limed water to moisten their dirty food. Above three thousand of these
poor fellows, expired with burning entrails, in the different seaports of the
treacherous and inhuman republic, only because they remained faithful to their
country and loyal to their king.

I now come to the other description of impressed seamen: those who owed
allegiance to America alone. And here I frankly declare, that I believe, many
acts of rudeness, insolence, and even tyranny, have been committed by
particular officers; for there are some of them that would press their own
mothers, if they were capable of standing before the mast. But, I can never
credit all the lamentable stories that the hirelings of France have so
industriously propagated on this subject. After a most piteous and pitiful
picture of the distresses of the impressed seamen, drawn by that able painter,
the taper-limbed and golden-hued Adonis of New York, who has been aptly enough
compared to a poplar tree in autumn; after as vigilant and spiteful an inquiry
as ever was prosecuted by the spirit of faction, not more than five or six
impressed seamen, of the description we are now speaking of, could be named;
and with respect to these, the report of the secretary of state proved, that,
where proper application had been made for their enlargement, it had always
been immediately attended to, and had produced the desired effect.

It was in the course of this memorable investigation, that the generous Mr.
Livingston proposed to furnish the British seamen, on board American vessels,
with certificates of naturalization. These were intended to operate as a charm
on the paws and bludgeons of the English press-gangs, or, at least, it is
difficult to conceive for what other purpose they were intended. Was there any
man in Congress fool enough imagine, that the just claims of one nation could
be annulled by the production of bits of sealed paper given to her subjects by
another nation? The particular act, or the general law, by which foreigners are
naturalized, may admit them to a participation in all the privileges and
immunities enjoyed by the citizens of the state adopting them (which is,
indeed, the sole end of naturalization), but can never weaken the claim of the
parent state; otherwise traitors and deserters, by producing certificates of
naturalization, might bid defiance to the just vengeance of their injured
country.

As to the measures taken by the Federal Government, relative to the impressed
seamen, they were such as the peculiar situation of America rendered wise. Mr.
Jay endeavored to obtain a stipulation, by which British seamen, found on
board American vessels, would have been exempted from the operation of the
impress orders. This Great Britain refused, for the same reason that nations as
well as individuals generally refuse to make a gratuitous sacrifice of what
belongs to them. Agents have since been appointed to attend to impressments,
and when their interposition is warranted by the state of the case, there is
every appearance that it will be productive of the end proposed, and that both
parties will readily cooperate for the preservation of harmony.

But, it is this cursed harmony that Citizen Adet and his masters do not
approve of. They wish the government of the United States to imitate them,
assume the tone of bullies, and so get into a war; or, at least, they wish
Great Britain to be compelled to relinquish her claim to her sailors, while she
stands in need of them to fight against her enemies. The former of these will
not happen, in spite of French envy and malice; and as to the latter, it will
never take place while Britain is able to beat France, Spain and Holland, on
the seas, and that I trust she will be as long as there are men of war in the
world and seas for them to fight on.

Thus far have I proceeded on this subject for the satisfaction of my reader:
what remains to be said on it is intended for the satisfaction of Citizen Adet
alone. -- And now then, you terrible Envoy of the "terrible nation," be so
polite for once as to tell me, what business you, or your worthy predecessors,
had to meddle or make with the impressment of American sailors. Your reading
does not, indeed, seem to be very deep or extensive; but, if you have not read
Grotius or Puffendorff, or any other civilian that treats of the sovereignty
and independence of nations, you may probably have dipped into the Mock Doctor
(which is a translation from your own comic poet), and if so, you must remember
the fate of the fool that interfered in the disputes of other people. -- You
tell us, that Fauchet, writing to our government, asked: What account do you
conceive I can render to the French government, of the means you take for
rendering your neutrality respectable? -- This, my good mounseer, is not
language to be used to an independent nation: it is the style of a
schoolmaster to his idle scholar, of a guardian to his childish or profligate
ward, or rather of a steward to the crouching vassals of his and their lord and
master. Yet you have had the assurance to repeat the question, couched in still
more hectoring and menacing terms, and pretend to be offended because the
government has not deigned to make you a reply. -- When your Convention were
dragging their sovereign to a mock trial, and condemning him to an ignominious
death, in open defiance of all law and justice; cutting off his unfortunate
sister and queen, after having drenched them with the dregs of humiliation, ten
times bitterer than death; cramming his son, an innocent child, into a dungeon,
ordering him to be kept from sleep, and finally -- my pen refuses to trace the
dastardly, the horrid deed. When they were butchering, by thousands, the
faithful inhabitants of Lions, and the brave peasants of La Vendee, whose names
will be remembered with honor and renown, when their assassins will be howling
in hell; when they were in the midst of this base and bloody work, what would
they have said, had the government of America called on them to hold their
hands? Would they not have rejected the interposition with scorn? Would they
not have added the Envoy to the group of an execution or the cargo of a
drowning boat? -- By what article of the rights of man then, do they assume to
themselves the office of Dictators to this free and independent nation? The
assumption is an outrage on every principle of nature, of law, of justice and
of policy: it can be surpassed by nothing on the annals of arrogance, and can
be equalled only by the impudence with which it is attempted to be exercised.

Dismissing this charge respecting impressed seamen, the length of my
observations on which I am afraid has wearied my reader, I proceed to the
remaining ones, on which I promise to be more concise.

6. The Federal Government eluded all the advances made by the French Republic
for renewing the treaties of commerce upon a more favorable footing to both
nations.

What does this learned Citizen mean by treaties of commerce? This country has
but one treaty of commerce with France: the other is a treaty "eventual and
defensive." Perhaps, indeed, he may regard war as a species of commerce; and it
must be allowed that this is the only commerce that can be carried on with his
terrible republic at present. The kind of trucking commerce that she is
carrying on in Italy, where she purchases a statue or a picture with the lives
of ten thousand soldiers, may, to her, be advantageous enough, because she is a
rich lady and a virtuoso; but to America, who is a plain homely dame, and has
but little taste for such fine things, this commerce has but few charms: to
her, one live farmer is of higher estimation than all the heroes and gods of
antiquity.

I rather think, however, that Citizen Adet, ignorant as he may be, knows that
a defensive treaty is not a treaty of commerce; and if so, he must know that
there was but one treaty of commerce between the countries. But there were two
treaties to be renewed, and, as it has always been held up to the people here,
that their dear friends of France did not wish their prosperity to be
interrupted by taking a part in the war, it would not do to talk about renewing
a defensive treaty; that would have smelt of powder: yet he could not say, that
the treaty of commerce only was proposed to be renewed, and so he has called
them both treaties of commerce. The Citizen was hemmed in between a lie and an
absurdity, and, to the credit of his morality, he has chosen the latter.

That the ground work of a new treaty, or a renewed treaty, with France, was to
be our going to war with her enemies, has been so often and so incontestibly
proved, that the fact is now universally acknowledged, except by the
stipendaries of that pure-principled republic. But, were a proof yet wanting,
Citizen Adet has furnished it, in the last page of his Diplomatic Blunderbuss.
Here he tells us, that both Genet and Fauchet used their utmost to draw the
government into a negotiation, but in vain; that it eluded all their friendly
overtures. -- Yes, and so it did indeed; just as the sheep eludes the friendly
overtures of the wolf, and for much about the same reason.

After relating the grievous disappointment of his importunate predecessors,
the Citizen goes on, and says that he himself also made the same overtures for
a negotiation, and adds:

On this subject the president authorized the secretary of state, who explained
to the undersigned the manner in which they could proceed in it. But at what
time? When the ratification of the treaty concluded between Lord Grenville and
Mr. Jay no longer permitted the undersigned to pursue that negotiation, -- And
why not? -- Why not go on man? If you had nothing to propose but treaties of
commerce, upon a footing more favorable to both nations, how could the treaty
with Great Britain prevent the pursuit of your negotiation? -- The reason is
plain: this treaty had happily put an end to all the disputes between America
and Britain, and left you no room to hope that your negotiation would rekindle
the embers of discord. It was this consideration, and this alone, that thwarted
your negociations, that has since set the gall of your masters afloat, and that
has now brought forth your impudent appeal from the government to the people.

The only question for the people to determine, then, is -- not whether they
wished the treaties to be renewed, but whether they wished for war, or not; and
this question they have already determined in the negative. There once stood a
majority in Congress ready to set the British treaty aside, and plunge this
country into a war with that nation. A pause ensued: the people, the real
people, had time to rally their good sense and break the hostile phalanx. Peace
was echoed from every quarter of the Union. Baffle the projects of our
insidious friends, fulfill our engagements, keep our honor untarnished, and
preserve to us the blessings of peace. This was the voice of the people of
America, and, whatever opinion the Envoy of the "terrible nation" may
entertain, his noisy Blunderbuss will not scare them into a revocation of the
solemn decision.

But, after all, admitting for a moment, that the renewed treaty was not to
engage this country in the war; nay, even admitting what is impossible, that
the ferocious tyrants of France were about to confer a favor on us; how long,
I pray, has it been a crime to refuse a favor? Every one has surely a right to
say: no, I thank you. Yet this right, that is blamelessly exercised by the
beggar at the door, is denied to the government of America! There are, indeed,
certain nameless favors that a man cannot refuse, with any hope of
forgiveness; and it would seem, that the French Republic looks upon herself in
the light of a battered harridan despised by a lusty youth, and that she is now
fulfilling the maxim of Zara: "Heaven has no scourge like love to hatred turned,
"Or hell a fury like a woman scorned."
And thus she flings off the stage, shaking her dishevelled locks and
brandishing her bloody dagger. -- Let the meddling, jealous, blood-thirsty
termagant go, and let Citizen Adet follow her in quality of train-bearer.

Thank God, we are at last come to the closing article of accusation.

7. The Federal Government anticipated Great Britain, by soliciting a treaty;
in which treaty it prostituted its neutrality; it sacrificed France to her
enemies, or rather, looking upon her as obliterated from the chart [map] of the
world, it forgot the services she had rendered it, and threw aside the duty of
gratitude, as if ingratitude was a governmental duty.

This is a complicated charge, comprising the crimes of meanness, prostitution,
treachery and ingratitude. The meanness of anticipating Great Britain, by
soliciting a treaty, shall not detain us long. -- When two nations form a
treaty, it is clear that one or the other must make the first overtures, or the
business could never be begun, and consequently never ended. I believe,
therefore, that making the first proposition for a treaty, and particularly a
treaty of commerce, was never before construed into an act of meanness. As for
soliciting, this word, by which the Citizen wishes to convey an insinuation
that Mr. Jay was haughtily received, at first rejected, and at last obliged to
approach with humiliating condescension, nothing can be farther from the truth.
His business was, to demand reparation of the wrongs sustained by America. When
these were made known, Great Britain had her wrongs to oppose to them. Both
parties were, as their interests dictated, equally desirous of an
accommodation; and this desire was productive of a treaty, settling all old
disputes, and making provisions for the avoiding of new ones. Now, I pray, in
this simple and natural process, what is there to be discovered of meanness or
humble solicitation?

It is ever the fate of an inconsistency in words and actions, to expose itself
to detection. -- Citizen Adet accuses the American government of meanness, in
anticipating Britain by soliciting a treaty of commerce, while, in the very
same note, he takes a wonderful deal of pains to prove to the people here, that
the French government not only anticipated America by soliciting a treaty, but
also, that, after two successive ministers had solicited it in vain, the
solicitation was continued by a third. God forbid I should attempt to justify
America by the example of France; but, if soliciting a treaty be a crime, I beg
the Citizen will take it from us and lay it respectfully at the feet of his
terrible republic.

The charge proceeds to assert, that the government prostituted its neutrality,
and sacrificed France to her enemies. -- This is too vague to be taken up as it
lies before us; except, indeed, it be the word prostituted, which may be
dismissed at once, by observing that it must have been picked up in the
purlieus of the Palais-Royal, a place of which the Irish-Town of Philadelphia
is a picture in miniature. To avoid the indecency therefore of joining it with
the American government, I shall supply its place by the word gave up.

What the polite Citizen chiefly alludes to then, in saying, that the
government gave up its neutrality and sacrificed France to her enemies, is,
that article of the British treaty which contains the stipulation respecting an
enemy's goods, found on board the vessels of the United States, when these
latter are neutral, with respect to Great Britain.

Want of room prevents me from entering fully into this subject, or I should
not despair of stripping off all the million of absurdities, misrepresentations
and downright falsehoods, in which the prostituted (here this word sounds well)
partisans of France have disguised it. Perhaps, however, if I should be so
happy as to place it in a clear light, brevity may be no disadvantage.

The stipulation of the treaty which we are about to examine, in substance
says, that an enemy's goods found on board the vessels of the contracting
parties, shall be looked upon as lawful prize. This, says Citizen Adet, is a
violation of the modern law of nations; and this, says the government, is no
such thing. As here is a flat contradiction, somebody must tell a lie; who it
is I know not, but I am sure it is not the government at any rate.

Within what limits Citizen Adet means to circumscribe the word modern, I
cannot exactly ascertain; but as, in another part of his Blunderbuss, he calls
France the ancient ally of America, and as it is well known that this alliance
began but eighteen years and ten months ago, it is probable he looks upon that
only as the modern law of nations which commenced its operation at some time
posterior to that epoch. Indeed, it is pretty clear that he supposes the modern
law of nations to date its beginning from what he calls the New Style; and, in
that case, thank heaven, we are ancients yet.

But, however cramped the signification may be, that this son of Floreal and
Fructidor pleases to give to the word modern, we Christians know, that the
modern law of nations means, that public law, or rather practice, which the
modern nations of Europe have observed toward each other. Now, with respect to
commerce with an enemy, whoever examines the best writers on the subject, will
find that, long since these nations assumed nearly their present relative
state, it was the general practice to prohibit all trade whatever with an enemy.

As the nations grew more polished, and as their relations increased by means
of maritime commerce, the rigor of this practice was gradually softened, till
confiscation was at last confined to the vessels and property of enemies, to
certain articles termed contraband of war, and to the property of enemies found
on board of neutral vessels.

Thus far the relaxation became pretty general about the time of Queen
Elizabeth. But some powers wished to extend the freedom of commerce still
further; even so far as to protect enemies' goods found on board of neutral
vessels; and to do this the Queen of England was one of the first to assert her
right. The right was, however, disputed, and that too by the United Provinces,
even before their independence was fully assured. They took some of her vessels
laden with Spanish property, and condemned the cargoes, without paying
freightage. The Queen at first resented this conduct in an infant state that
was chiefly indebted to her for support; but, notwithstanding the well known
tenacity and imperiousness of her disposition, her wisdom and justice
prevailed, and she at last acquiesced in the legality of the captures. -- Here
then we have an instance of the practice of a nation of modern birth, a
republic also, and a republic engaged in a revolutionary war.

I have at least a hundred examples of this nature now before me. But let us
descend to still more modern times, and that the example may be, if possible,
yet more strikingly applicable, let us appeal to the practice of the French
nation itself. -- The famous Ordinance of 1681, which might be called the
navigation act of France, expressly declared to be good prize, not only the
enemy's goods on board of a neutral vessel, but the neutral vessel also.

We are now got down to the close of the last century; but as that may not be
quite modern enough for our Decadery Mounseer, let us continue to descend,
still continuing our appeal to the practice of his own country. -- The
Ordinance of 1681 was mitigated by successive treaties, in which France,
according as her interest prescribed, refused, or granted, the permission which
Citizen Adet now sets up as a right: but, after these treaties, and even so
late as 1757, she declared to the republic of Holland, that if any goods
belonging to her enemy were found on board of Dutch vessels, such goods should
be condemned as good prize, and to this declaration her practice was
conformable, during the whole war which ended in 1763, only thirty-three years
ago. So that, unless this man of the "New Style" will absolutely sans-culotte
us, and insist upon it that our fathers were antediluvians, and that we
ourselves were born in the ages of antiquity, we must insist, on our part, that
the principle adhered to in the treaty between Great Britain and America, is a
principle of the modern law of nations, and moreover is sanctioned by the
practice of France.

But, says the Citizen, France adopted a different principle in her treaty with
America. -- France had her interested motives for that, of which I could say a
great deal more if I pleased. Let that be as it may; what had her treaty to do
with Great Britain? She is independent I hope, if America is not. France did
not "work her liberty" too, I humbly presume; and I presume also, that the
treaty between America and France is not the code to which all the modern
nations are to appeal for a decision of their rights. -- The fact is, this
principle is either adopted, or not adopted, according to the interests and
situations of the contracting parties: as these vary, nations act differently
at different times and toward different nations. It is a matter merely
conventional and solely dependent on circumstances, as much as any other
stipulation of a treaty.

The Citizen has one more fetch; which I think is the most impudent piece of
sophistry that ever was attempted to be palmed upon a nation. A nation, did I
say! Why, a nation of Indians would have tomahawked him, and we should now see
his skin hanging up in the shops for sale, had he offered to chouse them in
such a barefaced manner. -- I allude to that part of his Blunderbuss, where he
says, that America violated her treaty with France, by granting to Britain the
favor of seizure, which she had not granted to France, though she was to be
treated in the same manner as "the most favored nation."

The sophistry of this consists in confounding favor with right, terms almost
as opposite in signification as right and wrong. -- America conferred no
favor, when, by treaty, she declared that Great Britain should seize enemies'
goods on board of her vessels: she only acknowledged the existence of Great
Britain's right so to do. Nor was this acknowledgment absolutely necessary:
but, some nations having retained the exercise of the right and others having
relinquished it, it was a prudent precaution against future disputes, to
declare, by express stipulation, whether it was retained or relinquished in the
present instance.

It is clear therefore, that the stipulation in the treaty with France, which
says, that she shall be treated in the same manner as the most favored nation,
must be totally inapplicable to a case, wherein no favor is, or can be,
conferred. However, as the construction given to this has been the groundwork
of much complaint and even calumny, it may not be amiss here to explain its
true meaning.

The stipulation for equal favor then, which is to be found in most treaties
of commerce now existing in the world, extends to the effects of the municipal
laws and regulations of the contracting parties. It implies an equality in
duties, in tonnage, in the permission to have consuls; all which, and many
others, may properly be called favors: but, it can never be construed to
extend to any one of the great rights of national sovereignty. If this were the
case, all the advantageous stipulations of a treaty made with one power, would
be applicable to every other power, in a treaty with which this usual
stipulation for equal favor was found: and of this we shall see the monstrous
absurdity in a minute. -- America, for instance, has treaties with Spain, Great
Britain and France, in all which the stipulation for equal favor exists. In
the treaty with Spain, America allows to that nation a free navigation on the
American part of the Mississippi; but does she allow this to Britain and
France? In that with Great Britain, America allows her a free navigation and
trade on her rivers, lakes, etc. and Britain allows the same freedom to America
on hers; but does either of them extend this permission to France or Spain, or
any other nation? Yet they are obliged to do this, if the stipulation for equal
favor admits of the construction, which the maritime Goths wish to impose on
us, in support of their attack on the commerce of America.

The subject then is thus brought to a close: the seizure of an enemy's goods
on board of neutral vessels is a right of national sovereignty, which every
independent nation may, in her treaties, retain or give up, according to the
dictates of her interests or her will. In the treaty between Britain and
America this right is reciprocally retained; in that between America and France
it is reciprocally given up. Great Britain naturally adheres to her treaty;
America adheres to hers with both nations; and it only remains for us to see
how that between America and France has been adhered to, by the despots who
have seized on the wealth and the power of that unfortunate nation.

Soon after the commencement of the present war, the Convention ordered all
enemy's goods on board of American vessels to be seized, notwithstanding the
positive stipulation to the contrary. This order, dictated by the insolence of
success, was consequently revoked, when the scale of victory turned. After
this, the famished state, to which the infernal revolution had reduced that
once flourishing country, and the farce of friendship which it was necessary to
keep up, in order to engage this country in the war, for some time withheld the
Convention from further depredations on our commerce: but, being baffled in
their war project by the treaty with Britain, and imagining (vainly I trust)
that America would be terrified by their victories, and the consequences these
might produce, they issued on the 2d of July last, a decree for renewing their
spoliations, and for seizing all enemy's property on board of American vessels,
which decree Citizen Adet communicated to the Secretary of State, and to the
people, on the 27th of October.

The perfidy and tyranny of this conduct are nothing, when compared to the
manner in which they are brazened out. -- The Citizen first sends the Secretary
of State a Note, enclosing the unprincipled decree. The Secretary, in answer,
expresses the uneasiness of the President, at such a flagrant violation of the
treaty. To this the Frenchman has the assurance to reply, that it is the
resolution of a government terrible to its enemies, but generous to its allies;
and, as he elsewhere calls the government of America the enemy of France, he
menacingly leaves us to conclude, that generosity is to be the portion of
others, while dreadful chastisement is in reserve for us. -- We may pardon the
threats of a simple bully; we may even forgive a sharper or a robber, but when
he has the impudence to justify his conduct, and that too with his filthy fist
at our mouths, there is no degree of resentment, no mortal means of vengeance,
adequate to the insult.

Thus have I had patience to go through the mock charges, which the despots of
France have dared to prefer against the free, equitable and beneficent
government of America. I shall take the liberty of adding a few miscellaneous
observations, which would be dispensed with, fearing the reader is already too
much fatigued, did not the crisis of affairs seem to demand them now, or never.

The first thing that calls, and most loudly calls, for reprobation, is, the
contemptuous manner in which the Frenchman treated the government, by
communicating his Notes to the people, at the same time, or before, they were
received by the President.

The sole right of making communications of this nature to the people of a
state, so evidently belongs to its government, and is so essential to the very
existence of every government, that it is not surprising, that the first
violation of it should have been reserved for the heathenish French. Former
barbarians ever respected this right: the laws of decency had some influence on
their uncultivated minds; but the barbarians, or rather the savages, of Paris,
have set those and all other laws, human and divine, at defiance. They seem to
lock upon themselves as the children of the devil, and to have assumed, in
virtue of their father, the right of prowling about the earth, disturbing the
peace of mankind, by scattering the seeds of rebellion and bloodshed.

Their agents have long been practicing their fiend-like temptations on the
people of this country. They have proceeded from one degree of malice to
another, till at last their late Minister Adet (for whom I wish I could find a
name worse than his own) makes a direct attempt to inflame the people against
the government. -- After telling them, that the Convention has ordered their
vessels to be seized (contrary to treaty), he proceeds: And now, if the
execution of these measures gives rise to complaints in the United States, it
is not against France they should be directed, but against those men, who have
entered into negociations contrary to the interests of their country. -- Just
as if he had said, pointing to the President, the Senate and Officers of State:
there they are; rise on them, cut their throats, and choose others more pliant
to our will. -- His words do not amount to this, it is true; but in his country
a hint far less intelligible, would have been perfectly understood, and would
not have failed of the desired effect. Happily he was not haranguing a Parisian
mob. Whatever foolish partiality some of us may have had, and may yet have for
France, nature has been so kind as not to make us Frenchmen.

The insult on the people too; the despicable opinion he must have of their
understandings and their hearts, is past all bearing. -- I know a little
Island, which America was once proud to emulate, that would suffer itself to be
sunk into the sea, rather than patiently put up with such an abominable
outrage. -- In the reign of Queen Ann, when a Tory Ministry, aided by an
intriguing Frenchman, were treating for a separate peace with Louis XIV. the
Imperial Minister, Count Gallas, in order to prepossess the people of England
against the peace, caused the transaction to be published, as an article of
news, in one of the daily papers. This step, though it could not be looked upon
as an appeal to the people, was so much resented by the Queen, that she ordered
him to quit the kingdom immediately; and in this she was supported by the
unanimous voice of the nation; who, notwithstanding they disapproved of a peace
which was to sacrifice the great advantages obtained by their arms under the
immortal Duke of Marlborough, justly and manfully resented the attempt of a
foreign minister to step in between them and their own sovereign, however
blameable her measures might be.

And, shall it be said of the people of America, that they are less attached to
a government of their own choosing, and that has never for a moment lost sight
of their interests? No; it would be unjust to say this. The people are
impatient of the insult, and their confidence in the wisdom of their chief is
the only thing that could keep them pacified.

To express a hatred to the government and affect friendship for the people who
live under it, and thus arraign the former at the bar of the latter, is the
unbearable tone which the despots of Paris have assumed to all the nations of
Europe; and at lost it is come to the turn of America. They did not declare war
against the Germans, the English and the Dutch; but against the Emperor, the
King of England, and the Stadtholder. The Germans and the English did not
believe them; they knew them of old. The Dutch sucked in the bait, and now they
know them too. They have paid dearly for the fraternal hug. God send they may
squeeze them to the size of shotten herrings; that they may not leave even a
frog to sport in their canals; that they may eat up the very herbage, like the
locusts in Egypt. These poor degraded devils, who never ceased their clamours
for liberty and equality, till they had driven into exile the princely family
of Orange, to whom they owed the birth and the preservation of their real
liberties, their riches and their power, are now obliged to yield their houses
and even their beds to the filthy ragga-muffin sans-culottes. -- This may be
truly called political justice, and I sincerely hope it may fall on the heads
of every people capable of acting the same treacherous and dastardly part. That
this part will not be acted by America I am certain, and if Citizen Adet had
known the dispositions of the people, he never would have dared to hold out the
temptation.

After the perfidy, injustice and malice we have been witness of, it would seem
strange to hear any other than a Frenchman talking about French friendship. --
I, for my part, had long wished to know in what this friendship consisted. I
had often heard of it and read of it and read about it, especially in Poor
Richard's gazette; but never could discern any thing palpable in it. It all
seemed to consist in negatives. It appeared something like platonic love; or
like the girl that brought a fortune of twenty thousand pounds in the
excellence of her disposition. -- As my mind is too gross to be satisfied with
this abstract kind of friendship, I was led to seek for something more solid in
the Citizen's Notes. The reader will see how I was disappointed. The alliance
with America, says he, was always dear to Frenchmen; they have done every thing
to tighten its bands. -- Just as the Jack Catch does; and we were one time
actually upon the point of strangling. -- But the government has sought to
break them. -- Here Is a fellow for you! They were tucking us up, and he has the
conscience to blame the government for cutting the halter! -- Again: As soon as
the war broke out between France and England, American vessels were permitted
to trade to the West Indies and France, upon the same footing as French
vessels. -- All that is wanting to make this an act of friendship, is, the
permission should have been granted before the war broke out. After it broke
out, both the Islands and France must have starved, if an advantage had not
been offered to draw American produce to them; and even this has been a losing
game; for one half of this produce has never been paid for in Christian coin.
So that, the great act of friendship amounts to our liberty of keeping
themselves from starving and of receiving bundles of assignats as a recompense.
-- The French government heard the complaints of the United States, against
Genet, and immediately gave the most striking reparation. -- It was certainly
very gracious in them to hear these complaints, and a very striking reparation
to suffer Genet to remain here to insult the government by his presence; but,
if I am not mistaken, this gracious condescension was in consequence of Genet's
threatening to do of his own head, just what Adet has now done, by their order;
appeal from the government to the people. Hence we must inevitably conclude,
that Genet was displaced because he did not go far enough, or because he
deprived them of the pleasure of dragooning us; and this I take to be no very
great proof of family affection. -- We are now coming to the close, the very
bottom of the budget of friendship; the reception of the American flag, by the
Convention. -- What joy did not the American flag inspire, when it waved
unfurled in the French Senate! Tender tears trickled from each eye. Every one
looked at it with amazement. There, said they, is the symbol of the
independence of our American brethren. -- Shameful farce! The flag was received
as a symbol of voluntary subjection, instead of independence; and, had I been
President, the Ambassador who dared to give color to such an idea, should not
have had it in his power to degrade his country a second time.

It must have been curious to see the tender tears trickling from the eyes of
Robespierre and the rest of those sanguinary villains, who were daily employed
in butchering the human species, tearing out their entrails, biting their
hearts and lapping their gore. They wept blood instead of brine, I suppose.

When you go home, Citizen Adet, to your "terrible nation," which I hope in God
will be very soon, I will send, to those of your weepers whom the justice of
heaven has not yet overtaken, a copy of the Bloody Buoy: they will see
something there that has drawn tears from the eyes of Americans, and that has
made too deep an impression on their hearts to be worn away even by the hand of
time. This compendium of tyranny, brutality, ferociousness and infamy, is read
by the rising generation of America: it sinks into the memory as the plummet
into the stream, and, till the plummet shall glide along the surface like a
feather, the name of French Republican will awaken the idea of all that is
perfidious and bloody minded.

The trickling tears of the Convention, at the sight of a bit of linsy-woolsy,
puts me in mind of Mark Anthony and his mob of blubbering plebians. "Kind
souls!" says he, do you weep at the sight of Caesar's garment only? What will
you do then, when you see Caesar himself. Upon which he shows them the corpse,
and the rascals, who would have knocked his brains out if he had not been dead,
begin bellowing like so many town bulls round a buxom heifer. -- The Convention
would not have acted this silly part by America. If they could have got "Caesar
himself" under their clutches, they would have completed the farce of the
Crocodile; dried up their tears and fell to cracking our bones.

Whether the French Convention did really cry, or whether the tears flowed, or
rather trickled, from the leaky imagination of Citizen Adet, I know not; but
this I know, that the reception of their flag produced just a contrary effect
here. What makes them weep, makes us laugh; and what makes them laugh makes us
weep. Thank heaven, we are exactly their opposite in every thing!

From French tenderness we naturally turn to British barbarity. They form a
contrast like the gem and the foil, and therefore the Citizen, who is at once a
statesman and an orator, has, with great art and judgment, contrived to squeeze
them close together in the peroration of his Blunderbuss. "Alas!" says he, time
has not yet demolished the fortifications with which the English roughened this
country -- nor those the Americans raised for their defense; their half rounded
summits still appear in every quarter, amidst plains on the tops of mountains.
The traveller need not search for the ditch which served to encompass them; it
is still open under his feet. Scattered ruins of houses laid waste, which the
fire had partly respected, in order to leave monuments of British fury, are
still to be found. -- Men still exist, who can say, here a ferocious Englishman
slaughtered my father; there my wife tore her bleeding daughter from the hands
of an unbridled Englishman. Alas! the soldiers who fell under the sword of the
Britons are not yet reduced to dust; the labourer, in turning up his field,
still draws from the bosom of the earth their whitened bones; while the
ploughman, with tears of tenderness and gratitude, still recollects that his
fields, now covered with rich harvests, have been moistened with French blood;
while every thing around the inhabitants of this country animates them to speak
of the tyranny of Great Britain and of the generosity of Frenchmen.

I have till now avoided quotations as much as possible; but I could not resist
the temptation to cull this fairest flower of the diplomatic posey. Some
imaginations are said to rush forward like a flood, others to flow like a
stream, and others to glide like a current; but poor Citizen Adet's neither
rushes, flows, nor glides: it trickles, like the eyes of his masters; it
drains, it dribbles, it drops. -- Dear Citizen, if you love me (of which I much
doubt, by the bye), never again employ your eloquence to rouse the passions;
for it lays them as completely as the cold hand of death. Instead of inflaming,
you freeze us: instead of firebrarnds, you turn us into icicles. -- No; when
you wish to excite the vengeful feelings; keep to your insolence; that is your
fort; there your talents will ever ensure you the same success as they have
done on the present occasion.

And were you so vain, so completely the Frenchman, as to imagine, that this
tasteless, turgid, hyperbolical nonsense of yours, would make the people of
America believe, that ferocity is the characteristic of Britons? A little
reflection might have told you that your malignant endeavors would be in vain.
Two-thirds of the inhabitants of these States are of British descent: they know
that the ashes of their forefathers sleep in the island of Britain. They know
also, that only twenty years ago they were justly proud of being called Britons
themselves; and though a political revolution has rendered that name no longer
proper, they know that no revolution has taken place in their national
character. To charge the British character with ferocity then, is saying to the
Americans: I do not call you a set of ferocious rascals; but you are of a d --
d ferocious breed.

To retaliate here would be superfluous; for the ferocity of the French is now
acknowledged by themselves even. But, when I hear a man talk about whitened
bones, and assert that every thing animates the inhabitants of this country to
speak of the tyranny of Britain and the generosity of Frenchmen, I am naturally
led to look back to the cruel and savage war, which these generous Frenchmen
carried on against the inhabitants of this country, and in which they would
have succeeded in exterminating the whole of them, had it not been for the
protecting tyranny of Britain.

In the charge of ferocity which Citizen Adet has brought against the British,
he contents himself with a flourish of mere hyperbole, as destitute of novelty
and elegance as it necessarily is of truth. He has attempted to produce not a
single fact in support of his slander, and for this best of reasons, because he
knew no such fact was to be found. I shall proceed in a different manner. I
shall give such damning proof of the generosity of Frenchmen toward the people
of America as will leave no room for denial.

During the savage war of 1757, above alluded to, when the French had formed a
chain of posts stretching from the Bay of Funday to the Mississippi, with the
intention of subjugating these states or else driving the people into the sea,
they took several forts, and, for a long time, had pretty general success: what
use they made of it, how generous they were, will appear from the following
account of their capture of Fort William-Henry. I am not about to repeat a
vague report. I am not even appealing to the history of England, or the
writings of Englishmen. I am going to copy what was said, written and printed,
by Americans themselves. I could apply to many American publications of the
time; but I choose, for many reasons, to draw this proof of the "generosity of
Frenchmen," from Doctor Franklin himself.

In his paper, published at Philadelphia on the 25th of August, 1757, after
saying that the fort surrendered by capitulation, with leave to march out with
the honors of war, he proceeds thus: The French immediately after the
capitulation, most perfidiously let their bloodhounds loose upon our people.
Some got off, the rest were stripped stark naked; many were killed and scalped,
officers not excepted. The throats of the women were cut, their bellies ripped
open, their bowels turned out, and thrown upon the faces of their yet
palpitating bodies. The children were taken by the heels, and their brains beat
out against the trees or stones, and not one of them saved.

The Doctor then observes, that this cruelty of the French is nothing new; for
that, they massacred several hundreds of General Braddock's wounded men, that
they murdered their prisoners near Ticonderoga, and all the sick and wounded of
the garrison of Oswego, notwithstanding the previous capitulation. He concludes
thus: To what a pitch of perfidy and cruelty is the French nation arrived!
Would not an ancient beathen shudder with horror on hearing so hideous a tale.
Could the most savage nations ever exceed such French barbarity? It is hard for
an Englishman to kill his enemy that lies at his feet, begging his life; but
will not our armed men in future be obliged to refuse all quarter? Consider of
it my countrymen; take advice, and speak your minds -- In another place the
Doctor exclaims, The Lord knows what French treachery will do. When shall we
have revenge!

I do not know Citizen Adet's person, I cannot therefore tell whether his
cheeks be covered with buff or not. From his notes, I should rather suppose
they are; but if they are not, he must blush himself to death upon comparing
the Old Doctor's account of French generosity with his own. -- He will say,
perhaps, that it was the French king, and not the nation, that these cruelties
must be attributed to. Well then, it is the king and not the nation, that the
aid this country received last war must be attributed to. In both instances,
the king was the director and his people the actors; with this remarkable
distinction, that, it is certain the troops that came to America were always
sent by him, while it is not certain that he ever ordered them to turn human
butchers when they got here.

Let us now take a view of the generosity of Frenchmen, toward America, from
the bloody times above mentioned to the present day.

When, by the united valor and persevarance of America and Britain, they were
driven from this continent, they laid in watch, as the devil is said to do when
he sees a happy couple, for an opportunity of effecting a separation between
the two countries. With this opportunity the folly of the British
administration soon furnished them. Yet they at first hesitated whether the
independence of this country would be advantageous to them or not: but,
revenge, and that great object of their policy, the humbling of their rival, at
last got the better; and the alliance with the United States was concluded on.
This step, however, did not take place till after the Congress had issued their
Declaration of Independence, and even after those victories were obtained,
which gave the decisive blow to the British power in America. -- Some of their
troops landed here; but what did they do? Citizen Adet tells us about "fields
moistened with French blood," and says, that "the ploughman now sheds tears of
tenderness," when he is turning them up. This is as silly as the talk of the
mad wench in one of Gay's farces, when she exclaims: O, dear delightful streams
of cream! Rivers of milk and seas of honey! -- French blood! I would be glad to
know how it was spilt, unless they poked spear-grass up their noses, like Sir
John Falstaff and his bullies. They did nothing here. They were never engaged.
They only seemed to come to look on a bit, and go home and brag about giving
liberty to America. Their fleets were out, to be sure; but they were fighting
(or rather running away) for France and not for America. Taking British Islands
in the West Indies was just as serviceable to this country then, as robbing the
peasants of Germany now is. -- So much for their warlike generosity.

As their object in making war had been to weaken Great Britain, and not to
render this country free and independent, so, when the terms of peace came to
be proposed, they soon made it appear, that they wished to transfer the
dependence from Britain to themselves. To this end they attempted to exclude
America from the fisheries on one side, and from the Western countries on the
other. This would have at all times exposed the States to the power of the
British, and the natural consequence would have been, a continual dependence on
France. It was owing to Messrs. John Adams and Jay that this was not effected,
and this is the reason why they are now so hated and abused by the French
faction. -- There Is generosity for you!

Thus far went the insidious friendship of the old government: that of the mock
republic has been a thousand times worse.

First they sent Genet to raise an insurrection in the country; but finding
that he had failed, they pretended to recall him; leaving him here, however, to
insult the government. Now they even justify all that he did, and complain of
the treatment he received.

Fauchet we find dabbling in the Western rebellion, and writing home to the
Convention, his regret that it had been quelled, and his fear that it might
tend to consolidate the government. Can any man be fool enough to imagine, that
Fauchet would have written in this manner, had he not been well assured, that
the Convention thought like himself?

If any one doubted of this before, he can now doubt no longer. Adet has thrown
off the mask for them. They repealed their first decree for seizing American
vessels; they pretended to be sorry for the insolence of Genet; but now they
repeat their decree, and make that very appeal to the people, which they
displaced Genet for talking about! Generous fellows! -- Who would have thought,
while they were weeping over our flag, and sending theirs to be wept over here,
and writing love letters to the Congress, and sending us their new plan for
weighing bread and butter by sines and tangents. Lord curse them! Who would
have thought, I say, while all this loving mummery was going forward; while
they were hugging and squeezing, and slavering over with snuff and foam, their
dear "American brethren;" who would have thought that no less than seven heads
of accusation lay rankling in their bosoms! -- "A friend," says Citizen Adet,
injured by a friend, may safely complain, without fear of giving offense. --
Yes; but then he must complain like a friend, and not like a bully. He must not
talk of his horsewhip or his cane. He must not come with terror in his mouth;
or friendship takes its flight, and resentment succeeds. Besides, "a friend
injured by a friend," complains at once: he does not treasure up the injury in
his mind, and reserve it for the day of his strength. He does not hug, and
kiss, and hang on the neck of his friend, and weep for joy at the sight of his
garment; he does not keep up this farce for four long years, and at last, when
he sees that hypocrisy avails him nothing, come and rip up his grievances, and
threaten vengeance. This is not the conduct of an injured friend, but that of
an insidious d -- d Iago, as Peter Pindar calls the French; and such they have
been, and will be, to this and every other country, that has the folly to place
any dependence in their friendship.

Their audacious interference, too, in the election of a chief magistrate for
this country, is another mark of their generosity, their tender care of us.
"Let your government return to itself," says the Citizen, and the Directory
will temper the effects of its resentment. -- I wonder what sort of fellows
this Directory, as they call it, is composed of: whether they are shaped like
gods or devils, or what they are like, that they should dare to talk in this
manner to an independent nation, that they have no more power over than they
have over heaven. What a poor beggarly puff, for a man as much fit to be a
President as I am to be an Archbishop! A man who is a deist by profession, a
philosopher by trade, and a Frenchman in politics and morality: a man who has
written a passport for Tom Paine's Rights of Man, and would, if necessary,
write another for his infamous letter to General Washington: a man, in short,
who is at the head of the prostituted party by whose intrigues he has been
brought forward and is supported. If this man is elected President, the country
is sold to the French; and as plantations are generally sold with the live
stock on them. I shall remove my carcass; for I am resolved never to become
their property. I do not wish my family vault to be in the guts of cannibals.

Paine's Letter to General Washington is the last pretty little proof of French
generosity. I have no room here to say any thing as to the contents of this
superlatively insolent and infamous performance; but it is clear that the old
ruffian has been ordered to write it by the Convention. It was written nearly
about the same time that the decree for seizing American vessels was passed; it
was expected that Adet's communications would stir up the people, and these
sweepings of Tom's brain were intended to finish the work: nor have I the least
doubt but they are now enjoying the hope, that General Washington's head is
kicking about the streets of Philadelphia.

Such has been "the generosity of Frenchmen" toward the people of America.
From the continuation of this generosity I think we have little to hope, and I
am certain we shall find that we have as little to fear from their resentment.

The dispute between the two countries stands thus: France has violated the
treaty, and impudently insists, that she will continue in the violation of it,
at the same time that her minister first insults the government, and then
declares himself suspended, till the government returns to itself. -- What then
is to be done? Statues and curiosities we have none to stop their mouths with;
unless, indeed, it be the Statue from over the library door. We might also
spare them Mr. Jefferson's pivot-chair and his great bull Mammoth; to which
they might add Mr. Jefferson himself, for it does not appear that he will be
wanted on this side the water. But this would not satisfy them. What is to be
done, then? Is the government to return to itself, beg pardon of the terrible
nation for having issued a proclamation of neutrality; for having declined a
treaty with them, and for having formed one with Great Britain? Is this to be
the conduct of America, whose chief boast is her independence? Is she to become
a poor little twinkling star that is to hide its head at the rays of the Grande
Republique Francoise? Is she at last to be governed by a gang of assassins with
their long couteau at her throat? A pretty kind of independence truly! If this
is to be the case, she has changed a British parent for a French master: from a
child in leading strings she has become a grown up slave in chains.

But this will not be the case. This government will insist upon the fulfillment
of the treaty, or will declare it null and void for ever. They will no longer
suffer the country to be tantalized with decrees and revocations and
suspensions and threats. They will say; Do us justice and leave us to manage
our own affairs, or we have done with you; and in this they will be supported
by the voice of the people, however Citizen Adet may flatter himself to the
contrary.

The terrible tone was the worst that the Guillotine Legislators could have
assumed here. It may do well enough with the Brabansons, the Dutch, the
Savoyards and the Italians; but it will never do with Americans, who of all
mankind are the last to yield to compulsion. The quarrel with Great Britain
which finally brought about the independence of this country, was merely about
the word force. The colonies were willing to give the amount of the taxes
imposed, but they would not suffer it to be said that they were forced to do
it. When I was a little boy, my elder brother, in order to get my share of the
apple pudding, used to say: "PETER, I order you to eat." -- That very instant
my jaws refused their functions, and the morsel stuck in my throat. To be sure
I was a most obstinate dog, and I am inclined to think that the Mounseers will
find their dear little Miss America to be much about of the same temper. The
people of this country are the descendants of Britons and Germans, and they are
made of the same stubborn kind of stuff as their ancestors. With good words you
may lead them far, but with bad ones not a single step: to their humanity you
may always appeal with assurance of success, but never to their fears: like the
oak they may be crushed and shivered to splinters, but no mortal power will
ever make them bend.

Some people imagine that France will declare war against us. France dares do
no such thing. France knows better. No; the most she will do, is, to persevere
in the violation of the treaty, and consequently break off all connection with
the United States; and this is just what is wanted. Then we should get rid of
the council of old ones and the council of young ones and the five sovereigns,
that are born and expire in rotation, and Citizen Genet and Citizen Adet, and
all the Faro bank and billiard table men, and all the dingy offspring of French
delicacy, and, which will be the greatest blessing, we shall get rid of the
monstrous unnatural faction that they keep alive to goad, torment, and weaken
the government, and divide the country against itself. Would they but break off
from us, we should avoid that degradation of manners, which their impious
system must inevitably produce, wherever it gains ground to any extent. Their
diabolical agents are now seeking for proselytes in every state and township of
the Union. I believe that Bache's atheistical Calendar is paid for by the
French, as much as I believe that Paine's Age of Reason was. They both come
from the same press, and are intended to answer the same purpose; and that
purpose is, to corrupt the hearts of the people, make them emulate the French
in every thing that is vile and savage; to destroy the government, and throw
the country into the power of France. There is much more to be apprehended here
than from their direct threats. Their wild and blasphemous doctrines will have
little effect on people of sense; but they may have, and they will have, as
they already have had, on ignorance and youth. Youth is ever caught with
novelty, and ambitious of superior discernment. The panders of Paris have
always addressed themselves to this part of society: they succeeded completely
in France, and I am much afraid their success has been but too promising here.
The sooner, therefore, the country is purged of them, the better. Every year,
every month, every day, they become more dangerous. Let them then go. A war,
generally termed the scourge of nations, is a blessing, when compared with what
we have to expect from their disorganizing impious princiciples and perfidious
intrigues.

But, no declaration of war will come from them. They know better than to
relinquish their hold. They will stick to us like a burr. They can be as
haughty as Lucifer, and they can be as mean. When they cannot with majestic
stature scale the walls of Paradise, they can shrink themselves into the shape
of a toad, and creep in at a chink. When they perceive, that we are not to be
scared, that we laugh at their "terrible nation" and their "tempered
resentment," they will become as mild as milk-maids, and say they were only
joking. They will repeal their decree for seizing our vessels; they will
pretend to cry again, and their Citizen will tell us about their sweet
sentiments, and we shall have another flag sent, and so all will be made up. --
The reader who consults only his own heart will say that this is impossible;
but let him recollect whom we have to deal with: the French Convention; men who
make a sport of the violation of treaties and of oaths; who have banished every
idea of shame and remorse, and according to whose standard of retrograde
refinement, meanness is commensurate with weakness and misfortune, and
insolence with power and success.

However, though I am certain that the French will not go to war with America,
I am as certain that America must soon go to war with them. -- Let not the
reader start. He must accustom himself to think and to talk on the subject, and
the sooner he begins the better. I am not foretelling the day of judgment nor a
second deluge; but am speaking of an object that may be looked at with
calmness, as I make no doubt it will be encountered with success.

There is every reason to believe, indeed, with me the fact is certain, that
Spain has ceded Louisiana to France. This will put the French in possession of
all our Western Frontier, give them the free navigation of the Mississippi, and
then I beg any one to cast his eye over the map of the United States, and see
the exposed situation in which they will be placed.

France has had this in contemplation ever since the peace of 1783, and the
Spanish part of Saint Domingo, lately ceded to her, and with which she can do
nothing, now furnishes her with an object of exchange. Besides, the king of
Spain can refuse the French nothing, or he certainly would not have entered
into a league with the murderers of the head of his family, and have supplied
atheists with troops to carry on a marauding war on the Catholic States of
Italy and the defenseless head of the church.

The French, once in possession of Louisiana, will give law to the Mississippi,
and when we consider the prevalent spirit and politics of the Western people in
general, the distance they are at from the seat of government, and the
seductive arts of their new neighbors, there is little reason to hope, that
they will long remain obedient to the United States. The new inhabitants of
Louisiana will be made up of the profligate French soldiery, who will be
prevailed on by splendid promises to transport themselves to this country, but
who will be fit for nothing but pillage and war.

With such a hold on the back countries, and such a party in the Atlantic ones
as they now have, a division of the Union must be the consequence. The southern
States, where very little of that independence of spirit prevails, which
resists the encroachments of an ambitious foe, will soon become an appendage to
France. The middle and northern States may, at the expense of bloody wars,
preserve their independence for a while; but, at last, harrassed, and fatigued
with the burden of defending themselves, they will call in the aid of Great
Britain; and thus the basis of an empire will once more be cut out into
colonies and provinces.

Those who rely on the friendly professions of the French, I refer to the
instances of their friendship which we have witnessed in the course of these
observations. Let any one read the intercepted letter of Fauchet, and recollect
that it was written in confidence to the government, and doubt, if he can, that
the counties then in a state of insurrection would have been supported by
France, if she had been in possession of the territory she is now about to
acquire. Such opportunities will continually offer, as long as faction exists,
and that it ever will do, as long as there is any thing to contend for. To
judge of the future by the present tranquillity, is to presume that the billows
have ceased to roll, because we see the sea in a calm.

Ever since the peace of 1783, France has beheld the commerce, carried on
between America and Great Britain, with a watchful, jealous and envious eye. At
first she endeavored to turn the channel toward herself; but that having
failed, she fell on the plan of subjugation. A French writer in treating of
this subject observes, that it would be a balance against the loans of England
to the Atlantic merchants. By loans he means the credit given by the British
merchants, and which is indeed a mine of gold to the farmers and merchants of
America. There is something really diabolical in this envy. They would sooner
the country should be torn to pieces than it should trade with their rival.

They well know, that there is but one check to their ambitious projects; and
that is, an alliance offensive and defensive between Great Britain and America.
They know, that by such an alliance they would be deprived of all their
possessions in the West Indies, and would be excluded from the Atlantic seas.
This alliance once formed, America might forbid them to set a foot in
Louisiana, or might drive them and their natural allies, the Spaniards, into
the Gulf of Mexico. It is with the consciousness of this on their minds, that
they have been so sedulous in forming a faction to oppose every accommodating
step, and every advance toward friendship, between the two countries. They
have the Machiavellian maxim, "divide and you govern," continually in their
eye. They wish to keep them assunder, that they may devour them one at a time.

The most disagreeable circumstance at present, is, this cession of Louisiana
will not be perfectly ascertained, till after the general peace; so that,
though Great Britain is nearly as much interested in the event as America, she
can take no steps to prevent it, because she will be disarmed before it be
known; and their Myrmidons will be in possession of their promised land, before
any measures of prevention can be adopted on the part of America. Something,
however, must be done to preserve us from such neighbors, or the independence
of this country will go to the grave before us. National precautions must be
left to the rulers of the state, but every man has it in his power to
contribute toward the discouragement of faction, that, at any rate, though
there should be an enemy on the frontiers, there may be none in the heart of
the country.

Such is the situation of America with respect to the insidious, unprincipled,
insolent and perfidious Republic of France; and it only remains for the virtue
and public spirit of the people to determine, what sort of answer ought to be
given to her presumptuous and domineering minister. Let it be well remembered,
that the Notes, containing his calumnious accusations, his contemptuous
defiance and hectoring threats, are not the effusions of a paragraphist or a
pamphleteer: they are the official communications of a public minister, thrown
in the teeth of the nation. In less than two months they will be read and
commented on by half the civilized world. Those who know the American character
will not be deceived; but far the greater part, will set us down as a nation of
sharpers or poltroons, who have either not honesty to support our reputation,
or not courage to defend it. If there be a man, who, with this reflection on
his mind, can wish the government to stoop and cringe and sue and beg for
peace, to court a repetition of the buffet that yet tingles in our cheek, he
may boast about independence, he may even call himself a patriot; but his
independence is an empty sound, and he knows no more of the animating glow of
patriotism, where affection, duty and honor unite, than the slave knows of the
charms of liberty or the eunuch of the sweets of love. -- No; the answer of
every man, who loves his country and feels the insult it has received, yet
prefers the blessings of honorable peace to the inevitable calamities of war,
is, in the words of a good old English king that conquered France and all that
France contained: "The sum of all our answer is but this:
"We would not seek a battle as we are;
"Yet, as we are, we say we will not shun it:
"And so go tell your masters, Frenchman."


END.

