Surprising Account OF THE DEVIL's APPEARING TO JOHN CHESSELDEN AND JAMES
ARKINS, At a town near the Missisippi, on the 24th of May, 1784.

WRITTEN WITH THEIR OWN HANDS.

Printed at EXETER -- 1796.

A Surprising Account, etc.
WHAT can be more shocking to the human mind than the appearance of one of
those fallen angels that were turned out of heaven, and now make the
habitations of darkness their homes! Such an appearance would strike terror
into the most unshaken mind, the most hard and stubborn heart; yea, of such a
kind as no one can conceive of, but those who have had the trial, which has
been ours -- an account of which we now send abroad.

On the morning of the 24th of May, 1784, John Chesselden and James Arkins, set
out from Kenfry, a town near the Missisippi, to visit an old friend of ours,
who lived about twenty (...) The road that led to this place was through a
wood, called Varnum's wood, on account of its belonging to one Varnum. We sat
out about 8 o'clock in the morning; soon after which, James Arkins began to
tell me, (John Chesselden) that should we in passing this wood, meet with such
a devil of a fright as Isaac King did, (a person who passed them a few months
before, and supposed he saw a person without either head or arms) we should
deserve to stay in them, and never be suffered to return or pass them. He
likewise said that persons of the character of King, ought to be banished from
the society of all that had either spirits or common sense; and that he defied
all the devils inhabiting the infernal regions to intimidate him in the least,
should they be pleased to appear to him (...) this speech of his, I undertook
to reprimand him for his unguarded talk, telling him that although I supposed
the said King was frightened, at nothing more than imagination, yet I believed
the devil was often permitted to appear to men, though we had not seen the
appearance, This talk seemed greatly to raise his spirits, insomuch that he
said if there ever appeared a devil or any spirit unto men while on earth, he
desired that he might in passing this wood, have one of them for a guest.

Little did he, as well as myself thing of these words of his being fulfilled;
which however was done, in a most frightful and shocking manner; in a manner
which clearly showed it to be the hand of heaven, that it should be as he
desired, and which shows us that the all-wise God observes the actions of men,
and often (...) had not proceeded above two miles after this conversation was
over, before we came to a small river which crossed the road, at which we made
a stop and sat down; we had not sat there above eight or ten minutes before we
heard a rustling among the leaves at some distance, and which we supposed to be
occasioned by porcupines, which are very plenty in those parts. Here we sat for
some time waiting to see these supposed creatures come into our view, which
seemed to move toward us, though very moderately, but at length resolved not
to wait for their coming, but set out to meet them. We had not gone far before
we rose a small hill, on the other side of which, near the bottom, stood a
large bunch of bushes, in which was this rusttling of leaves. We both descended
the hill till we came (...) sudden issued out of them a torrent of smoke,
together with a beast as large as a moose, of the most tremendous and hideous
aspect, something like that of a lion, though infinitely more shocking, as his
eyes appeared to be a very flame of fire in its full strength, and out of his
mouth went a smoke like that of a furnace. He had not been out of the bushes
above the spabe of a minute, before he stood erect upon his feet, and greatly
altered both in shape and gesture; at the sight of which we both fell prostrate
on the ground, and so continued a while, wholly insensible; when at length, I
John Chesselden partly recovered from my insensibility and raising myself up
partly on my hands and feet, discovered this monster about three yards from me,
in a horizontal posture, in the clear fluid (...) earth, having the perfect
form of a man, except a head, of which he was wholly destitute. My companion,
James Arkins, being not yet recovered, I thought, if possible, to do it, and
endeavor to make our escape from the ferocious tyrant: whereupon I stepped up
to him and upon gently touching him, he immediately, its great surprise sprang
up, and with a loud voice exclaimed, God be merciful to me the greatest of
sinners, and most worthy of thy displeasure. Upon these words being pronounced,
this truly frightful monster immediately left his situation in the air, and
stood upright on his feet before the said James Arkins, without either head or
hands, and in the very form which the fore mentioned King had represented. In
this posture he continued for about the space of half an hour, standing the
whole of the time directly before the said Arkins, and imitating him in every
particular, even in the very motion of his fingers; till at length he gradually
drew back from us, and seated himself near a small stream that passed at the
bottom of this hill, about twenty rods from where we now were. Here in this
place he sent forth the most horrid cry that perhaps ever mortals heard, or
devils uttered. It was so strong a sound, that the earth where we stood was in
great commotion, and every tree appeared to be leaving its foudation. It is not
possible to describe our feelings at these moments when we expected so shortly
to bid adieu to our earthly bodies; to be destroyed by this universal tyrant;
what to do we knew not; to flee from him was not in our power. It was now about
2 of clock in the afternoon, and know (...) we resolved to make an attempt to
return, which was not above two miles and an half. No sooner had we attempted
to move, than the monster arose from his seat, which when he took, he was
without head or hands, or any kind of garment, but was now adorned with all
these, and of the most dazzling appearance; and truly had a more striking
appearance than the greatest potentate or prince on earth; -- and in this form
made up to us, where he stood for some time, as likewise did we, without either
attempting to move in the least; but at length we undertook to proceed on our
way back from whence we came, which when he saw, he made up to us, and with a
very pleasant voice, said, why do you hurry yourselves, friends; I will shortly
be your companion, and will attend you where you (...) countenances, what can
be the cause of it? pray let me know, and I will free you from it; come, young
friends, walk as I do; upon which he immediately cleared himself from the
earth, and walked about three feet above the surface, which was truly a fearful
sight, and highly astonishing. After he had proceeded in this manner about 20
rods, he again came upon the surface of the earth, and proceeded with us on our
way until we were within one hundred rods of our habitations, when he told us
we had got to go a little way with him, where he would show us several cities,
most elegantly adorned with a thousand objects that would highly elevate us,
and where he said were many pleasant dwelling places, which, without doubt, we
should so greatly fancy that he believed we should be willing to take up with
them for our abodes and lasting homes, where likewise he said were many that
spoke our language, and he believed were our countrymen. After this speech of
his, I John Chesselden made answer to him in these words: My business being of
such a nature it renders it impossible for me to attend you to this delightsome
dwelling, must therefore beg you to let me pass, together with my companion,
until some other season and more convenient opportunity. Upon this speech of
mine, he appeared greatly incensed and immediately caught James Arkins by the
hair of his head, and with a horrid cry said, what such young upstarts as you
disobey my will! Where were you, when old Adam and Eve in paradise in innocence
stood? why did not they disobe^ my will? After he had said these words he set
Arkins at his liberty, but not without taking out at least one half of the hair
of his head, and wounding him in many parts of his body. Now it was about
sunset, and we were at least four miles from any inhabitants, in this
deplorable situation, never expecting to be in any other, with Arkins groaning
with his wounds and death staring us in the face on every side. -- Here, gentle
reader, drop a tear at our condition in these moments, when we expected never
to escape to inform the world of our feelings or the cause of our deaths. But
Heaven be praised; now did we even in these moments that so shortly threatened
our ruin, get from his infernal hands. Seeing night was come upon us, and we
still in the hands of the devil, who every minute would assume whatever forms
he pleased, and them which were the most shocking to behold, I resolved to look
up to heaven for relief, fell upon my bended knees and cried with a loud voice
to him who made the heavens, that he would not suffer us to be destroyed by
this fallen angel, who was driven out of heaven and sentenced to dwell in
chains and everlasting punishment. Immediately upon the tyrant's hearing these
words, he vanished out of our sight, and was gone; upon which I immediately
took Arkins on my back, who was so wounded that he could not walk, and arrived
safely at our own homes about 8 of clock at night.

But by the way, we must not forget to inform the reader, that among the many
forms this tyrant assumed, was this truly surprising one: as the dark of the
evening approached, Arkins being in great distress with his wounds, and as I
suppose something shattered in reason, he cried out, who, or which of you can
deliver me out of these deep agonies? upon which the devil said, I will give
you the relief you deserve, and instantly mounted a large rock, upon which he
had the perfect form of two persons, both lying prostrate, one like a man when
expiring, uttering the most piercing groans that perhaps ever mortals heard,
and saying, oh my ruined and departing soul! The other form in some measure
resembled a man, though much larger, with one cloven foot, his face black, and
gestures very terrible. After they had continued in this posture some time, the
one in form of a man, uttered several more piercing groans than any of the
former, and violently struggling, seemed to die immediately! upon which there
seemed to come or evaporate from his body, the same form or likeness, to
appearance composed of pure air, whick kept in a gentle motion or tremor for
some time -- when at length, this other form arose upon his feet, with an
aspect very terrible, stepped to the utmost extremity of the rock, where he
extended his arms to receive this form in the air, which gradually made toward
him, tho seemingly with great reluctance, until it came within them, when he
grasped it with the greatest fury, and immediately leaped down upon the ground,
which when his feet touched, gave way for the space of two rods in
circumference, and sunk directly down, leaving a large cavity, into which he
descended with this form or body in his arms, where appeared melted minerals or
brimstone, dreadful to behold* in which they both continued some time, where
were groans not to be uttered. At length he who had the cloven foot came out of
this place, leaving the other behind, who sent forth such shrieks as we shall
not attempt to describe, as language would be too feeble for the undertaking.
Upon his coming out of this place, he returned to this rock, and on touching it
with one hand it rolled over and entirely shut up the cavity or opening in the
earth, when all was silent; he then put on many frightful shapes by turns, till
at length he vanished and was gone.

The occasion of our giving the reader a more particular account of this last
appearance was, that we verily believe it to have had great resemblance to a
person resigning his breath, and having his immortal soul committed by the
great Sovereign of the universe into the hands of the prince of darkness.
Surely it must have been the emblem of this, as one of these forms was the
exact picture of one in the agonies of death, as the very image of the immortal
soul appeared in open air, near the form of the body with the monster, this
universal tyrant receiving and consinging it to this true description of
endless torments.

And since this was without doubt a representation of what we have said, where
shall the wretch be found, so hard and so stupid as to one day more, yea one
hour, follow the ways of the devil, however inviting they may appear; for they
will surely lead to the death of the immortal soul! Though he now smiles at thy
ways, he will at death appear as he did to us upon this rock (most dreadful)
and after groaning life away as the form did, he will, with the same ferocity,
confine the soul in endless misery, and a rock will be rolled to the cavern's
mouth, never to be moved.

During the whole day nothing gave me a greater shock, than to hear the devil
say to Arkins, I will give you the relief you deserve, as I suppose he meant by
this to make an attempt upon our lives, and his appearing upon the rock as he
did seems to confirm the opinion. Without doubt he intended by this to show us,
that he had a will, though he had not power, quickly to destroy our souls, and
confine them in the dark abyss which he represented to us; but heaven be
praised, he was not permitted, but sent his way, without executing his plan,
and we were conducted to our habitations, rejoicing in the strength of the
Lord, and praising his holy name for this wonderful deliverance.

The next morning we related the narrative to our friends, which soon spread
through the town, and before 12 o'clock there were at least two hundred people
collected, with countenances that showed sorrow of the deepest nature,
supposing it was an appearance that foreboded their destruction, was the
appearance real, to convince them of which, Arkins showed them his wounds; but
this not being sufficient, we told them that by walking with us into Varnum's
wood, they would be convinced; upon which four persons turned out and went with
us, viz. James Erwin, Esquire Nathan Cole, Benjamin Guy, and Samuel Ford, to whom
we showed the rock which was moved, and which wholly satisfied them as to the
truth of it; we then returned with these four men, who told the people that
what we had related was without doubt true, as the huge rock was moved (for so
it was called) at least 12 feet; which when they heard they believed, and we
were brought before them and related the whole affair, with the conversation
that passed between us before we entered the wood, which greatly satisfied
them, for, said they, it was to punish a wicked person, and not to destroy us,
as we imagined. After the people's fears were abated, Mr. John Boyd, who was
preaching in these parts, and who came to enquire into the matter, called us
out, and in the presence of all the people said, "the appearance of the devil
is a great and shocking sight to the human mind, yet not so shocking as the
sight of one who makes light of it, and can deliberately, when a little out of
humor, wish him to be his companion and guest: surely the sight of the latter
of these ought to strike us with vastly greater astonishment than the former.
It ought to put each one of us upon strict enquiry whether we are wholly free
from such an abominable character. All must be convinced by what happened
yesterday, that the great God takes notice of the words and actions of men, and
often in this life gives them what they say they desire. And as we know he is a
being of justice, we may conclude, that those who pass through this life in a
course of sin, and yet go unpunished, must, when they die, be sentenced to that
world, where they must ever remain in unspeakable misery and despair. We see
one before us who has been taken at his word, and in a shocking manner wounded
by one who he wished might attend him. What can he say? he has had his wish.
Behold him and take warning, flee his ways with the greatest abhorrence. May
this be a mean of turning him into the ways of righteousness and every one
present, till we shall say these are the ways of pleasantness and true delight.
Then will the Lord smile on this new world, and choose it for his habitation
from generation to generation."

After this speech James Arkins in presence of all the people, came forth,
showed his wounds and with tears in his eyes said, these have I received
justly, and had I received my deserts, I must confess it would have been to
suffer with the devils to the endless ages of eternity. Here, my friends, you
see one who has lived in a course of sin, and at length was so hardened as even
to desire the devil for a guest in bodily shape. Be admonished, my friends, not
to follow such steps as these, but flee them with the utmost detestation. Let
it strike horror upon every soul that makes light of those things, and at every
trifle will wish his appearance. Let it remind us that all our words are taken
notice of, and will at some period come upon us, and perhaps when we are not
aware of it. Let it be the means of reforming my ways, and all others of this
character, and of turning unto the Lord for mercy, which if we do, perhaps he
may attend upon our cry and save us, which shall ever be the prayer of

JAMES ARKINS, JOHN CHESSELDEN.



