CHRISTIANITY CONTRASTED WITH DEISM: OR THE PRESENT RELIGION OF FRANCE.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, AN ADDRESS TO THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE
AND PIETY.

The Second Edition corrected, with Notes and Additions.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED FOR THE BOOKSELLERS. 1796.

INTRODUCTION.
THE boldest adventurers in reforming efforts, were never fortified with
sufficient temerity to adopt a system of religion truly rational or sublime. In
all ages of the world, the mind of man has been prescribed to certain rules; a
deviation from which would incur the severest penalties of persecution, and
proscription. It is true however, that new religions have been established;
fresh ideas brought forward; rights, rituals, and ceremonies altered; but these
were trifling improvements upon the general principles of common error; nothing
having yet appeared truly rational, in the production of our most celebrated
reformers.

Sect has generated sect, error producing error, till at length Christians are
divided into as many parties as the Indian tribes, and carry their
superstitious scruples to such a length, as to exclude reason, as being
incompatible with religion. But those who worship the Deity, contrary to the
dictates of reason, must do it conformable to the rude custom of irrational,
and savage barbarity, and may be compared to the men of Listra, to whom, Paul
said "Him therefore ye ignorantly worship declare I unto you."

Were our modern sectaries, who pretend to a superior refinement in the
knowledge of scriptural science, permitted to control opinion, how dark and
gloomy, how dull and uninteresting to a rational and intelligent being, would
all religious treatises appear? And the author of the following sheets would
suffer a persecution, no less rigorous than those instituted under the
influence of the Popes; and receive as dreadful a sentence of proscription as
those pronounced by the pious directors of the Inquisition. To such a length
would christian charity be extended by those who are intoxicated with the
pernicious draughts administered by a mysterious religion to its blind
votaries. But since opinion is in some measure free, nothing should deter us
from propagating sentiments interesting to the human race.

No sooner were the chains of monkish policy broken, and the mind of man
permitted to explore the wide empire of reason, than an important truth was
discovered, that an established Church, is an established tyranny; and if
philosophers would pursue their speculations, they would find that all positive
institutions of religion, are but a sanctified policy, which with propriety may
be considered a holy deception, or a pious fraud. There is no religion extant
destitute of able advocates; an Indian Fakier, or a Turkish Mufty, will defend
his faith, with equal confidence, as an English bishop will support the
trinity, or the divinity of Christ. Nor do I know any religion that would fall,
for want of supporters, were they rewarded equal to a British prelate.

How must every human heart sympathize at the recollection of those enormities
perpetrated under the specious name of religion -- under the mild banner of a
human God: those plots and conspiracies formed to propagate a divine system;
these holy massacres instituted to establish a belief in holy writ, and those
rewards given to catholic murderers to destroy unbelieving heretics. But St.
Dominic's flaming faggots are finally consumed; the fires of Smithfield are
extinguished; the dazzling sword of fanatacism is blunted; those gibbets
exhibiting the carcasses of slaughtered heretics, to adorn the mother of
Christianity, and of Rome, are mouldered into dust, the sublime worship of
saints, and the pious adoration of Idols, is left to our own discretion.
Religious liberty, and the freedom of conscience, is established among us upon
a pure and rational basis.

Let us then, in the name of GOD, remedy prevailing error, and remove stale
prejudices, by contemplating boundless creation, which perpetually exhibits its
captivating wonders around us, let us give free operation to the exercise of
reason, and improve those moral faculties conferred on us from a source
unknown; and finally, let us confide in a beneficient DEITY, to crown our
labors with success.

THE AUTHOR.

CHRISTIANITY CONTRASTED WITH DEISM.
WHEN man feels himself possessed of new ideas, or embraces sentiments on
celestial or terrestial objects, uncommon among the great mass of vulgar, he
also feels, by natural instinct a propensity to lay them before the public, for
the inspection of a regenerated people, recently emerged from the shackles
imposed on them by knaves and impostors. Under this impression, I embark in the
ardous task of being the public opposer of popular errors; trusting at the same
time, that in exposing those religious foibles, to which deluded mankind are
too fondly addicted, I shall not insult the good understanding of the well
informed, nor abuse that scope of reason which kind nature has conferred upon
me.

Could we but glance at futurity with equal facility as we view the actions of
past generations, how would our souls be exalted on contemplating posterity, at
so great a remove from rude barbarity, advancing by gradual steps to a more
natural image of that perfection, which brightens the features of humanity, and
exalts man to those high stations in human life, allotted him by his divine
Creator.

Situated as we are in the middle passage between the future and the past, we
cannot but look forward with consoling avidity on the rapid progress of human
perfection, for, however retarded in its progress, by a combination of kings
and priests, it has nevertheless succeeded in arresting sceptres from the one,
and mitres from the other.

The almighty host of reason and of truth strikes deep at the root of evil,
while ambiguous priests and their armies of spiritual slaves, grope in the
obscure cells of fable and of mystery.

When we take a prospect of the past ages of the world, and recount the
numberless enormities committed under the high-sounding sanction of a revealed
religion, human nature recoils, and our souls revolt against so unnatural a
system.

A liberal education, aided by rational liberty, and the light of reason,
emboldens men to hazard opinions, at the present day, for which, in times of
yore, the inquisitorial decrees of a vicious priesthood would consign him to
the dungeon, and his works to the flames. But as these obstacles to human
improvements are surmounted, and the superstitious worship paid to crowns and
mitres, nearly abolished; let us, while we reflect on past folly, endeavor to
improve on modern wisdom.

It would be the work of a voluminous history to deliniate the errors of former
ages, the wars and massacrees, fomented by one faction of priesthood against
another, each professing divine theological inspiration; the stretch of
princely power, the cruelties exercised to establish religious tenets, the
shifts and stratagems resorted to, in order to establish and seal with a ^^vine
impression, the doctrine of the victorious party; and the unnatural edicts of
kings and national governors, to bind men down to these tenets, under pain of
confiscation and excommunication, etc. All these being foreign to my present
plan, I shall proceed briefly to state some general objections to prevailing
error, and leave this age of philosophy to draw its own conclusion.

Our deluded ancestors were, for the most part, incapable of discriminating
between sound reason and ambiguous sophistry, nor was holy writ more revered by
them, than doubtful tradition, or human invention. Stories the most idle, and
doctrines the most repugnant to nature and reason, never wanted legions of
advocates; and cold steel, or flaming faggots, were applied as the cure of
unbelief; hence sprung fanatism and phrensy, the offspring of a systematic
ignorance established duplicity, art and imposture.

The infatuated men of old, who idolized and adored the prophetic history,
firmly believed it to be the hand writing of an unerring God, and yielding an
implicit obedience to the interpretation of their Priests, conceived it too
bold and presumptuous to reason for themselves, till at length they insensibly
sunk into a blind though tyrannic system of orthodoxy; which kept the world in
chains of ignorance for many centuries. No sooner did a bold adventurer rouse
from the bed of theology and start objections to the corrupt doctrines of the
times, but he was silenced by an imperious, self interrested, and monopolizing
clergy, who had no bounds to their usurpations, and scorned to live under any
rational control. -- All reforming efforts prove abortive, while the clergy
rule the roast.

At length some disappointed Monks, or outvoted Cardinals, fired with revenge
against the seer of Rome, publicly exposed the absurdities of current
orthodoxy. They set up a new traffic for themselves: and as the success of one
imposture proves a stimulus to various others, we find the christian religion
divided, and subdivided, into a variety of branches. Perseverance and artifice
established every sect into a kind of licensed Order. All are possessed of
divine grace; none are exempt from the promises of the gospel.

Kings choose some favorite system, as the religion of the land; not for their
own good, but for that of their loving subjects. The pious clergy reforming
with the times, found it their interest to crouch to the foot of monarchy;
royal letters patent, by the Lord's anointed, sealed their dogma's with a
divine mission. Separate establishments ensued; one church vied with another,
sect accused sect of false doctrine, heresy, and schism: the Bible was resorted
to as the rallying point of all controversies: divines of all descriptions
treasuring it up, as the grand magazine, which heaven reserves for their mutual
purposes. Like a free port for all nations, the Bible harbors all, and
supplies the contending parties with the implements of war and controversy.
This Bible will confute in one passage the doctrine it approves in another.
Tenets however doubtful can be proved by scripture, and fancy. From hence
orginated theological broils, and national calamities: with a variety of evils
heaped on man, by the blind leaders in religious ceremonies, which we hope
modern wisdom has finally put an end to.

We have now no further need of holy wars to fight the Lord's battle, nor
religious persecutions to establish the word of God; fagots need not be
lighted, nor racks, nor gibbets erected, to propagate a divine theology, which
has nothing for its object, but slavery to the laity, and revenue to the clergy.

Can a rational being suppose for a moment, that a religion descended from
heaven, should spread such terror and desolation wherever it makes its
appearance: or that a gracious God, would speak to his peculiar people, in a
language not to be understood: or transmit to posterity, a history so obscure
and unintelligible, as to leave us in eternal doubts and uncertainties: a
history no less difficult to reconcile in all its parts, than to bring the two
polar stars into one point: nothing can be a more glaring contrast, than the
different constructions each sect puts upon the words of the Bible. To believe
what they all say, is impossible, and how to discriminate we know not. Shall we
then renounce the fabric, with all its fiction, rapsodies and concomitant
absurdities: or shall we still keep growling in the dark and never find our
way, shall we nod approbation to a system of blind mysteries, and refuse to
embrace those truths conveyed to us by the light of nature and of reason? we
see the christian world convulsed and agitated, and it only requires the
virtuous exertions of enlightened men to restore those captive slaves, under
the bondage of Priests, to the family of freemen.

The few remaining fanatics will not fail to brand us with their usual epithets
of changlings, shifted about by every wind of doctrine, a natural man, carnally
minded, with other cant phrases. But may we not with equal justice retort, and
accuse them of shifting their ground, changing from primitive institutions, and
borrowing their maxims from the most notorious errors. What are the whole chain
of reformers, but the offspring of popery, the illegitimates of superstition
and idolatry? If fortunately for the good of man, we could dissipate the clouds
that cover so many mysteries, and remove the errors of human invention, we
should be better able to confute the proud presumption of those who threaten
with the vengeance of heaven, all who attempt to alter one tittle of their
ritual. Liberty of thought says the philosopher, is the first of rights, and
the most respectable domain, is that of conscience: these being the gifts of
nature conferred on man," who shall say we have not the right to examine.

May we not then under the hopes of impunity examine the precepts of the
christian system, and see whether its boasted morality excess those of other
nations, so much reprobated by Christians. We shall

First, with submission to the clergy of all nations, examine the holy order of
those missionaries sent by christian kings, and Roman Pontiffs, to convert
infidel nations to christianity:

Secondly, we shall notice the exemplary virtues of those patriots who graced
the golden age: these we shall do by a reference to their respective histories,
after which we shall proceed,

Thirdly, to analize the venerable system of christianity.

These three things being promised, we proceed, first, to examine the conduct
of these christian missionaries who have traveled into foreign countries to
spread the light of the gospel. These, instead of convincing the natives, that
they excelled in the practice of moral virtues, have given the loose to every
kind of vice, and out done in every species of plunder and debauchery, those
who have lived without religion, and without laws. They had committed every
enormity that could make human nature appear monstrous. Few can be ignorant of
the cruelties committed by the Spanish missionaries at Mexico and Peru, where
they built churches at the expense of the inhabitants, and endeavoring to
explain the mysteries of their religion to the natives, in a language of which
they were totally ignorant, and afterward piously slaughtered them as
heretics, for not believing what had been so clearly demonstrated to them. When
these missionaries had conquered the Island of Hispaniola, they made peace with
the natives upon conditions that they would cultivate all their lands for the
use of the servants of Jesus, and also to furnish them with a certain quantity
of Gold every month. The poor wretches finding the task unsupportable, as well
as impossible, took shelter in the mountains to screen themselves from their
cruel oppressors, but the Spaniards in justice (as they said) to the injuries
offered by the natives to God's people, trained their dogs to hunt them, and
fired with superstition, made a vow that each of them would destroy twelve
Indians every day, in honor of the twelve apostles; to this might be added a
brilliant history of the plunders and ravages committed by our much respected
mother country, upon the plains of Hindostan, but, humanity recoils at the
dismal recital.

From a view of such scenes of cruelties committed under the banner of a meek
and suffering God, and by the real professors of his holy religion, what
inference can we draw, but that they look upon their religion to be a mere
farce, and the Bible upon which it is founded, to be all a lie. I am purposely
short in this first proposition the second and third being rather lengthy.


We now proceed to notice in the second place the exemplary virtues of our
primitive patriots. Men are so infatuated even to this day, that they affect to
look back with a reverential awe, and devoutly honor the past periods of the
world, with the splended title of the golden age, admiring what is past, and
despising what is present, with the hardened epithet of the age of iron. They
indeed affirm, without much authority, that in the patriarchial ages, the earth
brought forth her abundance spontaneously, that the Lion, and the Tiger were
harmless as the Lamb, and that mankind free from tumultuous passions, lived in
the utmost simplicity and security: but if the Bible did not confute such
accounts, I should not be able to do it, under the authority of that confused
and barbarous history, of which the following is a brief abridgment. Instead of
all virtue then existing upon earth, the fate of the abandoned cities which
were consumed wirh fire, said to be from heaven, is a proof to the contrary,
and gives us an example of the total corruption of ancient times. The
diffidence that every man entertained of his neighbor, is no weak argument in
favor of their dishonesty. Abraham and Isaac both apprehended that they would
be slain for the sake of their wives, and it was no uncommon thing for a man to
require an oath of his neighbor that he would do him no harm.

The stories of Judah and Tamer, his daughter in law, and the rape of Dinah,
gives us a just idea of the debauchery and injustice of God's chosen people --
Judah condemned Tamer for the crime he had committed with her; -- The
perfidious sons of Jacob slew the Shechemites after they had ratified a treaty
of peace with them, in the most solemn manner; -- Jacob bargained with his
uncle to serve seven years for his daughter Rachel: when the time expired,
Laban shamefully imposed upon him Leah, and had the effrontery to justify what
he had done, and exacted another seven years for Rachel; -- Jacob deceived his
brother Esau; -- the sons of Jacob sold their brother Joseph as a slave to the
Egyptians; -- Moses committed murder; David contrived to have Uriah slain, that
he might enjoy his wife Rebecca; -- Solomon committed boundless fornications;
-- and Absolon in the most shameless manner, cohabited with a multitude of
women, before a numerous people.

Such, pious Christians, are the accounts of the peculiar favorites of the
Deity, recorded in the divine volume, so much admired by ignorance and
credulity. But, when Christianity took effect, were crimes less usual? Does
history paint mankind as meliorated at so great an event? alas! the reverse is
the fact. Gloomy superstition started up accompanied with persecution, which
drenched the world in blood. Rome erected a spiritual authority, and
indiscriminately trampled on the rights of God and Man; Christian Saints
succeeded heathen Gods: witchcraft and miracles were opposed to the eternal
unerring laws of nature. On looking over a vast desert of eighteen centuries,
we find that Christianity has been the parent of ignorance, and the handmaid
of oppression, cruelty and superstition. Blind mysteries and fabulous tales,
are the spiritual food dressed up for the faithful in Jesus Christ.

When Rome, the proud mistress of superstition, assumed a spiritual and
temporal authority over all Europe, she not only fettered men's minds to
slavish doctrines, but presumptuously laid an embargo on heaven. No more angels
shall descend from thence to minister unto men; no more prophets shall predict
the will of God; no more miracle to confound the obstinate, but such as are
wrought by her own members; and those, like the miracles of Jesus, are done in
secret, and seen only by the credulous ignorant. Yet these imaginary
phenomenons have been trumpeted a far off by the oracles of deceit, and were
the grand instruments in duping the Christian world into a servile submission
to superstitious formalities and idle ceremonies. When a few Christian States
reformed from the errors of popery, and shook off the pope's supremacy, the
clergy piously preserved to themselves the means of power and monopoly. They
changed indeed the name of their religion, but they firmly maintain the
aggrandizing benefices. They are continually disclaiming against the damnable
doctrine of the Roman church, who in her turn accuses them of heresy. Thus an
irreconciliable difference pervades the whole mass of Christian professors. The
Christian saints are considered as the tutular deities, who preside over the
churches dedicated to them. The Catholics have a day which they consecrate to
the memory of seven thousand holy virgins, who slept three years and thought it
but one night. The English have their St. George; the Scotch their St. Andrew;
the Welsh their St. Taffy; the Irish their St. Patrick, etc. Churches are
dedicated to these imaginary saints, and days religiously observed to
commemorate their virtues.

In this country we smell too strong of the old leaven, our churches are
dedicated to we know not who, and though we profess to be the most liberal in
our religious principles, we have not one church in this great continent
dedicated to the supreme Being. Reason dictates, that when we enter a temple,
consecrated to religious worship, it ought to be dedicated to the being therein
worshipped. The God of nature being the grand object of all rational adoration,
every house of worship should be dedicated to him alone. But the great trait in
the Christian system is its pre-eminence in the science of contradiction;
Christians contemn a deist for unbelief, but they cannot accuse him of idolatry.

A deist believes in a supreme being without an equal, or a troop of infernal
deities, called devils or damned spirits. A deist contemplates the glory of
omnipotence, in the minutest of his works, and worships God in every particle
of his creation; a deist presumes not to dictate to the almighty, what
blessings he shall give, or what evils to withhold; a deist is convinced by
reason and experience that human petitions will never alter the will of
providence; a deist endeavors to make himself happy in his present state,
contemns no man for opinions; is liberal, candid, and communicative to all men.
But a Christian worships three Gods in the person of one God: and in defiance
to the science of numbers contends that, three times one is one, and that, once
one is three; he petitions the deity in the most absolute and dictatorial
manner; he is dissatisfied with what he has, and is continually coveting more;
contemns those who differ from him in opinion, and is ready to persecute his
brother to do his God a service. In short, a Christian, is illiberal, narrow
minded, and uncharitable in the extreme. They tell us that their God is his own
son; that this son is his own father, and that he was born unbegotten, being
four thousand years older than his mother. Three Gods are but one God; three
eternals are but one eternal, three Almighties are but one Almighty; in short,
almost every tenet in the Christian system, is a complete negative to itself.

We shall now contrast a few passages of the sublime medley, called the Bible,
by comparing its former with its latter parts, and showing the difference
between the old and new word of God. In the former part we are informed that
Elijah never tasted death, but that he was hoisted off alive to heaven in a
chariot of fire; in the latter part we are informed that it is appointed to all
men once to die: and that flesh and blood cannot enter the kingdom of heaven.
Whether Elijah was a man or a composition of flesh and blood, I leave the
Christian doctors to determine. Moses tells us to resist evil and seek
restitution for injuries done unto us, even to so nice a fraction, as an eye
for an eye, a tooth for a tooth etc. But Christ in direct opposition to him,
tells us to resist not evil, and if any one shall smite us on the one cheek,
turn unto him the other also. As these two divine legislators differ so
materially in their preceptorial functions, it is absolutely impossible to
adhere to them both: and those pious Christians who believe all the Bible to be
the revealed will of God, must plainly see that in these opposite precepts, God
contradicts himself: which totally destroys the idea of his being an
unchangeable God, the same to day, to morrow, and for ever.

How chimerical are those notions which suppose that an infinite God, in the
person of man, or angel, should in his flight through immensity, perch upon this
earth, and relate those contemptible stories, about Sampson and his foxes:
Balaam and his ass: Jonah and his whale: Bell and his dragons, or Tobit and his
dog. Two is better than one, that which is crooked cannot be made straight;
that which is wanted can never be numbered: with a variety of such frivolities,
as are too insignificant to amuse the feeble genius of a child. Such never can
be the language of a God infinite in wisdom.

Fellow citizens, insult not the deity by attributing to him a work so
barbarously written, as that book called the Bible. Let the following passages
serve as a sample of the base production. " Now go and smite Amelak and utterly
destroy all that they have, and spare them not: but slay both man and woman,
infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass, etc. Again -- Let his
children be fatherless and his wife a widow, let his children be continually
vagabonds and beg, let them seek their bread in desolate places, let the
extortioner catch all that he has, and let the stranger spoil his labor, let
there be none to extend mercy on him, neither let there be any to favor his
fatherless children, let his posterity be cut off, and in the generation
following, let their names be blotted out." The first of these passages carries
with it all the marks of cruelty and injustice, and urges the execution of an
act shocking to humanity: while the second passage seems rather the language of
an infernal demon, than that of a just and merciful God. The only apology, for
this last passage, is, that it is the composition of a royal prophet. As for
the Psalms of David, the Songs of Solomon, of Deborah and Baruk, they were sung
in the camps of the Israelites and in the cities of Judea and Jerusalem, as
Homer's works were sung in the cities of Greece and Athens. Our Bible makers,
however, took infinite pains to collect together those scattered remnants of
oriental poetry, calling them the word of God: and metamorphosed David into a
pious Christian.

On closely examining this holy Bible I find it to be the dregs of ancient
folly and presumption. Some parts of it pretend to give an history of the
antediluvian and the first ages of the past diluvian world: other parts
describe God's dealings with man, under the Jewish economy, where all nature
is said to be inverted to convince those blind people of their errors: yet it
appears that God's government over them was ineffectual, and void of energy.
The upholder of worlds could not keep these people in proper subjection; he was
therefore, according to this Bible, obliged to resign his command, and suffer a
people, for whom he had so parental an affection, to become the common vagrants
of the earth. Other parts of this holy book predicts what God will do in time
to come: but as no specific time is affixed to any particular event, our
zealous partisans are making daily discoveries of the fulfilments of the
prophecies.

There is I think one passage of the Bible which bids fair never to be
accomplished, while a Christian king is in existence, and which might be truly
verified, if those devouring monsters were finally extirpated, viz. "they shall
turn their swords into plough shares, and their spears into pruning hooks."
When Saul was a peasant, he enquired of a prophet concerning his fathers asses,
but when he mounted a throne, his majesty consulted a witch on the success of a
battle; such is the universal piety of kings.

A wretch more infernal than either witch or Devil, would be consulted by a
king with avidity, while in pursuit of conquest, fame, and ambition.

I now proceed to examine those events called miracles, recorded in the sacred
history.

The famous miracle of the red sea dividing, and affording a dry passage to
Moses and his followers claims the first rank. If the history of Egypt deceives
me not, I find the same sea afforded a similar passage to Alexander the Great
and his whole army, when they were pursuing victory, to the destruction of the
Persian empire. We are as well assured that the red sea divides once a year in
that particular spot, as we are of the hurricanes in the West Indies, or the
monsoon in the East Indies. The second grand miracle, is that of the sun's
standing still at the command of Joshua. As this mighty miracle is fully
confuted by the Newtonian system of astronomy, I shall pass it by without a
single comment. If then, the two greatest miracles upon record are either
accounted for, or confuted by the laws of nature, what credit ought to be given
to those little tricks played off in the dark by magicians and soothsayers.
That Moses was a crafty and arbitrary legislator appears evident from his own
account. He took the advantage of thick hazy weather to go up to the mountain,
where he affected to consult the deity, and then returned with his head full of
proclamations, saying, "thus says the Lord." The deluded people, being duped,
paid the most religious regard to all his precepts which for the most part were
exceedingly stupid. Perhaps of all the high finished villains that ever
degraded the page of history, or the shape of humane, none ever eqalled the
monster Moses in scenes of systematic plunder, murder, and debauchery. To
assert that so vile a character could have access to the deity, and consult him
face to face, is to assert that the deity is accessory to his crimes, crimes so
complicated as to stagger all rational belief; Nay, charity obliges me to hope
they are not done.
His successors pursued the same maxims. Nothing could pass into a law, until
it was sanctioned by divine approbation: this once obtained, it was proclaimed
with another, "Thus says the Lord." Who can justify the bauld-headed prophet,
in calling from the woods two she bears to devour forty and two little
children: or can we suppose that the wisest man that ever lived should be the
chief of adulterers and fornicators: though at a period when incapable of
further excesses, he made a fortunate discovery, "that all was vanity." But,
passing over those wise men, murderers and miracle makers, I shall proceed to
make some observations on the New Testament: and here I trust that every
rational Christian, who seriously considers this subject, will look back with
horror upon his former folly, and reflect upon himself, for being so long the
dupe of faction, the sport of impostures and the victim of deceit.

The Christian system is prefaced with one of the most extravagant fables ever
recorded, a fable so much dwelt upon as the source of all human miseries, as
renders it impossible for me to pass it over without some animadversions. I
allude to the wars in heaven, which, by the by, are only a prelude to the fall
of man.

I know not the time, in which this rebellion is said to have happened, but the
history of this memorable event is as follows: Satan, once the highest angel in
heaven, and next in power to the Deity, stimulated by ambition, aspired to the
throne, and with a vast number of his confederates conspired against the
supreme power. The deity apprised of the evil imaginations of the insurgents,
whose intentions were to dethrone him, immediately summoned a numerous army, at
the head of which he placed Jesus Christ, then angel Gabriel, and conferred
upon him the high office of commander in chief of the heavenly host. The
progress of the proud conspirator was impeded, after a most desperate battle,
in which the superior generalship of Jesus Christ, and the valiant powers of
his royal army, proved victorious. Satan's troop of infernals, being so
completely routed, as rendered it impossible for him to rally his forces, or
take the field a second time. Genearl Jesus pursued his victory, and kept close
to the rear of Satan's retreating army, until he had finally driven the rebels
beyond the boundaries of heaven. Here blind Milton takes his poetic flight, and
sets the heavens in an uproar; he pursues with wonderful success the lofty
style of genius, and humors with vast sublimity, the fabulous dreams of
theological facts; O that such talents should be lost in fable.


So wonderful was this war conducted that not one soldier was killed, wounded,
or taken prisoner on either side, during the whole campaign.

We must further observe that the conduct of the Deity was widely different
from that of the present rulers of the world: who immediately execute those
that resist their government. The Deity pursued a different plan; he added
another limb to creation by forming a place called Hell; he put a crown upon
the head of Satan, and gave him the sovereign dominion over that vast empire,
with full power and authority, to commit all manner of depredations upon the
inhabitants of this earth, as if we had been a party concerned in the
rebellion. The first shock we sustained, by this infernal Monster, was at a
time when he had taking a country airing in the garden of Eden, where he
assumed the form of a serpent, and by the charms of his eloquence, and the
rattling of his tail, he prevailed on mother Eve to eat an apple, by which all
mankind would have been eternally damned if the Deity had not ratified a treaty
of amity and commerce between Satan and the clergy about 1796 years ago.

The conditions of this treaty, for inhumanity cruelty, and injustice,
surpasses all rational belief. The preamble is briefly this: a virgin was
overshadowed by the holy Ghost: this holy Ghost was God: the virgin conceived,
and brought forth a son: this son was God also. There is something very
puzzling to make it appear, that Christ is the second person in the trinity. If
the holy Ghost overshadowed the virgin Mary and that she conceived by him; then
the fruits of that conception must be the son of the holy Ghost: of course he
is the grandson of God, the third person in the trinity, and not the second.
But my business is not to prove doctrinal points, I shall therefore leave the
doctors of mysteries to manage this part of the subject.

After this God, or, son of God, had lived for thirty years in the most perfect
poverty and wretchedness, he commenced the profession of an itinerant preacher;
and, in consequence of his seditious tenets, he was accused before the chief
judge, who sentenced him to death, which he accordingly suffered. It is said
that Christ predicted all this himself, and that it was necessary he should die
for the sins of the world. Yet it is remarkable, that the people who executed
so necessary a work, should of all others be so much reprobated by Christians.

When Christ was expiring upon the cross he said to one of his fellow
sufferers, this day shall thou be with me in paradise. This was the last speech
of a poor unfortunate God. But the creed makers assert that he descended into
hell. Whether then to believe Christ, or creed mongers, is at the option of the
reader, for my part, I believe neither. After Christ was taken down from the
cross, he was packed up in a stone sepulcher, and a sentinel placed at the
mouth of the cave to prevent the corpse from being stolen away. Christ however,
found means, without breaking the seal, or alarming the sentinel, to creep out
of the sepulcher, and take a journey all the way to hell: and was so
expeditious, as to return in less than three days, and took his position as
before. Fortunately for the Christians, but quite the reverse for the Jews, the
sentinal fell fast asleep, and afforded a most special opportunity for an angel
to descend from heaven, If this celestial messenger had not arrived just at the
nick of time, it is a thousand to one: but he would have been shot dead by the
sentinal.
who rolled the stone from the mouth of the sepulcher, and let out Jesus, alive
and well, safe and sound. After this, Jesus appeared to a few of his former
disciples and gave them some directions concerning their future ministry, when,
lo! he took wings and flew up to heaven.

Thus ends the whimsical history of Christ's birth, death, and resurrection: on
which I shall make a few remarks, by way of illustration. I have not knowledge
enough in mysteries to know what Christ's business could be in hell, unless it
was to pay his court to the royal family, and, by his personal appearance,
convince Prince Satan that the treaty was ratified on his part, by which we
were purchased of the Devil, whose property we were previous to the
crucifiction. A papist will inform us, the better to establish the doctrine of
purgatory, that Christ did not descend into the hell of the damned, having no
sin to answer for. A protestant will retort, that he did not descend into
purgatory, because, having no sin, he need not go there for purification: but
most Christians agree, that he descended into hell to preach the gospel to the
damned, and this clenches the argument at once. I must give it as my opinion
that Christ's stay was too short in hell to deliver many sermons, and that if
he was accustomed to preach from notes, as most of our modern divines are, they
were in danger of being scorched by the flames; or, perhaps the climate was too
hot to agree with his constitution, and this obliged him to make so speedy a
return to the more temperate regions of Asia. The vulgar are led to believe
that hell is somewhat below us, or in the bowels of the earth, which notion is
chimerical, nor is it possible to know what part of the creation this
tremendous abyss occupies. If we may judge from the gestures of divines, in
their pulpit harangues, heaven appears to be above us and hell below us, for
when they mention heaven they look up, and when they mention hell they look
down, it is like looking up for the sun, and down for the moon.

If Christ did really leave the sepulcher, and descend into hell, could he not
with equal facility, have risen from the dead, without the assistance of an
angel: and made a public appearance before that tribunal which condemned him to
death. If he predicted that he would rise the third day after his crucifixion,
would not those who pronounced his sentence have anxiously awaited the
fulfillment of such predictions, or, if he actually did rise from the dead,
should he not have made his resurrection of equal publicity, as his
crucifixion; this he should have done unless he was afraid of being crucified a
second time.

If darkness obscured the air, -- if the earth shook with a convulsive pang, --
if the vale of the temple was rent at Christ's crucifiction, he should, at his
resurrection, have dashed to atoms the sepulcher wherein he was laid, -- the
proud temple should have been shattered into dust. -- The palace of Caiphus, --
and the hall of Pilot, should vanish like smoke, -- and a thousand phenomenons
should have taken place, to convince the Jews, that the great Being, whom they
crucified, was now risen from the dead, agreeable to his own prediction. But
alas! Nothing like this had happened, every thing was silent.

In the name of common sense, what great and mighty works did Christ perform,
what godlike acts, or monuments of fame did he leave behind to establish his
divinity? His greatest miracles are equalled, if not exceeded in the Old
Testament. We grant that he destroyed a whole herd of swine, and a troop of
devils, at one stroke, -- he cursed the barren fig tree, -- and made a
triumphant entry into the city of Jerusalem, mounted upon an ass said to be
stolen; with a variety of other feats, which taken in the aggregate, make
rather against than for his divinity.

Had Christ left any thing wonderful, for the world to behold, we would suspend
all doubts respecting his mission. But doing so little we have just cause to
suspect the whole system to be a fraud piously contrived by a few early
impostors. Had he caused a fountain to spring from the dry land and raised its
summit to the utmost ken of human sight; had he caused the cross whereon he was
crucified to take root, and grow to the size of Babel's tower, remaining an
everlasting monument of his attoning merits; -- these might be irresistible
proofs of his divinity. But the tale is related without authority, and credited
without evidence.

Having shown the feeble principles upon which the Christian system is founded,
I proceed to other observations.

Christ says, "Lo I am with you even unto the end of the world." When I read
the new word of God, commonly called the gospel, and see how often Christ
appears and disappears. A little while and you shall see me, and a little while
and you shall not see me, and the indefatigable Mary meeting him on all
occasions, it reminds me of Harlequin and Columbine; and the conspicuous, part
the devil acts in the farce, is characteristic of old Pantaleon in the
Pantomime.
If so, why such distraction among Christians; or why not make another visible
appearance, and set matters right; and not give the poor clergy so much room to
complain for want of faith; nor exclaim that Christianity is losing ground, and
that Deism is gaining hard upon them. Do they insinuate that Satan has violated
the treaty, or that he is more powerful than the Almighty; surely not. That
there is a want of faith among Christians is evident, else mountains would be
rolled about like pebble stones.

In short, under the most favorable circumstance in which we can view the
Christian system, it has all the marks of fraud and imposition; its sole basis
is founded upon fable, and its rubric more irrational than the heathen worship.

After these bold declarations, me thinks, I hear some Christian exclaim, what,
are we to have but one God; Are we to have no Jesus Christ to redeem us; Are we
to have no holy Ghost to sanctify us; Are we to have no infernal Demons to
inflict torments? Why this would be to unhinge the whole order of our system,
and place at once the righteous and the ungodly upon an equal footing. Surely
Sirs, little need be said to prove that one true God, is better than a thousand
false ones: as for Jesus Christ, he never redeemed you; neither has the holy
Ghost sanctified you; these are but the catch words of priestcraft. Men are as
independent of these step ladders, by which to climb up to heaven, as they were
ten thousand years ago. If Jesus Christ has redeemed you, why terrify the
vulgar with the fears of hell? (as for the learned of all nations they have no
fear about it.) If the holy Ghost has sanctified you, in what manner does the
sanctification appear? Are Christians more honorable or honest in their way of
dealing? are they freer from debauchery and vices of every kind than other men?
With sorrow I repeat it, the reverse is the melancholy truth. A little Turkish
morality, annexed to the purest precepts of the Christian gospel, would
constitute a better religion than any now in vogue.

It requires a round faith indeed to credit the existence of a monstrous devil,
or that there is such a place as hell, I disbelieve both: yet I am far from the
opinion that the righteous and the ungodly will be upon an equal footing; for
the same God who reserves to himself the power to reward virtue, will also
punish vice, independent to agents, demi gods, or infernal demons. As for
unhinging the whole order of the Christian system, that can never be effected
while the duplicity of the clergy, and the blind credulity of the laity are
proof against reason and common sense, for, truly, such is the system of piety
preserved by Christians, that if a man, conscious of the duty he owes his
maker, undertakes to vindicate the moral character of the deity, in opposition
to the corrupt passages of current orthodoxy, he is sure to be stigmatized with
the most opprobrous epithets, and none more contemptible than that of a Deist.
It is a truth that I am a Deist, I wish to live a Deist, and hope to die a
Deist, yet I shall reproach no man for being a Christian.

The Bible on which the Christian system is founded, exhibits doctrines
repugnant to each other, and inculcates principles highly injurious to the
moral happiness of man, it delivers precepts of doubtful meanings, and are
therefore liable to be disputed, neither do the trumpetors of the Bible's
praise, think proper to be governed by it, but follow their own course of life
as heedless as if they had no such thing as a Bible to be governed by. This
book is written in such figurative and ambiguous language, hyperboles, and
metaphorical phrases, that it appears only calculated to puzzle creed-makers,
miracle men, and soul-saviours.

When the church of Rome had the Bible under lock and key closely concealed
from the people, mankind were anxious to know the contents of the sacred
deposit, but the moment it were divulged its frivolty appeared, and the more
this book is read, the less it is regarded. I firmly believe that if this Bible
could be generally read without prejudice, there would not be a Christian in
existence fifty years hence; it lays down no system of religion whatever, but
is equally calculated to establish Atheism as Christianity, and is but a wanton
burlesque upon God and his providence. It has done less real good, and more
real mischief, than any other book that ever was printed. Read the Bible
without prejudice, and if any thing is calculated to shock the human heart, or
blacken the character of the Deity, the Bible seems evidently intended for that
purpose. It was written with blood, and is a continued history of murders and
debauchery.


If Christianity was instituted for the purpose of making men better than they
would otherwise be, to curb their unwiedly passions, and prevent those murders,
massacres, and inhuman butcheries, so frequently committed by Christian against
Christian, we find it has entirely missed its aim, and woeful experience proves
how prevalent such cruelties are at this day in almost every corner of the
Christian world. Not less than two millions of Christians including the slaves
of despots, have been murdered, massacred, and slain in battle, in the space of
four years. Is not this in due conformity to Christ's words, Think not that I
am come to bring peace upon earth, no, but to set families and friends at
variance: the true character of a Christian then, is to live in a continual
state of warfare. And behold one of the most gracious kings in Europe, in
justice to his profession, proclaims to the world that he is called upon by his
religion, to prosecute with vigor the most infamous war, that ever degraded
the page of history. If then the Christian religion is of a celestial origin,
as its professors proudly boast it to be, would it, or could it, possibly admit
of so many enormities. In short, view it in every direction and it appears a
monster in full perfection.

Christ is represented to us as the Prince of peace, though he says himself,
that he is not come to bring peace upon earth. O sublime contradiction, peace
in one hand, and war in the other, welcome most noble prince to this world
below.

It is not, I am persuaded the sublimity of the Christian system that invites
so many to its communion, when children, our parents lead us to their
respective churches, and train us up to their different ceremonies; but when we
begin to think for ourselves, discovering errors not easily digested, we
renounce our first rituals, and embrace another doctrine, in order, if possible
to arrive at some rational certainty; instead, however, of improving here, we
find other tenets equally disgusting, from this we change perhaps to a third,
where similar errors still exist, at length, fatigued by making fruitless
researches after rational and comprehensive doctrines, we abjure our reason,
and join the common cry that "all is mystery." This was absolutely the case
with me for near forty years, till finding with all my endeavors to sift out
some consistent mode of worship, I was only changing from one absurdity to
another, at length I solemnly renounced them all. Is it not the same with the
people of this continent, as it is with those of other countries, who take
their religion by chance, not by choice.

If the grand Turk of Constantinople had established a colony in America,
instead of the king of Britain, we should be all Mahometans, we should then say
of Christians, as the Christians now say of the Mahometans. The reason why a
child is brought to the synagogue to be circumcised is because his father was a
Jew, and he becomes a Jew himself for the same reason that his father was a Jew
before him.

Suppose we were in a mere state of nature, destitute of any religion
whatsoever; and that all the religious extant were laid before us to chose from
among them one; it is a query which we should prefer; probably that which
appeared the most rational. In this case, I see nothing in the Christian
religion that would give it the preference to the Pythagorian system; and it is
probable Mahomet's coran would take the lead of the Mosaic Bible.

As for the Christian religion I know not what it is; Christ never instituted
any, he only taught a few scraps of moral philosophy; the whole history of his
life, and doctrines might be comprised in a six penny pamphlet, who taught us
then that this man was God? Did he ever say so himself? No. Did any of his
disciples say so? certainly not. Christ has not left a single paragraph on
record by which we may know his real sentiments; he had no learning in
consequence of his poverty, of which he made great merit, and wished none to
follow him, but those who are equally poor as himself. But we discover a
striking contrast in the professors of his doctrines. He was illeterate, they
are learned; he was poor, they are rich; he was humble, they are arrogant. In
short, he was destitute, but they have abundance.

Having stretched this second proposition to some length I now proceed in the
third place to analize the venerable system of Christianity, and here I shall
endeavor to demonstrate three propositions:

First, that the Christian religion is impracticable.

Second, that it is inconsistent with reason, and

Thirdly, that it is unnatural.

First then; that the Christian religion is impracticable, appears from the
following precepts, which enjoins us to pray without ceasing, to sell all and
follow Christ, to cut off our hands and pull out our eyes, in case they should
offend us, to love our enemies; bless them that curse us, and pray for them
that persecute and despitefully use us, etc. Great stress is laid upon the
first of these precepts, but we are assured from long experience, that our
prayers are ineffectual, and perhaps the reason is best assigned by the
apostle, who tells us, that we receive not, because we ask in vain: What then
is the use of asking? have we not innumerable instances that human petitions
never altered the divine will? David was three days and nights in prayer for
the recovery of his child; the answer was, thy child shall die. Are not all the
kings of Europe, assisted by their clergy, almost incessantly supplicating the
deity in the name of Jesus, for the success of their respective armies. But the
God of battle hears them not; neither is it possible to pray without ceasing,
because the time required to procure the necessaries of life, is about two
thirds, and the remaining time is scarce sufficient for rest and refreshment;
therefore to suppose a man can be in prayer continually, is to suppose an
impossibility.

"To sell all and follow Christ, is a precept delivered to the laity only, it
does not effect the clergy, as appears by their love of riches, and in general
this doctrine has had a contrary tendency, for the more pious and religious the
Christian, the more greedy after gain; point out to me a devout Christian, and
I will point out to you in the same person, a miserable worldly muck-worm.

"To cut off our hands, or pull out our eyes," may be a kind of hyperbole, or
figurative speech, it is therefore the province of some learned doctor of
divinity to explain how far these precepts can be compiled with.

To love our enemies, bless them that curse us and pray for them that persecute
and despitefully use us, are precepts that look well on paper, though it is not
the weakest part of Christian philosophy that can strengthen our resolution, or
restrain our resentment of injuries done unto us; nor is it common among
Christians to kneel down and pray for the being who is at the same moment
cursing them. "To love our enemies," is a precept strongly urged by the
pleaders of the pulpit, but the pleaders of the bar preach a different
doctrine; and if the greater number of adherants amounts to a proof in favor
of any precept, we must evidently declare for the latter; consequently the
preachers of the bar not those of the pulpit, are inspired by the holy Ghost.

Secondly, that the Christian religion is inconsistent to reason, will appear
by the following. "If a man smite you on one cheek turn unto him the other: he
who steals your coat, give him your cloak also: take no thought of tomorrow,
neither seek what ye shall eat, drink, or wherewith ye shall be clothed." All
these precepts are truly Christian, and how far they can be compiled with,
common experience plainly demonstrates. That they are inconsistent with moral
happiness, is beyond all doubt. As for encouraging a thief, or tamely
submitting to assault and battery, as applied by the two first articles, it is
contrary to the principles of moral justice, or public order. The law of
retaliation, as thought by Moses, is far more rational, and, I need not say,
more universal. He who takes no "thought for tomorrow, nor seeks what he shall
eat, drink, or wherewith he shall be clothed," would be considered as an idle
vagabond; he would be destitute of credit or respect; he would be covered with
rags and poverty, and discarded from all society. Nay, where is the Christian,
be he ever so pious, that is not anxious to day, for the bread he hopes to
consume tomorrow. Even the clergy, the most righteous of all men, are
particularly nice in their table furniture; resembling the rich man talked of
in the gospel, "They are clothed in purple and fine linen, and fare
sumptuously every day."

I shall now proceed thirdly, to show that the Christian religion is unnatural.
" When thou make a feast, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, nor thy
kinsman, nor thy rich neighbors etc. But when thou make a feast, call the
poor, the maimed, the lame, the halt, and the blind. Except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Except ye are born
again, and become as little children, ye can never enter the kingdom of heaven
etc. These are the express words of Christ, consequently they are positive
rules, proper to be obeyed by every professor.

The first of these precepts denies a Christian the social enjoyment, which
naturally results from friendly visits, and rational entertainments; it
confines a Christian to the company of poor, lame, and blind beggars. This
precept is so unnatural, that those who have voluntarily chosen Christ for
their head, never obey it. Even those who pretend to have obtained patents from
heaven, for being ushers in Christ's school, pay no regard to it, but run
through life with as little remorse, or shame at a breach of it, as the most
obstinate unbelievers. Can we suppose that a right reverend father in God, by
divine providence, a true disciple of Jesus Christ, should provide a sumptuous
entertainment, and sit down to glut and gormandize with his rich neighbors, to
the total exclusion of the poor, the lame, the maimed, the halt, and the blind,
when conscious that he is thereby violating an express command of his lord and
master. Or shall we suppose that these right reverends are concealed infidels
who believe nothing of the matter? The words of Christ are plain and express,
they are not in a lofty style of language, neither are they hyperboles, or
figurative speeches, that mean more than is expressed; they are plain words
that do not admit of double dealing. If then these rules of life, laid down by
Christ himself, are improper, as well as unnatural, and professors indulge
themselves in a total neglect of them, is it not the duty then of our first
rate divines to unfold this riddle?

"Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you." It is impossible to enumerate the volumes of contraversy this
text has given rise to, the contentions it has created, or the tuns of human
blood it has shed. To suppose that Christ offered his disciples real human
flesh to eat, and natural human blood to drink, is in itself so barbarous and
inhuman as to shock our grossest feelings. This is one of the christian
mysteries never to be understood, and because of its sublimity it is construed
into a sacrament, wherein bread is, by the conjuration of a priest,
transubstantiated into flesh, and wine eucrastised into blood, and this bread
and wine is taken and received by the faithful "as the real body and blood of
Christ." Thus a system of canabalism spiritualized, is the most fundamental
tenet in the Christian religion.

"Except ye are born again, and become as little children, ye cannot enter the
kingdom of heaven." If by being born again, signifies changing from one rule of
faith to another, there are few Christians who have not been born and reborn
over and over again. Whether Christ means this kind of re-generation, I know
not, it is however unnatural in the extreme, to suppose we can grow downwards,
shrink into children, become as little infants, re-enter our mother's womb, and
put her to the painful operation of giving us a second birth. This is so
repugnant to the course of nature, and so great an insult to reason, that I
should think it a waste of time and paper to say more upon the subject.

There are a variety of other passages equally impracticable, inconsistent, and
unnatural as those already quoted, but it would require a book as large as the
Bible, to do them justice. I shall therefore wave all further animadversion,
and proceed to some cursary observations.

There are a sect of Christians, commonly called Quakers, who profess the
strictest observance to the christian precepts, particularly these; resist not
evil, swear not at all, let your charity be in secret, place no dependence in
long prayer, etc." but surely he who prescribed these rules also said, "lay not
up for yourselves treasure upon earth." The friends probably think they may
safely indulge themselves in the breach of this latter precept, upon condition
that they attend to the former rules. Christ, if I mistake not, cautions his
disciples, against making an outward show of their profession, by any external
form, or dress, yet the moment we behold a man in a drab colored coat, or an
horizontal hat, we immediately think of a Quaker. Mr. Pain asserts that these
people are Deists, but I hope he will excuse me, when I say that this is paying
them too high a compliment, they are between the Deist and the Christian, which
denote nothing but a Buckram pride, as rediculous, as it is singular.
The enlightened and well informed Methodists, are gradually declining into the
same maxims, signifying their profession by outward apparel: but I will not say
of them, as Christ said to the Pharasees in a parallel case, "Woe be unto you
hypocrites for ye have your reward!"

After the monstrous heap of absurdities, thus briefly stated, it is to be
hoped that, in future, Christians will not take the liberty to contemn Deists,
in the manner they have usually done.

Were I disposed to dispute doctrinal points, my essay would be extended to an
enormous size indeed, yet I would wish to know what benefit arises from the
frivolous ceremony of infant baptism, or saying a few prayers over a dead
person? For my part, I know of none, except good eating and drinking, in the
former, and the parson's fees in the latter, be considered as such. If
sprinkling a little water upon the face of an infant, or saying a few prayers
over a corpse, could operate by way of a charm, these ceremonies would be of
infinite utility; but as they appear to be founded in priestcraft, no good can
be expected to result from them.

The clergy it is true are civil enough to conduct us to the grave, and wish us
a good journey to the other world, being confident that when they have
deposited our remains in the silent vault, their deceptions have thus far
escaped detection, and this accounts for their successful duplicity. But we
will develope the dark designs of sanctified impostors and decry the cunning
artifices of fictitious theologists. -- In short

There appear to be so many absurd and whimsical ceremonies in the christian
institution, that I am now stimulated to ask the candid reader, (even supposing
him to be a Christian,) what apology he can make for the many contradictions
and inconsistencies, of which the christian system consists? Will he answer,
that he principally depends upon the faith and virtue of the good clergy, who
would not preach a doctrine, knowing it to be false, and as they are a very
learned body they are the best judges. That this is the plea of millions of
christian professors I verily believe, and I am no less certain, that the
clergy are a very learned body, who will do any thing that serves their present
interest, and this is the plain reason why religion, and the Bible, are what
they are. For instance, if you apply to a doctor of divinity concerning some
doubtful tenet, you should first recollect that he is bound by oath of office,
and interest, to support, at all events, true or false, the doctrine of that
church to which he belongs, and from which he receives his revenues. A popish
priest will defend the doctrines of transubstantiation, purgatory, and the
works of superorogation, etc. A Presbyterian priest I denominate all under the
term Priests, or Drs. of duplicity.
will support the doctrines of election and reprobation. An Episcopalian priest
will maintain the doctrines of free grace and redemption by the blood of
Christ. Each of these priests will take his oath that his doctrines are true
and that all the rest are false, so that, lay piety aside, and the clergy are a
very learned body indeed.

I am informed that in England when a gentleman takes up holy orders, he is
qualified to keep a pack of hounds, and the business of a clergyman being but
an idle calling, most of their time is occupied in hunting, shooting, or
gambling, so that it is a mystery to know whether those men live to play, or
play to live. The clergy of France swore by the four Evangelists that they were
inspired by the Holy Ghost, and endowed with the gift of continency; but since
the revolution of that country, they have discovered a propensity to women
equal to other men. Thus much for the oath and veracity of the holy order of
clergymen.

I find in history that the clergy of England changed from popish to protestant
in one reign, from protestant to popish in the next, and from popish to
protestant in the third. Who will say that all this shifting and changing was
in search of purer doctrine, and not in search of loaves and fishes? It would
be a disgrace to my profession if these men were called Deists.

These people seem wonderfully affected, while deploring the sufferings of a
poor unfortunate God. But can a rational being suppose for a moment, that the
creator of the world should reside for three and thirty years upon this earth,
in the contemptible manner ascribed to him, one part of the time necessiated to
work with his father at the business of a carpenter, at another time so
destitute as not to have whereon to lay his head, and at last to be put to a
shameful death by a few of his own creatures? Is it not a fact, that God is as
far above the power of human cruelties, as the heavens are above the earth? Can
the creature have power over the Creator? Certainly not: if then it should be
said in the cant way, the better to get over these difficulties, that there is
nothing impossible to God: I answer in the negative, not but I acknowledge the
divine will, and admit the power and attributes of the Deity in the fullest
latitude, yet I am of opinion that there are many things absolutely impossible
to God. He cannot create another God as old as himself -- he cannot act
inconsistent with himself -- he cannot divide his own essence, -- he cannot put
a period to his own existence, nor suffer it to be done by others. -- These
plain truths, without any comments, will, I presume, convince the candid, that
there are many things impossibe to God.

Is it not time to abolish for ever the ignominious remembrance of ancient
frenzy, and renounce the dreadful custom of commemorating a torturing God. Our
thinking faculties enable us to enlarge our circle, and we discover few truths
but what a beneficent Deity has permitted us to see. It is therefore by
communicating our sentiments through the medium of the press, that we benefit
society in a thousand different forms. To exalt the mind to a true sense or
omnipotent wisdom, to represent the Deity in the high plenitude of power and of
goodness, and show his wondrous works in the rapid movement of blind matter,
has been the work of philosophers for many ages, far from the narrow and
contracted notions of crucifying to death a God who was from all eternity, --
far from the magic tricks of putting him in a hollow stone, -- sending him down
to hell, -- bringing him back again, -- and then sending him to heaven in a
whirlwind. A Deist laughs at these contemptible tales, and pities those who
are dupes to fables and to mysteries, to priests and impostors.

If there is any thing which can astonish the contemplative philosopher, it is
the length of time which these magic deceptions are permitted to impose upon
the credulity of man, and it is no less surprising that any being of ordinary
capacities should abjure his reason, his liberty, and his finest faculties, to
embrace ideas incompatible with nature, reason, and all human comprehension.

The word Gospel signifies truth, but why the new testament should be
considered as such, is difficult to determine, since it is all fable, mystery,
and metaphor. The parables said to be uttered by Christ himself are allowed by
all the Christian clergy to be only figurative speeches, which represent things
in a foreign sense, after the eastern style. No such person ever existed as the
prodigal son, though it is the most striking fable in the whole Bible, and
fully expressive of the natural consequences of prodigality, wantoness, and
dissipation. As for the fable of Dives and Lazarus, it is a most extravagant
thought. I have often amused myself in the idea, what a roaring and tremendous
voice Dives must have had, to be heard from the lowermost pit of hell by father
Abraham, who was at the same time in heaven, dandling Lazarus in his arms, as a
nurse would a child. In short, this parable is too romantic, and all the rest
are too insignificant to admit of serious animadversion. If Aesop's fables were
bound up in the Bible, and called the book of parables, Then might our pious
and learned clergy say, the word of God which you will find written in the 6th
chap. of Aesop's parables, and the fox said to the grapes thou art sour.
they would convey more moral instruction to man, than any thing we read of in
that vast volume. I shall pass by those letter written by the Saints, which we
call Epistles, because they are no more to be considered holy writ than the
letters written by one clergyman to another. As for Jacob's ladder, -- the
miraculous pillar, -- Peter's vision, -- St. John's dreams, -- his white horse,
-- the sheet full of wild beasts, -- and the seven golden candlesticks, -- I
throw them as lumber into the bargain.

Thus, the Bible running through a tedious and uninteresting narration of
contradictory circumstances, empties itself in a round assertion, "Were all the
works that Christ had done written in a book, the world could not contain it."
What a pitiful notion of the world the people of those days must have had, to
suppose it might be covered over with a manuscript.

Citizens, rouse from your lethargy, be no longer amused with the remnants of
fusty tales, or the genealogical tree of Eden, disregard at once all antiquated
folly, and become the cotemporary of future ages. Contemplate that revelation,
which the God of nature and reason has given us, in the bounties of his
creation; there you will read a language that requires not the interpretation
of theological drones, nor the comments of divine Simonites; you see that
religion which has poisoned the world is founded upon a rotten basis, and it
appears high time to give to morality a much better support.

Let us all seek truth as if none of us were possessed of it, the opinions
which to this day have governed the earth, produced by chance, disseminated in
obscurity, admitted without discussion, credited from a love of novelty and
imitation, have in a manner usurped their empire. It is time if they are
founded in reality to give them the solemn stamp of certainty, and to
legitimate their existence. See Volney, page 151.


Oh ye clergy! ye learned men! instigated by some untoward destiny to deceive
the world, permit me to address these my last lines to you. What say you to
those gospel precepts, do you really believe them to be either practicable,
rational, or consistent with nature or with reason? Do you patronize after the
model of him whose disciples ye profess to be? Are you like him, free from
passion, anger, or despair? Have you disgraced the reformed pulpit, or profaned
the Roman altar, when an unitarian lecturer exposed the folly of your dogmas?
Oh ye clergy, are you the disciples of that unreasonable man who laid down
rules of life impossible to obey? Do you take thought for tomorrow, what ye
shall eat, drink, or wherewith ye shall be clothed? Do you pray without
ceasing? Do you do good for evil, bless them that curse you, and pray for them
that persecute and despitefully use you? Do you invite the poor, the lame, the
maimed, the halt, and the blind to your sumptuous tables, to the utter
exclusion of your rich friends and neighbors? Do you swear not at all, and
resist not evil? In a word, Do you do unto all men as you wish they should do
unto you? If Sirs, you do not attend to all these precepts, which are truly
Christian, what pretensions have you to be the obedient servants of him, who,
as your master, allotted you these several tasks and duties to perform, without
exception.

He who told you to sell all and follow him, do you not rather acquire all and
forsake him? did he not forewarn you against covetousness? And are you not as
covetous as if you were to live a never ending life? You who should lay no
store on the good things of this world, are you not as particularly nice in
your eatables and wearables, as if your bodies were formed of purer clay than
those of other mortals? Do you not in direct contradiction to the precepts of
your Lord, entertain your rich friends and neighbors to the total exclusion of
the poor and blind, nay, have you not under the sanction of a reformation, even
robbed the poor to enrich your own revenues. If then, what you tell us be
really true, that we shall all appear before your divine master at the last
day, to receive judgment according to our works, what account can you give of
yourselves, seeing that you deviate from those commandments which he set before
you; must you not say that they were impracticable, inconsistent, and
unnatural, or else that you did not approve of them.

Remember then the language of my fellow creature whom you style your God: "If
ye continue in my word then are ye my disciples indeed." Divines, we see you
eternally conspiring against reason, against liberty, and against the freedom
of conscience, we listen to your declamations against us Deists, whom you
inviduously style the sons of infidelity, you prevail upon your flock, to
believe that we wish to destroy all virtue and morality, but the reverse is the
fact, we inculcate virtue and sound morality, founded upon reason and the being
of a God. We Deists are not ashamed to own our profession; we will convince our
Christian adversaries, by our commerce with the world, by our lives, conduct,
and conversation, that we are virtuous, mild, gentle, and humane.

Clergy, we listen to your description of a terrible heterogeneous monster whom
you set up as the terror of man. At one time he is fomenting sedition in
heaven, -- at another time he is in open rebellion against the Deity, -- at
another time he is hurled into a pit, and chained for a thousand years, -- at
another time he is at large going about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may
devour, -- in short, he is but every where: can a reflective mind suppose for a
moment that such a monster does exist, or that he has the power which divines
attribute to him. It was to destroy the power of this fiend that the mighty
Jesus came into the world, yet he never was more omnipotent than since the
commencement of the Christian era, and divines render him more almighty than
the Deity himself. Perhaps of all the scarecrow doctrines that ever afflicted
an enlightened nation, this is one of the grossest impositions on the human
understanding. Foolish man there is no roaring lion, the clergy who terrify you
with this idea know it to be a fraud, yet they carry their deception to such a
length, as to count it profane to take his sooty majesty's name in vain.


As it is with Satan, so it is with man, at one time he is the high and mighty
Lord of God's creation, -- the noblest of God's creatures, -- the image of God
himself, -- but one degree below the angels in heaven, -- having dominion over
all things, etc. at another time he is but dust and ashes, -- a crawling worm,
-- a filthy animal, -- a helpless wretch unworthy of God's favors etc. Thus
divines, do you figure to us with profound sublimity, those glaring
contradictions, nay, you transmography the Deity himself in as many, and
various attributes, as man and Satan. You Deify a man and call him very good,
who tells you, "There is none good but one," evidently meaning God.

To conclude. Charity will not permit a supposition that a well informed people
can yield implicit credit to a book which exhibits in almost every leaf some
strange and unaccountable paradox, a book crowded with indelicate and obscene
matter, unworthy a serious reading, it leads the credulous into numberless
errors, and involves them in a multiplicity of incoherent doctrines. To
attribute such a production to an all-wise Deity is offering the grossest
insult to his omnipotent wisdom, it being a mass of iniquity, the fountain of
inviduous controversies which usually terminate in the effusion of human blood,
whose overflowing torrents have deluged the world, as well under the Mosaic
theocracy, as under the Christian dispensation: it is a volume of knavery,
purposely contrived to answer the sinister views of priests and princes, who
alone fatten on its impracticable precepts.

Would it not then, be a felicity to future generations, were this book and the
blind tenets deduced from it, scouted from the earth, and bloated for ever from
the memory of man, will not an unborn posterity, at the perusal of this volume,
blush at the folly and blind credulity of their ancestors. But alas we fear,
while the apostles of duplicity feel an interest in supporting the pious fraud,
and live in sumptuous indolence upon the bounties of a credulous laity, the
world will be too long infected with a nuisance so disgusting to every
enlightened mind. Christians, we Deists are not possessed of vain ostentation,
and, though we act upon a different principle, and found our hopes upon a
different prospect, we acknowledge you to be our brethren, we pity error, we
defy envy, but we never persecute opinion.

ADDRESS, TO THE SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE AND PIETY.
DURING the imbecility of childhood I had not the capacity to judge, and in the
juvenal days of immatured manhood I thought it a crime to doubt the divinity of
those preceptorial doctrines, the knowledge of which you wish to promote, but
now, finding my chin graced with a grizly beard, my head ornamented with gray
locks -- my mind free from the shackles of ecclesiastical tyranny, -- and my
heart panting for the good of man, -- I became moved by an indiscribable
impulse to compare the principles of your religion with the practice of its
professors. I soon discovered a contrast, which gave me a stimulous to further
enquiries, the result of which proves the utter impracticability of the
christian system.

My duty as a citizen of the world, leads me to publish a few strictures on a
chain of dogmas, and whimsical mysteries, so much at variance against nature,
-- incompatible with rational consistency, -- irreconcilable to common sense,
-- and dishonorable to an all-wise Deity. Motives of pity might be the basis
of your institution, but your zealous efforts to promote the cause of God, and
the good of man, would be less in vain, were you to abandon folly, and
institute a society for the promotion of useful knowledge and science, instead
of encouraging the breed of saints and fanatics.

Is it now after a religion has been in fashion near 1800 years that we are to
acquire a knowledge of its ceremonious punctilios, and extract from it a little
piety, what it really produces? is it now, we are to open our eyes, and gaze
with astonishment on the beautiful fabric of blind mysteries, or look with a
pious admiration on the divine sublimity of a system which has confounded the
inquisitors of all ages. -- A system founded upon fable, and established upon
fanaticism, and persecution: -- a system that never consults reason, but always
opposes it: -- a system that approves poverty, yet commits symony and rapine to
maintain its pomp: -- in short, -- a system inconsistent with every thing but
contradiction. How are our thinking faculties confounded at the contemplation
of such a system, -- strange that a society should be instituted to promote the
knowledge of a religion, to the bottom of which no Christian dare venture; it
is criminal for a christian to enquire into the origin of his religion, and to
doubt the truth of the Bible, is an exclusion from heaven. Does your society in
the circulation of its knowledge, inform the faithful, that the book of Job, is
fabulous? That the acts of the apostles are anonymous? That the gospel of St.
John is spurious? That the Epistles are miscellaneous? And the Revelations an
unintelligeble jargon of metaphysics. Deluded Christians, what will you say of
yourselves, when we tell you that this description is precisely true, as
evidently proved by the ministers of your own religion.


These facts are well know to the christian clergy of all nations, but instead
of giving their flock such information, they fondly conceal the fraud, under
the mask of piety: how then are we to obtain a knowledge of the christian
religion, ask one sect of christians, "how many sacraments has Christ ordained
in his church?" You will receive for answer, seven: ask another sect, the same
question, and you will be informed, two: ask a third sect, and you will be
told, none at all: what shall we say to such glaring contradictions. Each of
these profess to be of found orthodox principles, yet they differ from each
other, as much as a substantive differs from a nonentity. It appears to me
then, that instead of promoting christian knowledge, your society is instituted
for the promotion of christian ignorance, by which reason is degraded; and
those who are dupes to a pretended revelation, are completely hag-ridden by the
magic charms of priestcraft. Thus we may discover, that while the deluded
Mahometans are coranized the infatuated Christians, are bibleized to a miracle,
and the pious ministers of a poor unfortunate God fail not to pronounce an
eternal anathema on those who do not abjure reason, and embrace dogmas
repugnant to sense and nature.

Divines? You who assume such powerful dominion over the souls of men; you who
can transport us either to heaven or to hell at your pleasure, why not work
some mighty miracle, after the manner of your lord and master, from whom you
received your divine mission, to convince us of your authority over us, but,
why talk of miracles, when pious duplicity informs us that miracles have
ceased; all we have to do then, is to believe, and this belief leads us to
imagine, that we are dead when alive, and that we are alive when actually dead.
This belief reverses the whole order of creation; this belief will save us to
eternity, with all our imperfections, without which the most righteous must
endure, a bitter portion of never ending miseries. Oh! horrible doctrine!
established by the sword, and maintained to this day by military governments,
hostile to reason and to liberty. Faith serves as a mask and muzzle to
hood-wink and jaw-clench the deluded laity; who, by virtue of their spiritual
faith, can work themselves into a belief that any thing is possible, however
derogatory to the nature of things. Will my believing a fable constitute it a
fact, or will my believing in a nonentity constitute it a substantive? Suppose
I believe a horse is a dog, or a dog to be a pig, will this alter the nature of
these animals? If I believe that one is three, or that three is one, this is
repugnant to the science of numbers, or if I believe that a virgin conceived a
son, and that this son was his own father, being 4000 years older than his
mother, nature and reason instantly revolts and says this cannot be. It would
be well then to throw aside blind faith, and believe in nothing but what can be
clearly demonstrated.


Will you, Sirs, deem it criminal to expose the foibles of a system which has
filled the world with blood and terror for eighteen centuries, during which
period, scarce a moment's interval of peace can be traced out by the most
zealous partizan; -- hostile wars, -- carnage, -- desolation, -- famine, -- and
infidelity, mark the gloomy pages of the Christian history, -- thus the divine
precepts of a celestially begotten man, has transformed Christians into
devouring monsters, who make the earth groan under the weight of superstition,
bigotry, fanaticism, and persecution.

Divines, you call these enormities, only an abuse of power, flowing from the
corruption of Christianity; but it is not your bountiful stock of divine grace,
nor all your rhetoric, nor pulpit admonitions, that can prevent the evils, nor
wipe away the odium: know you not, that you are the time servers of every
nation: the engines of despotism: the tools of statesmen, and of sovereigns:
even to assassinate where occasion requires, whatever is the will of your
prince, you cheerfully obey, and thus you piously serve God and Mammon. You
profess a dependence upon the mercies of your God, a reliance upon his
providence, and a cheerful resignation to his will; but the moment an epidemic
appears you abandon all your professions, desert your church, and mistrust the
goodness of your God, whose mercy and providence is no longer to be depended
upon. I had an opportunity of making these observations in the case of the
Philadelphians in the year 1793, and of the New-Yorkers in 1795, when the most
religious were the most apprehensive of danger, and the first who fled from the
contagion. Family attachment had no check upon their fears, humanity yielded to
selfish brutality, they no longer trusted to the mercies of a divine
providence, and the God of Christians was no longer the God of hope, at that
awful crisis. Christian piety discovered that the rural Gods were more
propitious than the great ruler of populous cities.

Let us now listen to the language of your divine master, "whatsoever ye ask
the father in my name, he will give it." Needs there any more to confute this
vague assertion, than a reference to long experience, and well known
disappointments. It is fresh in the recollection of every man, that all
churches and chapels of every sect through the British dominions, were for
seven successive years importuning the Almighty, to turn the hearts of the
rebellious subjects in America. Why where not their prayers immediately
answered, after heaven and earth were so piously moved to that effect, or why
are not all Christian petitions complied with, after being echoed from one
nation to another, especially since they are fervently offered up in the name,
and for the sake of Jesus Christ their Lord and Savior.

He again tells us that, "his yoke is easy, and his burden is light," and
invites "those who are weary and heavy laden to come unto him, and he will give
them rest." Now, though it is the language of an humble God, to his poor
distressed disciples, I challenge the assertions. His yoke, if such may be
considered the obligation of performing his precepts, is slavish beyond
comparison, impossible to be complied with, being repugnant to human nature,
and his burden, if such may be considered the expense of supporting his
religion, is arbitrary, oppressive and tyrannical, especially in countries,
where established churches, have the exclusive right to expound the word of
God, and where every individual is obliged to contribute to the religion which
is most fashionable at court; in such countries, the clergy resemble the imps
of infernal deities, rather than the meek disciples of an humble, penitent, and
suffering Savior. What rest can the weary and heavy laden find, by subscribing
to a religion, bearing no proportion to itself, -- a religion that confounds
both sense and nature, and petrifies all human understanding, -- a religion
that humbles a God to a man, and proudly exalts man to a God, -- a religion
that makes the creature a creator, and the creator a mere creature.

Is it to promote the knowledge of such a system that societies are formed.
Yes, you will say, it is necessary to keep up a system of religion. Granted;
but is it necessary to keep up a system of fraud, would not a more rational
system be equally effectual, both in its moral and political tendency. What
benefit arises to man by confounding divinity with humanity, or worshipping a
feeble man, who disclaimed the title of a God. Are you afraid to offend the
deity; by discontinuing to honor him. You will answer perhaps, that it is no
wise criminal to worship a being who had, "all power given him, in heaven, and
upon earth:" but how has Christ made it appear that ever such power was
delegated to him? upon what authority do you believe he possessed such power?
upon the authority of a blind assertion; one man relates the story to another,
and he relates it again as an ipso facto. Would such authority establish a fact
now a days? certainly not. Were I to say I was born unbegotten, or begotten not
made, or that I was older than the man who was at my christning, would any one
believe me.

Strange indeed that a man who had all power in heaven and upon earth, the
savior of a whole world, could not save himself, and prolong a terrestrial
existence, to the more solid satisfaction of future generations. Was eighteen
months the only time allotted this ambassador plenipotentiary extraordinary, to
ratify a treaty between the priests of this earth, and the high court of
heaven. That the all powerful God of nature could perform more in eighteen
seconds, than Christ had done during his earthly residence, all reasonable men
will allow, yet this man is represented to us as a God of worship and
adoration, and though he was miserably wretched, we are taught to believe he
possessed all power in heaven and upon earth.

Were not his distresses insupportable; did he not labor for a miserable
existence like many others; was he not as destitute as the itinerant mendicant:
-- and did he not suffer a degrading and ignominious death: but, you will say,
all this was to set an example to the world, and his death was to ransom
sinners from the wrath to come. Yes, he set an example which his most pious and
zealous admirers studiously avoid, and his death was evidently, because he
could not help it. -- He preached up sedition, and opposed the law of Moses, he
insulted the Jewish Rabies, and obstructed their tranquillity, for which they
accused him, and by legal prosecution sentenced him to death agreeable to the
customs of their country. Would to God the Christian religion were exempt from
crimes of equal abhorrence. Murder and felony were alike committed under the
mask of piety; racks, gibbets, and lighted faggots were the arguments opposed
to those, who attempted to obstruct the early progress of the Christian system.
Even now, in the states of Italy, or in the empires of Spain and Portugal, any
person attempting to reform popery, would infallibly suffer death, -- not as a
redeemeer, but as an heretic, -- not as a savior, but as a sinner.

Upon a clear examination, I find this savior of the world is but a partial
redeemer, his atoning merits extending but to a few of the human race. The
number of people inhabiting Christian nations, does not exceed 136 millions;
one fourth of them are Deists, consequently they disclaim all participation in
the meritorious sufferings of a savior. The remaining number will not exceed
102 millions. The whole globe has about 400 millions of inhabitants, subtract
102 millions of Christians, and there remains 366 millions of people; who know
not Christ, nor choose him for their head; must all these perish eternally, must
they linger in never ending torments, and wallow forever in fire, -- brimstone,
-- melted lead, -- brandy and gunpowder, -- with all the combustibles a
vicious priesthood can invent, because they do not believe what is not true.
Who but men blindly infatuated would subscribe to such a preposterous religion.
The clergy may, For interested motives, maintain their rigid doctrines, but I
have too great a sense of their learning and understanding not to allow them to
be Deists. I have a knowledge of three in Philadelphia, and two in New York,
who are of that persuasion and one of the five is a bishop. It is because
Deists are not formed into society that they have not preceptors of the first
rate talents.


The capricious temper of the Deity, as recorded in scripture, is somewhat
singular. At one time, to save the world and mankind, he destroyed it and them
together by a mighty deluge: This not perfecting his intention to save lost
man, he destroyed himself upon a gibbet. His third experiment will be to
consume the whole globe and all things in it with fire from heaven; such
romances pass as current among Christians. If sin is to be destroyed by
barbarous and inhuman cruelties, this latter experiment will undoubtedly prove
most effectual. This will be a grand burnt-offering to the Lord of Hosts. Here
the gratifying flames of all things, animate and inanimate, will ascend to
heaven, and the Deity will console himself with the odoriferous effluvia, this,
not like the partial offerings of the ancient priests, who sacraficed bulls,
and goats, and kids, and lambs etc. upon the holy alter, piously offering the
fat and blood to God, but eat the flesh themselves. In this last exhibition the
whole earth with all its inhabitants, both priests and laity, both savage and
civil, will be consumed by celestial fire, while the almighty will delight in
our torments, and like a Roman tyrant dance to the music of our shrieks and
groans; well may the God of Christians be called a devouring God, a God of
vengeance, who creates men only to destroy them: but, the scene is not yet
closed: after the consummation of the earth, the moon shall be turned into
blood, the clouds shall fall, and the stars drop from heaven. Here will be
rattling works indeed; much better be a spectator than an actor in this
pantomime. Perhaps this is the time, when those who have died in the faith
shall rise triumphant, and play marbles with those little stars, kick about the
morn, and quench the blazing sun; then shall the celestial gods, and goddesses
meet, and fumble in the dark. Unruly man, be cautious on that great day, how
you come across the virgin Mary.

Pardon me Sirs, I am more at a loss to apologize for this irony, than to
expose the folly of your favorite system -- but to return

The most potent evidence in favor of the Christian scheme, are those of Mary
and Thomas, though it is a little remarkable that Thomas said nothing about the
matter himself; other people tell the story for him. As for Mary, she gains
greater credit, than would be given to a lady of more honor and veracity in
those days: it is rather strange, that Mary and Thomas never favored the world
with either an epistle or a gospel upon the subject. They, it seems, told the
story to others; others told it again to others, till at length the tradition,
like that which Moses gives us of the creation, becomes the prevailing belief.
Were an old Methodist woman to assert that she saw John Westly, a certain time
after his burial, that he was seen by many others of his most intimate friends,
that he wrought many miracles before them, and then went up to heaven, would
any one believe her; if she had gone before a magistrate and taken her oath
that it was a fact; would she gain the more credit, certainly not: neither do I
chose to believe Mary, nor Thomas, nor.....

The primitive councils, who first founded the Christian system, took infinite
pains to blend the virgin Mary with the Godhead, and so make it consist of
four persons instead of three; she was however, rejected by a small majority.
Notwithstanding she lost her election, there are a numerous sect of Christians,
who, to this day honor her with divine worship and adoration. The Roman
Catholics have it thus: Mary by the rights of a Mother, command thy son to
intercede for us.
If then the motion for her union with the Godhead had passed in the
affirmative, would not our modern Christians worship her among the catalogue of
their Gods. All this proves to a demonstration, that the world is governed by
fraud, and not influenced by reason. The four following remarks will bring us
to a conclusion.

1st. The Lords prayer is confessed by all Christians to be of divine
sublimity, surpassing any thing of human composition, but this is far below the
test of criticism. In the former part you direct the Deity to do his own will,
the next sentence demands bread for the day, what most people are already
possessed of. Then proceeds a request, that your trespasses might be forgiven,
as you forgive those who trespass against you: But I say unto all Christians,
woe be unto them, if heaven shows no more benignity on them, than they show
mercy on their offenders.

2d. If Moses and Jesus Christ spoke by divine authority, it is blowing hot and
cold with the same breath, every proposition of one being palpably contradicted
by the other; however, the laws of Moses, take the lead of Jesus Christ's whose
precepts have no influence upon the passions, form no part of our municipal
laws, nor are they attended to by any Christian sect whatever. Whether then,
your Christian religion is of divine revelation or a trick played off in the
dark ages of ignorance, it is an untoward system, and deserves to be admired
only for its deformity.

3d. The Christian religion was first established by the terror of authority:
the insinuating arts of missionaries, persecution and proscription, etc. All
these conspired to establish Christianity upon the ruins of the Mosaic system.
Did you ever consult these truths, -- did you ever inform yourselves of the
stratagems first adopted to propagate your holy religion, even in its reformed
state, or, -- did you believe the histories which transmit to posterity these
impartial facts, as implicitly as you believe the bible. It is probable your
zeal would slacken, -- your exertions to promote Christian knowledge would be
less vigorous, and -- your contribution would be appropriated to a more
laudable purpose.

4th. Were I to say that blind men were very keen sighted, and that deaf men
are very quick of hearing, you would naturally think me a lunatic, yet such
sentiments are as compatible with reason and commom sense, as many precepts of
the christian system. Can you reconcile those ideas of a God in three parts? --
a virgin in wedlock? a God in gibbets? -- serpents and asses speaking most
eloquently in human language, -- and those heroic flights from earth up to
heaven, in whirl-winds and fiery chariots; -- yes, you believe all these, and a
thousand other like stories, but deny an equal fact that blind men can see, or
that deaf men can hear. You bow down with reverence to the fables of antiquity,
and consider a modern farce as the effects of sin and levity. -- You reject the
adoration of an indivisible God, and worship with enthusiasm, a mixture of
deities, composed of many parts; -- You confound finity with infinity, and
divinity with humanity, -- you humble the God of creation to a level with man,
and proudly exalt man to the magnificence of a God. Believe me, sirs, that
Deism is yet triumphant, where despotic laws are not enforced, to maintain that
whimsical, and metaphorical system, the knowledge of which you wish to promote.

Now, (...), urging the subject no further, I have only to observe, that if I
have corrupted any passage, or misquoted any text, it is your duty to instruct
the ignorant, to reclaim the obstinate, and direct the stranger, in the path
that leads to our destined heritage.

THE END.

