A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY OF MRS. JOHNSON. CONTAINING An ACCOUNT of her
SUFFERINGS, during Four Years with the INDIANS and FRENCH.

Published according to ACT of CONGRESS.

PRINTED AT WALPOLE, NEWHAMPSHIRE, BY DAVID CARLISLE, jun. 1796.

PART of the following pages were dictated by Mrs. JOHNSON, now Mrs. HASTINGS,
herself, and part were taken from minutes, made by Mr. JOHNSON and herself,
during their imprisonment. She is much indebted to her fellow prisoner, Mr.
LABARREE, by whose assistance many incidents are mentioned, which had escaped
her recollection.

NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY OF Mrs. JOHNSON.
INTRODUCTION.
A DETAIL of the miseries of a "frontier man," must excite the pity of every
one who claims humanity. The gloominess of the rude forest, the distance from
friends and competent defense, and the daily inroads and nocturnal yells of
hostile Indians, awaken those keen apprehensions and anxieties which conception
only can picture. If the peaceful employment of husbandry is pursued, the
loaded musket must stand by his side; if he visits a neighbor, or resorts on
sundays to the sacred house of prayer, the weapons of war must bear him
company; at home, the distresses of a wife, and the fears of lisping children
often unman the soul that real danger assailed in vain. Those, who can
recollect the war that existed between France and England fifty years ago, may
figure to themselves the unhappy situation of the inhabitants on the frontiers
of Newhampshire; the malice of the French in Canada, and the exasperated
savages that dwelt in their vicinity, rendered the tedious days and frightful
nights a season of unequalled calamities. The daily reports of captured
families and slaughtered friends, mingled grief with fear. Had there been an
organized government, to stretch forth its protecting arm, in any case of
danger, the misery might have been in a degree alleviated. But the infancy of
our country did not admit of this blessing. While Governor Shirley of
Massachusetts, was petitioning to England for a fleet and an army, Benning
Wentworth the supine Governor of Newhampshire, obeyed implicitly the advice of
his friend Shirley, and remained inactively secure at his seat at Portsmouth.
At the commencement of the year seventeen hundred and forty five, the Quixotick
expedition to Louisburg was projected, the success of which originated from the
merest accident, rather than from military valor or generalship; this drained
the thinly inhabited state of Newhampshire of most of its effective men. From
that period till the peace, which took place in the year seventeen hundred and
forty nine, the visionary schemes of Shirley kept the best soldiers embodied in
some remote place, as a force to execute some impolitick project. The conquest
of Canada, and the attack upon Crownpoint, are recorded as specimens of the
wild projects which were to employ the infant forces of New England. During this
time, the frontiers sustained additional miseries, by having the small forces
of the state deducted for purposes which could be of no immediate service to
them. The savages committed frequent depredations on the defenseless
inhabitants, and the ease with which they gained their prey, encouraged their
boldness, and by scattering in small parties, they were able to infest the
whole frontier of Newhampshire, from fort Dummer on Connecticut River, to the
lowest settlement on Merrimack. During this war, which is known by the name of
the Cape Breton war, the town of No. 4 could hardly be said to be inhabited;
some adventurers had made a beginning, but few were considered as belonging to
the town. Capt. Stevens, whose valor is recorded as an instance of consummate
generalship, part of the time kept the fort, which afforded a shelter to the
enterprizing settlers, in times of imminent danger. But even his vigilance did
not save the town from numerous scenes of carnage. At the commencement of the
peace, in seventeen hundred and forty nine, the enterprizing spirit of
New England rose superior to the dangers of the forest, and they began to
venture innovation. The Indians, still thirsty for plunder and rapine, and
regardless of the peace which their masters, the French, had concluded, kept up
a flying warfare, and committed several outrages upon lives and property; this
kept the increasing inhabitants in a state of alarm, for three or four years;
most of the time, they performed their daily work without molestation, but
retreated to the fort at each returning night.

OUR country has so long been exposed to Indian wars, that recitals of exploits
and sufferings, of escapes and deliverances, have become both numerous and
trite. The air of novelty will not be attempted in the following pages; simple
facts, unadorned, is what the reader must expect; pity for my sufferings, and
admiration at my safe return, is all that my history can excite. The aged man,
while perusing, will probably turn his attention to the period when the facts
took place, his memory will be refreshed with the sad tidings of his country's
sufferings, which gave a daily wound to his feelings, between the years forty
and sixty; by contrasting those days with the present, he may rejoice, that he
witnesses those times, which many have "waited for, but died without a sight."
Those "in early life," while they commiserate the sufferings which their
parents, and ancestors endured, may felicitate themselves that their lines fell
in a land of peace, where neither savages, nor neighboring wars embitter life.

CHAP. I. Removal to No. 4, in the year seventeen hundred and fifty, and
situation till August the 31st, the day after our Captivity.
THE continuation of peace, began by degrees to appease the resentment of the
Indians, and they appeared to discover a wish for friendly intercourse. The
inhabitants in No. 4, and its vicinity, relaxed their watchfulness, and
ventured more boldly into their fields. As prospects grew favorable, my
husband, Mr. James Johnson, was induced, in the year 1750, to remove his family
from Lunenburgh, in Massachusetts, to his possessions in No. 4. Lest savage
caprice might offer some insult, we resided in the fort the two or three first
years, but every appearance of hostility at length vanished -- the Indians
expressed a wish to traffic, the inhabitants laid by their fears, and thought
no more of tomahawks, nor scalpingknives. Mr. Johnson now thought himself
justified in removing to his farm, an hundred rods distant from the fort, which
was then the uppermost settlement on Connecticut River, he pursued his
occupation of trade, and the Indians made frequent visits to traffic their
furs for his merchandise. He frequently credited them for blankets and other
necessaries, and in most instances they were punctual in payment. During the
year 1753, all was harmony and safety -- settlements increased with tolerable
rapidity, and the new country began to assume the appearance of cultivation.

THE commencement of the year 1754 began to threaten another rupture between
the French and English, and as the dividing line between Canada and the English
Colonies was the object of contention, it was readily seen that the frontier
towns would be in imminent danger. But as immediate war was not expected, Mr,
Johnson thought that he might risk the safety of his family, while he made a
tour to Connecticut, for trade. He sat out the last of May, and his absence of
three months was a tedious and a bitter season to me. Soon after his departure
every body was "tremblingly alive" with fear. The Indians were reported to be
on their march for our destruction, and our distance from sources of
information gave full latitude for exaggeration of news, before it reached our
ears. The fears of the night were horrible beyond description, and even the
light of day was far from dispelling painful anxiety. While looking from the
windows of my log house, and seeing my neighbors tread cautiously by each hedge
and hillock, left some secreted savage might start forth to take their scalp,
my fears would baffle description. Alarms grew louder and louder, till our
apprehensions were too strongly confirmed, by the news of the capture of Mr.
Malony's family, on Merrimack River; this reached us about the twentieth of
August. Imagination now saw and heard a thousand Indians; and I never went
round my own house, without first looking with trembling caution by each
corner, to see if a tomahawk was not raised for my destruction.

ON the twenty fourth of August I was relieved from all my fears by the arrival
of my husband. He brought intelligence from Connecticut that a war was expected
the next spring, but that no immediate danger was contemplated. He had made
preparations to remove to Northfield, as soon as our stock of hay was consumed,
and our dozen of swine had demolished our ample stores of grain, which would
secure his family and property from the miseries and ravages of war. Our eldest
son, Sylvanus, who was six years old, was in the mean time to be put to school
at Springfield. -- Mr. Johnson brought home a large addition to his stores, and
the neighbors made frequent parties at our house, to express their joy for his
return, and time passed merrily off, by the aid of spirit and a ripe yard of
melons. As I was in the last days of pregnancy, I could not join so heartily in
their good cheer as I otherwise might. Yet in a new country, pleasure is often
derived from sources unknown to those less accustomed to the woods. The return
of my husband, the relief from danger, and the crowds of happy friends,
combined to render my situation peculiarly agreeable. I now boasted with
exultation, that I should, with husband, friends, and luxuries, live happy in
spite of the fear of savages.

ON the evening of the twenty ninth of August our house was visited by a party
of neighbors, who spent the time very cheerfully with watermelons and flip,
till midnight; they all then retired in high spirits, except a spruce young
spark, who tarried to keep company with my sister. We then went to bed with
feelings well tuned for sleep, and rested with fine composure, till midway
between daybreak and sunrise, when we were roused by neighbor Labarree's
knocking at the door, who had shouldered his ax to do a day's work for my
husband. Mr. Johnson slipped on his jacket and trowsers, and stepped to the
door to let him in. But by opening the door he opened a scene -- terrible to
describe!! Indians! Indians were the first words I heard, he sprang to his
guns, but Labarree, heedless of danger, instead of closing the door to keep
them out, began to rally our hired men up stairs, for not rising earlier. But
in an instant a crowd of savages, fixed horribly for war, rushed furiously in.
I screamed and begged my friends to ask for quarter; by this time they were all
over the house, some up stairs, some haling my sister out of bed, another had
hold of me, and one was approaching Mr. Johnson, who stood in the middle of the
floor to deliver himself up; but the Indian, supposing that he would make
resistance, and be more than his match, went to the door and brought three of
his comrades, and the four bound him. I was led to the door, fainting and
trembling; there stood my friend Labarree, bound; Ebenezer Farnsworth, whom
they found up chamber, they were putting in the same situation, and to complete
the shocking scene, my three little children were driven naked to the place
where I stood. On viewing myself I found that I too was naked. An Indian had
plundered three gowns, who, on seeing my situation, gave me the whole. I asked
another for a petticoat, but he refused it. After what little plunder their
hurry would allow them to get, was confusedly bundled up, we were ordered to
march. After going about twenty rods we fell behind a rising ground, where we
halted to pack the things in a better manner; while there, a savage went back,
as we supposed, to fire the buildings. Farnsworth proposed to my husband to go
back with him, to get a quantity of pork from the cellar, to help us on our
journey; but Mr. Johnson prudently replied, that by that means, the Indians
might find the rum, and in a fit of intoxication kill us all. The Indian
presently returned with marks of fear in his countenance, This, as we
afterward found, was occasioned by his meeting Mr. Osmer at the door of the
house, who lodged in the chamber, and had secreted himself behind a box, and
was then making his escape. He run directly to the fort, and the alarm guns
were fired. My father, Mr. James Willard, was then second in command. Captain
Stevens was for sallying out with a party for our relief; but my father begged
him to desist, as the Indians made it an invariable practice to kill their
prisoners when attacked.
and we were hurried on with all violence. Two savages laid hold of each of my
arms, and hurried me through thorny thickets in a most unmerciful manner. I
lost a shoe and suffered exceedingly. We heard the alarm guns from the fort.
This added new speed to the flight of the savages. -- They were apprehensive
that soldiers might be sent for our relief. When we had got a mile and a half,
my faintness obliged me to sit. This being observed by an Indian, he drew his
knife, as I supposed, to put an end to my existence. But he only cut some
bands, with which my gown was tied, and then pushed me on. My little children
were crying, my husband and the other two men were bound, and my sister and
myself were obliged to make the best of our way, with all our might. The loss
of my shoe rendered traveling extremely painful. At the distance of three
miles there was a general halt; the savages, supposing that we, as well as
themselves, might have an appetite for breakfast, gave us a loaf of bread, some
raisins and apples, which they had taken from the house. While we were forcing
down our scanty breakfast, a horse came in sight, known to us all by the name
of Scoggin, belonging to Phineas Stevens, Esquire. One of the Indians attempted
to shoot him, but was prevented by Mr. Johnson. They then expressed a wish to
catch him, saying, by pointing to me, for squaw to ride; my husband had
previously been unbound to assist the children, he, with two Indians, caught
the horse on the banks of the river. By this time my legs and feet were covered
with blood, which being noticed by Mr. Labarree, he, with that humanity which
never forsook him, took his own stockings and presented them to me, and the
Indians gave me a pair of moggasons. Bags and blankets were thrown over
Scoggin, and I mounted on the top of them, and on we jogged about seven miles,
to the upper end of Wilcott's Island. We there halted, and prepared to cross
the river; rafts were made of dry timber -- two Indians and Farnsworth crossed
first, Labarree, by signs, got permission to swim the horse, and Mr. Johnson
was allowed to swim by the raft that I was on, to push it along. We all arrived
safe on the other side of the river, about four o'clock in the afternoon; a
fire was kindled and some of their stolen kettles were hung over it, and filled
with porridge. The savages took delight in viewing their spoil, which amounted
to forty or fifty pounds in value. They then, with a true savage yell, gave the
war whoop, and bid defiance to danger. As our tarry in this place lasted an
hour, I had time to reflect on our miserable situation. -- Captives, in the
power of unmerciful savages, without provision, and almost without clothes, in
a wilderness where we must sojourn as long as the children of Israel did, for
ought we knew, and what added to our distress, not one of our savage masters
could understand a word of English. Here, after being hurried from home with
such rapidity, I have leisure to inform the reader, respecting our Indian
masters. They were eleven Mr. Labarree is very positive, and I think Mr.
Johnson was of the same opinion, that seventeen Indians attacked the house; the
other six might have been a scouting party, that watched till we were out of
danger, and then took another rout.
in number, men of middle age, except one, a youth of sixteen, who in our
journey, discovered a very mischievous and troublesome disposition. According
to their national practice, he who first laid hands on a prisoner considered
him as his property. My master, who was the one that took my hand when I sat on
the bed, was as clever an Indian as ever I saw, he even evinced, at numerous
times, a disposition, that showed he was by no means void of compassion. The
four, who took my husband, claimed him as their property, and my sister, three
children, Labarree and Farnsworth, had each a master. When the time came for us
to prepare to march, I almost expired at the thought. To leave my aged parents,
brothers, sisters and friends, and travel with savages, through a dismal forest
to unknown regions, in the alarming situation I then was in, with three small
children, the eldest, Sylvanus, who was but six years old. My eldest daughter,
Susanna, was four, and Polly, the other, two. My sister Miriam was fourteen. My
husband was barefoot, and otherwise thinly clothed, his master had taken his
jacket, and nothing but his shirt and trowsers remained. My two daughters had
nothing but their shifts, and I only the gown that was handed me by the
savages. In addition to the sufferings which arose from my own deplorable
condition, I could not but feel for my friend Labarree; he had left a wife and
four small children behind, to lament his loss, and to render his situation
extremely unhappy. With all these misfortunes lying heavily upon me, the reader
can imagine my situation. -- The Indians pronounced the dreadful word "munch,"
march, and on we must go. I was put on the horse, Mr. Johnson took one
daughter, and Mr. Labarree, being unbound, took the other; we went six or eight
miles, and stopped for the night. The men were made secure, by having their
legs put in split sticks, somewhat like stocks, and tied with cords, which were
tied to the limbs of trees too high to be reached. My sister, much to her
mortification, must lie between two Indians, with a cord thrown over her, and
passing under each of them; the little children had blankets, and I was allowed
one for my use. Thus we took lodging for the night, with the sky for a
covering, and the ground for a pillow. The fatigues of the preceding day
obliged me to sleep several hours, in spite of the horrors which surrounded me.
The Indians observed great silence, and never spoke but when really necessary,
and all the prisoners were disposed to say but little; my children were much
more peaceable, than could be imagined, gloomy fear imposed a dead silence.

CHAP. II. History of our Journey through the Wilderness, till we came to the
waters that enter Lake Champlain.
IN the morning we were roused before sunrise, the Indians struck up a fire,
hung on their stolen kettles, and made us some water gruel for breakfast. After
a few sips of this meagre fare, I was again put on the horse, with my husband
by my side, to hold me on. My two fellow prisoners took the little girls, and
we marched sorrowfully on for an hour or two, when a keener distress was added
to my multiplied afflictions; -- I was taken with the pangs of childbirth. The
Indians signified to us that we must go on to a brook. When we got there, they
showed some humanity, by making a booth for me. Here the compassionate reader
will drop a fresh tear, for my inexpressible distress; fifteen or twenty miles
from the abode of any civilized being, in the open wilderness, rendered cold by
a rainy day -- in one of the most perilous hours, and unsupplied with the least
necessary, that could yield convenience in the hazardous moment. My children
were crying at a distance, where they were held by their masters, and only my
husband and sister to attend me; none but mothers can figure to themselves my
unhappy fortune. The Indians kept aloof the whole time. About ten o'clock a
daughter was born. They then brought me some articles of clothing for the
child, which they had taken from the house. My master looked into the booth,
and clapped his hands with joy, crying two moneys for me, two moneys for me. I
was permitted to rest the remainder of the day. The Indians were employed in
making a bier for the prisoners to carry me on, and another booth for my
lodging during night. They brought a needle and two pins, and some bark to tie
the child's clothes, which they gave my sister, and a large wooden spoon to
feed it with; at dusk they made some porridge, and brought a cup to steep some
roots in, which Mr. Labarree had provided. In the evening I was removed to the
new booth. For supper, they made more porridge and some Johnny cakes. My
portion was brought me in a little bark. I slept that night far beyond
expectation.

IN the morning we were summoned for the journey, after the usual breakfast, of
meal and water. I, with my infant in my arms, was laid on the litter, which was
supported alternately by Mr. Johnson, Labarree and Farnsworth. My sister and
son were put upon Scoggin, and the two little girls rode on their masters'
backs. Thus we proceeded two miles, when my carriers grew too faint to proceed
any further. This being observed by our sable masters, a general halt was
called, and they embodied themselves for council. My master soon made signs to
Mr. Johnson, that if I could ride on the horse I might proceed, otherwise I
must be left behind. Here I observed marks of pity in his countenance, but this
might arise from the fear of loosing his two moneys. I preferred an attempt to
ride on the horse, rather than to perish miserably alone. Mr. Labarree took the
infant, and every step of the horse almost deprived me of life. My weak and
helpless condition rendered me, in a degree, insensible to every thing; my poor
child could have no sustenance from my breast, and was supported entirely by
water gruel. My other little children, rendered peevish by an uneasy mode of
riding, often burst into cries, but a surly check from their masters soon
silenced them. -- We proceeded on with a slow, mournful pace. My weakness was
too severe to allow me to sit on the horse, long at a time; every hour I was
taken off, and laid on the ground to rest. This preserved my life, during the
third day. At night we found ourselves at the head of Black River Pond. Here we
prepared to spend the night, our supper consisted of gruel and the broth of a
hawk, they had killed the preceding day. The prisoners were secured, as usual,
a booth was made for me, and all went to rest. After encampment, we entered
into a short conversation. My sister observed, that if I could have been left
behind, our trouble would have been seemingly nothing. My husband hoped, by the
assistance of Providence, we should all be preserved. Mr. Labarree pitied his
poor family -- and Farnsworth, summed the whole of his wishes, by saying, that
if he could have got a layer of pork, from the cellar, we should not be in fear
of starvation. The night was uncommonly dark, and passed tediously off.

IN the morning, half chilled with a cold fog, we were ordered from our places
of rest, were offered the lean fare of meal and water, and then prepared for
the journey; every thing resembled a funeral procession. The savages preserved
their gloomy sadness -- the prisoners, bowed down with grief and fatigue, felt
little disposition to talk; and the unevenness of the country, sometimes lying
in miry plains, at others rising into steep and broken hills, rendered our
passage hazardous and painful. Mr. Labarree kept the infant in his arms, and
preserved its life. The fifth day's journey was an unvaried scene of fatigue.
The Indians sent out too or three hunting parties, who returned without game.
As we had in the morning consumed the last morsel of our meal, every one now
began to be seriously alarmed; and hunger, with all its horrors, looked us
earnestly in the face. At night, we found the waters that run into Lake
Champlain, which was over the height of land; before dark we halted, and the
Indians, by the help of their punk, which they carried in horns, made a fire.
They soon adopted a plan to relieve their hunger. The horse was shot, and his
flesh was in a few moments broiling on embers, and they, with native gluttony,
satiated their craving appetites. To use the term politeness, in the management
of this repast, may be thought a burlesque, yet their offering the prisoners
the best parts of the horse, certainly bordered on (...); an epicure could not
have cartered nicer slices, nor in that situation, served them up with more
neatness. Appetite is said to be the best sauce, yet our abundance of it did
not render savory this novel steak. My children, however, eat too much, which
made them very unwell for a number of days. Broth was made for me and my child,
which was rendered almost a luxury by the seasoning of roots. After supper,
countenances began to brighten, those who had relished the meal, exhibited new
strength, and those who had only snuffed its effluvia, confessed themselves
regaled; the evening was employed in drying and smoking what remained, for
future use. The night was a scene of distressing fears to me, and my extreme
weakness had affected my mind to such a degree, that every difficulty appeared
doubly terrible. By the assistance of Scoggin, I had been brought so far, yet
so great was my debility, that every hour I was taken off, and laid on the
ground, to keep me from expiring. But now alas! this conveyance was no more. To
walk was impossible. Inevitable death, in the midst of woods, one hundred miles
wide, appeared my only portion.

CHAP. III. Continuation -- till our arrival at East Bay, in Lake Champlain.
IN the morning of the sixth day, the Indians exerted themselves to prepare one
of their greatest dainties. The marrow bones of old Scoggin were pounded for a
soup, and every root, both sweet and bitter, that the woods afforded, was
thrown in to give it a flavor. Each one partook of as much as his feelings
would allow. The war whoop then resounded, with an infernal yell, and we began
to fix for a march. My fate was unknown, till my master brought some bark, and
tied my petticoats, as high as he supposed would be convenient for walking, and
ordered me to "munch." With scarce strength to stand alone, I went on half a
mile, with my little son and three Indians. The rest were advanced. My power to
move then failed, the world grew dark, and I dropped down. I had sight enough
to see an Indian lift his hatchet over my head, while my little son screamed,
"Ma'am do go, for they will kill you." As I fainted, my last thought was, that
I should presently be in the world of spirits. -- When I awoke, my master was
talking angrily with the savage, who had threatened my life. By his gestures I
could learn, that he charged him with not acting the honorable part of a
warrior, by an attempt to destroy the prize of a brother. A whoop was given,
for a halt. My master helped me to the rest of the company -- where a council
was held, the result of which was, that my husband should walk by my side, and
help me along. This he did for some hours, but faintness then overpowered me,
and Mr. Johnson's tenderness and solicitude, was unequal to the task, of aiding
me further; another council was held -- while in debate, as I lay on the
ground, gasping for breath, my master sprang toward me, with his hatchet. My
husband and fellow prisoners grew pale at the sight, suspecting that he, by a
single blow, would rid themselves of so great a burden, as myself. But he had
yet too much esteem for his "two moneys." His object was to get bark from a
tree, to make a pack saddle, for my conveyance on the back of my husband. He
took me up, and we marched in that form the rest of the day. Mr. Labarree still
kept my infant, Farnsworth carried one of the little girls, and the other rode
with her master; they were extremely sick and weak, owing to the large portion
of the horse, which they eat; but if they uttered a murmuring word, a menacing
frown from the savages, soon imposed silence. None of the Indians were disposed
to show insults of any nature, except the youngest, which I have before
mentioned. He often delighted himself, by tormenting my sister, by pulling her
hair, treading on her gown, and numerous other boyish pranks, which were
provoking and troublesome. We moved on, faint and wearily, till night; the
Indians, then yelled their war whoop, built a fire, and hung over their horse
broth. After supper, my booth was built, as usual, and I reposed much better
than I had the preceding nights.

IN the morning, I found myself greatly restored. Without the aid of
physicians, or physic, nature had began the cure of that weakness, to which
she had reduced me, but a few days before. The reader will be tired of the
repetition of the same materials, for our meals; but if my feelings can be
realized, no one will turn with disgust from a breakfast of steaks, which were
cut from the thigh of a horse. After which, Mr. Johnson was ordered to take the
infant, and go forward with part of the company. I "munched" in the rear till
we came to a beaver pond, which was formed in a branch of Otter Creek. Here I
was obliged to wade; when half way over, up to the middle in cold water, my
little strength failed, and my power to speak or see left me. While motionless
and stiffened, in the middle of the pond, I was perceived from the other side,
by Mr. Johnson, who laid down the infant, and came to my assistance; he took me
in his arms, and when the opposite side was gained, life itself had apparently
forsaken me. The whole company stopped, and the Indians, with more humanity
than I supposed them possessed of, busied themselves in making a fire, to warm
me into life. The warm influence of the fire restored my exhausted strength, by
degrees; and in two hours I was told to munch. The rest of the day I was
carried by my husband. In the middle of the afternoon, we arrived on the banks
of one of the great branches of Otter Creek. Here we halted, and two savages,
who had been on a hunting scout, returned with a duck; a fire was made, which
was thrice grateful to my cold shivering limbs. Six days had now almost
elapsed, since the fatal morn, in which we were taken, and by the blessing of
that Providence, whose smiles give life to creation, we were still in
existence. My wearied husband, naked children, and helpless infant, formed a
scene, that conveyed severer pangs to my heart, than all the sufferings I
endured myself. The Indians were sullen and silent, the prisoners were swollen
with gloomy grief, and I was half the time expiring. After my feelings were a
little quickened by warmth, my sad portion was brought in a bark, consisting of
the Duck's head, and a gill of broth. As I lifted the unsavory morsel, with a
trembling hand, to my mouth, I cast my thoughts back a few days, to a time,
when, from a board plentifully spread, in my own house, I eat my food with a
merry heart. The wooden spoon dropped from my feeble hand. The contrast was too
affecting. Seated on a ragged rock, beneath a hemlock, as I then was. Emaciated
by sickness, and surrounded by my weeping and distressed family, who were
helpless prisoners, despair would have robbed me of life, had I not put my
whole confidence in that Being, who has power to save. Our masters began to
prepare to ford the stream. I swallowed most of my broth, and was taken up by
my husband. The river was very rapid, and passing dangerous. Mr. Labarree, when
half over with my child, was tripped up by its rapidity, and lost the babe in
the water; little did I expect to see the poor thing again, but he fortunately
reached a corner of its blanket, and saved its life. The rest got safe to the
other shore -- another fire was built, and my sister dried the infant, and its
clothes. Here we found a proof of Indian sagacity, which might justly be
suppesed not to belong to a band of rambling barbarians. In their journey over
to Connecticut River, they had, in this place, killed a Bear. The entrails were
cleansed, and filled with the fat of the animal, and suspended from the limb of
a tree; by it was deposited a bag of flour, and some tobacco, all which was
designed for future stores, when traveling that way. Nothing could have been
offered more acceptable, than these tokens of Indian economy and prudence. The
flour was made into pudding, and the bear grease sauce was not unrelishing.
Broth was made, and well seasoned with snakeroot, and those who were fond of
tobacco, had each their share. The whole, formed quite a sumptuous
entertainment. But these savage dainties, made no sensible addition to our
quota of happiness. My weakness increased, my children were very unwell, and
Mr. Johnson's situation was truly distressing. By traveling barefoot, over
such a length of forest, and supporting me on his shoulders, his feet were
rendered sore, beyond description. I cannot express too much gratitude, for Mr.
Labarree's goodness. My infant was his sole charge, and he supported it, by
pieces of the horse flesh, which he kept for its use, which by being first
chewed in his own mouth, and then put into the child's, afforded it the
necessary nutriment. After supper, my booth was made, the evening yell was
sounded, and we encamped for the night. By this time the savages, had relaxed
part of their watchfulness, and began to be careless of our escaping. Labarree
and Farnsworth were slightly bound, and my husband had all his liberty. My
sister could sleep without her two Indian companions, and the whole company
appeared less like prisoners.

IN the morning of the eighth day, we were roused at sunrise. Although the
early part of September is generally blessed with a serene sky, and a warm sun,
yet we suffered exceedingly, by the cold. The mornings were damp and foggy, and
the lofty trees, and numerous mountains, often excluded the sun till noon. Our
snakeroot broth, enriched with flour, made a rare breakfast, and gave a little
strength to our exhausted limbs. Orders came to "munch." My poor husband took
me upon the pack saddle, and we reassumed our march. Long before night,
despondency had strikingly pictured every countenance. My little son, who had
performed the whole journey on foot, was almost lifeless. Mr. Johnson was
emaciated, and almost exhausted; often he laid me on the ground to save his own
life, and mine; for my weakness was too great to ride far, without requiring
rest. While prostrate upon the earth, and able to speak, I often begged him to
leave me there, to end a life, which could last but a short time, and would
take his with it, if he continued his exertions to save me; but the idea was
too shocking, we continued our journey, in a slow sorrowful mood, till night.
Often did I measure a small distance for the sun to run, before I must bid it
an eternal adieu. But the same Providence who had brought us so far, and
inclined our savage masters to mercy, continued my protector. Farnsworth
carried me a small distance, and at last darkness put an end to our painful
day's journey. After the customary refreshment, we went to rest. The night was
terrible; the first part was Egyptian darkness, then thunder, and lightning,
and rain. On the cold earth, without a cover, our situation may be imagined,
but not described. The Indians gave me an additional blanket for my use, and
showed some concern for my welfare; but it will ever stand first among modern
miracles, that my life was spared.

THE morning came, and a bright sun reanimated our drowned spirits. The whole
company now resembled a group of ghosts, more than bodily forms. Little did I
expect that the light of another day, would witness my existence; sensible,
that if my own sad diseases did not finish my existence, that my husband would
be reduced to the woeful alternative, of either perishing with me, or leaving me
in the woods to preserve his own life. The horrid yell was given, which was a
signal for preparation. Melancholy sat heavily on every countenance, and the
tear of woe moistened the sickened cheek of every prisoner. In addition to
famine and fatigue, so long a journey, without a shoe, for defense, had
lacerated and mangled every foot, to a shocking degree; traveling was keenly
painful. -- The scanty breakfast was served up; as I was lifting my gill of
broth to my cold lips, my master, with a rash hand, pulled it from me, and gave
it to my husband, observing, by signs, that he required all the sustenance, to
enable him to carry me. I yielded, on the supposition that it was a matter of
little consequence, whether any thing was bestowed to that body which must soon
mingle with its original clay. With sorrow and anguish, we began the ninth
day's journey. Before we proceeded far, the Indians signified to us, that we
should arrive, before night, at East Bay, on Lake Champlain. This was a cordial
to our drooping spirits, and caused an immediate transition from despair to
joy; the idea of arriving at a place of water carriage, translated us to new
life. Those who languished with sickness, fatigue or despair, now marched
forward, with nervous alacrity. Two Indians were sent on a hunting scout, who
were to meet us at the Bay, with canoes. This seasonable and agreeable
intelligence, had every possible effect that was good, we walked with greater
speed, felt less of the journey, and thought little of our distresses. About
the middle of the afternoon the waters of the Lake were seen, from a
neighboring eminence; we soon gained the bank, where we found the two Indians,
with four canoes, and a ground squirrel; a fire was built, and some food put in
preparation. Here my feelings, which had not been exhilirated, so much as the
rest of my fellow prisoners, were buoyed above despair, and, for a short time,
the pangs of distress lost their influence. The life, which nine days painful
suffering in the wilderness, had brought to its last moment of duration, now
started into new existence, and rendered the hour I sat on the shore of Lake
Champlain, the happiest I ever experienced. Here we were to take passage, in
boats, and find relief from the thorny hills and miry swamps of the
damp-desart. My husband could now be relieved, from the burden, which had
brought him as nigh eternity, as myself. My little children would soon find
clothing, and all my fellow sufferers would be in a condition to attain some of
life's conveniences; Twelve hours sailing would waft us to the settlements of
civilized Frenchmen. Considering how much we had endured, few will deem it less
than a miracle, that we were still among the living. My son, of six years old,
had walked barefoot the whole journey. Farnsworth was shoeless, and carried my
eldest daughter. Labarree had to carry, and preserve the life of my infant. My
sister, owing to her youth and health, had suffered the least. My two little
daughters, with only their shifts, and part of one of the three gowns, which
the savage gave me, were subject to all the damps of morn and night; and Mr.
Johnson's situation was pitiably painful; the fatigue of carrying me on the
wearying pack saddle, had rendered his emaciated body almost a corpse, and his
sore feet made him a cripple. The Indians had been surprisingly patient, and
often discovered tokens of humanity. At every meal, we all shared equal with
them, whether a horse or a duck composed the bill of fare, and more than once,
they gave me a blanket, to shelter me from a thunder storm.

CHAP. IV. Crossing the Lake to Crown Point, from thence to St. John's --
Chamblee -- and to St. Francis's Village.
I WILL only detain the reader a few moments longer in this place, while I eat
the leg of a woodchuck, and then request him to take a night's sailing in the
canoe with me across the Lake. Though I sincerely wish him a better passage
than I had. No sooner was our repast finished, than the party were divided into
four equal parties, for passage. In my boat were two savages, besides my son
and infant. I was ordered to lie flat on the bottom of the canoe, and when pain
obliged me to move for relief, I had a rap from a paddle. At day break, we
arrived at a great rock, on the west side of the Lake, where we stopped and
built a fire. The Indians went to a French house, not far distant, and got some
meat, bread, and green corn. Although we were not allowed to taste the meat,
yet, by the grateful effluvia of the broiling steak, we were finely regaled,
and the bread and roast corn, were a luxury. Here the savages, for the first
time, gave loud tokens of joy, by hallooing and yelling in a tremendous manner.
The prisoners were now introduced to a new school. Little did we expect that
the accomplishment of dancing, would ever be taught us, by the savages. But the
war dance must now be held; and every prisone that could move, must take its
awkward steps. The figure consisted of circular motion, round the fire; each
sang his own music, and the best dancer was the one most violent in motion.
The prisoners were taught each a song, mine was, danna witchee natchepung; my
son's was narwiscumptom. The rest I cannot recollect. Whether this talk was
imposed on us for their diversion, or a religious ceremonial, I cannot say, but
it was very painful and offensive. In the forenoon, seven Indians came to us,
who were received with great joy, by our masters, who took great pleasure in
introducing their prisoners. The war dance was again held; we were obliged to
join, and sing our songs, while the Indians rent the air with infernal yelling.
We then embarked and arrived at Crown Point about noon. Each prisoner was then
led by their masters, to the residence of the French Commander. The Indians
kept up their infernal yelling the whole time. We were ordered to his
apartment, and used with that hospitality, which characterizes the best part of
the nation. We had brandy in profusion, a good dinner, and a change of linen.
This was luxury indeed, after what we had suffered, for the want of these
things. None but ourselves could prize their value. We, after dinner, were
paraded before Mr. Commander, and underwent examination, after which we were
shown a convenient apartment, where we resided four days, not subject to the
jurisdiction of our savage masters. Here we received great civilities, and many
presents. I had a nurse, who in a great measure, restored my exhausted
strength. My children were all decently clothed, and my infant in particular.
The first day, while I was taking a nap, they dressed it so fantastically, a la
France, that I refused to own it, when brought to my bedside, not guessing that
I was the mother of such a strange thing.

ON the fourth day, to our great grief and mortification, we were again
delivered to the Indians, who led us to the water side, where we all embarked
in one vessel for St. John's. The wind shifted, after a short sail and we
dropped anchor. In a little time, a canoe came a long side of us, in which was
a white woman, who was bound for Albany. Mr. Johnson begged her to stop a few
minutes, while he wrote to Col. Lydius, of Albany, to inform him of our
situation, and to request him to put the same in the Boston newspapers, that
our friends might learn that we were alive. The woman delivered the letter, and
the contents were published, which conveyed the agreeable tidings to our
friends, that although prisoners, we were then alive.

AFTER a disagreeable voyage of three days, we made St. John's, the sixteenth of
September, where we again experienced the politeness of a French Commander. I,
with my child, was kindly lodged in the same room with himself and lady. In the
morning, we still found misfortune treading close at our heels; -- we must
again be delivered to our savage masters, and take another passage in the boats
for Chamblee, when within three miles of which, Labarree, myself and child,
with our two masters, were put on shore; we were ignorant of our destiny, and
parting from my husband and friends, was a severe trial, without knowing
whether we were ever to meet them again. We walked on to Chamblee; here our
fears were dissipated, by meeting our friends. In the garrison of this place,
we found all the hospitality our necessities required. Here, for the first,
after my captivity, I lodged on a bed. Brandy was handed about in large bowls,
and we lived in high style. The next morning we were put in the custody of our
old masters, who took us to the canoes, in which we had a painful voyage that
day, and the following night to Sorell; where we arrived on the nineteenth. A
hospitable friar came to the shore to see us, and invited us to his house; he
gave us a good breakfast, and drank our better healths, in a tumbler of brandy;
he took compassionate notice of my child, and ordered it some suitable food.
But the Indians hurried us off, before it could eat. He then went with us to
the shore, and ordered his servant to carry the food, prepared for the child,
to the canoe, where he waited till I fed it. The friar was a very genteel man,
and gave us his benediction, at parting, in feeling language. We then rowed on
till the middle of the afternoon, when we landed on a barren heath, and by the
help of a fire, cooked an Indian dinner; after which the war dance was held,
and another infernal yelling. The prisoners were obliged to sing, till they
were hoarse, and dance round the fire. We had now arrived within a few miles of
the village St. Francis, to which place our masters belonged. Whenever the
warriors return from an excursion against an enemy, their return to the tribe
or village, must be designated by warlike ceremonial; the captives or spoil,
which may happen to crown their valor, must be conducted in a triumphant form,
and decorated to every possible advantage. For this end we must now submit to
painting; their vermillion, with which they were ever supplied, was mixed with
bear's grease, and every cheek, chin, and forehead, must have a dash. We then
rowed on within a mile of the town, where we stopped at a French house, to
dine; the prisoners were served with soup meagre, and bread. After dinner, two
savages proceeded to the village, to carry the glad tidings of our arrival. The
whole atmosphere soon resounded from every quarter, with whoops, yells,
shrieks, and screams. St. Francis, from the noise that came from it, might be
supposed the center of Pandemonium. Our masters were not backward, they made
every response they possibly could. The whole time we were sailing from the
French house, the noise was direful to be heard. Two hours before sunset, we
came to the landing, at the village. No sooner had we landed, than the yelling
in the town was redoubled, a cloud of savages, of all sizes, and sexes, soon
appeared running toward us; when they reached the boats, they formed
themselves into a long parade, leaving a small space, through which we must
pass. Each Indian then took his prisoner by his hand, and after ordering him to
sing the war song, began to march through the gauntlet. We expected a severe
beating, before we got through, but were agreeably disappointed, when we found
that each Indian only gave us a tap on the shoulder. We were led directly to
the houses, each taking his prisoner to his own wigwam. When I entered my
master's door, his brother saluted me with a large belt of wampum, and my
master presented me with another. Both were put over my shoulders, and crossed
behind and before. My new home was not the most agreeable; a large wigwam
without a floor, with a sire in the center, and only a few water vessels and
dishes, to eat from, made of birch bark, and tools for cookery, made clumsily
of wood, for furniture, will not be thought a pleasing residence to one
accustomed to civilized life*

CHAP. V. Residence at St. Francis. Sale of most of the Prisoners to the
French, and Removal to Montreal.
NIGHT presently came, after our arrival at St. Francis. Those, who have felt
the gloomy, homesick feelings, which sadden those hours which a youth passes,
when first from a father's house, may judge of part of my sufferings; but when
the rest of my circumstances are added, their conception must fall infinitely
short. I now found myself, with my infant, in a large wigwam, accompanied with
two or three warriors, and as many squaws, where I must spend the night, and
perhaps a year. My fellow prisoners were disposed over the town; each one,
probably, feeling the same gloominess, with myself. Hasty pudding presently was
brought forward, for supper. A spacious bowl of wood, well filled, was placed
in a central spot, and each one drew near with a wooden spoon. As the Indians
never use seats, nor have any in their wigwams, my awkwardness in taking my
position, was a matter of no small amusement to my new companions. The squaws
first fall upon their knees, and then sit back upon their heels. This was a
posture that I could not imitate. To sit in any other, was thought by them,
indelicate and unpolite. But I advanced to my pudding, with the best grace I
could, not, however, escaping some of their funny remarks. When the hour for
sleep came on, for it would be improper to call it bedtime, where beds were
not, I was pointed to a platform, raised half a yard, where upon a board,
covered with a blanket, I was to pass the night. The Indians threw themselves
down, in various parts of the building, in a manner that more resembled cows,
in a shed, than human beings, in a house. In the morning, our breakfast
consisted of the relics of the last night; my sister came to see me in the
forenoon, and we spent some hours, in observations upon our situation, while
washing some apparel, at a little brook. In the afternoon, I with my infant,
was taken to the grand parade, where we found a large collection of the village
inhabitants; an aged chief stepped forward, into an area, and after every noise
was silenced, and every one fixed in profound attention, he began to harrangue;
his manner was solemn -- his motions and expression gave me a perfect idea of
an orator. Not a breath was (...) and every spectator seemed to reverence what
he said. After the speech, my little son was brought to the opposite side of
the parade, and a number of blankets laid by his side. It now appeared that his
master and mine, intended a swop of prisoners. My master being a hunter, wished
for my son, to attend him on his excursions. Each delivered his property with
great formality; my son and blankets, being an equivalent for myself, child,
and wampum. I was taken to the house of my new master, and found myself allied
to the first family; my master was son in law to the grand sachem, was
accounted rich, had a store of goods, and lived in a style far above the
majority of his tribe. Soon after my arrival at his house, the interpreter came
to inform me, that I was adopted into his family. I was then introduced to the
family, and was told to call them brothers and sisters. -- I made a short
reply, expressive of gratitude, for being introduced to a house of high blood,
and requested their patience, while I should learn the customs of the nation.
This was scarce over, when the attention of the village was called to the grand
parade, to attend a rejoicing, occasioned by the arrival of some warriors, who
had brought some scalps. They were carried in triumph on a pole. Savage
butchery, upon murdered countrymen. The sight was horrid. As I retired to my
new residence, I could hear the savage yells, that accompany the war dance. I
spent the night in sad reflection.

MY time now was solitary beyond description; my new sisters and brothers
treated me with the same attention that they did their natural kindred, but it
was an unnatural situation to me. I was a novice at making canoes, bunks, and
tumplines, which was the only occupation of the squaws; of course, idleness was
among my calamities. -- My fellow prisoners, were as gloomy as myself ignorant,
whether they were to spend their days in this inactive village, to be carried
into a war campaign, to slaughter their countrymen, or to be dragged to the
cold Lakes of the north, in a hunting voyage. We visited each other daily, and
spent our time in conjecturing our future destiny.

THE space of forty five years having elapsed, since my residence in St.
Francis, it is impossible to give the reader a minute detail of events, that
occurred, while there; many of them are still forcibly impressed upon my
memory, but dates and particulars, are now inaccurately treasured up, by faint
recollection. Mr. Johnson tarried but a few days with me, before he was carried
to Montreal, to be sold. My two daughters, sister and Labarree, were soon after
carried to the same place, at different times. Farnsworth was carried by his
master, on a hunting scout, but not proving so active in the chase and ambush,
as they wished, he was returned, and sent to Montreal. I now found an increase
to my trouble, with only my son and infant, in this strange land, without a
prospect of relief, and with all my former trouble lying heavy upon me,
disappointment and despair came well nigh being my executioners. In this
dilemma, who can imagine my distress, when my little son came running to me one
morning, swollen with tears, exclaiming, that the Indians were going to carry
him into the woods to hunt; he had scarcely told the piteous story, before his
master came, to pull him away; he threw his little arms around me, begging in
the agony of grief, that I would keep him. The inexorable savage, unclenched
his hands, and forced him away; the last words I heard, intermingled with his
cries, were, Ma'am I shall never see you again. The keenness of my pangs,
almost obliged me to wish that I never had been a mother. Farewell, Sylvanus,
says I, God will preserve you.

IT was now the fifteenth of October. Forty five days had passed since my
captivity, and no prospect, but what was darkened with clouds of misfortune.
The uneasiness occasioned by indolence, was in some measure relieved, by the
privilege of making shirts for my brother. At night and morn, I was allowed to
milk the cows. The rest of the time I strolled gloomily about, looking
sometimes into an unsociable wigwam, at others sauntering into the bushes, and
walking on the banks of brooks. Once, I went to a French house, three miles
distant, to visit some friends of my brother's family, where I was entertained
politely a week; at another time, I went with a party to fish, accompanied by a
number of squaws. My weakness obliged me to rest often, which gave my
companions a poor opinion of me; but they showed no other resentment, than
calling me "no good squaw," which was the only reproach my sister ever gave,
when I displeased her. All the French inhabitants I formed an acquaintance
with, treated me with that civility, which distinguishes the nation; once in
particular, being almost distracted with an aching tooth, I was carried to a
French physician, across the river, for relief. They prevailed on the Indians,
to let me visit them a day or two, during which time, their marked attention
and generosity, claims my warmest gratitude. At parting, they expressed their
earnest wishes to have me visit them again.

ST. Francis contained about thirty wigwams, which were thrown disorderly into
a clump. There was a church, in which mass was held every night and morning,
and every Sunday, the hearers were summoned by a bell; and attendance was
pretty general. Ceremonies were performed by a French friar, who lived in the
midst of them, for the salvation of their souls. He appeared to be in that
place, what the legislative branch is in civil governments, and the grand
sachem the executive. The inhabitants lived in perfect harmony, holding most of
their property in common. They were prone to indolence, when at home, and not
remarkable for neatness. They were extremely modest, and apparently averse to
airs of courtship. Necessity was the only thing that called them to action,
this induced them to plant their corn, and to undergo the fatigues of hunting.
Perhaps I am wrong, to call necessity the only motive; revenge, which prompts
them to war, has great power. I had a numerous retinue of relations, which I
visited daily; but my brother's house, being one of the most decent in the
village, I fared full as well at home. Among my connexions, was a little
brother Sabatis, who brought the cows for me, and took particular notice of my
child. He was a sprightly little fellow, and often amused me, with feats
performed with his bow and arrow.

IN the early part of November, Mr. Johnson wrote from Montreal, requesting me
to prevail on the Indians, to carry me to Montreal, for sale, as he had made
provision for that purpose. I disclosed the matter, which was agreed to by my
brother and sister, and, on the seventh, we set sail in a little bark canoe.
While crossing Lake St. Peter's, we came nigh landing on the shores of eternity.
The waves were raised to an enormous height, by the wind, and often broke over
the canoe. My brother and sister, were pale as ghosts, and we all expected
immediate destruction; but the arm of Salvation was extended for our relief,
and we reached the shore. We were four days in this voyage, and received
obliging civilities every night, at French settlements; on the eleventh, we
arrived at Montreal, where I had the supreme satisfaction of meeting my
husband, children, and friends. Here I had the happiness to find, that all my
fellow prisoners had been purchased, by gentlemen of respectability, by whom
they were treated with great humanity. Mr. Du Quesne bought my sister, my
eldest daughter was owned by three affluent old maids, by the name of Jaisson,
and the other was owned by the mayor of the city.

MR. Johnson had obtained the privilege of two month's absence, on parole, for
the purpose of going to New England, to procure cash, for the redemption of his
family; he sat out on his journey the day after my arrival at Montreal. Mr. Du
Quesne engaged to supply his family with necessaries, during his absence, and
was to be recompensed at his return. Directly after his departure, I found
myself doomed to fresh trouble. The Indians brought me here, for the purpose of
exchanging me for some Micanaw savages, a tribe with whom they were at war; but
being disappointed in this, they were exorbitant in their demands, and refused
to take less than a thousand livres, for me, and my child, Mr. Du Quesne fixed
his offer at seven hundred, which was utterly refused, by my savage masters.
Their next step was, to threaten to carry me back to St. Francis. After a half
day's surly deliberation, they concluded to take the offered sum. I was
received into Mr. Du Quesne's family. My joy at being delivered from savage
captivity, was unbounded. From this period, Indians and sufferings were no more
to torture me, or my family, except the unfortunate Sylvanus. The fond idea of
liberty, held forth its dazzling pleasures, and the ignorance of future
calamities, precluded every cloud, that could obscure its effulgence. On Mr.
Johnson's journey to New England, I rested all my hope, and felt full confidence
in being relieved at his return.

IN justice to the Indians, I ought to remark, that they never treated me with
cruelty, to a wanton degree; few people have survived a situation like mine,
and few have fallen into the hands of savages, disposed to more lenity and
patience. Modesty has ever been a characteristick of every savage tribe; a
truth which my whole family will join to corroborate, to the extent of their
knowledge. As they are aptly called the children of nature, those who have
profited by refinement and education, ought to abate part of the prejudice,
which prompts them to look with an eye of censure on this untutored race. Can
it be said of civilized conquerors, that they, in the main, are willing to
share with their prisoners, the last ration of food, when famine stares them in
the face? Do they ever adopt an enemy, and salute him by the tender name of
brother? And I am justified in doubting, whether if I had fallen into the hands
of French soldiery, so much assiduity would have been shown, to preserve my
life.

CHAP. VI. Mr. Johnson's Tour to Boston, and Portsmouth, and the Catastrophe at
his return* Arrival at the Prison in Quebec.
THE reader will leave me, and my family, under the care of our factor, a short
time, and proceed with Mr. Johnson. On the twelth of November, he sat forward
for Albany, accompanied by two Indians for pilots, for whose fidelity, the
commander in chief was responsible. They were to tarry at Albany, till his
return. In a short time, I had a letter from Col. Lydius, informing me, that he
had safely arrived at Albany, and had gone to Boston. His first step was, to
apply to Governor Wentworth, at Portsmouth, for money to redeem his family, and
the English prisoners. Wentworth laid his matter before the General Assembly,
and they granted the sum of one hundred and fifty pounds sterling, for the
purposes of redemption, and ten pounds, to defray his expenses. The committee
of the General Court gave him the following directions.

Portsmouth, N. H. January 25, 1755. Mr. JAMES JOHNSON, SIR,
AGREEABLE to your letter to the Secretary, of the sixteenth instant, you have
enclosed a letter to Col. Cornelius Cuyler, Esquire in which you will observe, we
have given you credit, for letters on his acquaintance in Canada, to furnish
you with credit, to the amount of one hundred and fifty pounds sterling. We
therefore, advise you, to proceed to Albany, and on your arrival there, deliver
the said letter to Col. Cuyler, and take from him such credit as he shall give
you, on some able person or persons, in Canada, and when you are thus
furnished, you will then proceed to Canada, and there negotiate, in the best
and most frugal manner you can, the purchasing such, and so many captives, as
you may hear of, that have been taken from any part of this Province, taking
care that the aforesaid sum agreeable to the grant of the General Assembly
here, be distributed, to and for the purchasing all the said captives, that are
to be come at, in the most equal and exact manner, that none may be left there,
for want of their quota of said money. The captive's names, and places from
whence taken, that we have information of, you have herewith a list of, for
your direction. You are to keep an exact account of the distribution of this
money, in order to your future discharge.

IF Col. Cuyler should not be living, or refuse you his good offices, in this
affair, you are then to apply to the Hon. -- Saunders, Esquire mayor of the city of
Albany, or any other person, that can give you credit at Canada, and leave with
them our letter to Col. Cuyler, which shall oblige us to pay the said sum or
sums, mentioned in the said letter, to such person, and in the same way and
manner, as we have obliged ourselves to pay him.

We are your friends, THEODORE ATKINSON, Com. S. WIBING, Com. MESHECH WEAR,
Com. BENJ. SHERBURNE, jun. Com.

A list of the Captives, taken from the Province of Newhampshire, by the St.
Francis Indians, in the summer 1754.
From Charlestown, on Connecticut River. James Johnson, his wife, and four
children. Peter Labarree, Ebenezer Farnsworth, Miriam Willard.
From Merrimack River.
Nathaniel Malloon, his wife and three children. Robert Barber, Samuel
Scribner, Enos Bishop.





IN addition to this letter of credit, Gov. Wentworth gave him the following
passport.

Province of Newhampshire, in New England.
L.S.
By his Excellency BENNING WENTWORTH, Esquire Captain General, Governor, and
Commander in Chief, in and over his Britannick Majesty's Province of
Newhampshire, aforesaid, and Vice Admiral of the same, and Surveyor General of
all his Majesty's Woods, in Northamerica.

WHEREAS the St. Francis, and other Indians, did, in the summer last past,
captivate sundry of his Majesty's subjects, inhabitants of this Province, and
have, as I have been informed, sold the same to the subjects of the French
King, in Canada, where they are now detained, in servitude; and having had
application made to me, by Mr. James Johnson, of Charlestown, within this
Province, one of the said captives, who obtained leave to come to this country,
in order to purchase his own, and other captive's liberty. For letters of safe
passport, I do hereby require, and command, all officers, civil and military,
as well as all other persons, that they offer no let or hindrance to the said
James Johnson, or his company, but contrariwise, that they afford him all
necessary dispatch, in said journey, through this Province.

AND I do hereby, also desire, that all his Majesty's subjects, of his several
other governments, through which the said Johnson may have occasion to travel,
may treat him with that civility that becomes.

I also, hereby, earnestly entreat the Governor General, and all other
officers, ministers, and subjects, of his most Christian Majesty, governing and
inhabiting, the country and territories of Canada, aforesaid; that they would
respectively be aiding and assisting to the said James Johnson, in the
aforesaid negotiation. Hereby engaging to return the same civility and
kindness, to any of his most Christian Majesty's officers and subjects, when
thereto requested, by any of his Governors or proper officers. In token of
which, I have caused the public seal of the Province of Newhampshire
aforesaid, to be hereunto affixed, this twenty fifth day of January, in the
twenty eighth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lord George, the second, of
Greatbritain, France, and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.

BENNING WENTWORTH.
By his Excellency's Command, THEODORE ATKINSON, Sec'ry.
Anno Domini. 1755.

WITH these credentials, Mr. Johnson proceeded with alacrity to Boston,
procured Governor Shirley's passport, and set forward to Worcester, on his
return back; while there, he was greatly astonished at receiving the following
letter from Governor Shirley.

Boston, February 15, 1755. Mr. JOHNSON,
THESE have some things happened in our public affairs, since your going from
Boston, with my letters to the Governor of Canada, and intelligence come of the
motions of the French in Canada, for further invading his Majesty's territories
on the frontiers of Newyork, and Newhampshire, as make it unsafe for you, as
well as for the public, to proceed, at present, on your journey to Quebec, and
therefore I expect that you do forthwith, upon receiving this letter, return
back, and lay aside all thoughts of going forward, on this journey, till you
have my leave, or the leave of Governor Wentworth, to whom I shall write, and
inform him of what I have undertook to do in this matter, in which his
Majesty's service is so much concerned.

Your friend and servant, W. SHIRLEY.

Mr. JAMES JOHNSON.

ON the receipt of this letter, he returned with a heavy heart to Boston, and
was positively ordered, by Shirley, to stay till further orders. His situation
now, was really deplorable. His parole, which was only for two months, must be
violated; his credit in Canada lost. His family exposed to the malice of
exasperated Frenchmen, and all his good prospects, at an end. After using every
exertion, in Boston, for leave to recommence his journey, and spending the rest
of the winter, and all the spring, he found his efforts were in vain. During
this time, my situation grew daily distressing. Mr. Du Quesne made honorable
provision for myself, sister, and child, till the expiration of my husband's
parole; the two Indians were then sent to Albany, to pilot him back; after
waiting some time, and learning nothing about him, they returned. Previous to
this, I had been treated with great attention and civility; dined frequently in
the first families, received cards, to attend them on parties of pleasure, and
was introduced to a large and respectable acquaintance. As an unfortunate
woman, I received those general tokens of generosity, which flow from a humane
people. Among the presents which I received, was one of no small magnitude,
from Captains Stowbrow and Vambram, two gentlemen, who were delivered by Major
Washington, as hostages, when he, with the Virginia troops, surrendered to the
French and Indians. In compliance with their billet, I waited on them one
morning, and, at parting, received a present of one hundred and forty eight
livres. Mr. St. Ange, a French gentleman of fortune, and distinction, beside
frequent proofs of his goodness, gave me, at one time, forty eight livres. In
his family, I formed an intimate acquaintance, with a young English lady, who
was captured by the Indians, in the Province of Maine, and sold to him; she was
used with parental tenderness, and shared the privileges of his children; she,
with his daughter, frequently came in their morning carriage, to ride with my
sister and me. Gratitude to my numerous benefactors, pleads loudly in favor of
inserting all their names, and particularizing every act of generosity. If I
omit it, it must not be imagined that I have forgotten their charity; it has
left an impression on my heart, that can only be erased with the extinction of
life.

WHILE in Mr. Du Quesnes family, my little daughter was very unwell, and the
superstitious people were convinced that she would either die, or be carried
off by the Devil, unless baptized. I yielded to their wishes, and they prepared
for the ceremony, with all the appendages annexed to their religion. Mr. Du
Quesne was godfather, and the young English lady godmother; by Mrs. Du Quesne's
particular request, she was christened Louis, after herself -- to which I added
the name of Captive.

THE return of the Indians, without Mr. Johnson, boded no good to me. I
observed, with pain, the gradual change in my friends, from coldness to
neglect, and from neglect to contempt. Mr. Du Quesne, who had the most delicate
sense of honor, supposed that he had designedly broken his parole, and abused
his confidence; he refused to grant me further assistance, or even to see my
face. I now found myself friendless and alone; not a word had I heard from Mr.
Johnson, not a word had I heard from my little son, with the Indians.
Affliction lowered upon me, with all its horrors; in this dilemma, my sister
and I agreed to take a small room, and support ourselves, till our little store
of cash was expended, and then have recourse to our needles.

IN the beginning of April, the Indians made a second tour to Albany, in quest
of Mr. Johnson, and again returned without him. I wrote to Col. Lydius, for
information, but he could tell nothing. Darkness increased; but I summoned all
my resolution, and indulged the fond hope, of being soon relieved. We kept our
little room till June, when I had the happiness to hear, that my husband was
without the city, waiting for permission to come in. He was conducted in by a
file of men; his presence banished care and trouble, and turned the tear of
sorrow, to the effusion of joy; after the gratulation of meeting had subsided,
he related his sad fate in New England. He finally got permission from Gov.
Wentworth, to come privately, by the way of Albany, where he took his bills,
drawn by Mr. Cuyler, on Mr. St. Luc Lucorne, and Mr. Rine Du Quesne. The face
of affairs in Canada had materially changed; during his absence a new Governor
had been sent over, and various maneuvers in politics had taken place, which
were very injurious to him. Had the old Governor tarried, his absence would
have probably been excused. But Mons. Vaudrieul was ignorant of the conditions,
on which he went home, and could not admit apologies, for the breach of his
parole. Our disappointment and mortification were severe, when we found our
bills protested. This reduced us at once to a beggarly state. The evil was
partially remedied, by St. Luc Lucorne's lending us paper money, while we could
send some Indians, to Mr. Cuyler, for silver. Mr. Johnson received orders to
settle his affairs, with all possible dispatch.

SPIRITED preparations were now making for war. General Dieskau, arrived from
France, with an army, and Montreal was a scene of busy confusion. We were
completing our settlements, with our paper, expecting to have full permission
to go home, when the Indians returned. But the measure of our misery was not
yet full. In the beginning of July, Mr. Johnson was put into jail. Terrible to
me, was this unexpected stroke; without money, credit or friends, I must now
roam the streets, without a prospect of relief, from the cloud of misfortune,
that hung over me. In a few days, the faithful Indians, who had been sent to
Mr. Cuyler, for the silver, returned, with four hundred and thirty eight
dollars, with an order on St. Luc Lucorne, for seven hundred additional livres;
but he took the whole into possession, and we never after received a penny from
him.

HALF distracted, and almost exhausted with despair and grief, I went to the
Governor, to paint our distress, and ask relief. I found him of easy access,
and he heard my lamentable story, with seeming emotion; his only promise was,
to take care of us, and, at parting, he gave me a crown, to buy milk for my
babes. Ignorant of our destiny, my sister and I, kept our little room, and were
fortunate enough, to get subsistence from day to day. Often going to the gloomy
prison, to see my poor husband, whose misfortunes in Boston had brought him to
this wretchedness.

OUR own misfortunes had taught us how to feel for the sufferings of others,
and large demands were now made, on our sympathetick powers. Just as we were
plunged into this new distress, a scout of savages brought a number of
prisoners into Montreal, which were our old friends and acquaintance. Two
children from Mr. H. Grout's family, and two children belonging to Mrs. How,
the fair captive, celebrated in Col. Humphrey's life of Putnam. Their names
were Polly and Submit Phips. Mrs. How was then a prisoner at St. John's, with
six other children, and one Garfield. They were all taken at Hinsdale. -- Mrs.
How Is daughters were purchased by Mons. Vaudrieul, the Governor, and had every
attention paid their education. After a year's residence in Montreal, they were
sent to the grand nunnery in Quebec, where my sister and I, made them a visit;
they were beautiful girls, cheerful and well taught. We here found two aged
English ladies, who had been taken in former wars. One, by the name of
Wheelright, who had a brother in Boston, on whom she requested me to call, if
ever I went to that place; I complied with her request afterward, and received
many civilities from her brother.
Our meeting was a scene of sorrow, and melancholy pleasure.

ALL were now flocking to the standard of war. The Indians came from all
quarters, thirsting for English blood, and receiving instruction from the
French. A number of tribes, with all their horrid weapons of war, paraded, one
morning, before the General's house, and held the war dance, and filled the air
with infernal yells, after which, in a formal manner, they took the hatchet,
against the English, and marched for the field of battle. Alas! my poor
countrymen, thought I, how many of you are to derive misery from these monsters.

ON the twenty second of July, Mr. Johnson was taken from jail, and with
myself, and our two youngest children, were ordered on board a vessel for
Quebec. To leave our friends at Montreal, was a distressing affair; my sisters
ransom had been paid, but she could not go with us. She went into the family of
the Lieut. Governor, where she supported herself, with her needle. My eldest
daughter, was still with the three old maids, who treated her tenderly.
Labarree and Farnsworth, had paid the full price of their redemption, but were
not allowed to go home. Not a word had we heard yet, from poor Sylvanus. We
parted in tears, ignorant of our destination, but little thinking, that we were
to embark for a place of wretchedness and woe. After two days good sailing, we
arrived at Quebec, and were all conducted directly to jail.

CHAP. VII. Six month's residence in the Criminal Jail, and removal to the
Civil Prison.
WE now, to our indescribable pain, found the fallacy of Mr. Governor's
promises, for our welfare. This jail was a place, too shocking for description.
In one corner, sat a poor being, half dead with the small pox; in another, were
some lousy blankets and straw; in the center stood a few dirty dishes, and the
whole presented a scene miserable to view. The terrors of starvation, and the
fear of suffocating in filth, were overpowered, by the more alarming evil of
the small pox, which none of us had had. But there was no retreat, resignation
was our only resource; the first fortnight we waited anxiously for the attack
of the disease, in which time, we were supported by a small piece of meat a
day, which was stewed with some rusty crusts of bread, and brought to us in a
pail, that swine would run from. The straw and lousy blankets, were our only
lodging, and the rest of our furniture consisted of some wooden blocks, for
seats. On the fifteenth day, I was taken with the small pox, and removed to the
hospital; leaving my husband and two children in the horrid prison. In two
days, Mr. Johnson put my youngest child, Captive, out to nurse. The woman kept
the child but a few days, before she returned it, owing to a mistrust, that she
should not get her pay. But should it remain in prison, certain death must be
its portion. Her father was reduced to the sad necessity, of requesting her, to
carry it to the Lord Intendant, and tell him, that he must either allow her a
compensation for keeping it, or it must be left at his door. The good woman
dressed it decently, and obeyed her orders. Mr. Intendant smiled at her story,
and took the child in his arms, saying, it was a pretty little English devil,
it was a pity it should die; he ordered his clerk to draw an order for its
allowance, and she took good care of it, till the last of October, except a few
days, while it had the small pox.

A few days after I left the prison, Mr. Johnson and my other daughter, were
taken with symptoms, and came to the hospital to me. It is a singular instance
of Divine Interposition, that we all recovered from this malignant disease. We
were remanded to prison, but were not compelled to our former rigid
confinement. Mr. Johnson was allowed, at certain times, to go about the city,
in quest of provision. But, on the twentieth of October, St. Luc Lucorne
arrived from Montreal, with the news of Dieskau's defeat; he had ever since my
husband's misfortune, about his parole, been his persecuting enemy. By his
instigation, we were all put directly to close prison.

THE ravages of the small pox, reduced us to the last extremity, and the foetid
prison, without fire or food, added bitterness to our distress. Mr. Johnson
preferred a petition to the Lord Intendant, stating our melancholy situation. I
had the liberty of presenting it myself, and by the assistance of Mr. Pertua,
the interpreter, in whom we ever found a compassionate friend, we got some
small relief. About the first of November. I was taken violently ill of a
fever, and was carried to the hospital, with my daughter Captive. After a
month's residence there, with tolerable good attendance, I recovered from my
illness, and went back to my husband. While at the hospital, I found an
opportunity to convey the unwelcome tidings of our deplorable situation to my
sister, at Montreal, charging her to give my best love to my daughter Susanna,
and to inform our fellow prisoners, Labarree and Farnsworth, that our good
wishes awaited them. Not a word had we yet heard from poor Sylvanus.

WINTER now began to approach, and the severe frosts of Canada, operated keenly
upon our feelings. Our prison was a horrid defense, from the blasts of
December, with two chairs, and a heap of straw, and two lousy blankets, we may
well be supposed to live uncomfortably; but, in addition to this, we had but
one poor fire a day, and the iron grates gave free access to the chills of the
inclement sky. A quart basin, was the only thing allowed us to cook our small
piece of meat and dirty crusts in, and it must serve at the same time for table
furniture. In this sad plight -- a prisoner -- in jail -- winter approaching --
conceive reader, for I cannot speak our distress.

OUR former benevolent friends, Captains Stowbrow and Vambram, had the peculiar
misfortune, to be cast into a prison, opposite to us. Suspicion of having
corresponded with their countrymen, was the crime, with which they were
charged. Their misfortune did not preclude the exertion of generosity; they
frequently sent us, by the waiting maid, bottles of wine, and articles of
provision. But the malice of Frenchmen, had now arrived to such a pitch,
against all our country, that We must be deprived of these comforts. These good
men were forbidden their offices of kindness, and our intercourse was entirely
prohibited. We, however, found means, by stratagem, to effect, in some measure,
what could not be done by open dealing. When the servants were carrying in our
daily supplies, we slipped into the entry, and deposited our letters in an ash
box, which were taken by our friends, they leaving one at the same time for us;
this served in some measure, to amuse a dull hour -- sometimes, we diverted
ourselves, by the use of Spanish cards; as Mr. Johnson was ignorant of the
game, I derived no inconsiderable pleasure from instructing him. But the
vigilance of our keepers increased, and our paper and ink were withheld. -- We
had now been prisoners seventeen months, and our prospects were changing from
bad to worse, five months had elapsed, since our confinement in this horrid
receptacle, except the time we lingered in the hospital. Our jailer was a true
descendant from Pharaoh; but, urged by impatience and despair, I softened him
so much, as to get him to ask Mr. Pertua, to call on us. When the good man
came, we described our situation, in all the moving terms, which our feelings
inspired, which in addition to what he saw, convinced him of the reality of our
distress. He proposed asking an influential friend of his, to call on us, who,
perhaps, would devise some mode, for our relief. The next day, the gentleman
came to see us; he was one of those good souls, who ever feel for others woes.
He was highly affronted with his countrymen, for reducing us to such distress,
and declared, that the Lord Intendant himself, should call on us, and see the
extremities to which he had reduced us; he sent, from his own house, that
night, a kettle, some candles, and each of us a change of linen.

THE next day, January 8th, 1756, Mr. Intendant came to see us; he exculpated
himself, by saying, that we were put there, by the special order of Mons.
Vaudrieul, the Governor in chief, and that he had no authority to release us.
But he would convey a letter from Mr. Johnson to Monsieur, which might have the
desired effect. The letter was accordingly written, stating our troubles, and
beseeching relief; likewise praying that our son might be got from the Indians,
and sent to us, with our daughter and sister, from Montreal. The Governor
returned the following obliging letter.

TRANSLATION.
I have received, Sir, your letter, and am much concerned for the situation you
are in. I write to Mr. Longieul, to put you and your wife, in the civil jail.
Mr. L. Intendant, will be so good as to take some notice of the things you
stand in need of, and to help you. As to your boy, who is in the hands of the
Indians, I will do all that is in my power, to get him, but I do not hope to
have a good success in it; your child in town, and your sister, in law are
well. If it is some opportunity of doing you some pleasure, I will make use of
it; unless some reason might happen, that hinder and stop the effects of my
goodwill. If you had not before, given some cause of being suspected, you
should be at liberty. I am, Sir, your most humble and obedient servant.

VAUDRIEUL.


FROM the receipt of this letter, we dated our escape from direful bondage. Mr.
Intendant ordered us directly to the new jail, called the civil prison, where
our accomodations were infinitely better. We had a decent bed, candles, fuel,
and all the conveniences belonging to prisoners of war. Mr. Johnson was allowed
fifteen pence, per day, on account of a Lieutenant's commission, which he held
under George the second, and I was permitted to go once a week into the city to
purchase necessaries; and a washerwoman was provided for my use. We were not
confined to the narrow limits of a single room, but were restrained only by the
bounds of the jail yard. Our situation formed such a contrast, with what we
endured in the gloomy criminal jail, that we imagined ourselves the favorites
of fortune, and in high life.

CHAP. VIII Residence in the Civil Jail, and occurrences till the twentieth of
July, 1757.
TO be indolent from necessity, has ever been deemed a formidable evil. No
better witnesses than ourselves, can testify the truth of the remark, although,
our lodgings were now such as we envied a month before, yet, to be compelled to
continual idleness, was grievous to be borne. We derived some amusement, from
the cultivation of a small garden, within the jail yard; but a continued
sameness of friends and action, rendered our time extremely wearisome.

ABOUT a month after our arrival at this new abode, one Captain Milton, with
his crew, who, with their vessel, were taken at sea, were brought prisoners of
war to the same place. Milton was lodged in our apartment; he had all the rude
boisterous airs of a seaman; without the least trait of a gentleman, which
rendered him a very troublesome companion. His impudence was consummate, but
that was not the greatest evil; while some new recruits were parading before
the prison, one day, Milton addressed them in very improper language, from our
window, which was noticed directly by city authority, who, supposing it to be
Mr. Johnson, ordered him into the dungeon. Deeply affected, by this new
trouble, I again called on my friend, Mr. Pertua, who, after having ascertained
the facts, got him released. Mr. Milton was then put into other quarters.

A new jailer, who had an agreeable lady for his wife, now made our situation
still more happy. My little daughters played with hers, and learned the French
language.

CAPT. M'Neil, and his brother, from Boston, were brought to us as prisoners;
they told us the state of politics, in our own country, and told us some
interesting news, about some of our friends at home.

IN the morning of the thirteenth of August, our jailer, with moon eyes, came
to congratulate us, on the taking of Oswego, by the French. We entered little
into his spirit of joy, preferring much, to hear good news from the other side.
We were soon visited by some of the prisoners, who had surrendered. Col.
Schuyler was in the number, who, with the gentlemen in his suit, made us a
generous present.

THE remainder of the summer and fall, of fifty six, passed off without any
sensible variation. We frequently heard from Montreal my sister was very well
situated, in the family of the Lieut. Governor, and my eldest daughter was
caressed by her three mothers. Could I have heard from my son, half my trouble
would have ended.

IN December, I was delivered of a son, which lived but a few hours, and was
buried under the Cathedral Church.

IN the winter, I received a letter from my sister, containing the sad tidings
of my father's death, who was killed by Indians, on his own farm, the preceding
May. Savage vengeance fell heavily upon our family; I had a brother wounded at
the same time, who ran to the fort, with the spear sticking in his thigh. Too
much grief reduced me to a weak condition; I was taken sick, and carried to the
hospital, where, after a month's lingering illness, I found myself able to
return.

THE commencement of the year fifty seven, passed off without a prospect of
liberty. Part of our fellow prisoners, were sent to France, but we made no
voyage out of the jail yard. About the first of May, we petitioned Mons.
Vaudrieul, to permit our sister to come to us. Our prayer was granted, and in
May, we had the pleasure of seeing her, after an absence of two years. She had
supported herself by her needle, in the family of the Lieut. Governor, where
she was treated extremely well, and received a present of four crowns at
parting.

IMPATIENT of confinement, we now made another attempt to gain our liberty. Mr.
Pertua conducted us to the house of the Lord Intendant, to whom we petitioned
in pressing terms; stating that we had now been prisoners almost three years,
and had suffered every thing but death; and that would be our speedy portion,
unless we had relief. His Lordship listened with seeming pity, and promised to
lay our case before the head man, at Montreal, and give us an answer, in seven
days; at the expiration of which time, we had a permit to leave the prison. It
is not easy to describe the effect of such news; those only, who have felt the
horrors of confinement, can figure to themselves, the happiness we enjoyed,
when breathing, once more, the air of liberty. We took lodgings in town, where
we tarried till the first of June; when a cartel ship arrived, to carry
prisoners to England, for an exchange. Mr. Johnson wrote an urgent letter, to
Mons. Vaudrieul, praying that his family might be included with those, who were
to take passage. Monsieur wrote a very encouraging letter back, promising that
he and his family should sail, and that his daughter, Susanna, should be sent
to him -- he concluded, by congratulating him on his good prospects, and
ordering the Governor of Quebec to afford us his assistance. This letter was
dated June the 27th.

THIS tide of good fortune almost wiped away the remembrance of three years
adversity. We began our preparations for embarkation, with alacrity. Mr.
Johnson wrote St. Luc Lucorne, for the seven hundred livres, due on Mr.
Cuyler's order, but his request was, and still is, unsatisfied. This was a
period, big with every thing propitious and happy. The idea of leaving a
country, where I had suffered the keenest distress, during two months and a
half, with the savages -- been bowed down by every mortification and insult,
which could arise from the misfortunes of my husband in New England; and, where
I had spent two years in sickness and despair, in a prison too shocking to
mention, contributed to fill the moment with all the happiness, which the
benevolent reader will conceive my due, after sufferings so intense; to
consummate the whole, my daughter was to be returned to my arms, who had been
absent more than two years. -- There was a good prospect of our son's being
released from the Indians; the whole, formed such a lucky combination of
fortunate events, that the danger of twice crossing the ocean, to gain our
native shore, vanished in a moment. My family were all in the same joyful mood,
and hailed the happy day, when we should sail for England.

BUT little did we think, that this sunshine of prosperity was so soon to be
darkened, by the heaviest clouds of misfortune. Three days before the appointed
day for sailing, the ship came down from Montreal, without my daughter; in a
few moments, I met Mr. Pertua, who told me, that counter orders had come, and
Mr. Johnson must be retained a prisoner; only my two little daughters, sister
and myself could go. This was calamity indeed; to attempt such a long,
wearisome voyage, without money, and without acquaintance, and to leave a
husband, and two children in the hands of enemies, was too abhorrent for
reflection. But is was an affair of importance, and required weighty
consideration; accordingly, the next day a solemn council, of all the prisoners
in the city, was held in the coffee house. -- Col. Schuyler was president, and,
after numerous arguments, for and against, were heard, it was voted, by a large
majority, that I should go. -- I, with hesitation, gave my consent. Some,
perhaps, will censure the measure, as rash, and others may applaud my courage;
but I had so long been accustomed to danger and distress, in the most menacing
forms, they could assume, that I was now almost insensible to their threats;
and this act was not a little biassed by desperation. Life could no longer
retain its value, if lingered out in the inimical regions of Canada. In Europe,
I should, at least, find friends, if not acquaintance; and among the numerous
vessels bound to America, I might chance to get a passage. But then, to leave a
tender husband, who had so long, at the hazard of his life, preserved my own;
to part, perhaps forever, from two children, put all my resolution to the test,
and shook my boasted firmness.

COL. Schuyler, whom we ever found our benevolent friend, promised to use his
influence, for Mr. Johnson's release, and for the redemption of our children.

ON the twentieth of July, we went on board the vessel, accompanied by Mr.
Johnson, who went with us to take leave. We were introduced to the Captain, who
was a gentleman, and a person of great civility; -- he showed us the best
cabin, which was to be the place of our residence, and, after promising my
husband, that the voyage should be made as agreeable to me as possible, he gave
orders for weighing anchor. -- The time was now come, that we must part -- Mr.
Johnson took me by the hand -- our tears imposed silence -- I saw him step into
the barge; -- but my two little children, sister, and myself, were bound for
Europe.

WE fell down the river St. Lawrence, but a small distance that night. The next
morning, the Captain, with a cheerful countenance, came to our cabin, and
invited us to rise, and take our leave of Quebec; none but myself complied, and
I gazed, as long as sight would permit, at the place, where I had left my
dearest friend.

CHAP. IX. Voyage to Plymouth. Occurrences. Sailing from Plymouth to
Portsmouth, from thence, by the way of Cork, to Newyork.
ALL my fears and affliction, did not prevent my feeling some little joy, at
being released from the jurisdiction of Frenchmen. I could pardon the Indians,
for their vindictive spirit, because they had no claim to the benefits of
civilization. But the French, who give lessons of politeness, to the rest of
the world, can derive no advantage from the plea of ignorance. The blind
superstition, which is inculcated by their monks and friars, doubtless,
stifles, in some measure, the exertion of pity toward their enemies; and the
common herd, which includes almost seven eighths of their number, have no
advantages from education. To these sources, I attribute most of my sufferings.
But I found some benevolent friends, whose generosity I shall ever recollect,
with the warmest gratitude.

THE commencement of the voyage, had every favorable presage; the weather was
fine, the sailors cheerful, and the ship in good trim. My accommodations in the
Captain's family, were very commodious; a boy was allowed me, for my particular
use. We sailed with excellent fortune, till the nineteenth of August, when we
hove in sight of old Plymouth, and at four o'clock, in the afternoon, dropped
anchor.

THE next day, all but myself and family, were taken from the vessel; we felt
great anxiety at being left, and began to fear, that fortune was not willing to
smile on us, even on these shores; we waited in despair, thirty or forty hours,
and found no relief. The Captain, observing our despondency, began his airs of
gaiety to cheer us; he assured us, that we should not suffer -- that if the
English would not receive us, he would take us to France, and make us happy.
But, at last an officer came on board, to see if the vessel was prepared for
the reception of French prisoners. We related to him our situation; he
conducted us on shore, and applied to the Admiral for directions -- who ordered
us lodgings, and the King's allowance of two shillings sterling, per day, for
our support. Fortunately, we were lodged in a house, where resided Captain John
Tuston Mason, whose name will be familiar to the inhabitants of Newhampshire,
on account of his patent. He very kindly interested himself in our favor, and
wrote to Messrs. Thomlinson and Apthorp, agents at London, for the Province of
Newhampshire, soliciting their assistance, in my behalf. We tarried at Plymouth
but a fortnight, during which time, I received much attention, and had to
gratify many an inquisitive friend, with the history of my sufferings.

CAPT. Mason procured me a passage to Portsmouth, in the Rainbow man of war,
from whence I was to take passage in a packet, for America. Just as I stepped
on board the Rainbow, a good lady, with her son, came to make me a visit; her
curiosity to see a person of my description, was not abated, by my being on my
passage; she said she could not sleep, till she had seen the person, who had
suffered such hard fortune. -- After she had asked all the questions that time
would allow of, she gave me a guinea, and a half guinea to my sister, and a
muslin handkerchief to each of my little girls. On our arrival at Portsmouth,
the packet had sailed; the Captain of the Rainbow, not finding it convenient to
keep us with him, introduced us on board the Royal Ann.

WHEREVER we lived, we found the best friends and the politest treatment. -- It
will be thought singular, that a defenseless woman, should suffer so many
changes, without meeting with some insults, and many incivilities. But, during
my long residence on board the various vessels, the most delicate gallantry
ever designated my companions. The officers were assiduous in making my
situation agreeable, and readily proffered their services.

WHILE on board the Royal Ann, I received the following letters; the reader
will excuse the recitation; it would be ingratitude gratitude not to record
such conspicuous acts of benevolence.

Plymouth, Sept. 13, 1757. MADAM,
LATE last postnight, I received an answer from Mr. Apthorp, who is partner
with Mr. Thomlinson, the agent for Newhampshire, with a letter enclosed to you,
which gave you liberty to draw on him for fifteen guineas. As Madam Hornech was
just closing her letter to you, I gave it her, to enclose for you, I now write
again to London, in your behalf. You must immediately write Mr. Apthorp, what
you intend to do, and what further you would have him, and our friends at
London, do for you.

I hope you have received the benefaction, of the charitable Ladies in this
town. All friends here commisserate your misfortunes, and wish you well,
together with your sister and children.

Your friend and countryman to serve. JOHN T. MASON.

Mrs. JOHNSON.

London, Sept. 7, 1757. MADAM,
I received a letter from Capt. Mason, dated the thirtieth of last month,
giving an account of your unfortunate situation, and yesterday, Mr. Thomlinson,
who is ill in the country, sent me your letter, together with Capt. Mason's to
him, with the papers relative to you. In consequence of which, I, this day,
applied to a number of gentlemen, in your behalf; who, very readily gave their
assistance* but as I am a stranger to the steps you intend to pursue, I can
only give you liberty, at present, to draw on me for ten or fifteen guineas,
for which sum your bill shall be paid, and when you furnish me with
information, I shall, very cheerfully, give any furtherance in my power, to
your relief, when I shall also send you a list of your benefactors.

I am, Madam, your most humble servant, JOHN APTHORP.

Mrs. SUSANNA JOHNSON

Letter from H Grove.
I have now the pleasure to let dear Mrs. Johnson know the goodness of Mrs.
Hornech; she has collected seven pounds for you, and sent it to Mrs. Brett, who
lives in the yard at Portsmouth, to beg her favors to you, in any thing she can
do, to help or assist you. She is a good lady; do go to her, and let her know
your distress. Capt. Mason has got a letter this post, but he is not at home;
cannot tell you further. You will excuse this scrawl, likewise my not
enlarging. As Mr. Hornech waits to send it away. Only believe me, madam, you
have my earnest prayers to God, to help and assist you. My mama's compliments
with mine, and begs to wait on you, and, believe me, dear Mrs. Johnson, yours
in all events to serve you.

HANNAH GROVE.
Sunday eve, 10 o'clock.

I received the donation, and Mr. Apthorp sent me the fifteen guineas. I
sincerely lament, that he omitted sending me the names of my benefactors.

THE Captain of the Royal Ann, supposing my situation with him, might not be so
convenient, applied to the mayor, for a permit for me to take lodgings in the
city, which was granted. I took new lodgings, where I tarried three or four
days, when orders came for me to be on board the Orange, man of war, in three
hours, which was to sail for America. We made all possible dispatch, but when
we got to the shore, we were astonished to find the ship too far under way, to
be overtaken. No time was to be lost, I applied to a waterman, to carry us to a
merchantman, who was weighing anchor, at a distance, to go in the same fleet.
He hesitated long enough to pronounce a chapter of oaths, and rowed us off.
When we came to the vessel, I petitioned the Captain to take us on board, till
he overtook the Orange. He directly flew into a violent passion, and offered
greater insults, than I had ever received, during my whole voyage; he swore we
were women of bad fame, who wished to follow the army, and that he would have
nothing to do with us. I begged him to calm his rage, and we would convince him
of his error. But, fortunately, the victualler of the fleet happened to be in
the ship, who at this moment stepped forward, with his roll of names, and told
the outrageous Captain, that he would soon convince him, whether we deserved
notice, by searching his list. He soon found our names, and the Captain began
to beg pardon. -- He took us on board, and apologized for his rudeness. We
sailed with a fair wind for Cork, where the fleet took provision. We tarried a
fortnight in this place, during which time, the Captain of the Orange came on
board to see me, and to offer me a birth in his vessel; but that being a battle
ship, it was thought best for me to stay where I then was. After weighing
anchor at Cork, we had a passage of seven weeks, remarkably pleasant, to
Newyork. On the tenth of December, we dropped anchor at Sandy Hook; on the
eleventh, I had the supreme felicity, to find myself on shore in my native
country, after an absence of three years, three months, and eleven days.

CHAP. X The History ends.
I MIGHT descant for many a page, on the felicity I felt, on being once more in
my own country; but others can guess my feelings better than I can tell them.
The Mayor of Newyork, ordered lodgings for us; here I had the pleasure of
meeting my friend, Col. Schuyler, who gave me much information about affairs in
Canada, he told me that my husband had been released, and taken passage in a
cartel ship, for Halifax; and that he had redeemed my son from the Indians, for
the sum of five hundred livres.

MY fellow prisoner, Labarree, had made his escape from the French, and had
been in Newyork a few days before, on his way home.

WE tarried in Newyork ten days -- then took water passage for Newhaven, where
I had the good fortune to find a number of officers who had been stationed at
Charlestown, the preceding summer, who gratified my curiosity with intelligence
respecting my relations and friends in that place. Some of these gentlemen,
among whom was Col. Whiting, kindly undertook to assist us on our journey home,
by the way of Springfield. At Hartford we found some gentlemen who were bound
for Charlestown; they solicited my sister Miss Miriam Willard, was afterward
married to the Reverend Mr. Whitney, of Shirley, Massachusetts.
to go in company with them, which she assented to.

WHEN within half a dozen miles of Springfield, Mr. Ely, a benevolent friend of
Mr. Johnson's, sent his two sons, with a sleigh to convey me to his house,
where I proposed staying till some of my friends could hear of my arrival.
Fortunately, Mr. Johnson about the same time arrived at Boston, but misfortune
had not yet filled the measure of his calamity. He had no sooner landed, than
he was put under guard, on suspicion of not performing his duty in the
redemption of the Canada prisoners, which suspicion was occasioned by his
remisness in producing his vouchers. But the following certificate procured his
liberty.

THIS is to certify, whom it may concern, that the bearer, Lieutenant James
Johnson, inhabitant in the town of Charlestown, in the Province of
Newhampshire, in New England; who together with his family were taken by the
Indians on the thirtieth of August 1754, has ever since continued a steady and
faithful subject to his Majesty King George, and has used his utmost endeavors
to redeem his own family, and all others belonging to the Province aforesaid,
that was in the hands of the French and Indians, which he cannot yet
accomplish; and that both himself and family, have undergone innumerable
hardships and affliction since they have been prisoners in Canada.

IN testimony of which, we the subscribers, Officers in his Brittanick
Majesty's service, and now prisoners of war at Quebec, have thought it
necessary to grant him this certificate, and do recommend him as an object
worthy the aid and compassion of every honest Englishman.

Signed PETER SCHUYLER, ANDREW WATKINS, WILLIAM MARTIN, WILLIAM PADGELD.

Quebec, Sept. 16, 1757.

AFTER his dismission, from the guards in Boston, he proceeded directly for
Charlestown. When within fifteen miles of Springfield, he was met by a
gentleman, who had just before seen me, who gave him the best news he could
have heard; although, it was then late at night, he lost not a moment. -- At
two o'clock, in the morning of the first of January 1758, I again embraced my
dearest friend -- happy new year, with pleasure would I describe my emotions of
joy, could language paint them sufficiently forcible; but the feeble pen
shrinks from the task.

CHARLESTOWN was still a frontier town, and suffered from savage depredations,
which rendered it an improper residence for me; consequently I went to
Lancaster.

MR. Johnson, in a few days, sat out for Newyork, to adjust his Canada
accounts. But, on his journey, he was persuaded by Gov. Pownal to take a
Captain's commission, and join the forces, bound for Ticonderoga; where he was
killed on the 8th of July following, while fighting for his country. Humanity
will weep with me. The cup of sorrow, was now replete with bitter drops. All my
former miseries were lost in the affliction of the widow.

IN the October following, I had the happiness to embrace rny son Sylvanus; he
had been above three years with the Indians, followed them in all their hunting
excursions and learnt too many of their habits; to civilize him, and learn him
his native language was a severe task.

I lived in Lancaster till October 1759, when I returned to old Charlestown. --
The sight of my former residence afforded a strange mixture of joy and grief,
while the desolations of war, and the loss of a number of dear and valuable
friends, combined to give the place an air of melancholy. Soon after my
arrival, Major Rogers returned from an expedition against the village St.
Francis, which he had destroyed and killed most of the inhabitants. He brought
with him a young Indian prisoner, who stopped at my house, the moment he saw
me, he cried, my God, my God here is my sister; it was my little brother
Sabatis, who formerly used to bring the cows for me, when I lived at my Indian
masters. He was transported to see me, and declared that he was still my
brother, and I must be his sister. Poor fellow! The fortune of war had left him
without a single relation, but with his country's enemies, he could find one
who too sensibly felt his miseries; I felt the purest pleasure in administering
to his comfort.

MY daughter Susanna, was still in Canada -- but as I had the fullest
assurances that every attention was paid to her education and welfare, by her
three mothers, I felt less anxiety than I otherwise might have done.

EVERY one will imagine, that I have paid affliction her utmost demand, the
pains of imprisonment, the separation from my children, the keen sorrow
occasioned by the death of a butchered father, and the severe grief arising
from my husband's death, will amount to a sum, perhaps, unequaled. But still my
family must be doomed to further, and severe persecutions, from the savages. In
the commencement of the summer of seventeen hundred and sixty, my brother in
law, Mr. Joseph Willard, with his wife and five children, who lived but two
miles distant from me, were taken by a party of Indians. They were carried much
the same rout that I was, to Montreal. Their journey of fourteen days, through
the wilderness, was a series of miseries, unknown to any but those who suffered
with me, they lost two children, whose deaths were owing to savage barbarity.
The history of their captivity would almost equal my own, but the reader's
commiseration and pity must now be exhausted. No more of anguish, no more of
sufferings.

THEY arrived at Montreal, a few days before the French surrendered it to the
English; and after four Month's absence, returned home, and brought my daughter
Susanna to my arms; while I rejoiced at again meeting my child, whom I had not
seen for above four years, I felt extremely grateful to the Mrs. Jaissons, for
the affectionate attention they had bestowed her. As they had received her as
their child, they had made their affluent fortune subservient to her best
interest. To give her the accomplishments of a polite education had been their
principal care, she had contracted an ardent love for them, which never will be
obliterated. Their parting was an affecting scene of tears.

MR. Farnsworth, my only fellow prisoner whose return I have not mentioned,
came home a little before.

THUS, by the goodness of Providence, we all returned in the course of six
painful years, to the place from whence we were taken. The long period of our
captivity, and the severity of our sufferings, will be called uncommon and
unprecedented. But we even found some friends to pity, among our most
persecuting enemies; and from the various shapes, in which mankind appeared, we
learned many valuable lessons. Whether in the wilds of Canada, the horrid jails
of Quebec, or in our voyage to Europe, daily occurrences happened, to convince
us, that the passions of men are as various as their complexions. And, although
my sufferings were often increased by the selfishness of this world's spirit,
yet the numerous testimonies of generosity I received, bids me suppress the
charge of neglect, or want of benevolence. That I have been an unfortunate
woman, all will grant; yet, my misfortunes, while they enriched my experience,
and taught me the value of patience, have increased my gratitude to the author
of all blessings, whose goodness and mercy have preserved my life to the
present time.

I am now in the winter of life, and feel sensibly the effects of old age, my
vacant hours I often employ in reflecting on the various scenes, that have
marked the different stages of my life. When viewing the present rising
generation, in the bloom of health, and enjoying those gay pleasures which shed
their exhilerating influence, so plentifully in the morn of life, I look back
to my early days, when I too was happy, and basked in the sunshine of good
fortune: Little do they think, that the meridian of their lives, can possibly
be rendered miserable by captivity or a prison; as little too did I think, that
my gilded prospects could be obscured, but it was the happy delusion of youth;
and I fervently wish there was no deception. But that Being, who "sits upon the
circle of the earth, and views the inhabitants as grasshoppers," allots our
fortunes.

ALTHOUGH I have drank so largely, from the cup of sorrow, yet my present
happiness is a small compensation. Twice has my country been ravaged by war,
since my remembrance; I have detailed the share I bore in the first; in the
last, although the place in which I live, was not a field of bloody battle, yet
its vicinity to Ticonderoga, and the savages that ravaged the Coos country,
rendered it perilous and distressing. But now, no one can set a higher value on
the smiles of peace, than myself. The savages are driven beyond the Lakes, and
our country has no enemies. The gloomy wilderness, that forty years ago,
secreted the Indian and the beast of prey, has vanished away; and the thrifty
farm smiles in its stead; the sundays, that were then employed in guarding a
fort, are now quietly devoted to worship; the tomahawk and scalping knife, have
given place to the sickle and ploughshare; and prosperous husbandry now
thrives, where the terrors of death once chilled us with fear.

MY numerous progeny, often gather around me, to hear the sufferings once felt
by their aunt or grandmother, and wonder at their magnitude. My daughter,
Captive, still keeps the dress she appeared in, when brought to my bed side, by
the French nurse, at the Ticonderoga hospital; and often refreshes my memory
with past scenes, when showing it to her children. These things yield a kind of
melancholy pleasure.

INSTANCES of longevity are remarkable in my family. My aged mother says to me,
arise daughter and go to thy daughter, for your daughter's daughter, has got a
daughter; a command which few mothers can make and be obeyed.

AND now reader, after sincerely wishing that your days may be as happy, as
mine have been unfortunate, I bid you adieu.

Charlestown, June 20, 1796.

