THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF PETER PORCUPINE, WITH A FULL AND FAIR ACCOUNT OF
All his Authoring Transactions; BEING A SURE AND INFALLIBLE GUIDE FOR ALL
ENTERPRISING YOUNG MEN WHO WISH TO MAKE A FORTUNE BY WRITING PAMPHLETS.

BY PETER PORCUPINE Himself.

Now, you lying Varlets, you shall see how a plain tale will put you down.

SHAKESPEARE. PHILADELPHIA: Printed for, and sold by, WILLIAM COBBETT, at No.
25, North Second Street, opposite Christ Church. M.DCC.XCVI.

PREFACE.
THE Celebrated Dean of St. Patrick's somewhere observes, that a man of talents
no sooner emerges from obscurity than all the blockheads are instantly up in
arms against him. Fully persuaded of the truth of this observation, I should
have been prepared for hostility, had I imagined myself a man of talents; but,
knowing the contrary too well, I little expected that the harmless essays from
my pen would have conjured up against me this numerous and stupid host. It is
their misfortune, never to form a right conception of any person or thing, and
therefore their abuse is not always a certain proof of merit in the object on
which it is bestowed: their ignorance lessens the honor conferred by their
envy, hatred and malice.

I have long been the butt of the silly aspersions of this grovelling tribe;
but their spite never discovered itself in its deepest colors, till they saw
me, as they imagined, issue from poverty to the appearance of better condition.
Then it was that their gall ran over, and jaundiced their whole countenances;
then it was that the stupidest of all stupid gazettes, that lewd and common
strumpet, the Aurora, became pregnant with the following bastard, as abundant
in falsehood as any one that ever sprang from the loins of Poor Richard.

FOR THE AURORA.
HISTORY OF PETER PORCUPINE.
Mr. BACHE,
As the people of America may not be informed who PETER PORCUPINE is, the
celebrated manufacturer of lies, and retailer of filth, I will give you some
little account of this pestiferous animal. This wretch was obliged to abscond
from his darling Old England to avoid being turned off into the other world
before, what he supposed, his time. It may be well imagined, that in a land of
liberty and flowing with milk and honey, his precipitate retreat could not have
been owing to any offense committed against the government very honorable to
himself. Gnawed by the worm that never dies, his own wretchedness would ever
prevent him from making any attempt in favor of human happiness. His usual
occupation at home was that of a garret-scribbler, excepting a little
night-business occasionally, to supply unavoidable exigencies; Grubb-sheet did
not answer his purposes, and being scented by certain tip-staffs for something
more than scribbling, he took a French leave for France. His evil genius
pursued him here, and as his fingers were as long as ever, he was obliged as
suddenly to leave the Republic, which has now drawn forth all his venom for her
attempt to do him justice. On his arrival in this country, he figured some time
as a pedagogue; but as this employment scarcely furnished him salt to his
porridge, he having been literally without hardly bread to eat, and not a
second shirt to his back," he resumed his old occupation of scribbling, having
little chance of success in the other employments which drove him to this
country. His talent at lies and Billingsgate rhetoric, introduced him to the
notice of a certain foreign agent, who was known during the Revolution by the
name of traitor. This said agent has been seen to pay frequent visits to PETER.
To atone for his transgressions in the mother country, as well as to get a
little more bread to eat than he had been accustomed to, he enlisted in the
cause of his gracious Majesty. From the extreme of poverty and filth, he has
suddenly sprouted into at least the appearance of better condition; for he has
taken a house for the sale of his large poison, at the enormous rent of twelve
hundred dollars a year, and has paid a year's rent in advance!! The public will
now be enabled to account for the overflowings of his gall against the Republic
of France, and the Republicans of this country, as well as his devotion to the
cause of tyranny and of Kings. From the frequency of visits paid him by the
agent already mentioned, and his sudden change of condition, secret
service-money must have been liberally employed; for his zeal to make atonement
to his mother country seems proportioned to the magnitude of his offense, and
the guineas advanced. As this fugitive felon has crept from his hole, his
quills will now become harmless; for hitherto they have only excited
apprehension because the beast who shot them was concealed. I have a number of
anecdotes respecting him, that I will soon trouble you with, for the amusement
of the public. This statement will convince PETER, that I know him well, and
that I have only disclosed a part of the truth.

PAUL HEDGEHOG.


This Paul Hedgehog I know nothing of. I can hardly suppose that he is one of
my cousins at New York: if he be, for the honor of our family, I hope that he
is a bastard. But, let Paul be what he will, he is not the only one who has
attempted to sink me in the opinion of a public that has ever honored my
essays with distinguished marks of approbation. I have been well informed, that
it is currently reported, that Mr. Thomas Bradford, the Bookseller, "put a
coat upon my back," and that, when I was first favored with his patronage, I
had not a second shirt to my back.

Were I to calculate upon the usual operations of truth and gratitude, I should
look upon it as impossible that insinuations of this kind had ever been thrown
out by Mr. Bradford, or any of his family; but, nowadays, in this happy age
of reason and liberty, we see such extraordinary things happen in the world,
that to doubt, at least, does not argue an excess of credulity or incredulity.

Let the propagators of all these falsehoods be who they may, I am much obliged
to them for giving me this opportunity of publishing the History of my Life and
Adventures, a thing that I was determined to do, whenever a fair occasion
offered, and which never could have been so well timed as at the moment when I
am stepping into a situation, where I may probably continue for the rest of my
life.

I here remember well what I said in my Observations on the Emigration of
Doctor Priestley. No man has a right to pry into his neighbor's private
concerns; and the opinions of every man are his private concerns, while he
keeps them so; that is to say, while they are confined to himself, his family
and particular friends; but, when he makes those opinions public; when he once
attempts to make converts, whether it be in religion, politics, or any thing
else; when he once comes forward as a candidate for public admiration, esteem
or compassion, his opinions, his principles, his motives, every action of his
life, public or private, become the fair subject of public discussion.

This is a principle I laid down in the first original page I ever wrote for
the press. On this principle it is, that I think myself justified in the
present publication, and that I am ready to approve of others for publishing
whatever they may know concerning me. Let them write on, till their old pens
are worn to the stump: let the devils sweat; let them fire their balls at my
reputation, till the very press cries out murder. If ever they hear me whine or
complain, I will give them leave to fritter my carcass and trail my guts along
the street, as the French sans-culottes did those of Thomas Mauduit.

THE LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF PETER PORCUPINE.
TO be descended from an illustrious family certainly reflects honor on any
man, in spite of the sans-culotte principles of the present day. This is,
however, an honor that I have no pretension to. All that I can boast of in my
birth, is, that I was born in Old England; the country from whence came the men
who explored and settled North America; the country of Penn, and of the father
and mother of General Washington.

With respect to my ancestors, I shall go no further back than my grandfather,
and for this plain reason, that I never heard talk of any prior to him. He was
a day-labourer, and I have heard my father say, that he worked for one farmer
from the day of his marriage to that of his death, upwards of forty years. He
died before I was born, but I have often slept beneath the same roof that had
sheltered him, and where his widow dwelt for several years after his death. It
was a little thatched cottage with a garden before the door. It had but two
windows; a damson tree shaded one, and a clump of filberts the other. Here I
and my brothers went every Christmas and Whitsuntide, to spend a week or two,
and torment the poor old woman with our noise and dilapidations. She used to
give us milk and bread for breakfast, an apple pudding for our dinner, and a
piece of bread and cheese for supper. Her fire was made of turf, cut from the
neighboring heath, and her evening light was a rush dipped in grease.

How much better is it, thus to tell the naked truth, than to descend to such
miserable shifts as Doctor Franklin has had recourse to, in order to persuade
people, that his forefathers were men of wealth and consideration. Not being
able to refer his reader to the herald's office for proofs of the fame and
antiquity of his family, he appeals to the etymology of his name, and points
out a passage in an obsolete book, whence he has the conscience to insist on
our concluding, that, in the Old English language, a Franklin meant a man of
good reputation and of consequence. According to Doctor Johnson, a Franklin was
what we now call a gentleman's steward or land-bailiff, a personage one degree
above a bumbailiff, and that is all.

Every one will, I hope, have the goodness to believe, that my grandfather was
no philosopher. Indeed he was not. He never made a lightning rod nor bottled up
a single quart of sunshine in the whole course of his life. He was no
almanac-maker, nor quack, nor chimney-doctor, nor soap-boiler, nor ambassador,
nor printer's devil: neither was he a deist, and all his children were born in
wedlock. The legacies he left, were, his scythe, his reap-hook, and his flail;
he bequeathed no old and irrecoverable debts to an hospital: he never cheated
the poor during his life, nor mocked them in his death. He has, it is true,
been suffered to sleep quietly beneath the green-sord; but, if his descendants
cannot point to his statue over the door of a library, they have not the
mortification to hear him daily accused of having been a whoremaster, a
hypocrite and an infidel.

My father, when I was born, was a farmer. The reader will easily believe, from
the poverty of his parents, that he had received no very brilliant education:
he was, however, learned, for a man in his rank of life. When a little boy, he
drove plough for twopence a day, and these his earnings were appropriated to
the expenses of an evening school. What a village schoolmaster could be
expected to teach, he had learnt, and had besides considerably improved himself
in several branches of the mathematics. He understood land surveying well, and
was often chosen to draw the plans of disputed territory: in short, he had the
reputation of possessing experience and understanding, which never fails, in
England, to give a man in a country place, some little weight with his
neighbors. He was honest, industrious, and frugal; it was not, therefore,
wonderful, that he should be situated in a good farm, and happy in a wife of
his own rank, like him, beloved and respected.

So much for my ancestors, from whom, if I derive no honor, I derive no shame.

I had (and I hope I yet have) three brothers: the eldest is a shopkeeper, the
second a farmer, and the youngest, if alive, is in the service of the
Honorable East India company, a private soldier, perhaps, as I have been in
the service of the king. I was born on the ninth of March 1766: the exact age
of my brothers I have forgotten, but I remember having heard my mother say,
that there was but three years and three quarters difference between the age of
the oldest and that of the youngest.

A father like ours, it will be readily supposed did not suffer us to eat the
bread of idleness. I do not remember the time when I did not earn my living. My
first occupation was, driving the small birds from the turnip seed, and the
rooks from the peace. When I first trudged a-field, with my wooden bottle and my
satchel swung over my shoulders, I was hardly able to climb the gates and
styles, and, at the close of the day, to reach home was a task of infinite
difficulty. My next employment was weeding wheat, and leading a single horse at
harrowing barley. Hoeing peace followed, and hence I arrived at the honor of
joining the reapers in harvest, driving the team and holding plough. We were
all of us strong and laborious, and my father used to boast, that he had four
boys, the eldest of whom was but fifteen years old, who did as much work as any
three men in the parish of Farnham. Honest pride, and happy days!

I have some faint recollection of going to school to an old woman, who, I
believe, did not succeed in learning me my letters. In the winter evenings my
father learnt us all to read and write, and gave us a pretty tolerable
knowledge of arithmetic. Grammar he did not perfectly understand himself, and
therefore his endeavors to learn us that, necessarily failed; for, though he
thought he understood it, and though he made us get the rules by heart, we
learnt nothing at all of the principles.

Our religion was that of the Church of England, to which I have ever remained
attached; the more so, perhaps, as it bears the name of my country. As my
ancestors were never persecuted for their religious opinions, they never had an
opportunity of giving such a singular proof of their faith as Doctor Franklin's
grandfather did, when he kept his Bible under the lid of a close-stool. (What a
book-case!) If I had been in the place of Doctor Franklin, I never would have
related this ridiculous circumstance, especially as it must be construed into a
boast of his grandfather's having an extraordinary degree of veneration for a
book, which, it is well known, he himself durst not believe in.

As to politics, we were like the rest of the country people in England; that
is to say, we neither knew or thought any thing about the matter. The shouts of
victory or the murmurs at a defeat, would now-and-then break in upon our
tranquillity for a moment; but I do not remember ever having seen a news-paper
in the house, and most certainly that privation did not render us less
industrious, happy or free.

After, however, the American war had continued for some time, and the cause
and nature of it began to be understood, or rather misunderstood, by the lower
classes of the people in England, we became a little better acquainted with
subjects of this kind. It is well known, that the people were, as to numbers,
nearly equally divided in their opinions concerning that war, and their wishes
respecting the result of it. My father was a partizan of the Americans: he used
frequently to dispute on the subject with the gardener of a nobleman who lived
near us. This was generally done with good humor, over a pot of our best ale;
yet the disputants sometimes grew warm, and gave way to language that could not
fail to attract our attention. My father was worsted without doubt, as he had
for antagonist, a shrewd and sensible old Scotchman, far his superior in
political knowledge; but he pleaded before a partial audience: we thought there
was but one wise man in the world, and that that one was our father. He who
pleaded the cause of the Americans had an advantage, too, with young minds: he
had only to represent the king's troops as sent to cut the throats of a people,
our friends and relations, merely because they would not submit to oppression,
and his cause was gained. Speaking to the passions is ever sure to succeed on
the uninformed.

Men of integrity are generally pretty obstinate in adhering to an opinion once
adopted. Whether it was owing to this, or to the weakness of Mr. Martin's
arguments, I will not pretend to say, but he never could make a convert of my
father: he continued an American, and so staunch a one, that he would not have
suffered his best friend to drink success to the king's arms at his table. I
cannot give the reader a better idea of his obstinacy in this respect, and of
the length to which this difference in sentiment was carried in England, than
by relating the following instance.

My father used to take one of us with him every year to the great hop-fair at
Wey-Hill. The fair was held at Old Michaelmas-tide, and the journey was, to us,
a sort of reward for the labors of the summer. It happened to be my turn to go
thither the very year that Long Island was taken by the British. A great
company of hop-merchants and farmers were just sitting down to supper as the
post arrived, bringing in the extraordinary Gazette which announced the
victory. A hop-factor from London took the paper, placed his chair upon the
table, and began to read with an audible voice. He was opposed, a dispute
ensued, and my father retired, taking me by the hand, to another apartment,
where we supped with about a dozen others of the same sentiments. Here
Washington's health, and success to the Americans, were repeatedly toasted, and
this was the first time, as far as I can recollect, that I ever heard the
General's name mentioned. Little did I then dream, that I should ever see the
man, and still less that I should hear some of his own countrymen reviling and
execrating him.

Let not the reader imagine, that I wish to assume any merit from this, perhaps
mistaken, prejudice of an honored and beloved parent. Whether he was right or
wrong is not now worth talking about: that I had no opinion of my own is
certain; for, had my father been on the other side, I should have been on the
other side too, and should have looked upon the company I then made a part of
as malcontents and rebels. I mention these circumstances merely to show that I
was not nursed in the lap of aristocracy, and that I did not imbibe my
principles, or prejudices, from those who were the advocates of blind
submission. If my father had any fault, it was not being submissive enough, and
I am much afraid my acquaintance have but too often discovered the same fault
in his son.

It would be as useless as unentertaining to dwell on the occupations and
sports of a country boy; to lead the reader to fairs, cricket-matches and
hare-hunts. I shall therefore come at once to the epoch, when an accident
happened that gave that turn to my future life, which at last brought me to the
United States.

Toward the autumn of 1782 I went to visit a relation who lived in the
neighborhood of Portsmouth. From the top of Portsdown, I, for the first time,
beheld the sea, and no sooner did I behold it than I wished to be a sailor. I
could never account for this sudden impulse, nor can I now. Almost all English
boys feel the same inclination: it would seem that, like young ducks, instinct
leads them to rush on the bosom of the water.

But it was not the sea alone that I saw: the grand fleet was riding at anchor
at Spithead. I had heard of the wooden walls of Old England: I had formed my
ideas of a ship and of a fleet; but, what I now beheld so far surpassed what I
had ever been able to form a conception of, that I stood lost between
astonishment and admiration. I had heard talk of the glorious deeds of our
admirals and sailors, of the defeat of the Spanish Armada, and of all those
memorable combats that good and true Englishmen never fail to relate to their
children about a hundred times a year. The brave Rodney's victories over our
natural enemies, the French and Spaniards, had long been the theme of our
praise, and the burden of our songs. The sight of the fleet brought all these
into my mind; in confused order, it is true, but with irresistible force. My
heart was inflated with national pride. The sailors were my countrymen, the
fleet belonged to my country, and surely I had my part in it, and in all its
honors: yet, these honors I had not earned; I took to myself a sort of
reproach for possessing what I had no right to, and resolved to have a just
claim by sharing in the hardships and the dangers.

I arrived at my uncle's late in the evening, with my mind full of my
seafaring project. Though I had walked thirty miles during the day, and
consequently was well wearied, I slept not a moment. It was no sooner daylight
than I arose and walked down toward the old castle on the beach of Spithead.
For a sixpence given to an invalid I got permission to go up on the
battlements: here I had a closer view of the fleet, and at every look my
impatience to be on board increased. In short, I went from the castle to
Portsmouth, got into a boat, and was in a few minutes on board the Pegasus man
of war, commanded by the Right Honorable George Berkley, brother to the Earl
of Berkley.

The Captain had more compassion than is generally met with in men of his
profession: he represented to me the toils I must undergo, and the punishment
that the least disobedience or neglect would subject me to. He persuaded me to
return home, and I remember he concluded his advice with telling me, that it
was better to be led to church in a halter, to be tied to a girl that I did not
like, than to be tied to the gang-way, or, as the sailors call it, married to
miss roper. From the conclusion of this wholesome counsel, I perceived that the
captain thought I had eloped on account of a bastard. I blushed, and that
confirmed him in his opinion; but I declare to the reader, that I was no more
guilty of such an offense than Mr. Swanwick, or any other gentleman who is
constitutionally virtuous. No; thank heaven, I have none of the Franklintonian
crimes to accuse myself of; my children do not hang their hats up in other
men's houses; I am neither patriot nor philosopher.

I in vain attempted to convince Captain Berkley, that choice alone had led me
to the sea; he sent me on shore, and I at last quitted Portsmouth; but not
before I had applied to the Port-Admiral, Evans, to get my name enrolled among
those who were destined for the service. I was, in some sort, obliged to
acquaint the Admiral with what had passed on board the Pegasus, in consequence
of which my request was refused, and I happily escaped, sorely against my will,
from the most toil-some and perilous profession in the world.

I returned once more to the plough, but I was spoiled for a farmer. I had,
before my Portsmouth adventure, never known any other ambition than that of
surpassing my brothers in the different labors of the field; but it was quite
otherwise now; I sighed for a sight of the world; the little island of Britain
seemed too small a compass for me. The things in which I had taken the most
delight were neglected; the singing of the birds grew insipid, and even the
heart-cheering cry of the hounds, after which I formerly used to fly from my
work, bound over the fields, and dash through the brakes and coppices, was
heard with the most torpid indifference. Still, however, I remained at home
till the following spring, when I quitted it, perhaps, for ever.

It was on the sixth of May 1783, that I, like Don Quixotte, sallied forth to
seek adventures. I was dressed in my holiday clothes, in order to accompany two
or three lasses to Guildford fair. They were to assemble at a house about three
miles from my home, where I was to attend them; but, unfortunately for me, I
had to cross the London turnpike road. The stage-coach had just turned the
summit of a hill and was rattling down toward me at a merry rate. The notion
of going to London never entered my mind till this very moment, yet the step
was completely determined on, before the coach came to the spot where I stood.
Up I got, and was in London about nine o'clock in the evening.

It was by mere accident that I had money enough to defray the expenses of this
day. Being rigged out for the fair, I had three or four crown and half-crown
pieces (which most certainly I did not intend to spend) besides a few shillings
and halfpence. This my little all, which I had been years in amassing, melted
away, like snow before the sun, when touched by the fingers of the innkeepers
and their waiters. In short, when I arrived at Ludgate Hill, and had paid my
fare, I had but about half a crown in my pocket.

By a commencement of that good luck, which has hitherto attended me through
all the situations in which fortune has placed me, I was preserved from ruin. A
gentleman, who was one of the passengers in the stage, fell into conversation
with me at dinner, and he soon learnt that I was going I knew not whither nor
for what. This gentleman was a hop-merchant in the borough of Southwark, and,
upon closer inquiry, it appeared that he had often dealt with my father at
Wey-Hill. He knew the danger I was in; he was himself a father, and he felt for
my parents. His house became my home, he wrote to my father, and endeavored to
prevail on me to obey his orders, which were to return immediately home. I am
ashamed to say that I was disobedient. It was the first time I had ever been
so, and I have repented of it from that moment to this. Willingly would I have
returned, but pride would not suffer me to do it. I feared the scoffs of my
acquaintances more than the real evils that threatened me.

My generous preserver, finding my obstinacy not to be overcome, began to look
out for an employment for me. He was preparing an advertisement for the
news-paper, when an acquaintance of his, an attorney, called in to see him. He
related my adventure to this gentleman, whose name was Holland, and who,
happening to want an understrapping quill-driver, did me the honor to take me
into his service, and the next day saw me perched upon a great high stool, in
an obscure chamber in Gray's Inn, endeavoring to decypher the crabbed draughts
of my employer.

I could write a good plain hand, but I could not read the pot-hooks and
hangers of Mr. Holland. He was a month in learning me to copy without almost
continual assistance, and even then I was of but little use to him; for,
besides that I wrote a snail's pace, my want of knowledge in orthography gave
him infinite trouble: so that, for the first two months I was a dead weight
upon his hands. Time, however, rendered me useful, and Mr. Holland was pleased
to tell me that he was very well satisfied with me, just at the very moment
when I began to grow extremely dissatisfied with him.

No part of my life has been totally unattended with pleasure, except the eight
or nine months I passed in Gray's Inn. The office (for so the dungeon where I
wrote was called) was so dark, that, on cloudy days, we were obliged to burn
candle. I worked like a galley-slave from five in the morning till eight or
nine at night, and sometimes all night long. How many quarrels have I assisted
to foment and perpetuate between those poor innocent fellows, John Do and
Richard Roe! How many times (God forgive me!) have I set them to assault each
other with guns, swords, staves and pitch-forks, and then brought them to
answer for their misdeeds before Our Sovereign Lord the King seated in His
Court of Westminster! When I think of the said and soforths and the counts of
tautology that I scribbled over; when I think of those sheets of seventy-two
words, and those lines two inches a part, my brain turns. Gracious heaven! if I
am doomed to be wretched, bury me beneath Iceland snows, and let me feed on
blubber; stretch me under the burning line and deny me thy propitious dews;
nay, if it be thy will, suffocate me with the infected and pestilential air of
a democratic club room; but save me from the desk of an attorney!

Mr. Holland was but little in the chambers himself. He always went out to
dinner, while I was left to be provided for by the Laundress, as he called her.
Those gentlemen of the law, who have resided in the Inns of court in London,
know very well what a Laundress means. Ours was, I believe, the oldest and
ugliest of the officious sisterhood. She had age and experience enough to be
Lady Abbess of all the nuns in all the convents of Irish-Town. It would be
wronging the witch of Endor to compare her to this hag, who was the only
creature that deigned to enter into conversation with me. All except the name,
I was in prison, and this Weird Sister was my keeper. Our chambers were, to me,
what the subterraneous cavern was to Gil Blas: his description of the Dame
Leonarda exactly suited my Laundress; nor were the professions, or rather the
practice, of our masters altogether dissimilar.

I never quitted this gloomy recess except on Sundays, when I usually took a
walk to St. James's Park, to feast my eyes with the sight of the trees, the
grass, and the water. In one of these walks I happened to cast my eye on an
advertisement, inviting all loyal young men, who had a mind to gain riches and
glory, to repair to a certain rendezvous, where they might enter into His
Majesty's marine service, and have the peculiar happiness and honor of being
enrolled in the Chatham Division. I was not ignorant enough to be the dupe of
this morsel of military bombast; but a change was what I wanted: besides, I
knew that marines went to sea, and my desire to be on that element had rather
increased than diminished by my being penned up in London. In short, I resolved
to join this glorious corpse; and, to avoid all possibility of being discovered
by my friends, I went down to Chatham and enlisted, into the marines as I
thought, but the next morning I found myself before a Captain of a marching
regiment. There was no retreating: I had taken a shilling to drink his
Majesty's health, and his further bounty was ready for my reception.

When I told the Captain (who was an Irishman, and who has since been an
excellent friend to me), that I thought myself engaged in the marines: "By
Jases, my lad," said he, "and you have had a narrow escape." He told me, that
the regiment into which I had been so happy as to enlist was one of the oldest
and boldest in the whole army, and that it was at that moment serving in that
fine, flourishing and plentiful country, Nova Scotia. He dwelt long on the
beauties and riches of this terrestrial Paradise, and dismissed me, perfectly
enchanted with the prospect of a voyage thither.

I enlisted early in 1784, and, as peace had then taken place, no great haste
was made to send recruits off to their regiments. I remained upwards of a year
at Chatham, during which time I was employed in learning my exercise, and
taking my tour in the duty of the garrison. My leisure time, which was a very
considerable portion of the twenty-four hours, was spent, not in the
dissipations common to such a way of life, but in reading and study. In the
course of this year I learnt more than I had ever done before. I subscribed to
a circulating library at Brompton, the greatest part of the books in which I
read more than once over. The library was not very considerable, it is true,
nor in my reading was I directed by any degree of taste or choice. Novels,
plays, history, poetry, all were read, and nearly with equal avidity.

Such a course of reading could be attended with but little profit: it was
skimming over the surface of every thing. One branch of learning, however, I
went to the bottom with, and that the most essential branch too, the grammar of
my mother tongue. I had experienced the want of a knowledge of grammar during
my stay with Mr. Holland; but it is very probable that I never should have
thought of encountering the study of it, had not accident placed me under a man
whose friendship extended beyond his interest. Writing a fair hand procured me
the honor of being copyist to Colonel Debieg, the commandant of the garrison.
I transcribed the famous correspondence between him and the Duke of Richmond,
which ended in the good and gallant old Colonel being stripped of the reward,
bestowed on him for his long and meritorious servitude.

Being totally ignorant of the rules of grammar, I necessarily made many
mistakes in copying, because no one can copy letter by letter, nor even word by
word. The Colonel saw my deficiency, and strongly recommended study. He
enforced his advice with a sort of injunction, and with a promise of reward in
case of success.

I procured me a Lowth's grammar, and applied myself to the study of it with
unceasing assiduity, and not without some profit; for, though it was a
considerable time before I fully comprehended all that I read, still I read and
studied with such unremitted attention, that, at last, I could write without
falling into any very gross errors. The pains I took cannot be described: I
wrote the whole grammar out two or three times; I got it by heart; I repeated
it every morning and every evening, and, when on guard, I imposed on myself the
task of saying it all over once every time I was posted sentinel. To this
exercise of my memory I ascribe the retentiveness of which I have since found
it capable, and to the success with which it was attended, I ascribe the
perseverance that has led to the acquirement of the little learning of which I
am master.

This study was, too, attended with another advantage: it kept me out of
mischief. I was always sober, and regular in my attendance; and, not being a
clumsy fellow, I met with none of those reproofs, which disgust so many young
men with the service.

There is no situation where merit is so sure to meet with reward as in a well
disciplined army. Those who command are obliged to reward it for their own ease
and credit. I was soon raised to the rank of Corporal, a rank, which, however
contemptible it may appear in some people's eyes, brought me in a clear
twopence per diem, and put a very clever worsted knot upon my shoulder too.
Don't you laugh now, Mr. Swanwick; a worsted knot is a much more honorable
mark of distinction than a Custom-House badge; though, I confess, the king must
have such people as Tide-waiters as well as Corporals.

As promotion began to dawn, I grew impatient to get to my regiment, where I
expected soon to bask under the rays of Royal favor. The happy day of
departure at last came: we set sail from Gravesend, and, after a short and
pleasant passage, arrived at Hallifax in Nova Scotia. When I first beheld the
barren, not to say hideous, rocks at the entrance of the harbor, I began to
fear that the master of the vessel had mistaken his way; for I could perceive
nothing of that fertility that my good recruiting Captain had dwelt on with so
much delight.

Nova Scotia had no other charm for me than that of novelty. Every thing I saw
was new: bogs, rocks and stumps, musquitoes and bull-frogs. Thousands of
Captains and Colonels without soldiers, and of 'Squires without stockings or
shoes. In England, I had never thought of approaching a 'Squire without a most
respectful bow; but, in this new world, though I was but a Corporal, I often
ordered a 'Squire to bring me a glass of grog, and even to take care of my
knapsack.

We staid but a few weeks in Nova Scotia, being ordered to St. John's, in the
Province of New Brunswick. Here, and at other places in the same Province, we
remained till the month of September, 1791, when the regiment was relieved, and
sent home.

We landed at Portsmouth on the 3d of November, and on the 19th of the next
month I obtained my discharge, after having served not quite eight years, and
after having, in that short space, passed through every rank, from that of a
private sentinel to that of Sergeant Major, without ever being once disgraced,
confined, or even reprimanded. -- But, let my superiors speak for me, they will
tell my friends and all my readers what I was during my servitude.

By the Right Honorable Major Lord Edward Fitzgerald, commanding His Majesty's
54th Regiment of Foot, whereof Lieutenant General Frederick is Colonel."
THESE are to certify, that the Bearer hereof, WILLIAM COBBETT, Sergeant Major
in the aforesaid regiment, has served honestly and faithfully for the space of
eight years, nearly seven of which he has been a non-commissioned officer, and
of that time he has been five years Sergeant Major to the regiment; but having
very earnestly applied for his discharge, he, in consideration of his good
behavior and the services he has rendered the regiment, is hereby discharged.

Given under my hand and the seal of the regiment, at Portsmouth, this 19th day
of December, 1791. EDWARD FITZGERALD.


I shall here add the orders, issued in the garrison of Portsmouth on the day
of my discharge.

Portsmouth, 19th Dec. 1791.
Sergeant Major Cobbett having most pressingly applied for his discharge, at
Major Lord Edward Fitzgerald's request, General Frederick has granted it.
General Frederick has ordered Major Lord Edward Fitzgerald to return the
Sergeant Major thanks for his behavior and conduct during the time of his
being in the regiment, and Major Lord Edward adds his most hearty thanks to
those of the General.


After having laid these pieces before my reader, I beg him to recollect what
the Argus of New York and the Aurora of Philadelphia have asserted concerning
Peter Porcupine's being flogged in his regiment for thieving, and afterward
deserting. The monstrous, disorganizing, democratic gang were not aware that I
was in possession of such uncontrovertible proofs as these.

I hope, I may presume that my character will be looked upon as good, down to
the date of my discharge; and, if so, it only remains for me to give an account
of myself from that time to this.

The democrats have asserted, as may be seen in the preface, that I got my
living in London by "garret-scribbling," and that I was obliged to take a
French Leave for France, for some night work. -- Now, the fact is, I went to
France in March, 1792, and I landed at New York in the month of October
following; so that, I had but three months to follow garret-scribbling in
London. How these three months were employed it is not necessary to say here,
but that I had not much leisure for garret-scribbling the ladies will be well
convinced, when I tell them that I got a wife in the time. As to the charge
concerning night work, I am afraid I must plead guilty, but not with my
"fingers," as these malicious fellows would insinuate. No, no, I am no relation
to Citizen Plato: the French ladies do not call me, the Garcon Fendu.

Before I go any further, it seems necessary to say a word or two about "French
Leave." Did this expression escape the democrats in an unwary moment? Why
"French Leave?" Do they wish to insinuate, that nobody but Frenchmen are
obliged to fly from the hands of thief-catchers? The Germans, and after them
the English, have applied this degrading expression to the French nation; but,
is it not inconsistent, and even ungrateful, for those who are in the interest,
and perhaps, in the pay, of that magnanimous republic, to talk about French
Leave? It is something curious that this expression should find a place in a
paragraph wherein I am accused of abusing the French. The fact is, the
friendship professed by these people, toward the French nation, is all
grimace, all hypocrisy: the moment they are off their guard, they let us see
that it is the abominable system of French tyranny that they are attached to,
and not to the people of that country. -- "French Leave!" The leave of a
runaway, a thief, a Tom Pain! What could the most prejudiced, the bitterest
Englishman have said more galling and severe against the whole French nation?
They cry out against me for "abusing" the cutthroats of Nantz and other
places, and for accusing the demagogue-tyrants of robbery; while they
themselves treat the whole nation as thieves. This is the democratic way of
washing out stains; just as the sweet and cleanly Sheelah washes her gentle
Dermot's face with a dishclout.

Leaving the ingenious citizens to extricate themselves from this hobble, or
fall under the displeasure of their masters, I shall return to my adventures.
-- I arrived in France in March, 1792, and continued there till the beginning
of September following, the six happiest months of my life. I should be the
most ungrateful monster that ever existed, were I to speak ill of the French
people in general. I went to that country full of all those prejudices, that
Englishmen suck in with their mother's milk, against the French and against
their religion: a few weeks convinced me that I had been deceived with respect
to both. I met every where with civility, and even hospitality, in a degree
that I never had been accustomed to. I found the people, among whom I lived,
excepting those who were already blasted with the principles of the accursed
revolution, honest, pious, and kind to excess.

People may say what they please about the misery of the French peasantry,
under the old government; I have conversed with thousands of them, not ten
among whom did not regret the change. I have not room here to go into an
inquiry into the causes that have led these people to become the passive
instruments, the slaves, of a set of tyrants such as the world never saw
before, but I venture to predict, that, sooner or later, they will return to
that form of government under which they were happy, and under which alone they
can over be so again.

My determination to settle in the United States was formed before I went to
France, and even before I quitted the army. A desire of seeing a country, so
long the theater of a war of which I had heard and read so much; the flattering
picture given of it by Raynal; and, above all, an inclination for seeing the
world, led me to this determination. It would look a little like coaxing for me
to say, that I had imbibed principles of republicanism, and that I was
ambitious to become a citizen of a free state, but this was really the case. I
thought that men enjoyed here a greater degree of liberty than in England; and
this, if not the principal reason, was at least one, for my coming to this
country.

I did intend to stay in France till the spring of 1793, as well to perfect
myself in the language, as to pass the winter at Paris; but I perceived the
storm gathering; I saw that a war with England was inevitable, and it was not
difficult to foresee what would be the fate of Englishmen, in that country,
where the rulers had laid aside even the appearance of justice and mercy. I
wished, however, to see Paris, and had actually hired a coach to go thither. I
was even on the way, when I heard, at Abbeville, that the king was dethroned
and his guards murdered. This intelligence made me turn off toward Havre de
Grace, whence I embarked for America.

I beg leave here to remind the reader, that one of the lying paragraphs,
lately published in the lying Aurora, states, that I was whipped at Paris, and
that hence I bear a grudge against the French Republic. Now, I never was at
Paris, as I can prove by the receipts for my board and lodging, from the day I
entered France to that of my leaving it; and, as to the Republic, as it is
called, I could have no grudge against it; for the tyrants had not given it
that name, when I was so happy as to bid it an eternal adieu. Had I remained a
few months longer, I make no doubt that I should have had reason to execrate it
as every other man, woman, and child has, who has had the misfortune to groan
under its iron anarchy.

Some little time after my arrival in this country, I sent Mr. Jefferson, then
Secretary of State, a letter of recommendation, which I had brought from the
American Ambassador at the Hague. The following is a copy of the letter Mr.
Jefferson wrote me on that occasion.

Philadelphia, Nov. 5th, 1792. Sir,
In acknowledging the receipt of your favor of the 2d instant, I wish it were
in my power to announce to you any way in which I could be useful to you. Mr.
Short's assurances of your merit would be a sufficient inducement to me. Public
Offices in our government are so few, and of so little value, as to offer no
resource to talents. When you shall have been here some small time, you will be
able to judge in what way you can set out with the best prospect of success,
and if I can serve you in it, I shall be very ready to do it.

I am, Sir, Your very humble servant, TH. JEFFERSON.


I will just observe on this letter, that it was thankfully received, and that,
had I stood in need of Mr. Jefferson's services, I should have applied to him;
but as that did not appear likely to be the case, I wrote him a letter some few
months afterward, requesting him to assist a poor man, the bearer of it, and
telling him that I should look upon the assistance as given to myself. I dare
say he complied with my request, for the person recommended was in deep
distress, and a Frenchman.

With respect to the authenticity of this letter there can be no doubt. I have
shown the original, as well as those of the other documents here transcribed,
to more than fifty gentlemen of the city of Philadelphia, and they may, at any
time, be seen by any person of credit, who wishes a sight of them. Nor have I
confined the perusal of them to those who have the misfortune to be deemed
aristocrats. Among persons of distant places, I have shown them to Mr. Ketlatas
of New York, who, I must do him the justice to say, had the candor to express
a becoming detestation of the base cutthroat author of the threatening letter
sent to Mr. Oldden.

I have now brought myself to the United States, and have enabled the reader to
judge of me so far. It remains for me to negative two assertions which apply to
my authoring transactions: the one is, that Mr. Bradford put a coat upon my
back; and the other, that I am, or have been, in the pay of a British Agent.

In the month of July, 1794, the famous Unitarian Doctor, fellow of the Royal
Society, London, citizen of France, and delegate to the Grande Convention
Nationale of notorious memory, landed at New York. His landing was nothing to
me, nor to any body else; but the fulsome and consequential addresses, sent him
by the pretended patriots, and his canting replies, at once calculated to
flatter the people here, and to degrade his country and mine, was something to
me. It was my business, and the business of every man who thinks that truth
ought to be opposed to malice and hypocrisy.

When the Observations on the Emigration of this "martyr to the cause of
liberty" were ready for the press, I did not, at first, offer them to Mr.
Bradford. I knew him to retain a rooted hatred against Great Britain, and
concluded, that his principles would prevent him from being instrumental in the
publication of any thing that tended to unveil one of its most bitter enemies.
I therefore addressed myself to Mr. Carey. This was, to make use of a culinary
figure, jumping out of the drying pan into the fire. Mr. Carey received me as
booksellers generally receive authors (I mean authors whom they hope to get but
little by): he looked at the title from top to bottom, and then at me from head
to foot. -- "No, my lad," says he, "I don't think it will suit" -- My lad! --
God in heaven forgive me! I believe that, at that moment, I wished for another
yellow fever to strike the city; not to destroy the inhabitants, but to furnish
me too with the subject of a pamphlet, that might make me rich. -- Mr. Carey
has sold hundreds of the Observations since that time, and therefore, I dare
say he highly approved of them, when he came to a perusal. At any rate, I must
not forget to say, that he behaved honorably in the business; for, he promised
not to make known the author, and he certainly kept his word, or the discovery
would not have been reserved for the month of June, 1796. This circumstance,
considering Mr. Carey's politics, is greatly to his honor, and has almost
wiped from my memory that contumelious "my lad."

From Mr. Carey I went to Mr. Bradford, and left the pamphlet for his perusal.
The next day I went to him to know his determination. He hesitated, wanted to
know if I could not make it a little more popular, adding that, unless I could,
he feared that the publishing of it would endanger his windows. More popular I
could not make it. I never was of an accommodating disposition in my life. The
only alteration I would consent to was in the title. I had given the pamphlet
the double title of, The Tartuffe Detected; or, Observations, etc. The former
was suppressed, though, had I not been pretty certain that every press in the
city was as little free as that to which I was sending it, the Tartuffe
Detected should have remained; for, the person on whom it was bestowed merited
it much better than the character so named by Moliere.

These difficulties, and these fears of the bookseller, at once opened my eyes
with respect to the boasted liberty of the press. Because the laws of this
country proclaim to the world, that every man may write and publish freely, and
because I saw the newspapers filled with vaunts on the subject, I was fool
enough to imagine that the press was really free for every one. I had not the
least idea, that a man's windows were in danger of being broken, if he
published any thing that was not popular. I did, indeed, see the words liberty
and equality, the rights of man, the crimes of kings, and such like, in most of
the bookseller's windows; but I did not know that they were put there to save
the glass, as a free republican Frenchman puts a cockade tricolor in his hat to
save his head. I was ignorant of all these arcana of the liberty of the press.

If it had so happened that one of the Whiskey-Boys had went over to England,
and had received addresses from any part of the people there, congratulating
him on his escape from a nation of ruffians, and beseeching the Lord that those
ruffians might tread back the paths of infamy and ruin; and if this emigrating
"Martyr" in the cause of whiskey had echoed back the hypocritical cant, and if
he and all his palavering addressers had been detected and exposed by some good
American, in London, would not such an American have received the applause of
all men of virtue and sense? And what would, or rather what would not, have
been said here against the prostituted press of Great Britain, had an English
bookseller testified his fears to publish the truth, lest his windows should be
dashed in?

The work that it was feared would draw down punishment on the publisher, did
not contain one untruth, one anarchical, indecent, immoral, or irreligious
expression; and yet the bookseller feared for his windows! For what? Because it
was not popular enough. A bookseller in a despotic state fears to publish a
work that is too popular and one in a free state fears to publish a work that
is not popular enough. I leave it to the learned philosophers of the "Age of
Reason" to determine in which of these states there is the most liberty of the
press; for, I must acknowledge the point is too nice for me: fear is fear,
whether inspired by a Sovereign Lord the King, or by a Sovereign People.

I shall be told, that Mr. Bradford's fears were groundless. It may be so; but
he ought to be a competent judge of the matter; he must know the extent of the
liberty of the press better than I could. He might be mistaken, but that he was
sincere appeared clearly from his not putting his name at the bottom of the
title page. Even the Bone to Gnaw for the Democrats, which did not appear till
about six months afterward, was Published for the Purchasers. It was not till
long after the public had fixed the seal of approbation on these pamphlets,
that they were honored with the bookseller's name. It was something curious
that the second and third and fourth editions should be entitled to a mark of
respect that the first was not worthy of. Poor little innocents! They were
thrown on the parish like foundlings; no soul would own them, till it was found
that they possessed the gift of bringing in the pence. Another singularity, is,
they got into better paper as they advanced. So the prudent matron changes the
little dirty ragged wench into a fine mademoiselle, as soon as she perceives
that the beaux begin to cast their eyes on her.

But, it is time to return, and give the reader an account of my gains. The
pecuniary concerns of an author are always the most interesting.

The terms on which Mr. Bradford took the Observations, were what booksellers
call publishing it together. I beg the reader, if he foresees the possibility
of his becoming author, to recollect this phrase well. Publishing it together
is thus managed: the bookseller takes the work, prints it, and defrays all
expenses of paper, binding, etc. and the profits, if any, are divided between
him and the author. -- Long after the Observations were sold off, Mr. Bradford
rendered me an account (undoubtedly a very just one) of the sales. According to
this account, my share of the profits (my share only) amounted to the sum of
one shilling and seven-pence halfpenny, currency of the State of Pennsylvania
(or, about eleven-pence three farthings sterling), quite entirely clear of all
deductions whatsoever!

Now, bulky as this sum appears in words at length, I presume, that when 17 is
reduced to figures, no one will suppose it sufficient to put a coat upon my
back. If my poor back were not too broad to be clothed with such a sum as this,
God knows how I should bear all that has been, and is, and is to be, laid on it
by the unmerciful democrats. Why! 17 would not cover the back of a Lilliputian;
no, not even in rags, as they sell here.

Besides, this clothing story will at once fall to the ground, when I assure
the reader (and Mr. Carey will bear witness to the truth of what I say), that,
when I offered this work for publication, I had as good a coat upon my back, as
ever Mr. Bradford or any of his brother booksellers put on in their lives; and,
what is more, this coat was my own. No tailor nor shoemaker ever had my name in
his books.

After the Observations, Mr. Bradford and I published it together no longer.
When a pamphlet was ready for the press, we made a bargain for it, and I took
his note of hand, payable in one, two, or three months. That the public may
know exactly what gains I have derived from the publications that issued from
Mr. Bradford's, I here subjoin a list of them, and the sums received in payment.

Dols. Cents. Observations 0 21 Bone to Gnaw, 1st part 125 0 Kick for a Bite 20
0 Bone to Gnaw, 2d Part 40 0 Plain English 100 0 New Year's Gift 100 0 Prospect
18 0 Total 403 21

The best way (...) giving the reader (...) the generosity of (...) bookseller,
is, to tell (...) upon my going (...) business for myself, I (...) to purchase
the (...)-rights of these (...) at the same price that I had sold them at. Mr.
Bradford's refusing to sell, is a clear proof that they were worth more than he
gave me, even after they had passed through several editions. Let it not be
said, then, that he put a coat upon my back.

My concerns with Mr. (...) closed with The Prospect from the Congress-Gallery,
and, as our separation has given rise to conjectures and reports, I shall
trouble the reader with an explanation of the matter.

I proposed making a mere collection of the debates, with here and there a note
by way of remarks. It was not my intention to publish it in Numbers, but at the
end of the session, in one volume; but Mr. Bradford, fearing a want of success
in this form, determined on publishing in Numbers. This was without my
approbation, as was also a subscription that was opened for the support of the
work. When about half a Number was finished, I was informed that many gentlemen
had expressed their desire, that the work might contain a good deal of original
matter, and few debates. In consequence of this, I was requested to alter my
plan; I said I would, but that I would by no means undertake to continue the
work.

The first Number, as it was (...) (but not by (...) published, and i^^ ^^ccess
led Mr. (...) to press for a continuation. His son (...) me, I believe, a
^^^dred dollars a ^^mber, in place of eight^ (...) and, I should have accepted
his offer, had it not been for a word that escaped him during the conversation.
He observed, that their customers would be much disappointed, for that, his
father had promised a continuation, and that it should be made very
interesting. This slip of the tongue, opened my (...). (...) a bookseller
undertake to (...) that I should write, and that I should write to please his
customers too! No; if all his customers, if all the Congress, with the
President at their head, had come and solicited me; nay, had my salvation
depended on a compliance, I would not have written another line.

I was fully employed at this time, having a translation on my hands for Mr.
Moreau de St. Merry as well as another work which took up a great deal of my
time; so that, I believe, I should not have published the Censor, had it not
been to convince the customers of Mr. Bradford, that I was not in his pay; that
I was not the puppet and he the show-man. That, whatever merits or demerits my
writings might have, no part of them fell to his share.

When Mr. Bradford found I was preparing to publish a continuation of the
remarks on the debates, he sent me the following note: Sir,
Send me your account and a receipt for the last publication, and your money
shall be sent you by

Yours, etc. THO. BRADFORD.
Phila. April 22, 1796.



To this I returned, for answer.

Philadelphia, 22d March, 1796. Sir,
I have the honor to possess your laconic note; but, upon my word, I do not
understand it. The requesting of a receipt from a person, before any tender of
money is made, and the note being dated in April in place of March; these
things throw such an obscurity over the whole, that I defer complying with its
contents, till I have the pleasure of seeing yourself.

I am Your most obedient Humble servant, WM. COBBETT.


This brought me a second note, in these words: Sir,
Finding you mean to pursue the Prospect, which you sold to me, I now make a
demand of the fulfillment of your contract and if honor does not prompt you to
fulfill your engagements, you may rely on an applycation to the laws of my
country and make no doubt I shall there meet you on such grounds as will
convince you I am not to be trifled with.

I am Yours, etc. THO. BRADFORD.
March 22, 1796.



Here ended the correspondence, except that it might be said to be continued
for about five minutes longer by the hearty laugh, that I bestowed on this
correct and polite billet.

It is something truly singular, that Mr. Bradford should threaten me with a
prosecution for not writing, just at the moment that others threatened me with
a prosecution for writing. It seemed a little difficult to set both at open
defiance, yet this was done, by continuing to write, and by employing another
bookseller.

Indeed these booksellers, in general, are a cruel race. They imagine that the
soul and body of every author that falls into their hands, is their exclusive
property. They have adopted the bird-catcher's maxim: a bird that can sing, and
wont sing, ought to be made sing. Whenever their devils are out of employment,
the drudging goblin of an author must sharpen up his pen, and never think of
repose till he is relieved by the arrival of a more profitable job. Then the
wretch may remain as undisturbed as a sleep-mouse in winter, while the stupid
dolt whom he has clad and fattened, receives the applause.

I now come to the assertion, that I am, or have been, in the pay of the
British government.

In the first place the democrats swear that I have been frequently visited by
a certain Agent, meaning I suppose Mr. Bond: to this I answer, that it is an
abominable lie. I never saw Mr. Bond but three times in my life, and then I had
business with him as the interpreter of Frenchmen, who wanted certificates from
him, in order to secure their property in the conquered colonies. I never in my
life spoke to, corresponded with, or even saw, to my knowledge, either of the
British Ministers, or any one of their retinue. Mr. Bradford once told me, that
Mr. Allen, the father-in-law of Mr. Hammond, said he was acquainted with me. If
this gentleman did really say so, he joked, or he told a lie; for he never saw
me in his life, that I know of.

A little while after the New Year's Gift was published, an attack was made in
the Argus of New York, on the supposed author of it; in consequence of which,
this supposed author, or some one in his behalf, took occasion to observe, in
Mr. Claypoole's paper, that it was uncandid to attribute to a gentleman of
irreproachable character, what was well known to be the work of a democrat. I
had a great mind to say at that time, what I shall now say; and that is, that
let this gentleman be who he will, I think myself as good as he, and of as good
a character too; and that, as to the dishonor attached to the publication, I
am willing to take it all to myself.

It is hard to prove a negative; it is what no man is expected to do; yet, I
think I can prove, that the accusation of my being in British pay is not
supported by one single fact, or the least shadow of probability.

When a foreign government hires a writer, it takes care that his labors shall
be distributed, whether the readers are all willing to pay for them or not.
This we daily see verified in the distribution of certain blasphemous gazettes,
which, though kicked from the door with disdain, flies in at the window. Now,
has this ever been the case with the works of Peter Porcupine? Were they ever
thrusted upon people in spite of their remonstrances? Can Mr. Bradford say that
thousands of these pamphlets have ever been paid for by any agent of Great
Britain? Can he say that I have ever distributed any of them? No; he can say no
such thing. They had, at first, to encounter every difficulty, and they have
made their way supported by public approbation, and by that alone. Mr.
Bradford, if he is candid enough to repeat what he told me, will say, that the
British Consul, when he purchased half a dozen of them, insisted upon having
them at the wholesale price! Did this look like a desire to encourage them?
Besides, those who know any thing of Mr. Bradford, will never believe, that he
would have lent his aid to a British Agent's publications; for, of all the
Americans I have yet conversed with, he seems to entertain the greatest degree
of rancour against that nation.

I have every reason to believe, that the British Consul was far from approving
of some, at least, of my publications. I happened to be in a bookseller's shop,
unseen by him, when he had the goodness to say, that I was a wild fellow. On
which I shall only observe, that when the King bestows on me about five hundred
pounds sterling a year, perhaps, I may become a tame fellow, and hear my
master, my countrymen, my friends and my parents, belied and execrated, without
saying one single word in their defense.

Had the Minister of Great Britain employed me to write, can it be supposed
that he would not furnish me with the means of living well, without becoming
the retailer of my own works? Can it be supposed that he would have suffered me
ever to appear on the scene? It must be a very poor king that he serves, if he
could not afford me more than I can get by keeping a book-shop. An Ambassador
from a king of the Gypsies could not have acted a meaner part. What! where was
all the "gold of Pit?" That gold which tempted, according to the democrats, an
American Envoy to sell his country, and two-thirds of the Senate to ratifiy the
bargain: that gold which, according to the Convention of France, has made one
half of that nation cut the throats of the other half; that potent gold could
not keep Peter Porcupine from standing behind a counter to sell a penknife, or
a quire of paper!

Must it not be evident, too, that the keeping of a shop would take up a great
part of my time? Time that was hardly worth a paying for at all, if it was not
of higher value than the profits on a few pamphlets. Every one knows that the
Censor has been delayed on account of my entering on business; would the
Minister of Great Britain have suffered this, had I been in his pay? No; I
repeat, that it is downright stupidity to suppose, that he would ever have
suffered me to appear at all, had he even felt in the least interested in the
fate of my works, or the effect they might produce. He must be sensible, that,
seeing the unconquerable prejudices existing in this country, my being known to
be an Englishman would operate weightily against whatever I might advance. I
saw this very plainly myself; but, as I had a living to get, and as I had
determined on this line of business, such a consideration was not to awe me
into idleness, or make me forego any other advantages that I had reason to hope
I should enjoy.

The notion of my being in British pay arose from my having now-and-then taken
upon me to attempt a defense of the character of that nation, and of the
intentions of its government toward the United States. But, have I ever teazed
my readers with this, except when the subject necessarily demanded it? And if I
have given way to my indignation when a hypocritical political divine attempted
to degrade my country, or when its vile calumniators called it "an insular
Bastile," what have I done more than every good man in my place would have
done? What have I done more than my duty; than obeyed the feelings of my heart?
When a man hears his country reviled, does it require that he should be paid
for speaking in its defense?

Besides, had my works been intended to introduce British influence, they would
have assumed a more conciliating tone. The author would have flattered the
people of this country, even in their excesses; he would have endeavored to
gain over the enemies of Britain by smooth and soothing language; he would have
"stooped to conquer;" he would not, as I have done, rendered them hatred for
hatred, and scorn for scorn.

My writings, the first pamphlet excepted, have had no other object than that
of keeping alive an attachment to the Constitution of the United States and the
inestimable man who is at the head of the government, and to paint in their
true colors those who are the enemies of both; to warn the people, of all
ranks and descriptions, of the danger of admitting among them, the anarchical
and blasphemous principles of the French revolutionists, principles as opposite
to those of liberty as hell is to heaven. If, therefore, I have written at the
instance of a British agent, that agent must most certainly deserve the thanks
of all the real friends of America. But, say some of the half democrats, what
right have you to meddle with the defense of our government at all? -- The same
right that you have to exact my obedience to it, and my contribution toward
its support. Several Englishmen, not so long in the country as I had been,
served in the militia against the western rebels, and, had I been called on, I
must have served too. Surely a man has a right to defend with his pen, that
which he may be compelled to defend with a musket.

As to the real, bloody, cutthroats, they carry their notion of excluding me
from the use of the press still further. "While" (says one of them) While I am
a friend to the unlimited freedom of the press, when exercised by an American,
I am an implacable foe to its prostitution to a foreigner, and would at any
time assist in hunting out of society, any meddling foreigner who should dare
to interfere in our politics. I hope the apathy of our brethren of Philadelphia
will no longer be indulged, and that an exemplary vengeance will soon burst
upon the head of such a presumptuous fellow. -- Justice, honor, national
gratitude, all call for it. -- May it no longer be delayed.

"An American." Are not you, Mr. Swanwick, the President of the Emigration
Society? Well, then, Sir, as your institution is said to be for the information
of persons emigrating from foreign countries, be so good as to insert the
little extract, above quoted, in your next dispatches for a cargo of emigrants.
Above all, Sir, be sure to tell those who are disposed to emigrate from
England, those martyrs in the cause of liberty; be sure to tell them that this
is the land of equal liberty; that here, and here alone, they will find the
true unlimited freedom of the press, but that, if they dare to make use of it,
justice, honor, national gratitude, will call for exemplary vengeance on their
heads.

I should not have noticed this distinction between foreigners and Americans,
had I not perceived, that several persons, who are, generally speaking, friends
to their country, seem to think that it was impertinent in me to meddle with
the politics here, because I was an Englishman. I would have these good people
to recollect, that the laws of this country hold out, to foreigners, an offer
of all that liberty of the press which Americans enjoy, and that, if this
liberty be abridged, by whatever means it may be done, the laws and the
constitution and all together is a mere cheat; a snare to catch the credulous
and enthusiastic of every other nation; a downright imposition on the world. If
people who emigrate hither have not a right to make use of the liberty of the
press, while the natives have, it is very ill done to call this a country of
equal liberty. Equal, above all epithets, is the most improper that can be
applied to it; for, if none but Americans have access to the press, they are
the masters and foreigners are their subjects, nay their slaves. An honorable
and comfortable situation upon my word! The emigrants from some countries may
be content with it, perhaps: I would not say, that the Martyrs in the cause of
liberty from England, would not quietly bend beneath the yoke, as, indeed, they
are in duty bound to do; but, for my part, who have not the ambition to aspire
to the crown of martyrdom, I must and I will be excused. Either the laws shall
be altered, or I will continue to avail myself of the liberty that they held
out to me, and that partly tempted me to the country. When an act is passed for
excluding Englishmen from exercising their talents, and from promulgating what
they write, then will I desist; but, I hope, when that time arrives; no act
will be passed to prevent people from emigrating back again.

Before I conclude, it seems necessary to say a word or two about the miserable
shift, which the democrats have had recourse to, respecting the infamous letter
of Citizen Hint. They now pretend, that I fabricated it myself, though I have
publicly declared, that it was delivered into my hands by a gentleman of
reputation, whose name I have mentioned. Can any one be stupid enough to
imagine, that I would, particularly at this time, have run the risk of being
detected in such a shameful business? And, how could it have been undertaken
without running that risk? Had I written it myself, there would have been my
handwriting against me, and had I employed another, that other might have
betrayed me; he might have ruined me in the opinion of all those, whom it is my
interest as well as my pride to be esteemed by; or, at best, I should have been
at his mercy for ever afterward.

Besides the great risk of detection, let any one point out, if he can, what
end I could propose to myself by such a device. As to making my shop and myself
known, I presume I did not stand in need of a scarecrow, to effect that, when
the kind democrats themselves had published to the whole Union, that I had
taken the house in which I live, for the purpose of retailing my "poison," as
they called it, and had even had the candor to tell the world, that I had paid
my rent in advance. It was to Mr. Franklin Bache's creditable and incorruptible
Gazette, that I was indebted for this volunteer advertisement. This was
generous in a declared foe; but those will not be astonished at the editor's
candor and tolerating principles, who are acquainted with the following
anecdote.

From the European Magazine, for Sept. 1795, page 156.
When Voltaire arrived at Paris, an interview took place between him and
Franklin. After the first compliments, which by the way were more adulative
than comported with the character of an American, and above all of a stern
Republican, the Doctor presented his grandson to Voltaire, in soliciting for
him his blessing. The philosopher of impiety relished the pleasantry; and to
render the farce complete, he rose from his chair, and with a patriarchal air,
laid his hands on the head of the child, and solemnly pronounced, in a loud
voice, these three words: God, Liberty, and Toleration. All the pious were
shocked at the American, who, they said, burlesqued Religion in asking the
blessing of Voltaire.


They affect to believe, sometimes, that the letter was a mere trick to bring
in the pence, and, in one of their latest paragraphs, they call me a
"catch-penny author." But, let them recollect, that I am now a bookseller,
whose trade it is to get money; and if I am driven to such shifts as the
Scarecrow, to get a living, let them reconcile this circumstance with their
assertions concerning my being liberally paid by Great Britain. A man in
British pay, rolling in "the Gold of Pit," could certainly never be so reduced
as to venture every thing for the sake of collecting a few eleven-penny bits.
It is the misfortune of the democrats ever to furnish arguments against
themselves.

Those who reason upon the improbability of the democrat's sending the
threatening letter, do not recollect the extract I have above quoted from the
Aurora, in which the people of Philadelphia are called upon to murder me, and
are told, that justice, honor, and national gratitude demand it. Is it very
improbable that men, capable of writing paragraphs like this, should, upon
finding the people deaf to their honorable insinuations, attempt to intimidate
my landlord by a cutthroat letter?

Their great object is to silence me, to this all their endeavors point: lies,
threats, spies and informers, every engine of Jacobinical invention is played
off. I am sorry to tell them, that it is all in vain, for I am one of those
whose obstinacy increases with opposition.

I have now to apologize to my indulgent reader, for having taken up so much of
his time with subjects relating chiefly to myself. The task, has, to me, been a
very disagreeable one; but it was become necessary, as well for the vindication
of my own character as for the satisfaction of my friends; yes, in spite of
envy, malice and falsehood, I say, my numerous and respectable friends, who, I
trust, will be well pleased to find, that there is nothing in the history of
Peter Porcupine to raise a blush for the commendations they have bestowed on
his works, or to render them unworthy of their future support.

END.
COPY RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

PROPOSALS (By William Cobbett, opposite Christ Church, Philadelphia) FOR
PUBLISHING BY SUBSCRIPTION, THE HISTORY OF JACOBINISM, ITS CRIMES, CRUELTIES
AND PERFIDIES: COMPRISING AN INQUIRY Into the Manner of disseminating, under
the Appearance of PHILOSOPHY and VIRTUE, PRINCIPLES WHICH ARE EQUALLY
SUBVERSIVE OF ORDER, VIRTUE, RELIGION, LIBERTY AND HAPPINESS.

BY WILLIAM PLAYFAIR, AUTHOR OF THE COMMERCIAL AND POLITICAL ATLAS, etc.

With an Appendix, By Peter Porcupine. Showing the close connection which has
ever subsisted between the Jacobins at Paris and the Democrats in the United
States of America.

CONDITIONS.
I. THIS new, entertaining and instructive work, which is at once a history of
Jacobinism and a complete history of the French Revolution down to the end of
1795, will consist of two volumes, octavo, each containing about 300 pages. It
shall be well printed, on a new type and fine paper. II. The price of each
volume, bound in boards, will be one Dollar and a Quarter, paid for on
delivery; and to non-subscribers, a Dollar and a Half. III. As soon as a
sufficient number of copies shall be subscribed for, the work will be put to
the press, and finished as expeditiously as a strict attention to neatness and
accuracy will admit of.
* Subscriptions taken by the publisher, and the principal booksellers of
Philadelphia; Messrs. Spotswood and Nancrede of Boston; Mr. Rivington of New
York; Mr. Rice of Baltimore; Messrs. Pritchard and Davidson of Richmond,
Virginia; and Mr. Young of Charleston, South Carolina.


