"Stop the Wheels of Government."


THE POLITICAL CENSOR, OR MONTHLY REVIEW OF THE Most interesting Political
Occurrences, RELATIVE TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR BENJAMIN DAVIES, NO. 68, HIGH STREET. MDCCXCVI.

THE POLITICAL CENSOR For APRIL, 1796.
DEBATES IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. (Continued from page 67.)
MR. S. SMITH observed, that, were there but one man, and he a negro, suffering
under the galling yoke of impressment, it was the duty of the government to
provide relief for that man. Now, Mr. Smith, have you not several negroes? How
easy, then, is it for you to do an act of philanthropy, without application to
the government, and without plunging the country into a dangerous dispute with
another nation? You will say, without doubt, that your negroes are not
suffering under the galling "yoke of impressment;" but, where is the
difference, whether they are under the yoke of the British or under your yoke;
slavery is still slavery; nor is the yoke the weight of a hair lighter, for
lasting durante vita, or because it is imposed by a man who pretends to be the
advocate of liberty.

Nothing that I have said, or shall say, on this subject, is intended to
justify the British in their impressment of Americans: I look upon their
conduct in this respect as tyrannical; as the effect of that overbearing
insolence which is the characteristic of but too many among their subaltern
officers, and I think that redress ought to be obtained, with all convenient
speed. But, I here confine myself to Americans alone, by which word I mean,
those who were born in the United States, or were inhabitants of them at the
peace of 1783, not including deserters from the British during the war. These
are Americans, and no others are, and, I venture to predict, that, whatever
schemes the Congress may fall on, whatever registers, certificates or oaths of
civism they may think proper to furnish sailors with, Great Britain will ever
seize hers, where she finds them.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, that it would be no difficult matter to prove, that
foreigners naturalized since the Declaration of Independence, were entitled to
the protection of the government. He attempted to prove this, and I shall not
contradict him, for the thing is, in itself so evidently absurd as to need no
remark. -- As to what he pleases to call the naturalization of foreigners
(whole cargoes at a time or otherwise) the rights of citizenship they enjoy
under their new masters, etc. etc. shall be reserved for a future opportunity.
It will be sufficient to add, on this article, that a bill was at last agreed
to for appointing agents for the relief and protection of impressed seamen. But
if these agents are to be employed (as the instruments of a predominant)
faction to embroil this country in a war, it were far better they had never
been appointed.

PAPERS RELATIVE TO THE TREATY WITH GREAT BRITAIN. MARCH 2nd.
Mr. LIVINGSTON (from N. York) said that it was generally understood that some
important constitutional questions would be discussed, when the treaty lately
concluded between this country and Great Britain should come under
consideration, it was very desirable, therefore, that every document which
might tend to throw light on the subject should be before the House. -- For
this purpose, he would move the following resolution:

Resolved, that the President of the United States be requested to lay before
this House, a copy of the instructions given to the minister of the United
States who negociated the treaty with Great Britain, communicated by his
message on the 1st inst. together with the correspondence and documents
relative to the said treaty. Ordered to lie on the table.

To this resolution the following exception was afterward added: -- excepting
such of said papers as any existing negotiation may render improper to be
disclosed.

Mr. TRACEY (Connecticut) requested the gentleman who brought forward this
resolution to give his reasons for doing so. He had at present only told the
House that, as the constitutionality of the treaty might be discussed, he
thought it necessary to propose the measure. It was well known by every man in
that House that much difference of opinion, and much sensibility had been
occasioned by the treaty in question all over the Union. -- He thought that the
only way to treat the matter fairly, would be for every member on that floor to
come forward and express himself openly. Perhaps the happiness of the country
might depend upon the issue of their deliberations upon it. In order to avoid
all bitterness and misunderstanding, it would be best for members to come
forward at first and state their opinions fully. He, therefore asked why this
motion was made? If made barely to enable the House to examine into the
constitutionality of the treaty, he thought that might be determined by
comparing it with the constitution itself. It may be thought necessary that
these papers be produced in order to impeach any of the persons employed in the
negotiation, or the Precident. He wished to know for what purpose these papers
are called. He thought to declare the whole intention of the motion would be a
means of harmonizing the House upon the subject. However, until he knew the
real intention, he would hope it was a good one. If he disagreed from the
honorable mover, he should give his reasons for it, it was a delicate subject.
That they had a right to the papers called for for a good purpose, could not be
doubted, but unless the House had real occasion for them, the President would
be justified, in keeping them where they are. What, said he, do we want with
these papers? Is it to make a better treaty, or to do away the one made? He
wished to know the mover's reasons fully.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said he had never any wish to conceal his intention, as he
trusted he never should have any which he should be ashamed to avow. The
gentleman asked with propriety for information: he answered, his motion was
made for the purpose of gaining information. He asked to what particular point.
It may be to all the points he has mentioned. It was impossible to know until
the papers were before him. He wished for information, the result would depend
upon the information received. He did not know that the impeachment of any
person would be determined upon by that House. He did not think so himself; but
he thought it necessary they should have an opportunity of making a fair
judgment of the matter. They were the proper persons to whom was delegated the
power of punishing officers; they ought therefore, to have full opportunity of
judging of their conduct. It was simply for information that the resolution
asked, not only with respect to the officers who were employed on the occasion,
but with respect to the thing itself. He believed, that House had the power to
carry into effect any Treaty, or not. It was for this purpose that he wanted
information; and if the House were of the same opinion, they would support the
motion. Something had been said as to the delicacy of the subject. If, said he,
any reason of State will not permit the President to give the papers they asked
for, he will give his reasons for refusing them. He meant not to invade the
rights of any branch of government; it was information which he sought for.

Mr. GILES (Virginia) said he would briefly state the reasons which induced him
to support the passing of the resolution which lay on the table. The gentleman
from Connecticut had justly said that the treaty had caused great sensibility
throughout the United States. It was on this account that he wanted that
information which they had a right to expect, and without which they could not
proceed to consider the subject. If he were to judge of the treaty itself, it
would not allay that sensibility which had been raised against it, but he
trusted the information which was called for would be of a sort to reconcile
the public mind. If no information was given he must own it would have an
unfavorable impression on his mind. He wished, therefore, for information.

Mr. MURRAY (Maryland) observed that if the mover of the resolution before the
House had clearly declared that the object of it was for information, he should
not have an objection to it; but the explanation given, led him to believe that
it had in view the establishment of a very alarming doctrine -- no less than to
determine whether the treaty shall be carried into effect or not. By the
Constitution, he said, the treaty was become the law of the land, and
obligatory on all the citizens of the United States. From the explanation
given, he should give the measure his decided negative; for if that House had
the power to decide on the legality of the treaty, in vain has the Constitution
given power to the President and Senate to make treaties. It appeared to him
that the House had no right to enquire into the particular ground upon which
this treaty has become the law of the land, since it appears that the President
and Senate have acted agreeably to the Constitution. It would be a solecism in
Government, to say that there were two powers which could control each other.
He thought the resolution unconstitutional, as it was predicated on the right
of that House to interfere with the power placed in the President and Senate to
make treaties. In order to justify this motion, the House should first
determine the treaty to be unconstitutional, and that (...) not to be the law
of the land. If it was agreed (...) House had a right to examine all the
secrets (...) negociations, a plan will be adopted which may open secrets that
may be of great injury to the nation. Every man knows, said he, that in
diplomatic transactions there are certain secret negociations; he did not know
that it was the case in this, but it might be so. To carry into effect this
resolution, appeared to him a direct invasion upon the constitutional rights
placed in the President, in conjunction with the Senate. He doubted whether the
Senate could make this demand.

Thus did the discussion wander from its object. This motion of Mr. Livingston
was the signal of hostile preparation. The Friends of the treaty took the
alarm, and the question became, not whether the House had a right to call for
the papers or not, but whether their sanction was necessary to the execution of
a treaty.

The debates occupied the House and the public during nearly a month. It is
incompatible with my plan to give all the speeches at length, many of which do
honor to the hearts and many others to the heads of the speakers: among the
former may be noticed those of Messieurs Buck, Sedgwick, Harper and William
Smith; among the latter, those of Messieurs Gallatin and Giles; and, on the
whole, the debate contains as masterly a display of polemical talents as,
perhaps, was ever exhibited by any assembly in the world.

I shall content myself with inserting here two of these speeches only, which
as they contain the substance of all that was said on both sides, will suffice,
at once to give the reader a complete view of the arguments adduced, and a
specimen of the rhetorical abilities of the members of the House of
Representatives.

Mr. GILES said, when the present motion was first brought forward, he saw no
other consideration attached to it, than the expediency, or inexpediency of
calling for the papers in question. It was expected the President was possessed
of information respecting the treaty, as such it became a question whether it
was not proper to make a call for it. The very referring of the treaty to a
committee of the whole showed an intention of acting upon it. Indeed the
communication from the President at the opening of the session, showed that he
expected that House to exercise an agency on the treaty. It appeared to him,
that if the papers would serve to explain any thing in the treaty, it was
desirable to have them. He was one of those who, in reflecting on the treaty,
and judging from the face of it, felt unfavorably toward it. He was persuaded
that he had the right, and he conceived it to be his duty, to oppose the
execution of, the instrument; but, knowing there was great responsibility
attached to the business, he wished for information. For the final issue, the
weight of responsibility would never make him swerve from his duty. These were
his motives for concurring in the motion.

That the House had a right to call for these papers was not denied; the right
being conceded, it appeared to him that they might have confined themselves to
the expediency of the motion. But the opposition had not been so much against
the motion, as against the arguments which have been used, that do not relate
to the subject. But though he believed that these were all the consequences, yet,
as it seemed to be deemed a test respecting another business, and members
appeared inclined now to express an opinion on that head, he would ask
indulgence of the committee whilst he stated his sentiments on that subject.

The real question appeared to be this, whether the treaty making power, can
receive any check, in consequence of provisions placed in the Congress of the
United States, and whether they have a right to question the merits of the
instruments? -- Various arguments have been used to show, that that House have
not the power to examine the treaty, or check its execution. Some of them have
grown from the Constitution, others from the face of the instrument. Though, he
said, it would have been more agreeable to him to have explained his sentiments
in a different way, yet, as gentlemen have chosen to enter upon the discussion
of the great Constitutional question, he should proceed to answer the
objections which had been urged against what he conceived to be the powers of
that assembly.

Of the description of objection against the rights of that House, which grew
out of the instrument itself, he should begin with remarks on what had fallen
from the gentleman from South Carolina yesterday. That gentleman had introduced
the Convention held in the state of Virginia near the time of adopting the
Constitution, and said, that it proposed an amendment, containing, amongst
other checks, one respecting the treaty power, viz. that there should be a
concurrence of two thirds of the whole of the Senate, instead of two thirds of
the Senate present. He believed it was so. But he would ask the gentleman how
this operated? The amendment was not to lessen, but to increase the checks,
which, from the extent of the treaty making power, as it stands in the
Constitution, was thought to be necessary. But how the gentleman could infer
that they believed there was no other check, he was at a loss to determine. If
he would refer to the proceedings of that Convention, he would find the reasons
urged in support of the proposed amendments, which, indeed, were the opinions
of individuals only. The next consideration which he resorted to was, that of
the opinion of certain citizens, at a meeting held at New York, to show that
they considered the business of the treaty, wholly an executive business. He
little expected, from a gentleman who is apt to speak rather contemptuously of
such assemblies, that the proceedings of town's meeting should have been
adduced in support of his argument. He acknowledged that the expressions of
such meetings of the people would always have an effect on his mind. Was the
gentleman willing to rely on the opinions of those whom he has mentioned? If
not, why introduce them? If the gentleman will admit that such meetings are the
orthodox expositors of the public Constitution, as they are expositors of the
will, he had no objections to their being adduced. It did not appear, however,
that he drew correctly the sentiments of the public meeting in question; it was
held to petition the President to withhold his signature from the treaty. Would
not the strongest arguments, then, be used to induce the President not to
execute the treaty? But he wished to be permitted to take the gentleman's own
rule. What was the situation of their table; was it not covered with petitions
from all parts of the Union against the treaty? Finding their petitions in vain
to the President, the people flew to that House, and the table never had, upon
any occasion, so many petitions upon it, praying them not to give up the rights
which the constitution had placed in their hands, of checking the treaty making
power. -- The next argument adduced by the gentleman was, the opinion expressed
in the amendments lately proposed by the State of Virginia, to the
constitution; from which, he drew an implication that there was at present no
check on the treaty making power, it was not so. It had not been contended that
there was any particular words in the constitution which directly goes to this
construction, but that it grows out of another powers. This was the idea of the
State of Virginia. The amendment was proposed to relieve them from constructive
power, by giving them an express power. It was unnecessary to remind them of
the fate which these amendments had met with. He hoped, however, the State of
Virginia would pursue that conduct which had always marked her political
character; and he trusted it would be admitted, that she was not more
distinguished for her love of liberty, than she was for her love of virtue, of
order and good conduct at home. He prided himself in being a Representative of
such a state; and he was persuaded, though her sister states differed from her
in opinion, she would never cease to pay them proper respect. He was sorry the
subject had been mentioned. If Virginia, he said, had been the cause of
indelicacy in others, she was the innocent cause and therefore not responsible.
In making the proposed amendments, she was impelled by the best motives to
attain an important object, an object, which, he doubted not, would ultimately
be attended with success.

The gentleman from South Carolina had resorted to another subject with but
little success. He read a resolution from the journals of the house, importing,
that when treaties were made under the authority of the United States, they
should be annexed to the laws.

He believed it proper they should be so. But does this show that the practice
of the House had been against expressing their opinion on great national
objects? The gentleman's next observation was with respect to appropriations
for carrying into effect Indian treaties, saying that there was no difference
betwixt treaties with foreign nations, and treaties with the Indian tribes. Mr.
Giles remarked there always had been a distinction. -- In the time of the
Colonial Government, that distinction was made and it had never been done away.
By means of Indian treaties, the treaty-making power had been vastly increased,
he could not say whether for a good or bad purpose. Provision had been made for
carrying Indian treaties into effect, because they thought it right. But
suppose a motion had been made to strike out the appropriation clause, in one
of those bills, would it have been out of order? No. That question had been
lately discussed (he referred to the business respecting the mint) and
determined upon. There was another subject that gentleman mentioned, which he
was very sorry to hear, though he seemed to plume himself upon it, that the
President of the United States had accompanied the publication of this treaty
with his proclamation to carry it into effect. Why was this mentioned? It was
not to illuminate that House. He was afraid it might have a tendency to check
investigation. Persons were too often brought before that House; not to
illustrate a subject, but to hinder free debate. He would even admit that the
President believed that that House had not the right to judge of the treaty.
Were his opinion to be authority? No. What is the nature of the question? It
implies contested rights of different branches of government. His introducing
the President, therefore, as an authoritative opinion, might alarm, but could
not convince. Notwithstanding the President's proclamation, he still thought
the treaty was sent to that House to be acted upon.

Having answered most of the objections from collateral sources, he should
proceed to more interesting matter -- to the Constitution itself, it was a
little unfortunate, he said, that sentiments could not be so combined as to
produce always the same ideas in every mind. Hence arose difference of opinion.
-- It is not wonderful, that in the Congress of the United States, there should
be a variety of opinion. Of all the expositions of the treaty-making power, he
thought that was the least probable and most dangerous, which fell from the
member from Connecticut -- That power, he informed the House, was undefined in
its nature, unlimited in its object, and supreme in its operation. He would not
say there had been no attempts at a definition of this extravagant power. It
was said, it might embrace legislative objects by compacts. He would not say
that objection had been attended to, that it could not go beyond the
Constitution, nor encroach on power placed by the Constitution in any branch of
Government.

On this construction he would examine the question. The first consequence was,
that the treaty supercedes the discussion of that House. The next was, that it
repeals all laws which stand in its way. When he proceeded to examine the
constitution, he would touch on both those particulars. He would remark, that
as far as he had been able to examine the history of mankind, there was always
an effort of the people to guard their rights, and an opposite effort in
government to encroach on them. The American people were called upon to
establish such a constitution as would ensure their rights and liberties. It
had been said that the American people had been more sagacious than any other
nation. But whilst it appears that they have been more sagacious to furnish
checks, there have not been wanting continual attempts to invade them. In no
nation has the doctrine of checks been so completely routed as in this, and if
the opinions now contended for, prevail, nothing will remain to be done by
checks. This construction has been deduced from two sources. One from the
constitution, and the other from the nature of the thing. Gentlemen have read
the clause of the constitution which gives a power to the President and Senate
to make treaties. Here they stop, and say that this gives them a complete
authority. If there was no other clause, it might be so. But let the question
be examined. The gentlemen then resort to another clause, viz. This
constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof, and all treaties made, or which shall be made under the
authority of the United States, shall be the supreme law of the land. Here they
stop again, and if there were no other words, it would seem to support their
doctrine. But the clause explains itself, and the judges in every state shall
be bound thereby, any thing in the constitution or laws of any state to the
contrary notwithstanding. Can any thing be more evident, that this clause
relates to former encroachments of particular states? It was necessary that the
constitution and laws of each state should yield to the general Government.
Gentlemen finding difficulties occur, contend for the supremacy of treaties
over all laws. It is admitted the clauses of the constitution will not support
this: and he would ask where they found the doctrine, that treaties are
superior to laws? Gentlemen say that it is from the nature of things. He
believed the reverse. In this point he differed from the gentleman from
Pennsylvania; for he would contend that laws could annul treaties, but that
treaties could not annul laws. This being a new doctrine, he would beg leave to
illustrate it. He inferred it from the nature of the two powers. Gentlemen
assert that treaties cannot be repealed, because they consist of two parts, and
nothing less than the consent of both, or war, can annul them. He would ask
that House, if they ever heard of a convention between two foreign nations for
this purpose? if it could be done, he should wish another envoy extraordinary
to be appointed and sent to repeal this treaty. But no such meeting having ever
taken place, from whence comes this theory? But is it reasonable that laws
should repeal treaties? Yes. But why? because laws were the expression of the
national will, through its proper organ.

It is admitted on all hands, said Mr. Giles, that Congress has the power of
declaring war; suppose it did declare war with Great Britain, would not the
treaty be annulled? would the treaty operate during the war? No. At least that
part of it which speaks of mutual amity, would be destroyed. He would go
farther, the treaty makes an equalization of duties in the Canada trade. Could
not this regulation be repealed? but this it might be said, would lead to war.
That might be; but he contended for the right. He said that a law pro tanto
renders the treaty void. Suppose Great Britain by her parliament, were to
repeal any law relative the treaty, what would be the consequence? Great
Britain would make herself responsible. True; but she might do it. Treaties
were said not to be repealable; was not that saying that the laws of the United
States were like the laws of the Medes and Persians, which change not? if
gentlemen took time to examine the doctrine they would find it less sound than
they expected.

In proportion as an authority was supposed to be unlimited or undefined, in
the same proportion was the necessity of a check upon it. When he looked into
the constitution, he found this check. Would it not, indeed have been the
height of folly in the people to have given unbounded power with respect to
making treaties, whilst some of the regulations in the constitution give
instances of well founded jealousy in their rulers? if the doctrine contended
for were just, it would afford a remarkable instance of the folly of the
American people.

The constitution, he said, contained a distribution of powers. It had three
distinct checks. The first related to the different species of authority. Each
distinct authority was placed in separate hands. The next was, the same species
of authority is placed in two different branches of the government, which
renders a concurrence of opinion necessary to any act. Another check, or denial
of authority altogether, was the qualified veto of the President.

As an instance of the caution which the people thought necessary against the
encroachment of power, it was made an article of the constitution that no
appropriation for an army could he made for more than two years. By which it
appears that they were not satisfied, though they had provided that there
should be a concurrence of sentiment in the Senate and Legislature, but
determined to prevent the posibility of keeping up an army establishment longer
than necessary. Another check was the biennial elections, as every new election
was considered as a fresh check upon the executive. No one will doubt that this
was the motive; and the doctrine at present insisted on, seemed to show the
necessity of this caution.

The checks on the treaty making power might consist of several parts; he
should rely upon two. The first was, the necessity for the concurrence of that
House to give the efficacy to a treaty whenever it embraces any object which is
contained in the power given by the constitution to Congress. The President and
Senate, it is acknowledged, have power to make treaties; but who have the power
to regulate commerce? Congress. Who have the power to declare war? Congress.
Who have the power to raise armies? Congress. Gentlemen talked much about the
will of the people. If he adored any thing on earth, he said, it was the will
of the people. The question was, what was the will of the people? That will was
expressed in the constitution. And that House, being the direct representatives
of the people, might be reasonably supposed to be the representatives of the
public will; and it was necessary, therefore, that they should concur in a
measure of so great importance as that of a commerical treaty. But gentlemen
seem to speak of that House as mere ciphers. What was the oath they took on
taking their seats? Not to sit silent to see the rights of the people invaded;
but to guard the constitution. Shall they them shrink from their duty; be
trusted they would not.

The other check to the treaty making power, was that of the right of
appropriation placed in Congress. No money shall be drawn from the treasury but
in consequence of appropriations made by law. Whence came this caution? From
the same spirit which dictated the other checks in the constitution. Without an
appropriation no mischief can be effected. He would ask the meaning of the word
law? Law, said he, is a rule of conduct prescribed by competent authority, Does
the law mentioned in this clause refer to the treaty making power? No. What
does it mean? It refers to Congress and not to the treaty making power, then
the law necessary to make appropriation is the exercise of the whole of the
authority appointed by the people to make laws. But gentlemen finding that a
new distinction must be made with respect to discrimination, have undertaken a
new definition. The gentleman from Connecticut, speaking on this subject, asked
whether all distinction was to be disclaimed? No, he said they were to exercise
sound discretion; but he was at a loss to know what discretion was left them,
if they might not refuse to appropriate money to carry into effect what
appeared to them mischievous. The gentleman from South Carolina attempted to
define this sort of discretion, and finished his remarks by saying, that they
could never have a right to do wrong. But this did not define their idea. He
would undertake to define the discretion they set up, it was a predestined
discretion, not giving its votaries a power of choice, but impelling them by
necessity. Indeed the whole force of the remarks of gentlemen, was to recommend
an easy, docile kind of discretion, which would be influenced by the opinions
of others. Some gentlemen finding this doctrine would not do, have taken what
they call moral obligation as their ground. He hoped they would give up
constitutional obligation, because he believed a constitutional obligation was
a moral one also.

There had been much difficulty, he said, with respect to moral obligation. The
exercise of moral sense was put in the discrimination of the President and
Senate, in their having made a treaty which gentlemen say binds that House to
carry it into effect. He always understood that moral sense must reside in an
agent. There was a remarkable instance of it in Great Britain, and more
remarkable, because their King can do no wrong. This brought him again to the
word law. It was said they intended to repeal the treaty. No. They claimed a
power to refuse the passing of a law -- a mere negative power. When he was
called upon to pass a law, was he to do it without consideration? Legislation
necessarily includes deliberation. It was the meaning of it. How then can a
Legislature be addressed in this language, although we acknowledge you are a
legislative body, yet, in this case, you have no right to discuss the merits of
the treaty which you are to appropriate money to carry into effect, The
gentleman from Connecticut, who was entitled to much praise for his ability and
ingenuity, said he could exercise his opinion as a citizen upon the treaty, but
not as a legislator. He could not enter into this distinction; for every
opinion which he formed as a citizen, he held as a legislator. Gentlemen should
consider that in passing a law, they were on legislative and not on executive
ground. It appeared to him that these opinions had been fostered by gentlemen
who were in the habit of associating together, and considered to have more
force than they will be found to possess. He had been told that pulpit orators
were less able to support an argument than other men, from their dictatorial
habits; and he believed the gentlemen who supported the arguments in favor of
prerogative, though they appeared smooth and feasible, would find a difficulty
in supporting them.

They had been told it was unfair to make allusions to the British House of
Commons. -- The reference had been made for two purposes, viz, to show the
practicability and the use of the check insisted upon, as it is fully
acknowledged in that government. When prerogative was the question, those
gentlemen who now oppose the appeal, are themselves the first to make it; and
he did not expect that in the year 1796, the British House of Commons would
have been acknowledged to possess greater privileges than the Legislature of
the United States; but this was the fact, that they were struggling for popular
rights, and obliged to refer to Britain to strengthen their claim. He
acknowledged that the British Constitution was made up of customs, but these
were their Constitution equally with their written one. The clause of their
Constitution which forbids the drawing of money from the Treasury but by law,
is copied from the English practice; but now an attempt was made to wrest this
privilege from their hands. If checks are necessary, said Mr. Giles, no danger
can arise from multiplying them, but were the contrary doctrine to prevail, it
would lead to this, that the President and Senate might reduce that House from
the real and efficient, to mere formal guardians of the people.

It was said, that when a treaty is made by the President, with the approbation
of two thirds of the Senate, it is the supreme law of the land, and they were
bound to obey it. It should be recollected, that about three years ago,
Congress was occupied in discussing the necessary measures to be pursued with
respect to Great Britain. The House of representatives differed in opinion from
the other branches. They deemed it advisable not to trust solely on the
magnanimity of the king, nor to any of his other qualities; several regulations
were proposed. What was done? Certain measures were agreed upon in that House,
sent to the Senate, but there negatived by the presiding voice only. A
negociator was then appointed, and the consequence has been found to be a
treaty, which goes to an inhibition of the powers of that House, which gives a
power to legislate against legislation. He would not say what evil consequences
might arise from such an instrument. He only remarked upon the evil of a treaty
making power, which would oblige that House to grant money to carry into effect
measures which might be subversive of the public interest.

The difference of opinion which he had mentioned, was not the only instance in
which the Senate and that House disagreed in sentiment. He believed the Senate
passed two or three bills to increase the military establishment which were
negatived by them. The doctrine of checks was fully illustrated. If, the
President and Senate can, by the association of a foreign power, legislate and
bind their measures conclusively on that House, may they not go on to any
extent? what security have the people against such a power? the treaty in
question is yet open for farther negotiation. Suppose Great Britain on pretense
of guarding her frontier, were to send 10,000 troops into Canada; and suppose
the United States were to raise 10,000 men to keep the Indians in order.
Suppose the thing was presented to that House, not for deliberation, but
obedience, what could be done? how would this operate with respect to
appropriation? the limitation might be for ten or twenty years, they could not
withhold appropriations, because, it is said, they are under a moral obligation
to do it. Ought they not, then, to be cautious how they admitted the
extravagant doctrine laid down? he asked what were the feelings of the people
in general, on account of the injuries received from a foreign nation? did they
wish to rely upon the magnanimity of the British monarch? No; they wished a
redress of grievances, not a surrender of rights or a concession of interests.

The doctrine espoused by gentlemen in opposition to this motion, would cut up
all checks, all power of thinking in the legislative body on occasions where
treaties interfered. This was not all. Two of these gentlemen had asserted,
that if that House went into a discussion of the treaty, it would be rebellion
against the other authorities. What, said he, can justify such language? might
it not be replied that they were destroying the liberties of their
constituents, and so the debate end in abuse? gentlemen can have little respect
for the opinions of those who differ from them in sentiment, who give way to
such expressions. Another argument which had been a common place one, was, that
the effect of any hindrance to carrying into effect this treaty, would be the
disorganizing of the government. He supposed that the proposition before the
House, with the negative vote insisted on, as the right of that assembly, was a
sort of acquasortis which was to eat up the whole powers of government.
Suppose, said he, there should be a vote that the treaty should not be carried
into effect, would not that House go on with its business as usual? surely it
would. There was not the least foundation for such assertions. They were mere
clamor; a voice, and nothing besides. Whenever the different branches of
government, instead of checking each other, coalefeed together, and confidence
in the Executive is the only security for good government, the system will be
reduced indeed. But even then, the American people would not be intimidated by
any military establishment; for, finding the inefficacy of proper checks in
their government, they would unitedly resist any attempt to deprive them of
their liberties.

It was said that certain advantages were to be derived to the United States
from the late treaty, but he knew not of what sort. And, he exclaimed, is the
government of the United States brought to so low an ebb, as to be indebted to
foreign nations for aid? if it was, he supposed by and by new concessions would
be made, for further services. But if it be once understood, that there is not
sufficient merits in the government to secure the affections of the people, but
that the President and Senate must lean on Great Britain for support, to what a
lamentable situation will the United States be reduced! he believed that if the
doctrine attempted to be supported were to prevail, and by that means to
destroy the provision of checks, the despotism of a President and twenty
Senators (he did not mean the present President and Senators) might operate to
an association of Despotism, which, if ever effected, must be by coercive
measures.

Mr. Giles said he might be mistaken, but there was certainly an attempt to
establish principles leading to that end. He spoke of calumnies which had been
spread abroad against him, but which he disdained to answer. He left his
conduct to speak for him. If the public were to be led astray by declamations
about war, disorganization and confusion, very little reliance could be placed
on them. He concluded, by saying, that he hoped the importance of the subject,
and his earnest wish to retain the wholesome provisions against the possibility
of encroachments upon the liberties of the people, would be a sufficient
apology for having so long engaged the attention of the committee.

The task of answering this artful speech fell to Mr. Sedgwick. How he
acquitted himself the reader will see.

Mr. SEDGWICK (Massachusetts) said that after the length of time which had been
consumed, and the talents which had been so ably exerted, in the discussion of
this subject, he should not think himself authorized to call the attention of
the committee, to any observations of his, but that he considered it in
principle, and in its consequences, as the most important question, which had
ever been debated in this House. It was no less, than whether this House
should, by construction and implication, extend its controuling influence to
subjects which were expressly, and he thought exclusively, delegated by the
people to another department of the Government. We had heretofore been warned
emphatically against seizing on power, by construction and implication. He had
known no instance, in which the caution which that warning enforced, deserved
more attention than on the present occasion.

It must, he said, have been foreseen by the author of the motion, that it
would ultimately be contested on the present ground. No sufficient reason had
been given as an object for the call. The various reasons which had been hinted
at, had hardly been suggested, before they were respectively abandoned. It
would be remembered, and indeed had been avowed, that a request such as the
present, was in nature of a demand. That, it was true, if we had an authority
on the subject of forming treaties, we had a right to all the means of
exercising an intelligent discretion; and the demand, of course, was well
founded. But if we had no such authority, and we had none unless it could be
discovered in the Constitution, then the demand had no good foundation on which
it could rest, and was in his opinion, an attempt at seizing on power by
usurpation.

He was perfectly sensible in how disagreeable an attitude a man would stand,
who should attempt to limit the extent of power, claimed by an assembly to
which he should address himself. He had some of the most powerful inclinations
of human nature to contend with. He felt the full force of the influence of
this principle, as it would afford the cause of repulsion and resistance, to
the arguments which he might submit. But having formed an opinion, perfectly
satisfactory to his own mind, from the best light which honest investigation
could procure, he thought it a duty he owed his country and posterity, a duty
rendered more indispensable, from the obligations which were upon him to obey
the will of the people, expressed in the Constitution of their government,
which he had sworn to support, solemnly to declare that opinion and the reasons
on which it was founded.

He in his conscience believed, that if the Constitution could operate the
benefits its original institution intended, that if the government should be
rendered adequate to the protection of liberty and the security of the people:
it must be, by keeping its sevaral departments distinct, and within their
prescribed limits. Hence that man would give as good evidence of republicanism,
of virtue, of sincere love of country, who should defend the executive in the
exercise of his constitutional rights, as the man who should contend for any
other department of government. If either should usurp the appropriate powers
of another, anarchy, confusion or despotism must ensue. The functions of the
usurping power would not be legitimate but their exercise, despotism. If the
power of controuling treaties was not in the House, the same spirit which might
usurp it, might also declare the existence of the House perpetual and fill the
vacancies as they should occur. The merits of the present question it seemed to
be agreed, depended on this right; it was of infinite importance therefore to
decide it justly.

It would be taken for granted that it would be conceded, on all hands, that we
were to resort to the Constitution, to know the extent and limits of our power,
and that if we found not there a clear evidence of its existence, we ought to
abandon the exercise. It was certain we had not any express delegation to make
or to control the public will in any of our relations with foreign nations. On
the other hand we found it declared, that the President should have power to
make treaties, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, provided two
thirds of the Senators present concurred. Treaties to attain the ends for which
they were designed were from their nature supreme laws: but the Constitution
had in another place declared, that treaties made under the authority of the
United States should be supreme laws. Gentlemen had said that it was not
declared that treaties made by the President and Senate should have this
effect; but those made under the authority of the United States. The question
then recurred what treaties were made under the authority of the United States.
The true answer undoubtedly was, treaties made by those, to whom the people, by
their Constitution, had delegated the power. The President, qualified as had
been mentioned, had expressly and none else had such power. If we were to rest
the subject here, it would seem to follow irresistably, and to be incapable
almost of higher proof, that whenever a compact was formed by the President,
with a foreign nation, and had received the advice and consent of the Senate,
if it was of such a nature as to be properly denominated a treaty, all its
stipulations would thereby and from that moment become "supreme laws."

That such had been the construction from the commencement of the government to
the promulgation of the British treaty, he believed, would be universally
admitted; and but for that treaty, probably, never would have been denied. Did
this afford no evidence, that the construction was a just one. Was the subject
a less important one, its decision might be safely trusted on this ground. But
all important as it was for the purpose of further investigation, it might be
useful to consider the nature, extent, objects and effects of this power.

What authority was then delegated under a grant of power to form treaties; did
not the term Treaty include all stipulations between independent nations,
relative to subjects, in which the contracting parties, had a mutual or common
interest? if it had a more confined or limited sense it became those who
contended for it, to make the limits and designate the boundaries. Without a
power so extensive, much of the benefits resulting from amicable intercourse,
between independent nations, would be lost; and disputes and differences, which
are inevitable, would have no means of amicable termination. From the obvious
utility and indeed the absolute necessity, that such power should be exercised,
we know of no civilized nation, either ancient or modern, which had not
provided the organs of negotiation, to the extent substantially which he had
mentioned. The power indispensible had always been delegated, though guards had
been provided against its abuse by different means:

It was not now to be enquired, whether the power of treating was wisely
deposited, (although he was inclined to believe it could not be entrusted to
safer hands.) It was sufficient that those who had the right, the citizens of
America, had declared their will, which we were bound to respect, because we
had sworn to support it, and because we were their deputies.

The power of treating between independent nations might be classed under the
following heads. 1. To compose and adjust differences whether to terminate or
to prevent war. 2. To form contracts for mutual security or defense; or to make
treaties offensive or defensive. 3. To regulate an intercourse for mutual
benefit, or to form treaties of commerce. Without the first war and contention
could only be terminated, by the destruction of one of the parties: without the
second there could be no defense, by means of union and concurrence, against
superior force, and without the last, a profitable and beneficial intercouse,
could not be arranged on terms of reciprocity. Hence, then, it must be evident
to every unprejudiced mind, that by a grant of power to make treaties,
authority was given to bind the nation by stipulations to preserve peace or
terminate war -- to enter into alliances offensive and defensive, and to form
commercial treaties.

This power, he held, unlimited by the constitution, and he held, too, that in
its nature, to the extent he had mentioned, it was illimitable. Did a serious
difference exist with a foreign nation, in determining on the nature and extent
of the stipulations which might be necessary to adjust it; the cause of injury
-- national rights and honor -- the evils of war, and all circumstances of
relation between the two countries, must be taken into account.

In forming alliances, the threatened pressure, your own and your enemies
relative strength, the objects of acquisition or defense, must be considered.
And in adjusting an equitable intercourse for commercial purposes, a thousand
circumstances present themselves for nice calculations. A thousand
circumstances of foreign relations would occur in the history of every country,
under which nothing short of unlimited powers of negotiation would be adequate
to a prevention of enormous perhaps ruinous evils.

But it might be objected that a power so enormous, and comprehending such
essential interests might be abused, and thence asked, where is the remedy? to
this he answered, that a national association required, for the great purpose
of preservation, an unlimited confidence on many subjects. Hence not only this,
but perhaps every other national government, had delegated to it, an unlimited
control over the persons and property of the nation. It might, by the express
power given to it of raising armies, convert every citizen into a soldier, and
by a single assessment of a tax, it might command the use of all the property
in the country.

The power to raise armies and taxes was limited in its exercise by nothing but
the discretion of the Legislature, under the direction of its prudence, wisdom
and virtue. Was there no security against a wanton abuse of these enormous
powers? yes; it was to be hoped that the people in electing the members of this
House, and the states in choosing those of the other, would not select
characters, who regardless of the public good would wantonly impose on their
constituents unnecessary burdens. It would be an additional security that the
interests of the rulers, were inseparably connected, with those of the people
-- that they could impose no burdens in which themselves did not equally
participate. But should all those guards be insufficient, was there no
dependence to be placed in the President? the man elected by a refined process,
pre-eminent in fame and virtue as in rank? was there no security in the
watchful guardianship of such a character responsible by every thing dear and
valuable to man -- his reputation, his own and his fellow citizens happiness?
was there no well founded reliance on all these considerations, for security
against oppression? if not, we had not the requisite materials, with which to
administer a republican government, and the project might be abandoned. --
After all however, should the unlimited powers he had mentioned, and such
powers must always be unlimited, be wantonly abused, was there no remedy? yes,
in the good sense and manly independent spirit of the people. If intolerable
burdens were wantonly imposed, if necessary to defeat the oppression,
opposition and insurrection would not only be authorized, but become a duty.
And if any man could honestly lay his hand on his heart, and in sincerity
declare, that a compliance with an existing treaty, was worth more than our
government, our constitution, our union and the liberty protected by them; to
that man he was ready to declare, that opposition had become a duty. Gentlemen
had spoken of the subject, as if the members of this House were the only
representatives of the people, as their only protectors against the usurpations
and oppressions of the other departments of government. Who then he asked were
the Senators? were they unfeeling tyrants, whose interests were separated from
and opposed to those of the people? No. Did they possess hereditary power and
honors? No. Who, as contemplated by the constitution, were they? the most
enlightened and the most virtuous of our citizens. What was the source from
whence they derive their elevation? from the confidence of the people, and the
free choice of their electors. Who were those electors? not an ignorant herd,
who could be cajoled, flattered and deceived, not even the body of the
enlightened American citizens: but their legislatures -- men to whom the real
characters of the candidates would be known. For what purposes were they
elected? to represent the most essential interests of their country -- As the
guardians of the sovereignty of the states, the happiness of the people and
their liberties -- Who as contemplated by the constitution was the President?
the man elected, by means intended to exclude the operation of faction and
ambition, as the one best entitled to public confidence and esteem -- And was
no confidence to be reposed in such characters, thus elected? might it not, to
say no more, be at least doubtful whether the treating power might not be as
safely entrusted in such hands exclusively, as with the participation and under
the control of the more numerous branch of the legislature, elected in small
districts, assailed by party and faction, and exposed to influence and
intrigue? whatever merits this as an original question might possess, the
people had decided their will. To the President and Senate they have given
powers to make treaties, they have given no such powers to this House.

It was not in his opinion, proper when investigating the constitutional
question of the extent of a particular power and in what hands it was
deposited, to divert the attention to a possible abuse of that power. Should it
become a question whether Congress was by the constitution authorized to raise
armies, and the extent to which the power might be exercised, it would be
unfair and improper to divert the attention from the enquiry of what was the
truth, to the abuse which might result from the exercise of the power -- To
state that if such power existed, every citizen might by the wanton abuse of
it, be degraded from his rank and subjected to the despotism of a military
discipline. To show that armies might be employed as the instruments of
destroying liberty -- To picture your country as strewed with human carcasses
and stained with human blood by their means. What would this be but to
substantiate prejudices instead of arguments? still however it would remain
true, that the power of Congress to raise armies, was only limited, by its
discretion, under the direction of wisdom and patriotism. The same observations
changing their relations, may with equal justness be applied to the treaty
making power. To be, and continue a nation, required on these subjects
unlimited confidence in the delegation of the necessary powers. The people had
granted them and provided, against their abuse, such guard as their wisdom
dictated.

The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Madison) had stated five different
constructions which possibly might be given to the constitution on this
subject. Three of which (and for none of them to Mr. Sedgwick's knowledge had
any man ever contended) the gentleman had proved to be unsounded. The fourth,
that which we had given to the constitution, if admitted, and it should be
abused might produce mischievous effects. Was not this true of all the great
and essential powers of government? if the controuling influence of the House
was added would the power be less? and if under these circumstances, abused
would the injury be more tolerable? in short was not this a kind of argument
infinitely more tending to the production of prejudice than to the discovery of
truth?

The gentleman had really given no decisive opinion what was the true
construction. He had however seemed to incline to a belief, that to the
stipulation of a treaty relative to any subject committed to the control of
the Legislature, to give it validity, legislative cooperation was necessary.
Of consequence if this was withheld, the operation of the treaty would be
defeated. That it was at the will and within the discretion of the Legislature
to withhold such cooperation, and of course the House might control and
defeat the solemn engagements of the President and Senate.

The gentleman who had suggested this opinion was well known to the committee
and through America. Mr. Sedgwick could not but observe, that it was perfectly
unaccountable to his mind, that that gentleman had yet to form an opinion to
whom was delegated that power, the nature, extent and effects of which he had
so strongly and perspicuously detailed. The capacity of that gentleman's mind,
long exercised on political subjects, his known caution and prudence, would
authorize a request, that he or his friends would explain, how it was possible,
if such as he states should have been the intention of those who framed the
Constitution, that the true meaning should not have been expressed in the
instruments? that when the gentleman went from the Assembly which framed the
Constitution, immediately afterward to one of those which ratified it; he
should have admitted an opposite construction. As Mr. Sedgwick would undertake
by and by to prove that in the Convention of Virginia he did admit the very
construction for which we now contended. He would take the liberty further to
enquire, how it happened that if such was really the intention of the
instrument, that such was the meaning of the people, no man had heard of it,
until the discovery was produced, by the British treaty? strange national
intention unknown for years, to every individual! -- As the gentleman had been
pleased to dwell on the idea of a cooperation between the powers of the
government, he would take the liberty to state what had been ably explained by
other gentlemen, that the power of making treaties was wholly different from
that of making ordinary laws, originating from different motives, producing
different effects and operating to a different extent. In all those particulars
the difference had been perfectly understood. For instance the ordinary legal
protection of property and the punishment of its violation could never be
extended beyond your own jurisdiction, but by treaty, the same protection could
be extended within the jurisdiction of a foreign government. You could not
legislate an adjustment of disputes, nor a peace with another country, but by
treaty both might be effected. Your laws in no instance could operate except in
your own jurisdiction, and on your own citizens; by treaty an operation was
given to stipulations, within the jurisdiction of both the contracting parties.

It had been said that treaties would not operate on those subjects which were
consigned to legislative control. "If this be true," said he, how impotent in
this respect is the power of the government? what, then permit me to enquire
can the power of treating effect? I will tell you what it cannot do -- it can
make no alliances, because any stipulations for offensive or defensive
operations will infringe on the legislative power of declaring war, laying
taxes or raising armies or all of them. No treaty of peace can probably be made
which will not either ascertain boundaries, stipulate privileges to aliens, the
payment of money or a cession of territory, and certainly no treaty of commerce
can be made.

Was it not strange that to this late hour it should have been delayed, and
that now all at once it should have been discovered, that no power was
delegated to any body to regulate our foreign relations? that although a power
was granted to the President and Senate to form treaties, that yet there were
such reservations and restrictions, that there remained nothing on which this
power could operate? or was it true that this power, was competent to treat
with every government on earth but that of Great Britain? might he not be
permitted further to enquire if this treaty had been formed with any other
power, with the precise stipulations it now contained, whether there ever could
have existed this doubt of constitutionality?

We had, he said, entered into treaties of commerce with many nations, we had
formed an alliance and entered into a guarantee with France, we had gived
consular power including judicial authority to the citizens of that country,
within our own jurisdiction, we had defined piracies and provided for their
punishment, we have removed the disabilities of alienage, we had granted
subsidies and ceded territory: all this and much more we had done, while the
power of the government remained unquestioned and none even thought that such
treaties required legislative cooperation. Treaties such as those could
without opposition and by unanimous consent be ratified and considered by force
of such ratification as supreme laws; but similar stipulations with Great
Britain, were clearly perceived to be unconstitutional, and President, Envoy
and Senate were denounced for their respective agency as infractors of the
constitution.

The objection which he had just answered had been brought forward by a
gentleman from Pennsylvania [Mr. Gallatin] with another nearly allied to it, if
not resting on precisely the same foundation -- that whatever stipulation in a
treaty required legislative provision or repealed a law, did not become a
supreme law, until it had received legislative sanction. There was no
limitation expressed in the constitution on which to found either of those
objections. If we claimed the power which the objections imported the claim
must rest on construction and implication alone. Indeed the whole reasoning of
the gentlemen seemed to him to be capable of being expressed in a few words.
The President and Senate, in the sole and uncontrouled exercise of the treaty
making power, may sacrifice the most important interests of the people. The
House of Representative is more worthy the public confidence, and therefore by
our influence we will prevent the abuse of power.

The gentleman, to prove his position stated that the power of treating in
Great Britain and the United States is precisely the same. He then had read a
passage from Judge Blackstone that the sovereign power of treating with foreign
nations was vested in the person of the king, and that any contract he engaged
in, no power in the kingdom could delay, resist or annul. At the same time he
said that certain treaties, such as those of subsidy and commerce were not
binding until ratified by parliament. Now both these could not be true; for it
was no less than a direct contradiction in terms to say, that there was no
power in the nation which could delay, resist or annul the contracts of the
king, and at the same time to say, there was a power in the nation. The
parliament, which could delay, resist and annul those contracts. Both the
assertions could not be true. He was willing however to allow that the treaties
which the gentlemen had mentioned were not the supreme laws of that country
until approved by the legislature. He had already said that different countries
had provided different guards, against the abuse of this power. But why attempt
to divert our attention from a construction of our own constitution, to the
vague uncertain customs and practices of other countries? why compare the
President and Senate to the king of Great Britain? in what was there a
resemblance? in nothing. Why then perplex the subject by the introduction of
irrelative matter? was there perceived an interest in a diversion from the only
legitimate source of information the declared will of the people? if we found
not there the power we claimed, we could exercise it only by usurpation.

Why did not gentlemen extend their reasoning further? where in point of
principle was the difference between restraining and controuling the
legislative power? the injury may be as great in the one instance as in the
other; nor is there any more foundation for denying to the President and Senate
the power in the one case than in the other, from any words or expressions in
the constitution.

If the gentlemen are right in their construction, if this was the
understanding of the people at the time they deliberated on and ratified the
constitution, the power of the President and Senate of making treaties which
then created the most serious deliberation and alarming apprehension was the
most innocent thing in nature. It could bind the essential interests of the
nation in nothing. Could any man really believe that the agitation which a
discussion of this subject occasioned, more perhaps than any other in the
constitution, could have for its object only the power of the President and
Senate, in which two thirds of the latter must concur, to digest schemes of
treaties to be laid before the legislature for its approbation?

The gentleman from New York (Mr. Havens) and the gentleman from Virginia (Mr.
Giles) had asserted the power of the legislature to repeal treaties -- whenever
the wisdom of Congress should concur in opinion, with these gentlemen we should
then cease to contend respecting the construction of the constitution on this
subject. For whenever our nation should in defiance of every principle of
morality and common honesty, by usurpation establish its right, to prostrate
national honor, by sporting with the public faith, no nation would submit to be
contaminated by a connection with one which avowed the right of violating its
faith by the infraction of solemn treaties.

On all subjects of this sort the real enquiry was and ought to be, what was
the intention of the parties to this instrument. Hence a brief review of some
interesting occurrences, which took place at the adoption of the government
would not be impertinent, but might be useful.

A cotemporaneous exposition of any instrument, and especially by those who
were agents in its fabrication, had been allowed, and was in fact among the
best guides to finding its true meaning. Gentlemen who had been members of the
convention, and unfriendly to the constitution, with an intention of preventing
its adoption, had stated to their constituents that the power of making
treaties as consided to the President and Senate was as extensive as was now
contended for. Their intention would have been no other than to alarm the
people with the dangerous extent and what would be the pernicious exercise of
this power. If this charge was unjust and groundless, what would have have been
the conduct of the friends of that instrument? they would have proved the
charge malicious and ill founded. They would have shown that the constitution
was not liable to such an objection. That it could bear no such construction.
They would in the language of novel discovery have said, that every subject of
legislation, was an exception from the power of making treaties; and thus they
would have proved to the world, that the sages of our country, had devised and
offered to their enlightened countrymen a scheme of government destitute, by an
express delegation, of the the essential attribute of adjusting differences
with other nations; and of agreeing with them on the terms of amicable
intercourse. But they did no such thing -- they admitted the power, proved the
necessity of it and contended that it would be safe in practice. Let me here,
said he, appeal to any unprejudiced man, if he can possibly believe that the
enemies of the constitution could have made the charge against it, and that its
friends would have admitted the truth of it, on the hypothesis that it was
unfounded and false. They certainly knew what they had so recently intended,
and having opposite objects in view which excited their strongest wishes, it
was impossible they should agree in imposing on the people a false and
unwarrantable construction. So far had he extended his reflections as resulting
from the conduct of those who formed the constitution; a conduct from which he
flattered himself there flowed demonstration, that the power of making treaties
was as extensive as that which was now contended for. This being the
concurrence of men who could not have united to deceive, with regard to which
it was impossible they should be mistaken, formed a guide for their opinion,
which could not mislead, which no degree of stupidity could mistake, nor the
most ingenious sophistry successfully misrepresent.

So much he had thought proper to say as respected the construction given to
this part of the instrument by those who formed, who could not mistake, and who
were under no temptation to misrepresent it. It might be necessary in the next
place enquire under what opinion it was adopted? and if we perceived a
correspondence of construction between those who formed and those who received
and approved; we might then surely derive all reasonable satisfation that we
had discovered the truth. Here he believed that it might be asserted without
any danger of contradiction, that in the state conventions it was on one hand
affirmed, that the President and Senate would, by the constitution have power
to form treaties on any subject in which the United States and a foreign nation
had a common interest, and that treaties so formed without any other aid or
circumstance whatever, would thereby become the supreme law of the land: and
that the exercise of this power was not so guarded as to render, it safe to the
public interests. On the other hand, it was admitted that such was the extent
of the power, and it was attempted, at least, to be proved, that it was so
guarded that danger could not reasonably be apprehended, from its exercise. It
would be too tedious and well might be thought unnecessary to consult all the
materials, which might be within our reach on this subject: but he dared appeal
to the recollection of every gentleman, who was in a situation to know the
facts, for the correctness of the statement which he had made, and he would
read some few passages, from the debates of the convention of Virginia, which
would probably be on this occasion, for many reasons admitted, as the best
authority; and particularly because the subject, there was examined by eminent
and scrupulous investigation.

He then read several passages to prove the statement which he had made, and
said, the construction he contended for was assented to by a solemn act of the
convention which proposed an amendment, which he also read, which would be
wholly unnecessary on any other hypothesis; and that by the late conduct of the
same state, in the amendment proposed to the constitution, it was manifest that
it still entertained the same opinion.

Mr. SEDGWICK, in the course of his speech, read the following extracts from
the third volume of debates and proceedings of the Convention of Virginia.

Mr. MASON, thought this a most dangerous clause. By the confederation, nine
states were necessary to concur in a treaty. This secured justice and
moderation. His principal fear however, was not that five but seven states, a
bare majority, would make treaties, to bind the union.

Mr. NICHOLAS said, the approbation of the President, who had no local views,
being elected by no partial state, but the people at large, was an additional
security.

Mr. MADISON thought it astonishing, that gentlemen should think a treaty
should be got with surprise, or that foreign nations should be solicitous to
get a treaty ratified by the senators of a few states -- that should the
President summon only a few states, he would for so atrocious a thing be
impeachable.

Mr. HENRY, If two thirds of a quorum would be empowered to make a treaty, they
might relinquish and alienate territorial rights, and our most valuable
commercial advantages; in short, if any thing should be left, it would be
because the President and Senate were pleased to admit it." The power of making
treaties was ill guarded, as it extended farther than it did in any country in
the world. "Treaties were to have more force here than in any part of
christendom.

(How, Mr. Sedgwick asked, could this be true, if the doctrine now laid down,
in support of the motion, was well founded?)

Mr. MADISON. Are not treaties the law of the land in England? I will refer you
to a book, which is in every man's hand -- Blackstone's Commentaries. It will
inform you, that treaties made by the king, are to be the supreme laws of the
land. If they are to have any efficacy they must be the laws of the land. They
are so in every country.

Gov. RANDOLPH. It is said there is no limitation of treaties. I defy the
wisdom of that gentleman to show how they ought to be limited.

Mr. NICHOLAS. Have we not seen in America that treaties were violated, though
they are in all countries considered as the supreme laws of the land?

Mr. MASON. It is true, that it is one of the greatest acts of sovereignty, and
therefore ought to be most strongly guarded. The cession of such power without
such checks and guards cannot be justified -- yet I acknowledge such a power
must be somewhere. It is so in all governments. If in the course of an
unsuccessful war, we should be compelled to give up part of our territories, or
undergo subjugation, if the general government could not make a treaty to give
up such a part, for the preservation of the residue, the government itself, and
consequently the rights of the people must fall. Such a power must therefore
rest somewhere. For my part, I never heard it denied that such a power must be
vested in the government. Our complaint is that it is not sufficiently guarded,
and that it requires much more solemnity and caution, than are delineated in
that system.

(Strange, Mr. Sedgwick said, that this gentleman did not discover, or was not
told, that treaties before they should become laws, must receive legislative
sanction!)

There are other things which the king of England cannot do, which may be done
by the President and Senate in this case. Could the king by his prerogative
enable foreign subjects to purchase lands, and have an hereditary indefeasible
title? will any gentleman say, that they (the President and Senate) may not
make a treaty, whereby the subjects of France, England and other powers may buy
what lands they please in this country? the President and Senate can make any
treaty whatsoever. We wish not to refuse but to guard this power, as it is done
in England. We wish an explicit declaration in that paper, that the power which
can make other treaties cannot without the consent of the national parliament,
the national legislature, dismember the empire. The Senate alone ought not to
have this power.

Mr. CORBIN (who was in favor of the constitution) If there be any found part
in the constitution, it is in this clause. The representatives are excluded
from interposing in making treaties, because large popular assemblies are very
improper to transact such business, from the impossibility of their acting with
sufficient secrecy, dispatch and decision, which can only be found in small
bodies, and are always subject to factions and party animosities. It would be
dangerous to give this power to the President alone, as the concession of such
a power to one individual, is repugnant to republican principles. It is
therefore given to the President and Senate (who represent the states in their
individual capacities) conjointly. In this it differs from every government we
know. It steers with admirable dexterity between the two extremes -- neither
leaving it to the executive as in most other governments, nor to the
legislature, which would too much retard such negociations.

That another member of the convention, Mr. Henry, after contending, that the
constitution ought to be amended, so as to guard against the abuse of the
treaty making power, by requiring the consent of the House, concluded his
observations by saying:

That when their consent is necessary there will be a certainty of attending to
the public interests.

Mr. MADISON concluded this interesting debate, not by insisting on that
security, which he had now discovered the constitution to have provided against
the abuse of this power: he stated:

That the power was precisely in the new constitution as it was in the
confederation.

The gentleman stated the checks which the constitution had in fact provided,
but it did not then occur to him, that the consent of this House was amongst
them.

Mr. Sedgwick then read the amendment which the convention of Virginia proposed
to the constitution.

That no commercial treaty shall be ratified without the concurrence of two
thirds of the whole number of the Senate; and no treaty ceding, controuling,
restraining, or suspending, territorial rights or claims of the United States
or any of them, or their or any of their rights or claims to fishing in the
American sea, or navigating the American rivers, shall be made but in cases of
the most urgent necessity; nor shall any such treaty be ratified without the
concurrence of three fourths of the whole number of the members of both Houses
respectively.

He had stated that the real inquiry was, what opinion was entertained on this
subject by those who ratified the constitution? if that opinion would be
discovered with honest minds, it must be conclusive on the present debate. He
had shown what opinion was entertained by Virginia -- what power she meant to
delegate and to whom. That this opinion remained from that time until she
proposed her late amendments, unaltered, appeared from the amendments
themselves. That state, then, and her representatives here, who had expressed
themselves, differed in opinion. He did not mention Virginia with intention of
producing any unpleasant sensations. He was willing to allow that she was
great, wise, intelligent, enlightened, and if gentlemen pleased, moral; her
opinion derived additional authority from her respectability. -- It was not
Virginia alone, but he was persuaded every other state, had given precisely the
same construction. -- That the treaty making power with all its effects and
consequences, was solely and exclusively in the President and Senate: And he
would dare to challenge gentlemen to produce a solitary instance of its being
adopted under any other idea. Indeed, the agitation which was at that time
produced, would of all things be the most ridiculous, if any of the other
constructions were true. If the power was checked as was now contended, it was
impossible danger should be apprehended from its exercise -- it could indeed do
neither good nor evil.

Here then he said we had the evidence of those who framed and of those who
received and approved the constitution. There was another source of enquiry,
which would confirm if it wanted confirmation, that construction for which he
had contended. It was the construction which had been, practically given, by
those who had administered our government, from the commencement of our foreign
relations, to the present session -- a construction which had been assumed,
admitted or acquiesed in, by our national and state governments and by every
individual citizen until they received new light, by our having accomodated our
causes of contention with Great Britain and escaped the evils with which we had
been threatened from that source.

The association which preceded any express contract between the states, was
supposed to imply an authority to form national compacts, imposing national
obligations, and pledging the public faith. Hence our treaty with France, which
preceded two years our national association, the confederation, had been
supposed binding on us, and not only obliging us to the faithful performance of
our express engagements, but as drawing after it undefined, unlimited and
perpetual obligations of gratitude. This seemed so far as respected defined
obligations, to be a rational deduction from what is an inseparable attendant
on national associations, and without which a nation would be destitute, of one
of the best means of securing its happiness and even existence,

To pursue, he said, the history of our country on this subject, in the order
of time, it would not be pretended that under the confederation, the powers of
Congress to form "treaties and aiiiances" were more extensive than those of the
President and Senate under the constitution to form "treaties." The legislative
powers of the nation, then residing with the several states, were as
obstructive to the operation of treaties (and extended to all the objects which
the national and state legislatures now comprehended) as the congressional
legislature can now be. Yet under the confederation treaties of alliance, of
peace, of commerce, were made, nor until the present moment has their
obligation been denied, though they contained stipulations, perhaps, on all the
subjects to which the treating power could extend. No legislative provision had
been thought necessary to give them validity; and he dared appeal to every
member of the committee, that every enlightened citizen had admitted their
binding obligation as supreme laws -- that the treaty of peace in particular,
which controuled the most important rights of sovereignty -- arrested the hand
of justice in inflicting punishment for the highest crime which a citizen could
commit, treason -- and stayed proceedings in cases of confiscation, for
forfeitures which had been incurred had always received this construction -- He
would add that it was well understood to be the opinion of that tribunal which
the constitution had authorized to pronounce the law the supreme court; that
the treaty, from its own powers repealed all antecedent laws, which stood in
the way of its execution.

To proceed further on. Since the adoption of the constitution, the powers now
denied, had been constantly exercised with all the consequences and effects now
contended for and until the present moment unquestioned. Peace had been
concluded, subsidies granted, payment of money stipulated, territorial rights
discussed and decided on. Treaties for those purposes had been ratified, not by
venal and corrupt majorities, but by virtuous unanimity. Hence from the moment
we had become a nation, under every form of our implied or expressed
association, the powers now denied had been exercised, not only without
question but with unqualified approbation.

There was one more point of light in which this subject ought to be viewed. In
the year 1789, it was proposed to discriminate in the imposition of our duties,
between the nations with whom we had, and those with whom we had not treaties
of commerce. The author of this proposition renewed the same in the year 1794.
This was virtually acknowledging the validity of the treaties which did exist,
and inviting those nations who had not already, to form commerical treaties.
Something more than this was done by the motions which some gentlemen of the
minority of the Senate, are said to have made when this very treaty was in
discussion. Their motions recommended an accommodation by treaty of all
subsisting differences between the two countries. It could not escape remark,
that these several propositions and motions were supported by all that
description of persons who now oppose the treaty.

It would not then be deemed impertinent to enquire, it was worthy attention,
what was imported and admitted by this conduct and by those propositions? they
undoubtedly implied a concession that the subsisting treaties were of validity;
why else should they be considered as a meritorious cause of favorable
discriminations? they implied, too, that there existed in this country a power
to treat on commerical relations, and to adjust subsisting differences.

If without legislative aid (and they had received none) those treaties would
authorize the legislature to derange the commerical pursuits of the nation, and
enter in legislative hostility with that nation with which we had the most
extensive relations; it must be from the competency of the treaty making power
on the principles which we contended. Strange again he would say, it must
appear, that the true construction of the constitution, on this very important
subject, should have escaped the penetration and segacity, of the author of
those propositions, during the time of forming and ratifying the instrument,
and his whole active public life from those periods, until that of the
publication of the British treaty.

If, then, it was true, as he had endeavored to prove, by that power, given by
the constitution, to the President and Senate, to make treaties they had an
authority to the extent he supposed, with all its consequences and effects. If
treaties so formed did in fact become the supreme law, then being compacts they
bound the public says and could not be violated without national disgrace and
personal dishonor. They might require legislative provision, to carry them
into effect; but this neither implied nor authorized the exercise of
discretion, as to refused. The constitution he had, frequent occasions of
saying, prescribed a government of departments. Each was intended to be
furnished with the means of self preservation and defense. For this purpose it
was declared, that the President would receive, a compensation to be
ascertained by law. Laws were to be made by the legislature, of which this
House was one branch. To support the constitution each department must be
enabled to perform the functions assigned to it. To enable the executive to do
its duties, the compensation must be provided. It was then necessary to the
support of the constitution, that the compensation should be made. We had sworn
to support the constitution. The people by their constitution had solemnly
engaged that whoever was the president, should receive a compensation. We had
been deputed to discharge the duties and engagements which our constituents had
assumed. Under these circumstances no man of common honesty could declare that
we were at liberty to refuse all provision.

The gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Madison) had attempted to take a distinction
between the duties we had imposed on us by the constitution and such as were
enjoined by law. He could perceive no such foundation for a distinction. After
the salary of the President was ascertained by law, it could not be paid
without an appropriation; would any one say he was at liberty to withhold it?
No man he presumed would wish to risk his reputation by such an assertion. For
such conduct instead of supporting would tend to subvert, and would if
persisted in, annihilate the constitution. This was undoubtedly one of the most
important of the public contracts; the truth was, in fact, that we were bound
to perform all the public engagements. The truth was, that our national
association was a compact of virtue. To support the constitution it was
necessary to preserve public faith -- to promote the public happiness it was
essential to hold sacred and to perform the public engagements. In this were
included all engagements whether expressed in the form of constitution, of
laws, or of treaties, in any way, indeed, in which the people had agreed that
their will and their duties might be expressed.

Mr. SEDGWICK concluded by observing that he had intended to have presented the
subject in several other important aspects, but he had already trespassed on
the patience of the committee. He would, as the time of adjournment was passed,
suspend for the present any further observations; and he hoped that all the
grounds which he had left unoccupied, could be taken by other gentlemen, so as
to supercede the necessity of troubling the committee with any further
observations on this subject.

REMARKS.
The resolution finally passed, fifty five against thirty seven. A committee
was accordingly appointed to wait on the President with the same; and, on the
31st of March the House received his refusal of the papers. His message was in
his usual perspicuous and manly style, and concluded in the following words: As
therefore it is perfectly clear to my understanding, that the assent of the
House of Representatives is not necessary to the validity of a treaty: as the
treaty with Great Britain exhibits, in itself, all the objects requiring
legislative provision; and on these the papers called for can throw no light;
and as it is essential to the due administration of the government, that the
boundaries fixed by the constitution, between the different departments should
be preserved, -- a just regard to the constitution, and to the duty of my
office, under all the circumstances of this case, forbid a compliance with your
request.

In my remarks on this debate, I shall confine myself to the call for the
papers, the debate on the treaty itself furnishing the best opportunity of
remarking on the participation of the House in the treaty making power.

There is nobody will deny, that the House of Representatives have a right to
call for papers of every kind, relative to matters laid before them; nor will
any one deny, that the President has an equal right to refuse them. The
necessity of the call can alone render it justifiable in point of propriety,
and, consequently, if no such necessity exists, a refusal on the part of the
President cannot be improper.

Three reasons were urged in favor of the call: 1. something might be
discovered that would justify an impeachment; 2. the papers might throw light
on some parts of the treaty; 3. they might contain something, which would tend
to reconcile the people to that instrument.

With respect to the first of these; discovering grounds for an impeachment, I
would ask, who could have been the object of this impeachment? not the
Negociator certainly; for, whatever might be his conduct at the court of
London, it had received the solemn sanction of the President and Senate. He was
charged with powers to make a treaty, he had done so, and those who had
dispatched him, had approved and ratified the result of his negotiation; if,
therefore, there was any blame, it must fall on those unders whose orders he
acted, and not on him.

I presume the idea of impeaching the Senate never entered the brains of even
Virginians, and of course the President must be the object. How an impeachment
of General Washington will sound in the ears of others I know not, in mine it
sounds extremely harsh; and, when I compare him with those who had the
effrontery to start the idea, it is with difficulty I refrain from breaking
through that respect, which is due to the assembly into which they have found
the means to insinuate themselves. That they did not expect to find something
that would furnish grounds of impeachment I will not pretend to aver, for men
are but too apt to judge of others by themselves; but the only answer that such
a slanderous insinuation merits from us, is, silent contempt.

But, the papers might throw light on some parts of the treaty. Now, I, who am
no statesman, God-knows, have read this treaty, and I think I understand it
perfectly well. It is in good plain English, and, though that may be one of its
principal faults with the quibblers from the south, yet it ought to render
explanatory papers unnecessary. Will any one of the Opposition members say,
that he does not understand the treaty? if he says so, will it not be necessary
to send him back to his constituents, or furnish him with an interpreter? I
confess that the outlandish gentlemen, such as Mr. Gallatin for example, may
experience serious difficulties on this account; but is this to authorize a
call that would divulge all the secrets of the state? would it not be
infinitely better to have the treaty translated into Italian, or, like the
French decrees of fraternity, into all the living languages? besides, let it be
remembered, that the papers called for are in English as well as the treaty,
and of course, those who do not understand the latter would not understand the
former.

I would by no means insinuate here, that all the Opposition members, who are
not foreigners, are adequate to a full comprehension of the treaty; for,
though, like the Bourgois Gentilhomme, they talk tolerable good prose, without
knowing it, their speeches fully prove that they know but little of the merits
of the treaty. And, to them, as to foreigners the same question will apply: if
they cannot understand the treaty, how are they to understand the papers? most
people, I believe, will allow, that a diplomatic correspondence is more
difficult to analyze than the instrument in question, and, if so, how is it
possible that these contracted minds should derive light from such a
correspondence?

Some of the members of opposition are, however, of a different stamp. These
did not want light. They are blessed with that in the extreme degree. The rays
strike on their minds with such force as to blind every principle of honor and
honesty. From the finesse of these gentlemen what could have been expected for
the papers? that profound politician patriot Madison found out five different
constructions of one single clause of the constitution, and perhaps he would
have found five times the number of every clause in the dispatches. Where or
when could this have ended?

It is something truly astonishing that papers, or any thing else, should, at
this late hour, be called for, in order to throw light on the British treaty.
There have been, upon a moderate computation, more than fifty volumes in folio
written and printed on the subject; public meetings have been held on it in
every corner of the Union; petitions by hundreds have been given in for and
against it; and the instrument itself has been in the hands of every one during
the space of eight months. Where, then, do these people come from, who now want
papers to throw light on the subject; if, indeed, they can prove, that they
have been buried in the western woods, plotting "political sins" anew, or
constantly occupied in driving their negro constituents to the tobacco fields
and home again, I shall be ready to make an allowance for their ignorance; but,
if they cannot prove this, if they have enjoyed the same means of information
as those enjoyed by every man in the free States, and are yet ignorant of the
merits or demerits of the treaty, I must absolutely declare them too stupid to
judge of it at all, and totally unworthy of having an intricate diplomatic
correspondence submitted to their examination.

But, allowing that the papers might have thrown light on some parts of the
treaty, how was this necessary to their deciding on granting the supplies
necessary to carry it into effect; for, it is for this purpose alone that a
treaty is laid before them. We will suppose, for a moment, that they had
discovered that Mr. Jay had gone beyond, or fallen short of, his instructions;
nay, we will even suppose, that they had found as indubitable proofs of English
corruption, as they have had of French corruption; how could that circumstance
have affected their decision? If they have a right of exercising their judgment
with respect to a treaty, it must be on the treaty itself, and that was before
them. The means employed in the negotiation could not alter the instrument
itself. It has a precise meaning, couched in terms which cannot be
misunderstood, and on that meaning alone could they found their decision. What
an idiot of a connoisseur should we think him, who, upon the sight of a
picture, should call for the pencils and colors with which it was painted, in
order to form an opinion of its merits. Yet, exactly such was the call for
papers relative to the treaty.

There was, however, another reason assigned: these papers might contain
something, which would tend to reconcile the people to the instrument. I could
have excused every thing but this gross, this palpable hypocrisy. What! did
these opposition members desire to see something that would reconcile the
people to the treaty! these very men who had, in ways more or less direct,
stipulated with the mob to oppose it. It is a fact well known, that the leaders
among them had all written or made public speeches representing it as inimical
to the rights and liberties of the people; the gentleman who brought forward
the resolution was one of those who took the lead at New York, when the French
and American flags were hoisted against it, and when it was absolutely burnt
before the house of Governor Jay. And yet, these very men now pretend, that
they wish for something that may reconcile the people to it! what an opinion
must they have of the President, to suppose him open to such barefaced
deception; when men have long succeeded in this, or any way, they are apt to
over rate their talents; it is not therefore so very wonderful, that they
should imagine it as easy to cajole General Washington as their deluded
constituents.

I have now done with the pretended motives of the resolution (on which I must
confess I have taken up too much of the reader's time) and shall come to what I
imagine to be the real motives of it.

To begin at the fountain head, the mind from which the mischievous and
malicious idea first issued, it is tolerably well known, that the Livingstons
harbor a mortal hatred against the family of his Excellency Governor Jay,
which hatred is undoubtedly paid back with contempt. The characters of the
parties sufficiently explain the cause. This is not the first instance of
private resentment finding its way into public assemblies. Something in these
papers might have been found which, if properly handled, would have impressed
on the minds of the ignorant, a belief that Mr. Jay had abandoned their
interests; that he was partial to the English nation (which alone is a
sufficient crime) and that he felt little anxiety for the success of the
French. The slightest expression, leaning this way, would have been tortured
into the most odious signification by men who are capable of finding five
different constructions of a simple sentence. There could not be imagined a
more complete method of rendering the worthy Envoy odious to the majority, in
numbers, of his State, and of preparing the way for his being rejected at
another election.

But, though this might be the principle object with the " honorable mover,"
as he has been ironically called, yet we must not suppose all the members of
opposition to have no higher views. They undoubtedly participate with Mr.
Livingston in a detestation of the Envoy. I presume this, because it is
natural; but their projects seem to be much more extensive than the ousting of
a governor. Their eyes are fixed on another quarter, where a nobler game
presents itself. In short, if I have any penetration, their plan is nothing
short of driving the President of the United States from the post he now fills.

If there be any one who, measuring the hearts of others by his own, looks upon
this as impossible, I request him to turn his eye to the insults that have been
heaped on this Savior of his country during the present session of Congress.
The fact is, nobody doubts of this, and the only thing that surprises me, is,
nobody attempts to render the destructive project abortive.

It may be asked; what views can the opposition have? to this question I answer
by another: what views have the disorganizers in every country? what views
could the nobleman have who proposed, in France, the abolition of nobility?
what views had the bishop who proposed the abolition of religion? what views
had the silly Lord Stanhope when he proposed an imitation of the French
sans-culottes, and declared he would like to be hanged? if there were any thing
too stupid, absurd and vile, to be wished for by those who are the partisans of
France and of French principles, then we might enquire, what men could propose
to themselves in driving a Chief Magistrate like ours from his post.

That they may not succeed is surely the sincere desire of every man, who
wishes well to this country. But the event is, at least, doubtful. It requires
fortitude something more than human, to endure such treatment as the President
has received, without yielding to the dictates of disgust. There is hardly a
man on earth but himself, that would not have retired long ago. For my part, I
should have hurled the papers in their face, in the midst of their quibbling
and spiteful harrangues, sent them my resignation and retired to my home.
Happily, General Washington is a man of another character. But it is not
reasonable to hope, that he will bear this tantalizing for ever: there is a
certain point beyond which the patience and fortitude of no man can go, and
should his ungrateful enemies surpass it, we must expect to be left adrift in
the storm.

I know, that it is become a custom to speak lightly of the services, past as
well as present, of this great man, and that his adversaries ask, with a sort
of triumph; what! is America so poor in talents and virtue as not to possess
another man fit for President? -- I am far from thinking any such thing. I
believe there are many men in America of great talents and virtues, even equal
to those of General Washington; but there is something more necessary in the
chief of this Union, which no man possesses but himself; and that is, Universal
confidence. Some other man may be found, the favorite of this or that part of
the Union; but no other, of every part of it. It is a melancholy truth, but a
truth, it is, that his life, as it grows toward a close, becomes still more
and more necessary to his constituents. I do not scruple to say, and I care not
who differs from me, that it is he, and he alone, that has kept the Union
entire to this day. Several gentlemen have been named as his successors, all of
them, without doubt, very fit for the important functions they would have to
exercise; but, I ask any thinking man, if, with the example they have before
their eyes, either of them would accept of the Presidency, or, if they should,
if they would be able to maintain harmony among the States for one year? I am
confident they would not, unless a change of principles should take place,
which, at present, there is little reason to expect.

These considerations ought to unite the friends of order and good government
in their attachment to the man of their choice. They should not content
themselves with silent approbation of his conduct, or confine the effusions of
their gratitude to sentiments over the bottle: the applause of a drunkard is
little better than slander. No; this is not the way of giving support to the
government; it is to be done by manly and affectionate addresses; by public
declarations of disapprobation of the conduct of the enemies to the peace and
happiness of the country; and by zealous and effectual endeavors to undeceive
the misguided multitude.

I have hitherto deferred giving the reader the Ayes and Noes on the call for
papers, in order that they may appear in this place, after the motives of the
resolution have been, as I presume, fairly stated. Here they follow, and the
reader will do well to recollect, that, however they may shift hereafter, this
is the list to which he may at all times refer, to know who are the friends and
who are the enemies of the government, constitution, peace and prosperity of
the United States.

AYES.
Messieurs Baily, Baird, Baldwin, Benton, Blount, Brent, Bryan, Burgess, Cabel,
Christie, Claibourne, Clopton, Coals, Dearborn, Dent, Duval, Earl, Findley,
Franklin, Gallatin, Gillespie, Giles, Gregg, Greenup, Grove, Hampton, Hancock,
Harrison, Hathorn, Havens, Heath, Holland, Jackson, Kitchell, Livingston,
Lock, W. Lyman, Maclay, Macon, Madison, Milledge, Moore, Muhlenberg, New,
Nicholas, Orr, Page, Parker, Patton, Preston, Richards, Rutherford, Sherborn,
Israel Smith, Samuel Smith, Sprigg, Swanwick, Tatem, Van Courtlandt, Varnum,
Venable, Winn. 62.

NAYS.
Messieurs Bourne, Bradbury, Buck, Coit, Cooper, A. Foster, D. Foster, Freeman,
Gill, Gilman, Glenn, Goodhue, Goodrich, Griswold, Harper, Hartley, Hillhouse,
Hindman, Kittera, S. Lyman, Malbone, Murray, Reed, Sedgwick, Sitgreaves,
Jeremiah Smith, N. Smith, Isaac Smith, W. Smith, Swift, Thatcher, Thomas,
Thompson, Tracey, Van Allen, Wadsworth, Williams. 37.



It is a truth, which cannot be too often repeated, that the opposers of the
British treaty are for the most part, men who have long and steadily opposed
every salutary measure of the general government, joined by such as this treaty
obliged to pay their just debts. It is well known that it is against the
Southern States alone that the British merchants complain, and for this reason
it is that we see the members from those States most opposed to it. All the
names in the above lists, written in italicks, are of members coming from
States to the North of Virginia, from which it will appear, that only two
members from the Southern States voted in the minority. This circumstance is a
sufficient proof of the motives of the opposition.

RESOLUTION BY WAY OF PROTEST AGAINST THE PRESIDENTS MESSAGE. April 26.
The House having resolved itself into a committee of the whole on the Message
from the President, Mr. Blount, (from North Carolina) moved the following
resolutions, which were finally passed.

Resolved, that, it being declared by the second section of the second article
of the constitution, that the President shall have power, by and with the
advice and consent of the Senate, to make treaties, provided two thirds of the
Senate present concur, the House of Representatives do not claim any agency in
making treaties; but that when a treaty stipulates regulations on any of the
subjects submitted by the constitution to the power of Congress, it must depend
for its execution, as to such stipulations, on a law or laws to be passed by
Congress, and it is the constitutional right and duty of the House of
Representatives; in all such cases, to deliberate on the expediency or
inexpediency of carrying such treaties into effect, and to determine and act
thereon, as in their judgment may be most conducive to the public good.

Resolved, that it is not necessary to the (...) any application from this
House to the Executive for information desired by them, and which may relate to
any constitutional functions of the House, that the purposes for which such
information may be wanted, or to which the same may be applied, should be
stated in the application.

On the latter of these resolutions it is only necessary to observe, that it is
by no means inconsistent with the motives that dictated the call for papers;
those motives I have already stated, it will therefore be useless to say
anything more on the resolution.

The first resolution merits a great deal of attention, as it seems, to be the
lasting definition of the treaty making power.

Patriot Madison was the only member that entered into a defense of this
resolution. To give his speech here would be to fill up my pages with what no
one would read: I shall, therefore, content myself with inserting an extract
from the debates in the Virginia Convention, at the time when the Constitution
of the United States was under consideration.

The reader should be informed, that this patriot was, at the time of forming
the constitution, a firm friend to it; and indeed, I have seen it asserted in
print, that he even drew it up. Let us, then, compare the explanation he gave
of this treaty making clause, at the time the constitution was under
consideration, with the explanation contained in the resolution which he now
supports.

A member in the convention having objected to the treaty making power, as
expressed in the constitution, because treaties became supreme laws of the
land, without the participation of Congress, patriot Madison rose and said: Are
not treaties the law of the land in England? I will refer you to a book, which
is in every man's hand, Blackstone's Commentaries. It will inform you, that
treaties, made by the king, are to be the supreme laws of the land. If they are
to have any efficacy they must be laws of the land. They are so in every
country.

Now where has the patriot been since the time that he gave this explanation of
the treaty making power? what sort of company must he have fallen into? I
should be very sorry to suppose that he has drank at the fountain that poisoned
his countryman Randolph; but, really such a change of sentiment such directly
contradictory explanation of the very same clause, is hard to be accounted for.

In this debate on the call for the papers, which was, in fact, a debate on the
treaty making power, the patriot was several times called on for an explanation
of his doctrine advanced in the convention. He had the prudence to avoid an
answer at that time; and to reserve himself for the discussion of the present
resolution. He tells us here, that, upon his honor, he has forgotten what
passed in the convention; but that, however respectable such authorities may
be, the constitution must now explain itself. -- And so, Sir, you have
forgotten, have you? Forgotten all about it? the waters of Virginia, where you
have undergone your political baptism, and where you have emerged a new man,
are I suppose, like those of Lethe, "Where mortals the sweets of forgetfulness
prove;
"Where the Slave-dealer's conscience is cased of its woes,
"And the Debtor forgets all the debts that he owes."


But, though Mr. Madison had been dipped in the pool of oblivion, some other
members of the House had not, and as they made so pressing a call on him for
the explanation, he was obliged to say something. It was not certainly a very
satisfactory answer, to say that, however respectable such authorities might
be, the constitution must now explain itself. As to the respectability of the
authority, as far as relates to himself, I am ready to give that up; but how
the constitution is to explain itself, when he has found out five different
constructions of the same clause, I cannot perceive. If it be true, that he
penned the constitution, I hope he will not boast of his work, unless, indeed,
which is not impossible, he wished it to answer all the convenient purposes of
a Jesuit's Creed.

The President, in his message, tells the House, with the candor and
uprighthness of heart which so eminently distinguish him from his adversaries,
that, the treaty making power has been thus understood by both parties in the
negociations with foreign powers. "It is thus," says he, that the treaty making
power has been understood by foreign nations; and in all treaties made with
them, we have declared, and they have believed, that when ratified by the
President, with the advice and consent of the Senate, they became obligatory.
-- To this Mr. Madison replies: By we was to be understood the executive alone,
and not the House of Representatives. Again he observes that this was the first
treaty made with a foreign power, since the operation of the present
government; and that therefore precedents must lose much of their weight.

What the patriot means by a foreign power, I know not: it is more than
probable that, in his ample budget of constructions, he may have a dozen or two
ready to be applied to his word foreign; but, according to my simple conception
of the meaning of this epithet, it is applicable to every power with whom the
United States have made, or can make, treaties; and of course, it ought to be
applied to the Indian as well as to the European nations. The continental
powers of Europe are all situated on the same land; some of them must
necessarily be divided by landmarks, as we are from the Indians, yet they
treat each other as foreign powers. If the word foreign is to be applied to no
nation situated on the same land with ourselves, it is yet to be proved,
whether it ought to be applied to France and Spain, or not. Indeed, it is
likely, that the patriot means to confine the word foreign to the British
nation, as the only one which is divided from us by the sea; if so, and if he
should be able to persuade us, that his construction is a good one, we may then
allow, that this treaty is the first which the Federal Government has formed
with foreign powers; but, till he can do this, I for my part, must continue to
look upon the treaties made with the Indians, as made with foreign powers.

If then it be true, and true it most assuredly is, that the treaties made with
the Indians, bear in themselves the full force of the principle laid down by
the President: that when ratified by the President and Senate, they become
obligatory, how happens it, that no objection was ever yet made to their
contents in that respect? foreign nations have seen those treaties go quietly
into effect, without waiting for the sanction of the House of Representatives;
and this, of itself, was a declaration of the whole nation, that no such
sanction was necessary. But, says the patriot, "the House of Representatives
never made any such declaration;" and for this very reason; because no such
declaration was wanted. The President and Senate ratified the treaties, and
nobody disputed their authority so to do; the unmaking power of the House was
reserved to be exercised on the present occasion.

Had the House of Representatives possessed the power of setting a treaty
aside, or rather as they now contend, of giving it a final ratification, they
should have come forward and declared so, when the first treaty made under the
present government was laid before them. This would have been heartily telling
other powers not to look upon a treaty as finally ratified by the United
States, till it had been approved of by the House; and, in the present
instance, the king of great Britain would not have been deceived into a
ratification on his part, till such approbation had been obtained.

Taking leave of the tergiversation of patriot Madison, I shall add a few short
remarks on the resolution itself.

One of its greatest faults is, its unnecessary length; it is however, like all
the other propositions brought forward by the Opposition: calculated to deceive
the multitude, and rally them under the banners of an interested and, perhaps,
corrupted faction, under the pretext of supporting their rights. The plain
meaning of it is this: The President and Senate have a right to make treaties,
and the House of Representatives to unmake them; and Mr. Blount, if he had had
as much courage as malice, would have couched it in these very words.

When a treaty, says the resolution, stipulates regulations on any subjects
submitted by the Constitution to the power of Congress, it must depend for its
execution on Congress, and conseqently, on the House of Representatives.
Several regulations are submitted to the power of Congress: I shall confine
myself to one only, as sufficient to demonstrate the consequences of the
doctrine here held up. "Congress," says the Constitution is empowered to
regulate commerce with foreign nations. Now what treaty, let me ask, can the
United States make with any nation on earth, not containing stipulations on
commerce? what treaty can be formed with Great Britain, with Spain, with the
Algerines, or even with the Indians, that does not contain stipulations of this
kind? There are treaties with them all now before the House, and they all do
contain such stipulations. It follows, of course, that the President and Senate
can make no treaty, that can be carried into execution without the consent, or
ratification of the House of Representatives.

Yes, there are treaties of alliance offensive or defensive, or both, which may
not contain stipulalations on commerce; but then, the Congress has the power to
declare war, and as these are certainly warlike regulations, the House of
Representatives will undoubtedly claim a participation in making them, or at
least in unmaking them, according to the spirit of the resolution. So that, the
President and Senate's treaty making power is, in fact, no power at all. It is
a mere form of words; a deception thrown out to give foreign nations a belief
of the stability and promptitude of this government; in order to lure them into
concessions, while the real power is reserved for annulling such treaties, as
fall short of the exorbitant pretensions, or militate against the interested
views, of these States.

If a vote of the House of Representatives be necessary to the ratification of
a treaty; I say ratification because that ACT alone is worthy of the name,
which gives full and complete effect to a treaty; if then, a vote of this House
be necessary to such ratification, it should be obtained before the
ratification be dispatched to a foreign court. Any other manner of proceeding
is mere duplicity. What says the treaty before us: This treaty, when the same
shall have been ratified by His Majesty, and by the President of the United
States, by and with the advice and consent of their Senate, and the respective
ratifications mutually exchanged, shall be binding and obligatory on His
Majesty and on the said States, etc. Now, this has been done; the treaty has
been ratified by His Majesty and by the President, with the consent of the
Senate, and yet the House of Representatives pretend, that it is not binding on
these States, without their consent also. Is this duplicity, or is it something
worse!

Suppose the posts, which are, in fulfillment of this treaty, to be delivered up
to the United States, were situated in some part of Europe, where no
intelligence of this resolution could be obtained in due time to prevent the
delivery; or suppose the treaty had stipulated for the western posts being
given up in the month of December last. Had either of these been the case,
Great Britain would have fulfilled her engagement, in this respect, while the
United States are debating with themselves whether they shall fulfill theirs or
not. What sort of national faith is this? to make use of the words of Mr. Giles
respecting the land jobbers, this is swindling upon a broad scale, indeed.

This resolution, whatever may be the fate of the British treaty, will have the
most pernicious effects on the relations of the United States with foreign
nations. If the ministers of any power can be supposed to understand this
Constitution, it must be those of Great Britain. We see, that they have
understood it as giving the sole power of making and ratifying treaties to the
President and Senate; and it is certain that other powers have, till now
understood it in the same way. But, the resolution of patriot Blount is well
calculated to undeceive them. All nations will now say: Yes, the Americans have
a President and Senate, whom they hold forth to us as officers empowered to
make treaties with us, and to give such treaties their full effect, as "supreme
laws of their land;" but we now perceive that this is all deception; these
officers are only authorized to make and ratify sham treaties with us; if they
obtain their wishes, they confirm these treaties afterward, but if not, they
reserve to themselves the power of setting them aside. In future, therefore, we
must naturally expect, that no power on earth, except, perhaps, a humiliated
king of Spain, or a stupid Indian Chief, will ever look upon a treaty with us
as legally ratified, till it has received the sanction of the House of
Representatives; nay, were I a prince, I would not ratify, till the treaty had
been signed by every individual member of the sovereign people; for, as patriot
Madison judiciously observed, there is a provident article in the Constitution
itself, by which an avenue is always left open to the sovereign people for
explanations or amendments, as they may be found indispensable.

Here I shall be told, that the British House of Commons possesses the same
power, with respect to treaties as is contended for by the House of
Representatives, and yet, that does not prevent other nations from treating
with the king of Great Britain. If any inconsistency on the part of the
Opposition could at this day excite surprise, it would be their having held up
the practices of Great Britain as proper for their imitation. What! these very
men, whose continual theme has been the execrating of the practices of that
nation, now fly to it for precidents! the first writer that appeared in
opposition to the British treaty, represented it as dangerous, because it would
tend to the introduction of the fashions, forms and precedents of a monarchy!
Mr. Giles said, in the debate concerning Randall, that he should be sorry to
see this House adopt precedents from the British House of Commons! several
times during this very debate, it was averred that the Constitution of Great
Britain was just crumbling to pieces; and it is no longer ago than last year,
that the sagacious patriot Madison foretold, that he should soon see the peers
of Great Britain coming to ask a lodging from him. Mr. Swanwick, in the debates
on the frigates, said that Great Britain was on the verge of ruin. Another of
these opposers declared she was at her last gasp. And these are the men, who
now tell us, that imitating Great Britain is the only way of preserving the
liberties of the people; while they seize every opportunity most slanderously
to represent the people of that country as slaves.

But, what are these precedents which they have taken from the Constitution of
Great Britain? they tell us that the House of Commons claim a right to withhold
the supplies necessary to carry a treaty into effect. They claim this right
with respect to all supplies; but, were they ever known to exercise it since
the reign of the profligate frenchified Charles? at least, were they ever known
to exercise it for the purpose of violating a treaty made with a foreign power?
I defy these gentlemen to prove any such thing, and even if they could prove
it, I would be very glad to know, how the precedent will apply to themselves.
The British Constitution, happily for the people of that country, is not
written in a book; is not reduced to a few clauses, each of which admits of
five constructions. There is no positive law that says to the House of Commons;
you shall have no deliberative voice on the expediency or inexpediency of
treaties. This is not necessary in a government like that of Great Britain. The
organization of the House of Commons is itself a guarantee for their doing
nothing that may endanger the honor or safety of the State. The electors there
are few; the members are the representatives of property, and not of numbers.
They are elected for seven years, and not for two. They are independent of the
mob, a much better security for the state, than their being independent of
those who sit at the helm of affairs. There is not, I am persuaded, a man in
that House, who could, under any circumstances, bring himself to avow openly,
that "he adored the voice of the people," as Mr. Giles did in the debate on the
call for papers. There is not the most distant resemblance between the House of
Commons and the House of Representatives; and therefore the citing of
precedents from the records of each other must be totally inadmissible. In one
particular, however, I am willing to allow that the House of Representatives
would do well in imitating the House of Commons, and here, I believe I shall be
seconded by every honest man in the Union; I mean in making provision for
carrying the present treaty into effect.

In the Philadelphia Gazette of last year I find the following words, made use
of by Mr. Giles in the debate on the allowances to members of Congress. Mr.
Giles said, there was a country from which America had copied a great deal too
much. The members of the British House of Commons received no wages, while the
officers of state had immense salaries. It was, however, understood that the
British House of Commons were very well paid. Mr. Giles did not wish to see
scenes of that kind in this country.

Now, would it, I wonder, be permitted me to ask this talkative gentleman, what
he meant by "scenes"? If this were permitted, I would go on, and ask him, what
he meant by copying too much from Great Britain? if he himself be a copy of
some original from that country, which I believe to be the case, in this
instance I shall not contend, that we have not copied too much; but as to wages
to members of Congress, I think we have not copied quite enough, witness a
session spun out to the month of May, and nothing done. Again, I would ask him,
how he came to understand that the members of the British House of Commons were
very well paid, or in other words, corrupted by the King? he knows how severely
I could retort upon him here; how I could dare him to a comparison; but I
forbear, and return to the sentence of this extract which so immediately
applies to the subject before us.

It is well known, that the members of the House of Commons receive no stipend
for their services in that capacity, therefore, when the proposal before the
House was to draw money out of the pockets of the people to pay Mr. Giles and
his colleagues such a stipend, he thought America should not copy from Great
Britain. Imitating the House of Commons in this instance, would have deprived
the gentleman of what he probably "adored" as much as he does "the voice of the
people," and, perhaps, a great deal more. The House of Commons was therefore
thrown aside, as totally unworthy of imitation; but, when something from the
records of that House seemed to strengthen the arguments of Mr. Giles for
setting aside the treaty, then it was not wrong to copy from it: it was to be
imitated as the only model; as the only assembly in the world, that was the
true repository of the liberties of the people. -- These palpable
inconsistencies I leave Mr. Giles to reconcile, which I make no doubt he will
be able to do, to the entire satisfaction of his constituents.

I shall now dismiss this resolution of citizen Blount, with observing, that if
no treaty, containing stipulations on commerce, is finally ratified till
sanctioned by a vote of the House of Representatives, no treaty, formed by the
present government is yet valid; for though that with Spain for instance has
been sanctioned by the House, such sanction was not obtained prior to the
ratification by the king of Spain. The ratification which that king now
possesses is not valid, and therefore the treaty is not. This is clear and fair
reasoning, and I defy even patriot Madison, with his five constructions, to
oppose it with success. Is it asserted that the ratification now in the hands
of the court of Spain is binding on the United States? so then, is the
ratification now in the hands of His Britannic Majesty; for they have both
emanated from exactly the same powers. If the ratification exchanged with Great
Britain be not final, be not obligatory, neither is that exchanged with Spain;
the kings of both nations have been duped; they have exchanged obligatory
ratifications for such as were not obligatory, and of course, both the treaties
become null and void: nor should I scruple, were I the minister of either of
those princes, to advise an infraction of either treaty, when circumstances
might render it convenient; fully confident that this resolution of the House
of Representatives would justify the proceeding.

RESOLUTION FOR SETTING ASIDE THE BRITISH TREATY. April 14th.
Mr. HILLHOUSE (from Connecticut) having brought forward a resolution for
passing the laws necessary to carry the treaty into effect, Mr. Maclay spoke
against it, and concluded his speech with the following preamble and resolution.

The House having taken into consideration the treaty of Amity, Commerce and
Navigation, between the United States and Great Britain, communicated by the
President in his message of the first day of March last, are of opinion, that
it is in many respects highly injurious to the interests of the United States;
yet, were they possessed of any information which could justify the great
sacrifices, contained in the treaty, their sincere desire to cherish harmony
and amicable intercourse with all nations, and their earnest wish to cooperate
in hastening a final adjustment of the differences subsisting between the
United States and Great Britain, might have induced them to wave their
objections to the treaty; but, when they contemplate the conduct of
Great Britain in persevering since the treaty was signed, in the impressment of
American Seamen and the seizure of American vessels (laden with provisions)
contrary to the sacred rights of neutral nations; whether this be viewed as the
construction meant to be given to any articles in the treaty, or as contrary to
an infraction of the true meaning and spirit thereof, the house cannot but
regard it as incumbent on them, in fidelity to the trust reposed in them, to
forbear, under such circumstances, taking at present any active measures on the
subject, therefore, Resolved, that under the circumstances aforesaid, and with
such information as the House possess, it is not expedient at this time to
concur in passing the laws necessary for carrying the said treaty into effect.

REMARKS.
The preamble to this resolution holds out as an excuse for withholding the
supplies, that, the House is not in possession of any information to justify
the great sacrifices, contained in the treaty. What information could possibly
render those sacrifices less than they are? how could the communication of the
correspondence between the President and Mr. Jay alter the nature of sacrifices
contained in the treaty itself? If an infraction of this treaty should take
place on the part of Great Britain, to what should we appeal? to the treaty
itself, and not to the notes and conversations employed in the negotiation. The
instrument itself is good or bad, and contains in itself full proofs of either,
and, if the House have a right to decide on its merits, why not do it boldly;
why not scorn this miserable subterfuge?

"But," says the preamble, when they contemplate the conduct of Great Britain
since the treaty was signed, etc. Now, allowing all the falsehoods which have
been circulated concerning impressments and seizures, to be undeniable truths,
and that they are all contrary to the rights of neutral nations, what have they
to do with laws necessary to carry the treaty into effect? or how can the
papers of negotiation render them more or less injurious? if they are contrary
to the rights of neutral nations, or to the letter of the treaty, no papers
whatever can justify them; if they are not, no papers can render them
unjustifiable.

One sentence in this preample is singularly unfortunate: "since the treaty was
signed." Observe here well, that an objection to giving the treaty its final
ratification is founded on something that Great Britain has done as an
infraction of it. The gentlemen have fairly tumbled into their own pit.
According to the resolution of Mr. Blount, now on the journals of the House,
the treaty is not a law of this land; it is not in force; it is not yet a
treaty; and consequently the British can be guilty of no infraction. Do the
Opposition wish, that this instrument should be obligatory on Great Britain,
from the moment of the signing of the ratifications as they now stand, and that
it should not even yet be obligatory on these States? they may, probably, find
powers to treat with them on this footing; a king of scalpes, the five kings of
France (barber Tom and his comrades four) or a degenerate scion of the stump of
the Bourbons, may, perhaps, do it; but the king of Great Britain never will.

After these remarks on this hypoctritical and absurd preamble, I shall
endeavor to point out the fatal consequences that the adoption of the
resolution must be attended with, taking, previously, a view of the causes
which have led to the present opposition. If, in doing this, I make use of an
undisguised language, which, notwithstanding the boasted liberty of the press,
is little customary in these States, I hope, my liege Lords, the
sovereign-citizens, will not take offense, as I declare upon my honor, that my
motive, and my only motive, is, to persuade them to live in peace with the only
power on earth that is capable of doing them an injury in war.

Among the causes of the opposition to the treaty, the stipulation for an
honorable discharge of the debts, due from the Southern States ( Virginia in
particular) to the merchants of Great Britain, certainly claims the first
place. These debts, due before the American war, were, according to the treaty
of peace, to be honorably discharged; or, at least, no law was to be passed,
or to remain in force, which might operate as an impediment to their recovery.
Here is the article of the treaty: Art. IV. It is agreed, that creditors on
either side, shall meet with no lawful impediment to the recovery of the full
value, in sterling money, of all bona fide debts heretofore contracted.

Notwithstanding this, in defiance of the general government, and regardless of
the national faith, thus solemnly pledged, the State of Virginia in particular
has enacted, or kept in force, such laws as are an impediment to the recovery
of these debts. In consequence of this violation of the treaty of peace, and as
a protection due from Great Britain to her merchants, she kept possession of
the Western Posts, in order to oblige the United States to a fulfillment of
their engagements. The debtor State, or States, have continued their
dishonorable laws in force to this day, and for this reason it is, that to
this day Great Britain keeps the forts in her possession.

When a new treaty between the two nations was to be made, the relinguishment
of the posts was the first object on the part of Great Britain, and
accordingly, the treaty sets out with a stipulation for their being given up,
on the first day of June 1796, five weeks from this day. But, on the other
hand, the United States stipulate to pay, or cause to be paid, the
abovementioned debts, the recovery of which has been hitherto unjustly impeded,
by acts which the Virginians have the assurance to dignify with the names of
laws.

It was not to be supposed that Virginia would not oppose to this arrangement.
Both her Senators stepped forward against the treaty. One of them, Mr. Mason
divulged its contents prematurely. It was printed without the permission of the
Executive power; agents were dispatched with it to every part of the Union,
with instructions to misrepresent its meaning, and to stir up such an
opposition as might deter the President from a ratification. The following
advertisement will fully show the temper of that State at the time.

RICHMOND (capitol of Virginia)
Notice is hereby given,

That in case the Treaty entered into by that d -- d Arch Traitor J -- n J -- y
with the British tyrant should be ratified -- A petition will be presented to
the next General Assembly of Virginia at their next session praying that the
said State may recede from the Union, and be left under the government and
protection of ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND FREE AND INDEPENDENT VIRGINIANS.

P. S. As it is the wish of the people of the said state, to enter into a
treaty of Amity Commerce and Navigation, with any other state, or states of the
present Union, who are averse to returning again under the galling yoke of
Great Britain. -- The Printers of the (at present) United States are requested
to publish the above notification.

Richmond July 30th 1795.
I must beg to be excused for stepping aside from my subject a minute, in order
to make a few observations, of a more general nature, on the conduct of this
turbulent, and I may say rebellious State. One of her Representatives in
Congress, Mr. Giles said, that he hoped Virginia would pursue uniformly the
line of conduct that had ever marked her political character. Her conduct, he
observed, had been uniform from the beginning of the revolution to the present
day; uniform and exemplary in her obedience to the laws, etc. -- He prided
himself in represening such a State. About a twentieth part of such a State,
the gentleman meant, without doubt; that is, if he did not, for the moment,
mean to give up his title of " immediate representative."

Indeed, as Mr. Giles observed, the conduct of his State has been uniform, if a
continual disaffection to the government of the United States, sometimes
concealed under the mask of hypocrisy and base crawling flattery, and sometimes
breaking out in open opposition; if this be a uniform conduct, her conduct has
been uniform. The reader must have remarked the word "British Tyrant." in the
above advertisement, and he must also know that to abuse and vilify that
monarch is the favorite theme of Virginians. Now, to give him a pretty correct
idea of the uniformity of their political conduct, I shall here insert an
extract from the American Magazine for September, 1769. We your Majesty's most
loyal, dutiful, and affectionate subjects, of your Majesty's ancient colony of
Virginia, beg leave in the humblest manner, to assure your Majesty, that your
faithful Subjects of this colony, ever distinguished by their loyalty and firm
attachment to your Majesty and your royal ancestors, etc. etc. We are ready to
sacrifice our lives and fortunes in defense of your Majesty's sacred person and
government. -- It is with the deepest concern and most heart felt grief that
your Majesty's dutiful subjects of this colony find that their loyalty has
been traduced and that those measures which a just regard for the British
Constitution (dearer to them than life) made necessary duties, have been
misrepresented as rebellious attacks on your Majesty's government. -- After
expressing our confidence in your royal wisdom and goodness, permit us to
assure your Majesty, that the most fervent prayers of your people of this
colony are daily addressed to the Almighty, that your Majesty's reign may be
long and prosperous over Great Britain and all your Dominions; and that after
death, your Majesty may taste the fullest fruition of eternal bliss, and that a
descendant of your illustrious House may reign over the extended British Empire
until time shall be no more. AMEN!

The man whose sacred person they were ready to sacrifice life and fortune in
defense of, is now called the "British Tyrant;" and "the British
Constitutution, dearer to them than life;" is now, "the galling yoke of Great
Britain!" Poor bankrupt devils, the king of great Britain stands in no need of
their lives and fortunes nor of their prayers daily addressed to the Almighty.
Neither do their curses affect him a bit more than those of the French
atheists. I dare say, if the truth were known, that he does not think half so
much about the "ancient and dutiful and loyal and pious State of Virginia" as
he does about the kennel of his Stag-Hounds.

Another trait of the uniformity of conduct in this State is exhibited in her
behavior to the President of the United States. After his election, he
received the first address from the Virginians. I can say nothing better nor
worse of this address, than that it was full as dutiful, affectionate and
sincere, as the address to the king. Let any man compare that address with the
insults that this insolent State, and her members in Congress, have heaped on
the President during the last nine months, and then doubt of the uniformity of
the conduct of Virginia, if he can.

But Mr. Giles says, Virginia has been uniform and exemplary in her obedience
to the laws. I shall mention but two instances of this. The first is, her
having absolutely disobeyed the treaty of peace, by making, or keeping in
force, acts which have hitherto prevented the fulfillment of that treaty, and
which had nearly plunged the Union into a war. The second instance is, her
having attempted, during this very session of Congress, to raise up an
opposition to the government in every State in the Union, and even to destroy
the Constitution. If these instances of her "obedience to the laws" were not
sufficient, one might add her instructions, to all her representatives, to
oppose the execution of the British Treaty, "a supreme law of the land." Such
are the proofs which Mr. Giles might have cited of her uniform and exemplary
obedience to the laws.

Mr. Giles may "pride himself in being a representative from "such a State;"
but, I believe that few men, who do not adore the voice of the people, will
envy him his post.

Who did not expect that every member from this State would do his utmost to
set the treaty aside? the final determination of the House of Representatives
is not yet known; but I do not scruple to declare all those enemies of the
treaty, who voted in favor of Mr. Blount's resolution, and it is well known
that every member from Virginia is included in that number. Had the treaty been
opposed from any other motive than the one I contend for, surely, out of
eighteen members, some one would have been found not included in the opposition.

If there are any particular members, among those now leagued against the
constitution, who claim the guilty pre-eminence, it must be those who are
actuated by this selfish, this disgraceful motive. It is a truth, and a truth
that will be a lasting stigma on the American character, that, if this treaty
be rendered null, it will be for no other reason, than because it engages for a
discharge of just debts, on the part of Americans.

I am far from wishing to insinuate, that there are no honorable exceptions to
be found among the people of Virginia: a recent attempt in their legislature to
subject lands to seizure for the payment of debts is a full proof that such
exceptions do exist; but in speaking of a State we must speak of it as one; our
opinions must be founded on the measures, it adopts, whether such measures may
be the effect of the unanimous voice of the people or not. In like manner
foreign nations must judge of the United States. If they fail in the fulfillment
of their engagements; if the swindling propositions for annulling the treaty
should finally succeed; foreign nations will pronounce on the measure itself,
without paying any attention to our internal disputes and divisions. The
minority will be lumped with the majority; the everlasting stain will imprint
itself on the whole American people, not excepting the hitherto spotless
character of a Washington.

French influence is another source of opposition to the treaty. Those who have
read Mr. Randolph's Vindication, as it was humourously called, have seen how
narrowly the President escaped from the plots of that gentleman; what overtures
were made to the French Minister for some thousands of dollars." They will see
how that "pretended patriot labored to protract the ratification; how well his
plans were laid for embroiling this country with Great Britain, and how all his
measures were taken for subjecting the government of this country to France. I
do not say, that any of the members, who now oppose the government and the
treaty, are absolutely in the pay of the five kings; but, after reviewing the
mutinous conduct of the Secretary of State; after having duly considered the
rank of the person on whose behalf, as well as his own, certain overtures were
made; after having seen some of the men now in Congress, particularly an
inconsistent leader, named as a confidential friend of Citizen Fauchet, I must
be excused, if I have my doubts. Doubts I shall have till I see those, who now
oppose the treaty, cease their eulogiums, their fulsome and nauseous eulogiums,
of a people, who, in their present state, are not entitled even to pity.

What influence the French have had among the multitude will appear from two
circumstances (I could mention a thousand) fresh in every ones mind. At the
town-meeting at New York, called to condemn the treaty, the people marched
under the banners of France and America. These flags were carried at the head
of the vile and insolent procession that proceeded to the governor's house, and
there burnt the treaty. The other fact is of still more recent date, and still
more striking. The petition, said to be signed by fifteen hundred citizens of
Philadelphia, against the treaty, and now before the House, was carried round
for signature by a Frenchman. The chairman of the meeting was also a Frenchman;
nor am I sure that it was not originally drawn up in the French language. I
wonder what the people of England, or, indeed, of any independent nation, would
say to a foreigner, who should carry round for their signature, a petition
against the execution of a "law of the land;" a solemn contract entered into
between them and another nation? There is a certain point of debasement, below
which no nation can sink, whether this be that point, or not, I will not at
present take upon me to say; God only knows what he has yet in reserve for us.

I am aware, it will be said here; that, though the chairman, under whose
authority and direction this petition was drawn up, was a Frenchman, yet it was
presented to the House by an Englishman, or, to speak more correctly, an
Homuncio, born in England. But, let it be recollected that this Homuncio has,
since the beginning of the present war, been a most desperate supporter of the
cause of the French; that he trades to France, and to France principally, and
that the whole of his political career justifies the name of English Jacobin.

The reader, from what has been said of this diminutive mortal, will at once
perceive that I am speaking of Mr. Swanwick, one of the august representatives
of the City of Philadelphia. I have been told, that this gentleman has taken
upon him to pronounce me a hired English scribbler. I will not tell this
omicciuolo (for the Italian diminutive suits him best on every account) what I
am; but I will tell him what I am not. -- I am not descended from the dregs of
the King of Great Britain's Custom-House; I was never fed from the scraps of
His Majesty's bounty, collected by an honest spy, called a Tide-Waiter. I never
snapped at the hand that gave me bread, and nourished the streams from which I
drew my life. I am the base and cringing flatterer of no man, much less of the
men I despise. I never wrote to England an enumeration of my titles,
outnumbering those of a Spanish Hidalgo, and concluding with, President of the
Emigration society, Treasurer of the Dancing-Assembly, and Trustee of the Young
Ladies School. At the age of thirty eight, in the prime of life, I never
decorated my bedchamber with lascivious pictures, Leda and her Swan, and such
like stimuluses. One who is obliged to have recourse to these miserable shifts
is unworthy even of the name omicciuollo.

After having thus heartily given an account of myself, let me ask you, Mr.
Swanwick, a question or two. -- How came you to imagine yourself blessed with
the aura divina? how came you to imagine, that the Muses, who are of the female
sex, had ever cast a favorable eye on you? besides, if you must commit your
miserable doggerel to paper, why send it to England for impression? why take
such incredible pains to insure its appearance in an English Magazine? why did
you not send it to your new country, France? can it be possible that you yet
wish to shine among the countrymen of your ancestors? I will wear the shine off
you, as sure as you and I live. -- As to the piece I here allude to, I have not
room, at present, to lay it before my readers; but I will just ask, how you
came to discover, that Earth is to become the proto-type of Heaven?

"So shall the year to harmony be given,
"And earth be found the proto-type of Heaven."
Let the year be given to harmony as much as you please, set all your vestals
to chanting, and rock us to sleep with your own canzones, yet I presume it will
never be found that earth is the proto-type of heaven; the proto-type of
something that existed before it, and which it is to resemble. -- As soon as
there is a vacancy in your Young Ladies' Academy, I advise you to fill it
yourself, and to let poetry and politics alone.

It is just matter of surprise that this gentleman should be elected the
representative of such a city as Philadelphia. The arts by which his election
was brought about I reserve as the subject of an article in a future Censor. I
have heard of a sturdy young Lord in England, who got himself elected through
the interest of the wives and daughters of his constituents; Mr. Swanwick will
never be suspected of this kind of corruption; but whether he ought to be
suspected of no other kind, is more than I will pretend to determine. Grog is
cheap, and its influence is mighty.

After this long and rambling digression, I return to the subject of French
influence, and I am persuaded that the reader must agree with me, that, after
the Virginia Debts, it has been the principal cause of opposition to the
British treaty.

However, it must be confessed, that these causes, powerful as they have been,
would have produced but a partial effect, had they not been aided by the
delusion of the great body of the people with respect to the situation of Great
Britain. The rancour they entertained against that nation laid them open to the
falsehoods which the friends of France, among whom we may reckon nearly all the
News-Printers, so industriously spread through the country. A hundred times
Great Britain has been represented as on the brink of ruin. The editor of the
Philadelphia Gazette opened the new-year, 1795, with congratulating his
customers on the stability and vigor of the Federal Government, while that of
Great Britain was just crumbling to pieces. In the same paper, he called the
Island of Britain "an insular Bastile." -- When intelligence was received of
the progress the French were making in Holland, the papers announced it as an
event that must necessarily be the immediate cause of the total overthrow of
the British nation. The taking of Amsterdam," said the papers, "is the last
blow to the power of Britain. Bets were laid that Great Britain would become an
appendage of the French Republic; and more than once were we informed by the
public papers, that the tricolored flag was flying on St. James's Palace.

Gross as these impositions were, they were greedily swallowed by the people,
nine tenths of whom believed every assertion of the kind that was made. Men are
apt to believe what they wish; it is hard to convince them, that those whom
they hate are objects of envy and respect. Such was the general opinion of the
distresses and weakness of Great Britain, and such the persuasion that her
situation would oblige her to yield to any thing that Mr. Jay should dictate,
that, when intelligence was received of the conclusion of the treaty, Pichegru
was toasted as the negociator.

A circumstance like this, though despicable in itself, proves that an opinion
was entertained, that His Britannic Majesty had been forced, by the successes
of the French, to accept of such terms as Mr. Jay chose to offer, and, of
course, a treaty was expected, at once humiliating to Great Britain and
honorable as well as advantageous to the United States. Nothing equal to these
lofty expectations was to be found in the treaty. It was a disappointment; and
disappointment ever disposes men to discontent. In vain were the people told,
that they had been deceived with respect to the state of Great Britain: in vain
was it hinted to them, that she would finally be successful in the war: their
hatred and the continued chain of falsehood running through the public papers,
had rendered them deaf to the voice of reason and of truth. The Southern
Debtors and French Emissaries took advantage of this prevalent delusion, and
the opposition became almost universal.

There were not wanting men of talents to add fuel to the flame, nor were there
wanting others, actuated by a sincere love of their country, who endeavored to
counter-act such baleful efforts. It is certainly owing to the writings of
these gentlemen, that the people have latterly begun to form a right judgment
of this important treaty, and to rally round that government on which their
very existence as an independent nation depends. The judges, too, in the middle
and nothern States, have exerted a laudable zeal; some of the public papers
have stood forth in the cause of order and truth; and there is not the least
doubt, that the treaty would have met with no opposition in the House of
Representatives, had not the members been chosen, while the public mind was at
the height of its fermentation. This was unfortunately the case: treaty, and no
treaty, were the signals at the elections; and as the opposers were the most
numerous, so are the members of the opposition.

Thus is this opposition bottomed on dishonesty, corruption, or ignorance, and,
probably, on all three together. That it may be frustrated is my sincere wish,
and that it will I have not the least doubt: I cannot bring myself to imagine,
that the people of this country will tamely suffer themselves to be hurled from
the pinnacle of national prosperity into the horrid abyss of foreign and civil
war, of anarchy, requisitions and massacre, by a band of interested and
desperate leaders, who have nothing to lose but the posts which their too
credulous constituents have bestowed on them. I have not the least doubt that
the nefarious conspiration will be finally rendered abortive, and that the
French gold, now in circulation, will be as ineffectual as that formerly
distributed among the pretended patriots of America; but, while there is a
possibility of the contrary, the attention of the people ought to be directed
to the dangers that await them. I shall point out these dangers as they present
themselves to me: if the reader should think them imaginary, he may do well to
treat them like other efforts of imagination; but, if he has the least reason
to think them real, it is certainly his duty to endeavor to avert them by
every exertion in his power.

The first thing that presents itself among the consequences of annulling the
treaty, is, the detention of the Western Posts by the British. The not
possessing of these posts has latterly cost the people of this country about a
million of dollars annually, besides the loss of lives; besides defeats and
continual discontents. The possession of them must, then, be a desirable
object. But, say the enemies of the treaty, they ought to have been given up
long ago, unconditionally. I have proved the contrary, and I could repeat my
proofs, but this is now totally out of the question: we know they were not
given up, that they are not yet given up, and we may be assured that they will
not be given up, unless the present treaty is carried into effect.

But, it is said, that the British are bound by the treaty to give up the posts
on the 1st of June, and that they ought to fulfill this part of their
engagements, without paying any attention to what is doing in Congress; that
they have no business with our internal disputes, the treaty being the only
rule for their conduct; and, with this doctrine in hand, it is supposed, that
some members of the House of Representatives mean to delay their decision on
the subject till after the first of June; and if the posts are not evacuated at
that time, to accuse the British of annulling the treaty. To this I answer:
that I am fully persuaded, that the Governor of Canada will retain the posts,
till the treaty has been sanctioned by an appropriation law; and that I am
fully convinced he would be justified in so doing. This nation formed a certain
constitution, or manner of government, which they promulgated to the world; in
this constitution it is said, that treaties, made and ratified by the President
and Senate, shall be supreme laws of the land. Persuaded that the nation would
abide by this its solemn declaration, several powers made treaties with the
President and Senate, and, among others, Great Britain; but before the time for
fulfilling a certain stipulation in the treaty with Great Britain is arrived,
it becomes matter of doubt, whether this treaty be valid or not; or rather, one
branch of the American government declares it invalid, by a resolution entered
on its journals. Under such circumstances, will common reason or common sense
deny, that the British would be justifiable in refusing to fulfill their part
of the stipulations?

I have said, that Mr. Blount's resolution declares the treaty invalid. The
word invalid is not made use of but we shall soon see that the resolution goes
to the full length. The House, by adopting it, have formally and explicitly
declared, that a treaty including commercial regulations, is not binding on the
United States, till sanctioned by the House of Representatives. The present
treaty includes commercial regulations, and therefore is not binding on the
United States. The House have also declared in this resolution, that treaties
including commercial regulations require the sanction of the House of
Representatives before they can be effectual; or, in other words, that the
ratification of the President and Senate is not sufficient to give such
treaties their full and entire effect. The present treaty was, then, concluded
and ratified by persons not fully empowered so to do.

Now, the first principles, touching treaties, are; that, to be valid, the
parties must have full power to conclude, ratify, and carry into effect; and
that, the covenant must be equally binding and obligatory on both parties. The
House of Representatives have declared, that the present treaty fails in both
these points; they declare it invalid, and the British will certainly be
permitted to believe them. Upon this ground it is, that, should the Governor of
Canada deliver the posts, before the House has sanctioned the treaty, he would
deserve to lose his head.

I will just stop here to observe; that, I dare say, it never entered into the
heads of the wise Opposition, that Billy Pit may, perhaps, play them a trick.
Suppose he could gull the five sans-culotte kings with Canada, in exchange for
St. Domingo? the Posts would go into the bargain, of course, and then we should
have to dispute with our own dear kindred republicans for them. Take care,
gentlemen; now or never is the time to have them, take my word for it.

The treaty being invalid, all the other stipulations as well as that
respecting the posts, will assuredly remain unfulfilled. The revisal of the
sentences given in the courts of Vice Admiralty, and the appointment of
commissioners for examining appeals, etc. will not take place; the consequence
of which will be, the merchants of this country will lose about five or six
millions of dollars. Indeed, Mr. Livingston, with a view of silencing these
people, has brought forward a resolution for paying these few millions out of
the treasury of the United States. All the difference in this case will be,
that the loss will be divided among us all; the hardworking peasant and
mechanic will be obliged to contribute toward an indemnification for a loss,
incurred by adventurers and speculators.

Things will remain, then, with respect to Great Britain, just as they were
before Mr. Jay went to England; we must, therefore, bring ourselves back to
that epoch, and set out afresh.

The same alternative presents itself: a negotiation or war. The President
would prefer a negotiation? but, can any one suppose, that he will ever enter
into another? I shall, however, for a moment, admit this to be possible. I
shall suppose him content to give up his adherence to the constitution, to
receive his instructions from the House of Representatives, and to order his
Envoy to confine himself within the bounds traced out by that House. I shall
suppose the Envoy arrived at the Court of St. James's; and, that all may be of
a piece, I shall suppose this Envoy to be the immaculate Mr. Gallatin. If this
respectable personage should be admitted to an interview with Lord Grenville,
of which I much doubt, the following dialogue would very probably take place

Lord Grenville. Your most obedient, Sir. What may have procured us the honor
of this Extraordinary Envoy from our very good friends the United States?


Mr. Gallatin. Vy, me Lort, de Citizens Sovereigns of my country dit send me to
make a treaty vit yours king.


Lord Grenville. (aside) I wonder where his country is? -- Sir, I fear here is
some mistake. Pray Sir, permit me to ask, of what country you are a citizen?


Mr. Gallatin. I am porn Citizen of Geneva, but..


Lord Grenville. (interrupting him) but, now you are a Citizen of France, I
suppose. It is my duty to inform you, Sir, that the King my Master authorizes
me to open no negotiation with any person, acting under the direction of
regicides and common stabbers. -- Here! Tom! show this Citizen down stairs;
and, do you hear! don't let him come behind you.


Tom (taking the Envoy by the shoulder). Come, come, go along, go long, my good
fellow. I wonder where the stupid porter was, that this ill-looking fellow got
up stairs.


Mr. Gallatin (resisting). But, me Lort, hear me von vort. Though I vas born
Citizen Genevese, I am now Citizen American; Mr. Gallatin has, I am told,
founded a new town in the Whisky country, which he has named, New Geneva. A
fellow transported, some years ago, to a certain State not far from the
Potomac, christened his cabin, New Newgate; it was, I presume, in imitation of
this worthy emigrant, that our Italian gave the name of his little native
municipal jail to an American town. I would advise him to suffer none but
imported Savoyards (in French synonimous with chimney-sweeps) to settle in it;
and, then, as the saying is, he will have a little hell of his own.
ant I am sended to you's king by me sovereigns, to make a treaty vit him.
Here, me Lort, are me credentials (pulling out papers).


Lord Grenville. But, Sir, previous to examining your papers, may I beg to be
informed, how it comes to pass, that the Americans should choose for the
representative of their nation, or for a representative of any kind, a
foreigner, and a foreigner too whose looks are not calculated to produce a
prepossession in their favor.


Mr. Gallatin. Bella di fuori, e dentro ha la magagna.


Lord Grenville. I have heard of such a proverb, Sir; I believe, however, that
your inside is as bad as your outside. I do not believe that insurrection face
of yours belies your heart.


Mr. Gallatin. Insurrection! me Lort! vy it is de very first article in de bill
of rights. I have made von insurrection in de mountains of Pennsylvene, dat is
vy I am representative.


Lord Grenville. Upon my word it is a curious qualification. But, let me
caution your, Sir, unless you have a mind to take a trip to Botany Bay, not to
attempt to exercise this article of you, bill of rights in this country. --
Your papers, Sir, if you please.


Mr. Gallatin. Dear de are, me Lort, in de veritable revolutionary style.


Lord Grenville (reading.) -- produced great disputes and divisions -- has been
declared invalid -- will not grant the sums -- into effect -- changed the
constitution -- hopes that the magnanimity of His Majesty -- wish to preserve
peace and good understanding.


Mr. Gallatin. Yes, me Lort, vee vishes to lif in de peace and goot
understanding.


Lord Grenville. And so, Sir, you have changed your constitution, and this is
to render the treaty invalid on your part, but not on ours. What sort of work
is this?


Mr. Gallatin. Vee Citizens call dis "political sin," me Lort.


Lord Grenville. It is a sin, I believe, my friend, you will have to expiate
yourselves. Our august Monarch will, undoubtedly, thank you for the high
opinion you entertain of his magnanimity; but, I am afraid you deceive
yourselves, if you imagine he will live in peace and good understanding with
you upon your terms. As to a new treaty, we can make none with you; for, as a
change in your constitution has rendered one invalid, another change may render
another invalid; and so, Sir, I heartily wish you a safe return over the
Atlantic.


Mr. Gallatin. But, me Lort, hear me von oder vort.


Lord Grenville. Not one, upon my honor; I have heard you too long already.
Besides, we are busy here settling the affairs of your friends the French.
After that is done you may hear from us. -- Tom, conduct the citizen into the
street.


Lord Grenville (solus.) Can it be possible that the Americans are so poor in
talents, so debased in principle, as to entrust their public affairs to an
European adventurer, the leader of an insurrection! Can these people be so
degenerated. I blush to think them the offspring of Britons. Blessed for ever
be the laws of Old England, that exclude all foreigners from public offices.
These wretches are now tearing the government of America to pieces, as the
subtle and intriguing Neckar did that of France. They join themselves to the
restless rabble of every country, flatter their passions and prejudices, make
war upon the rich, divide the spoil, and then retire to their own country to
devour it.


I do not pretend to say, that the interview would be conducted exactly thus;
but I am certain as to its result. I am certain that every offer to treat would
be rejected with disdain. War, then, must be resorted to: not that war is the
necessary consequence of the violation of a treaty; but with the accumulated
load of griefs and insults on both sides, and the irreconcilable hatred
existing in this country against Great Britain, it is morally impossible to
preserve peace.

The President and Senate are opposed to war; they know well its consequences
to this country; but, who can tell what the President of next year may be? Can
any man possibly hope, that General Washington will suffer himself to be
degraded by remaining the pageant, the mere tool of a faithless and profligate
faction. The reputation he has gained, it is not in the power of hell to wrest
from him; hitherto he has been suffered to keep in the path of honor; but, one
single step in the direction he is now required to tread, and his renown is
blasted for ever. No; if this treaty does not go into effect, it cannot be
expected, it cannot be hoped, that he will again accept the post of President.
Nor will any other man accept of it, who is attached to the present
constitution. Some more pliant mortal must, then, be found; some prostituted
friend of France, ready to sacrifice the interests of this country to the wild
and bloody principles of the Convention. With such a President, and with such a
majority in the House of Representatives, war with Britain would be inevitable.

War is at all times and to all countries dreadful in its effects, but to no
country and at no time was it ever so dreadful as it would now be to America.
This is not a warlike nation, nor has this nation a warlike government. In a
war with any nation whatever, this country can gain nothing, and in a war with
Great Britain it has every thing to lose.

When assertions like these are advanced, the advocates for war turn, with
imaginary triumph, to the result of the last war. They tell us, that America
was victorious, and that the country is now much more populous and rich than it
was then.

In the first place, what did this country gain by the last war? If
independence was a gain (for at present that is very problematical) it was the
only gain, I shall not dwell on the losses; those who have had their houses
burnt about their ears; those who have been pillaged, plundered robbed of their
property; those who are now starving with bundles of continental money under
their roofs; those who have lost their children or their parents, do not need
to be reminded of the losses of that war. If independence was the only gain of
last war, what is to be the gain of another? The warriors do not pretend, that
we could go and take Great Britain: they do not pretend that we could take
Jamaica: they do not pretend even that we could take Bermuda. What then can we
take? Why -- Canada. This is the burden of their song, or rather war-hoop.
With this they divert the rabble, and sharpen their fangs for war and conquest.
If you ask them how they would do this, they tell you that men are not wanting;
that four hundred thousand would turn out volunteer against Great Britain. I
believe twice that number would turn out for a field-day, with sticks and
staves, and return very peaceably home to supper; but would they do this two
days running? If I am to judge from experience; from the infinite difficulty
the government had to assemble so trifling a force as fifteen thousand men on a
recent occasion, I should reduce this army of four hundred thousand men to
three or four battalions. I shall be told, that the sentiments of the people
concerning the excise were divided; and are they unanimous concerning the
treaty? I will however suppose the people to have but one sentiment; I will
suppose one hundred thousand men ready to submit themselves to all the rigor
of military discipline, and all the hardships inseparable from actual service;
I will suppose them all heroes, ready to seek the bubble honor in the cannon's
mouth; and I will suppose a Washington at their head. Yet, these heroes must
eat, and must have some kind of covering too, and this will cost money. In
short, I have made a little calculation of the expense of fifty thousand men,
ten armed vessels, ten galleys, with all the necessary officers, horses,
wagons, cannon, etc. etc. etc. and I find the amount to be above twenty
millions of dollars annually, a sum three times as great as the present revenue
of the United States. Can any sober man look at this, and imagine this country
fit to engage in a war? There is not specie in the country sufficient to carry
on the war one month. As to loans, where are they to be obtained? in France, or
in Holland? the very mention of those countries, on such a subject, excites
laughter. Domestic loans; who will lend a sixpence? Taxes? there will be
nothing but houses and land to tax. Commerce will be no more. The enemy will
let nothing out of our ports, or into them. In a word, it is absolutely
impossible for this country to equip any thing like a creditable force, without
having recourse to a paper currency and requisitions. I care not who differs
from me in opinion, this opinion I give as my own, and, if war is declared, I
shall see it verified.

As doing injury to Great Britain is the strongest stimulus to war in this
country, I shall now take a view of the extent of that injury in the present
instance. As to the taking of Canada, I do not believe it probable. There are
men in that country as well as this, and they are better men, too, if we
believe those debased wretches, who tell us, that one frenchman is worth three
of their own ancestors. At any rate they are men, they are at home, they have
eight or nine regular regiments, and a train of artillery, such as this country
will not have in fifty years to come, Engineers and other experienced officers.
When the warriors talk about taking Canada, they forget that there is any body
to defend it. To be sure the poor devils are subjects; but as they might get
together twice the number of the citizens marched against them, there is a
possibility, at least, that they might lay some few of the latter dead upon the
field.

By sea, a war with this country would not add a dollar to the expenses of
Great Britain. She is already armed, and can very well spare a stout squadron
for this coast. How this squadron might be employed I shall not point out;
suffice it to say, that, if doing injury should be the object of the British
Court, more could be done to us in one week, than we could do to Great Britain
in ten years.

But, we should starve their islands: no such thing. He who is master of the
sea, may call himself the master of the land. Those who have produce to sell,
will sell it, in spite of decrees and ordinances. The British would obtain all
they wanted, just as they now do, with this advantage, that they would prevent
their enemies from doing the same. The more I contemplate this subject, the
more I am convinced, that a war with America would be favorable to the cause
in which Great Britain is at present engaged.

Another reason for going to war, is; we should injure (always injure) the
manufacturers in Great Britain; to which I beg may be added, we should leave
ourselves naked. This latter may be a desirable object with the sans-culottes,
though I should hardly imagine that Mr. Swanwick would much approve of it.
People vainly suppose that the very existence of Great Britain depends on her
commerce with this country: experience might have taught us the contrary: she
can do without our trade for a dozen years at a time. Nor would such a
contraction of her commerce at the present time, and in the present case, cause
any discontent in that country. Our behavior would unite the nation, and the
Englishman that would not patiently bear a temporary inconvenience or distress,
that would not even spend his last shilling, to enable his king to revenge such
an abominable trait of perfidy as the annulling of this treaty, ought to be
stripped to his skin, nay of his skin into the bargain. The fact is, that,
besides wanting the aid of France, this country would also want the aid of the
English in this war: and this would be one of the great differences between
this war and the last. Last war, addresses to the people of England did much:
some of those who came to fight for the king, took very good care to fight
against him: soldiers and sailors came to desert to their brothers, who were
combatting in a cause, which was pretty generally looked upon as the cause of
Britons. Things are now changed. Doctor Franklin, were he to rise from the
dead, would not now be heard at the bar of the House of Lords. No English
Lords, after the fate of Lord Chatham's statue at Charleston, will ever take
upon him the cause of this country; unless, indeed, it be the Earl of Stanhope,
who wishes to be hanged. Such was really the fate of Lord Chatham's statue at
Charleston, in the spring of 1794. Mr. William Pitt's Effigy was burnt in the
same town, and on the same day.
Doctor Priestley we have the happiness to have among us, and therefore he can
do his country no more harm. No; if we are to have war, let us come forward
boldly like republicans, and tell the British we abhor and detest them. No
wheedling, no coaxing. Let those who have burnt that nation's flag, and called
for all the thunder bolts in the stores of heaven to be hurled on them, expect
from them all the mischief they can possibly do.

I know, that such language as this is unusual in this country. It would be
much more pleasing to dwell on the power of the United States and the decrepid
state of Great Britain; but I am no candidate for popular favor or applause. I
delight in speaking hard truths; and besides, this is not the time for jesting
or flattery.

I have hitherto proceeded upon the supposition, that the people of this
country would be all united in the cause of the war. But, how far would this be
from the case! almost all the rich, almost all the people of property, would be
opposed to it. There is another and still more dangerous kind of division,
which would finally end in a dissolution of the Union: I mean the division of
the North from the South. The enemies of peace, in the House of
Representatives, are, with two honorable exceptions, to be found almost solely
in the southern States. Can it be imagined, that the honest and industrious
people of the north will suffer themselves to be dragged down to perdition,
merely to satisfy the unprincipled vengeance of a nest of fraudulent debtors?
Can it be imagined, that the New Englanders will tamely suffer the lords of
Virginia to sport with their prosperity and happiness, as they do with their
barrels of rice and tobacco at a cock-match? Common sense forbids us to believe
any such thing.

I have supposed also, that the government would retain its present form; but,
can this possibly be so? No; the moment a war should be declared, in
consequence of the rejection of the treaty, the constitution would be thrown
aside as useless lumber. A revolutionary state must succeed. Then our Brissots
and our Robespierres would mount the throne: we have them ready at hand, and a
war is all that is wanting to bring them forth. We should have our aristocrats;
indeed, they are already pointed out: the erection of a guillotine is all that
remains for the patriots to do, preparatory to their execution. In short, do we
envy the French their situation, or do we not? Do we wish to experience those
sufferings, at the recital of which we now weep? Do we wish to witness all
those cruelties, those frightful horrors, that freeze the blood and make us
ashamed of our species? If we do, a war, at the present moment, will infallibly
bring us the object of our wishes, and we shall do well to second the
endeavors of the Livingstons, the Madisons and the Gallatins.

I am persuaded, that the following letter, from my Cousin Hedgehog at New
York, will not be unacceptable to my readers.

New York, 21st April, 1796. DEAR COUSIN,
I have long been a constant reader of your useful works, and, as belonging to
a branch of your family, I have taken to myself some part of the honor which
their boldness and evident object reflect on the author; but, as my branch is a
younger, or subaltern one, and as I have not had the folly to adopt the
levelling principles of the sans-culottes of the present day, I have not 'till
now presumed to intrude on your time, nor should I have done it at all, had not
the Democratic tricks in this city seemed to call aloud for publicity.

Without further apology, then, I take the liberty to inform you; that,
yesterday, an assembly was held in the Bridewel-Fields (they were, you see, on
their own dunghill) to re-damn the treaty, or, in other words to decide on a
petition to order the House of Representatives not to pass the laws necessary
for carrying it into effect. As all the merchants, and other inhabitants of
credit and consequence, had before signed a petition to a contrary effect, you
will easily suppose of whom this Bridewel meeting was composed. The hour was,
12 o'clock, when laborers of every description were at leisure to attend. P.
R. Live -- ton and M. Live -- ton ( worthy relations of our nominal
representative) were the leading orators. After these came their coadjutor,
Francis Van D -- ke, a chocolate grinder, known only for his stupid head, his
rancourous heart, his sour phiz and the ridiculous bustle he made about the
tricolored flag, that some wag had the liberticide impudence to tear down from
the place where it was hoisted in our Coffee-House. This man was chairman of
the meeting. The next orator was Serj -- t Cl -- ke, so consessedly in the pay
of France, that he once actually sued G -- net for not paying his secret
services according to stipulated agreement. This "pretended patriot," previous
to the meeting, advertized for the purpose of purchasing several thousand of
hoop-poles, to be used as junkets (alias bludgeons) on the day of parade.

The complexion of the meeting was such, that, it is said, even the Live -- tons
blushed at it. This, however, nobody, that knows the thickness of their skin,
will believe. A petition was drawn up; but, as the assistants could not be
supposed capable of signing their names, and, as in making their marks they
must have rendered the paper as sooty as their own paws, a committee was
appointed to sign for them, though the paws of this committee are certainly not
much cleaner than those of the assembly in general.

What effect such a petition as this may have I know not: the sapient heads of
the Opposition seem to be turned; but they may rest assured, that, if they have
sold us to France, the bargain will notstand. They object to our treaty with
Britain, because contracted without their consent, and we shall object to their
treaty with France, because contracted without our consent. This is fighting
them at their own weapons.

I must now call your attention to another event. On the 12th instant, one
Kettlatas, whose offense was that of vilifying the assembly of the State, was
set at liberty, and drawn in triumph through the streets, seated in an old
ragged Pheaton, by the Guards of the city; I mean the Black-Guards. On this
joyful occasion there was a sort of civic-festival. The French hulks, now lying
in our harbor (where they have lain for nine months past, and where they will
lie while there is an English armed ship at sea) decorated themselves in all
their sans-culotte parafarnalia, usually exhibited at the triumph of savage
anarchy over order and law.

Thus you see the close connection that every where exists between the French
and the brutal enemies of our governments. These are insults that no government
ever before put up with; insults, I trust, we shall not long suffer with
impunity.

I am, etc. J. Hedgehog.
P. S. Unfortunately, your intelligence, in the last Censor, concerning our
malicious Argus (as far as relates to his decease) was not well founded. A
French surgeon sewed up his neck, and the wretch is now dropping about his aqua
fortis with as much malice as ever. Would not your quills and his eyes meet
very lovingly together? My prickles are not long enough.




The following articles are unavoidably postponed.

Observation on the attempt to propagate infidelity in the officious
distribution of Paine's Age of Reason. An Epitaph on Tom Pain, dead or alive.
A Letter to the Theologi -- Metaphysi -- Philosophi Politi -- call Unitarian
Doctor.
N. B. This Censor, from a desire of inserting two of the Speeches on the call
for papers, has been swelled to an unusual bulk; but, as the introduction to
the work promises that no augmentation of price shall take place, that promise
will be adhered to. Debates, however, cannot in future be admitted: want of
room, from a crowd of other matter, will oblige the Editor to confine himself
to remarks on them.


