New Year's GIFT TO THE DEMOCRATS; OR OBSERVATIONS ON A PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, "A
VINDICATION OF Mr. RANDOLPH's RESIGNATION."

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

"For gold defiles by frequent touch;
"There Is nothing fouls the hand so much.
"But as his paws be (...) to (...),
"He washed away the chemic power;
"And Midas now neglected stands,
"With asses ears and dirty hands."
SWIFT. PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY THOMAS BRADFORD, PRINTER, BOOKSELLER and
STATIONER, No. 8, South Front-Street. 1796.

PREFACE.
THE democrats and I have long been in the friendly habit of making presents to
each other; and, this being a season of the year when an interchange of
civilities of this kind is more particularly looked for, I was just turning
about me for a subject that might serve as some little mark of my attention,
when the vindication of Mr. Randolph's resignation made its long-looked-for
appearance.

If the reader knows any thing of the democrats, he will allow, that this
vindication is most eminently calculated to furnish me with the means of making
them a grateful offering: and I was the more anxious to be prompt in the
performance of this duty of etiquette, as, from their present formidable
situation, it was to be feared, that they might have the will as well as the
power to turn their vengeance against me, in case of the slightest neglect.

When we take a view of their affairs for a year past, it is impossible not to
percieve that they are wonderfully improved. They have had address sufficient
to stir up the mob to burn the greatest part of the Federal Senators in effegy;
they have dared publicly and vilely to traduce the President of the United
States; their own president has been elected a member of the legislature of
Pennsylvania; the legislature of Virginia has declared in their favor; and a
fresh importation of theives and traitors See the Democratiad, page 13.
from Ireland are daily expected to arrive. These are great and solid
advantages, and when we add to them the "precious confessions," which they may,
by the help of "some thousands of dollars," be able to draw from their new and
communicative brother, we cannot help regarding their club as the rising sun of
this country.

To this great luminary, then, I kneel; not to ask a boon, but to offer one;
and such a one as I hope will be acceptable, as its great object is to
commemorate actions flowing from the purest principles of democracy.

PHILADELPHIA, 1st. January, 1796.
A NEW YEAR's GIFT, etc.
AMONG the means employed by the anarchical Assemblies of France, in the
propagation of their detestable principles, that of corruption may be regarded
as one of the most powerful, and, accordingly, it has ever shared a principal
part of their attention. If we take a survey of their confiscations,
proscriptions and assassinations, from the seizure of the property of the
ecclesiastics, by the Constituent Assembly, down to the horrid butcheries of
Carrier, we shall find that this has often been a leading motive for
perpetrating of those deeds, which will blacken the French name as long as
honesty and humanity shall be esteemed amongst men. It is, at least, an object
of which they have never lost fight, and which they have spared nothing to
accomplish. They have ransacked the coffers of the rich, stripped poverty of
its very rags, robbed the infant of its birthright, wrenched the crutch from
the hand of tottering old age, and, joining sacrilege to burglary, have
plundered even the altars of God, in order to possess themselves of the means
of corrupting degenerate foreigners.

That their plans of seduction have been but two successful they themselves
avow. Like the gang of highwaymen in the subterraneous cave, each mounts the
polluted tribune in his turn, and tells his tale of corruption. According to
their own acknowledgements, they have expended millions upon millions in this
commerce of consciences, since they have called their country a republic; and,
which is well worthy of remark, these immense sums have all been expended, with
a trifling exception, in the republican states that have condescended to
fraternize with them. The patriots of Geneva and Holland, of Genoa and
Switzerland, have been bought with the treasures extorted from the unhappy
French. The two former states are, in every political point of view,
annihilated, and the two latter exist as a proof, that states as well as
individuals may sometimes triumph in successful baseness and venality.

The people of the United States of America had not the mortification to see
their country included in the dark catalogue; and, though it was evident to
every discerning man, that some such influence began to prevail, in different
parts of the Union, soon after the arrival of Citizen Genet; though it was
impossible to account for the foundation of the Democratic Clubs, and for the
countenance they received from many persons of weight and authority
[particularly in the State of Pennsylvania, where the secretary of the state
was at the head of the Mother Club] upon any other principle; though people
were daily seen acting in direct opposition to their apparent interests; and
though the partisans of France did not hesitate openly to declare their enmity
to the President of the United States and to the government he had been chosen
to administer; notwithstanding all these striking and well-known facts, the
great body of the people would have regarded any one as a slanderer of their
national character, who should have insinuated, that the secrets of their
government, and their most important interests, were the price of that sudden
exaltation that every where appeared among the persons devoted to the will of
the French minister. The people might have remained in this delusive
confidence, 'till their constitution had been subverted, and 'till they had
been plunged into a calamitous foreign war, or driven to the dire necessity of
shedding each other's blood, had it not been for the accidental interception of
the letter, that has led to the Vindication on which I have here undertaken to
make a few observations.

Before I enter on the Vindication itself, two circumstances present themselves
as subjects of preliminary observation: the time, and the manner, of its being
introduced to the public.

Mr. Randolph informs us, that he gave in his resignation on the 19th of
August, in consequence of his having been interrogated on the contents of an
intercepted letter of the French minister, Citizen Fauchet; and we all know,
that his Vindication, if vindication it must be, did not appear 'till the 18th
of December; a space of exactly four months, wanting one day. When he had given
in his resignation, he did not remain at Philadelphia to court the inquiry that
he talks so much of, but flew away to Rhode Island, in order to overtake Mr.
Fauchet, by whose very letter he stood accused, and to obtain from him a
certificate of his innocence and morality. We shall see by and by how he was
employed during his stay at Rhode Island; at present we must follow him back to
Philadelphia, where we find him arrived on the 21st of September, thirty three
days after his departure, and writing to the President of the United States, to
inform him, that he is preparing his Vindication with all imaginable dispatch;
and of this he had taken care to inform the public several days before. After
this notification, it was impossible that the people should not hourly expect
to see, in the public papers, an elucidation of the whole affair. What then
must be their astonishment, when, after having waited with the utmost
impatience for three long weeks, they were given to understand, that the
boasting Vindicator could not close his laborious performance, without having
access to certain other papers of a confidential nature! The request for these
papers, all evasive and malicious as it was, was at once granted by the
President. This pretended obstacle being removed, one would have imagined that
shame would have prevented him from framing further delays; but, alas! shame
has but little power, when honor has deserted the breast.

Two months longer was the publication put off, and we now find it to contain
no more original matter than any man, accustomed to writing, would have
prepared for the press in the space six or seven days at most. That the
Vindicator has not amused himself in polishing his style, every one will allow
that reads him. Besides, a man, whose reputation is suspended, and who is
conscious of his innocence, does not waste his precious time in the pointing of
a thought, or the rounding of a period. Truth needs no embellishment.

The Vindicator's motives for this delay are not difficult to be divined. He
wanted time to spread reports to the prejudice of the President, and to prepare
the minds of the people in his own favor: hence the idle tales of a British
faction, and hence the pitiful pleadings of the Calm Observer. It was probable,
too, that, by delaying the publication till after the meeting of congress, it
might be brought out at a moment when some decision of that body, respecting
the Treaty, might irritate the feelings of the people against the president's
conduct; and, by directing their attention to that part of the Vindication
intended to criminate him, might turn the shaft of their censure from the
Vindicator himself. Besides, Mr. Randolph had not been so assiduous a studier
of the temper of the multitude (for the multitude was all he could hope to
deceive) to be ignorant, that their minds, after being kept so long on the
stretch, would begin to relax; and that indifference would succeed to
curiosity. In short, independent of every other consideration, to gain time, we
may well suppose, was with him a capital object. To this he was led by the
motive common to all men in his situation: every one endeavors to put off the
evil hour; and he justly regarded the hour of the appearance of his
Vindication, as that in which he would be swung off into eternal ignominy.

However, whether any or all of these motives, were the real cause of the
procrastination, or not, is a matter of great indifference; I defy any one to
account for it in a way compatible with his honor. He knew that he stood
accused of a most heinous offense against his country, and had he been
confident, nay had he hoped, that he was in possession of the testimony of his
innocence, he never would have witheld it so long.

Nor shall we find, that the manner of his introducing his Vindication to the
public speaks more in his favor.

In his letter of resignation, he says to the President: I am satisfied, Sir,
that you will acknowledge one piece of justice on this occasion, which is, that
until an inquiry can be made, the affair shall continue in secrecy under your
injunction. But, after his return from Rhode Island, knowing that the President
could not lay an injunction for the time past, and knowing also, that a copy of
the dreadful dispatch was in the hands of Mr. Bond, on whom the President could
lay no injunction at all, he suspected the affair had got abroad, which was,
indeed, the case; it was then, and not before, that, making a virtue of
necessity, he informed the public, by publishing a letter he had written to the
President, that he would prepare a Vindication of his conduct.

After this he suffered the matter to rest for some time, and then published an
extract from another letter to the President, dated the 8th of October, in the
following words: You must be sensible, Sir, that I am inevitably driven into
the discussion of many confidential and delicate points. I could with safety
immediately appeal to the people of the United States, who can be of no party.
But I shall wait for your answer to this letter, so far as it respects the
paper desired, before I forward to you my general letter, which is delayed for
no other cause. I shall also rely that you will consent to the whole of this
affair, howsoever confidential and delicate, being exhibited to the world. --
At the same time I prescribe to myself this condition, not to mingle any thing
which I do not sincerely conceive to belong to the subject.

By this stroke our Vindicator imagined, he had reduced the President to a
dilemma, from which he would be unable to extricate himself. He thought that
the President's circumspect disposition would lead him to refuse the
communication of the paper demanded; and, in that case, he would have impressed
on the public mind an idea of its containing something, at once capable of
acquitting himself, and of criminating the President. And, should the paper be
granted, he hoped that he should be able to make such comments on it, as would,
at least, render the chief of the executive as odious as himself.

The President did not balance a moment on the course he should take. "It is
not difficult," says he in his answer, to perceive what your objects are; but
that you may have no cause to complain of the withholding any paper (however
private and confidential), which you shall think necessary in a case of so
serious a nature, I have directed that you should have the inspection of my
letter of the 22d of July, agreeably to your request: and you are at full
liberty to publish, without reserve, any and every private and confidential
letter I ever wrote you; nay more, every word I ever uttered to, or in your
presence, from whence you can derive any advantage in your justification.

I am sorry that the bounds, within which I propose to confine myself, do not
permit me to give the reader the whole of this noble letter; here, however, is
sufficient to prove the generous deportment of the writer. These extracts most
eminently depict the minds of the parties: in one we hear the bold, the
undaunted language of conscious integrity, and, in the other, the faultering
accents of guilt.

Baffled in this project of recrimination, the Vindicator had recourse to
others, if possible, still more unmanly. A paragraph appeared in the public
papers, as extracted from a Carolina gazette, telling us a shocking tale about
Mr. Randolph having been ill-treated by the President, who had been worked up
by a wicked British faction to accuse him (from something that had been
discovered by an intercepted letter of Mr. Fauchet) of having his price, and
that, in consequence, poor Mr. Randolph had been sacrificed, merely, because he
had advised the President not to sign the treaty with Great Britain. This
simpleton of a story concluded with some patriotic reflections on the
formidableness of the British faction, and the great danger of acting contrary
to their will and pleasure.

After an infinity of other subterfuges and precautions, the Vindication itself
comes forth; not in the face of day, like the honest innocent man from his
peaceful dwelling; but like the thief from his hiding place, preceded by his
skulking precursors. These numerous tricks and artifices have, however, all
failed: the public has had the candor to prejudge nothing: the thunder has
been reserved for the day of judgment.

Should the Vindicator be able to find some quibble to excuse these preliminary
maneuvers, how will he justify the sale of his pretended Vindication? If it be
not necessary to the justification of his conduct, while in the service of the
public, why is it published? and, if it be, how dares he attempt to make them
pay for it? He every where boasts of his pure republicanism, and fawningly
courts the favor of the people, by calling on them to judge between him and
his patron, the President. He pretends to have held his office from them,
though every one knows that he held it from the President, at whose pleasure he
was removeable, and to whom alone he was, in this case, accountable, But, allow
him to hold his office from the people, it is to them he owes an account of his
behavior therein, and that gratis, too.

It has been asserted, by him, or by his printer (it is of little consequence
which), that he is to derive no pecuniary advantage from the sale. But, what is
this to the purchaser? If he is obliged to pay two shillings and nine pence
three farthings for the Vindication, where is the difference to him, whether
Mr. Randolph or Mr. Smith pockets the money. Should it appear, at last, that
the Vindicator is to share in the profits of the work, he will have the honor
of introducing an improvement into the art of vindicating: men have often been
known to barter their reputations; but to derive profit from a public sale of
the proofs of their having done so, is as yet without an instance on the annals
of corruption. I will not, however, profess to believe that this is the case:
many reasons render it improbable. No; his grand object here, as every where
else, was to narrow the circulation of the evidence against him. He has so
managed it as not only to make the public pay for what they had a right to
demand information of without payment, but, by confining the copy-right to his
friend Smith, he has reserved to himself the power of limiting the number of
copies; and, it is very probable, that the Vindication may be out of print in
less than a month. Special care has been taken to place at the head of the book
the instrument by which all others are forbidden to print it, and an extract
from the act of congress, made for the encouragement of learning, by securing
the copies, etc. This is a fair menace; as if he had said: Here is my
vindication; but if any one dares to re-publish it, I will prosecute him
according to law. -- God of republicanism! if there be such a deity, could it
ever be imagined, that a law, made in a country that seems to be the receptacle
of all the patriots upon the face of the earth, for the express purpose of
encouraging learning, and enlightening the people, would have been made a
handle of to keep them in darkness and ignorance, concerning crimes of the most
momentous nature, imputed to those who pretend to glory in being called public
servants!

Had Mr. Randolph been sincere in his desire to appeal to the people, he would
have endeavored to make that appeal as general as possible; and what, I ask,
would have presented itself to him as the most likely mean of effecting this?
Would he not have sent a copy of it to a printer of a gazette, requesting at
the same time all the other printers of gazettes, in the United States, to
re-publish it? This was the method practiced with respect to the British
depredations, and all the other little spiteful stories of the same sort, and
we know that it has ever met with the wished-for success. Why was it not, then,
adopted on the present occasion? Mr. Randolph's friends say (for, astonishing
as it may seem, friends he has) that, by a newspaper publication, it would have
appeared in a mutilated, incomplete state. To this I reply; that, had he sent
his copy to his gazetteer, Mr. Brown, we should have had every line of it in
the Philadelphia Gazette at one time; or, at least, we should have had a right
to expect it; for, the trial of Hardy, which my old friend Brown published
about a year ago, to prove to us that the British government was just that
minute going to pieces like an old crazy hulk, contained much more matter than
the work of our Vindicator. It is very true, that Mr. Brown might not have
imagined that his customers were so nearly interested in the precious
confessions of the ex-secretary of state, as in the fate of a seditious cobbler
at London; more especially as the former might not be thought extremely
honorable to republicanism: yet, there can be but little doubt but he would
have complied; for, as to the reputation of his paper it could be in no danger
even from the insertion of the vindication, after the nonsense, the falsehoods,
the blasphemies, and the bawdry, of which it has so long been the vehicle. By
only sending it, then, to the press of this industrious, vulgar, and voluminous
quid nunc, two or three thousand copies of it would have been distributed
through the dark lanes and alleys of Philadelphia in the space of forty-eight
hours: we should have met with it in every direction, and in every shape that
inanimate nature can assume: not a garret, not a reeking stove-hole, would have
been without a copy: the windows of Paddy's filthy cabin, and even the
crannies of citizen Pompey's hovel, might have exhibited as clear and
undeniable proofs of Mr. Randolph's innocence as the French archives.

This would have been the way for the vindicator to throw himself on the
sovereign people indeed. But, instead of this, what has he done? He has
barricaded himself in by an act of Congress, and forbidden his sovereigns to
approach him without money in their hands. Ye gods! is he ever to have his
price! is he ever to be purchased? And yet this is the man who pretends to be
the friend of pure republicanism, and the advocate for the sovereignty of the
people! Without fur^her enumeration," says he, "of reasons for an appeal to the
people, to whom else ought I to appeal? If the stories which have been
propagated be true, it is their honor which has been wounded. By the bye, I do
not believe this last assertion, and I should be glad to hear how he makes it
out; how he has contrived to shift the dishonor from himself to the people:
but, if it be so, why not appeal to them? Why hide his precious confessions
from their sight? Why attempt to keep them in the dark by imposing a tax on
their curiosity and inquiries? Civilians have long been divided as to the
precise import of the word people; this question is now resolved by the rules
of arithmetic, and that to a fraction, as far at least as relates to the United
States: the people are, all those who are able and willing to give Mr.
Randolph, or his printer, two shillings and nine pence three farthings, good
and lawful money of Pennsylvania! O Respublica! O Mores!

Having dismissed these circumstances, which, though but trifles, if compared
with many others that we shall meet with, were too glaring to pass unnoticed, I
now come to the Vindication itself.

Mr. Randolph begins by a "statement of facts," and in this I shall imitate
him; but as to the manner of doing this we shall differ widely. He has
endeavored to lose us in a maze of letters and answers, and extracts and
conversations, and notes, and memorials, and certificates; but, as it is not my
intention to render what I have to say unintelligible, nor weary my reader's
patience with a round about story, I shall endeavor to be as concise as
possible, consistent with perspicuity.

On the 31st of October, 1794, Citizen Fauchet, the then French minister at
Philadelphia, dispatched a letter to a committee of the government in France,
informing them among other things, of the rise and progress of the insurrection
in the Western counties of Pennsylvania. This letter was put on board the Jean
Bart, a French corvette, which sailed directly afterward for France, and, on
her passage, took an English merchant vessel. When the corvette arrived in the
British Channel, she was brought to by a frigate of the enemy. As soon as the
commander of the former saw that it was impossible to escape, he brought the
dispatches, and Citizen Fauchet's letter among the rest, upon the deck and
threw them over board. But unfortunately for Mr. Randolph, and some other
patriots that we shall see mentioned by-and-by, there was a man on board who
had the presence of mind and the courage to jump into the sea and save them.
The reader will not be astonished at this heroic act, at this proof of
unfeigned and unbought patriotism, when I tell him that the man was no
sans-culotte citizen, but a British Tar. It was, indeed, no other than the
captain of the English vessel that the corvette had taken on her passage. This
good fellow and the dispatches he had so gallantly preserved, were taken up by
the frigate's boat: the dispatches were, of course, sent to the British
government, by whom Citizen Fauchet's letter was, through Mr. Hammond,
communicated to the President of the United States. The President showed it to
Mr. Randolph, desiring him to make such explanations as he chose; and Mr.
Randolph tells us, that it was in consequence of what passed at this interview
that he gave in the resignation, of which he has since published a Vindication.

Although this extraordinary performance is called A Vindication of Mr.
Randolph's Resignation, people naturally look upon it as an attempt to
vindicate his conduct, previous to that resignation. Few persons, I will take
it upon me to say, thought an apology for quitting his post necessary. Those
who had read his bungling correspondencies, never imagined him to be the Atlas
of the state. It was not, then, his resignation that excited public anxiety or
public curiosity, but a certain something between him and Citizen Fauchet. The
people had heard about corruption, about thousands of dollars, and about the
pretended patriots of America having their prices; these were the points the
people wanted to see cleared up. They could not conceive that exposing to the
whole world, and consequently to the enemies of this country, their President's
private letters of July, 1795, relative to the treaty, could possibly tend to
invalidate the charges of treason, contained in the French minister's letter,
written in the month of October, 1794. But Mr. Randolph, it appears, saw the
matter in another light. He has thought proper to attempt to balance the crime
laid to his charge, against another supposed crime, which he imputes to the
President, concerning the ratification of the treaty.

Hence it follows, that the Vindicator labors at two principal objects: to
wash away the stain on his own reputation, and to represent the President of
the United States as ratifying the treaty under the influence of a British
faction. That the latter of these can, as I have already observed, have no sort
of relation to the great and important point, toward which the public mind has
been so long directed, is very manifest; nevertheless, since it has been forced
upon us, it would look like flinching from the inquiry to pass it over in
silence. I shall, therefore, after having observed on that part of the
Vindication which comprehends what ought to have been its only object,
endeavor to place in as fair a light as possible the indirect charge that is
brought against the President.

From Citizen Fauchet's intercepted letter it appears, that Mr. Randolph did
betray to him the secrets of the American government, and make him overtures
for money, to be applied to some purpose relative to the insurrection in the
Western counties of Pennsylvania.

The first of these is fully set forth in the very first paragraph of the
letter, which runs thus: The measures which prudence prescribes to me to take,
with respect to my colleagues, have still presided in the digesting of the
dispatches signed by them, which treat of the insurrection of the Western
counties, and of the repressive means adopted by the government. I have allowed
them to be confined to the giving of a faithful, but naked recital of events,
the reflections therein contained scarcely exceed the conclusions easily
deducible from the character assumed by the public prints. I have reserved
myself to give you as far as I am able, a key to the facts detailed in our
reports. When it comes in question to explain either by conjectures or by
certain data, the secret views of a foreign government, it would be imprudent
to run the risk of indiscretions, and to give oneself up to men, whose known
partiality for that government, and similitude of passions and interests with
its chiefs, might lead to confidences, the issue of which are incalculable.
Besides the precious confessions of Mr. Randolph alone throw a satisfactory
light on every thing that comes to pass. These I have not yet communicated to
my colleagues. The motives already mentioned lead to this reserve, and still
less permit me to open myself to them at the present moment. I shall then
endeavor, citizen, to give you a clue to all the measures, of which the common
dispatches give you an account, and to discover the true causes of the
explosion, which it is obstinately resolved to repress with great means,
although the state of things has no longer any thing alarming. Notwithstanding
the unequivocal expressions contained in this paragraph, the Vindicator has
endeavored at a satisfactory explanation of it; and so confident does he
pretend to be of having succeeded, that he says: I hesitate not to pronounce,
that he who feels a due abhorrence of party maneuvers, will form a conclusion
honorable to myself. Let us see, then, how he has extricated himself; what
proof, or what argument, he has produced, to wipe away the stigma, and to
warrant the confidence with which he expresses himself of the people's forming
a conclusion to his honor.

The phrase of the first paragraph of Citizen Fauchet's letter, which more
immediately attracts our attention, is, the precious confessions of Mr.
Randolph. These words the Vindicator has taken a deal of pains to explain away,
and with his usual success. He begins by saying, that, this observation upon
the precious confessions of Mr. Randolph, involves the judicious management of
the office. It implies no deliberate impropriety, and cannot be particularly
answered, until particular instances are cited. I see nothing here from which
we are to form a conclusion to his honor; nor did he, it seems; for he
immediately throws the task on Citizen Fauchet's certificate. This extra
diplomatic instrument was obtained by the famous journey to Rhode Island, under
what circumstances we shall see by-and-by; at present let us hear what Citizen
Fauchet says in it. As to the communications which he [Mr. Randolph] has made
to me at different times, they were only of opinions, the greater part, if not
the whole of which I have heard circulated as opinions. -- I will observe here,
that none of his conversations with me concluded without his giving me the
idea, that the President was a man of integrity, and a sincere friend to
France. This explains in part [well put in] what I meant by the terms his
precious confessions. -- When I speak in the same paragraph in these words:
"Besides the precious confessions of Mr. Randolph alone cast upon all which
happens a satisfactory light," I have still in view only the explanations of
which I have spoken above; and I must confess that very often I have taken for
confessions, what he might have communicated to me by virtue of a secret
authority. And many things which I had, at the first instant, considered as
confessions, were the subject of public conversation!

Without admitting, even for a single moment, the validity of the evidence of
this certificate, we may be permitted to admire its effrontery. Precious
confessions are here explained to signify opinions, and opinions, too, that
were the subject of public conversation! Oh! monstrous! Oh! front of tenfold
brass! Were we to give credit to what Citizen Fauchet has ende^oured to palm
upon us in this certificate, we must conclude him to be either drunk or mad at
the time of writing the paragraph which he thus explains, and the rest of his
letter by no means authorizes such a conclusion. What idea do the words
precious confessions convey to our minds? What is a confession? -- An
acknowledgement which some one is prevailed on to make. And in what sense do we
ever apply the epithet precious, but in that of valuable, rare, costly, or dear
Would any man, that knows the meaning of these words, apply them to designate
the common chat of a town, mere news-paper topics? We say, for instance,
precious stones; but do we mean by these the rocks that we see cover the lands,
or the flints and pebbles that we kick along the road? If some impudent quack
were to tell us, that the pavement of Philadelphia is composed of precious
stones, should we not hurl them at his head; should we not lapidate him?

But, let us see in what sense Citizen Fauchet employs the same word precious,
in another place, even in the very certificate where he endeavors to explain
it to mean nothing. -- After speaking of the secret machinations of Mr.
Hammond, the conspirations of the English, and their being at the bottom of the
Western insurrection, he comes to the means that Mr. Randolph had proposed to
get at their secrets, and says: I was astonished that the government itself did
not procure for itself information so precious. Here, then, precious signifies
secret. This information so precious was rare information; information not to
be come at without a bribe. This phrase, fallen from the pen of Citizen
Fauchet, while his invention was upon the rack to explain away another charge
against the moral Mr. Randolph, fully proves in what sense he had ever used the
word precious.

However, we should be very far from doing justice to these "precious
confessions of Mr. Randolph" by considering them in their naked independent
sense. It is very rarely that the true meaning of any phrase, or even of a
complete sentence is to be come at without taking in the context. That these
precious confessions were neither so trifling nor of so public a nature, as
the citizen would make us believe, is clear from the tenor of the whole first
paragraph above transcribed, which Mr. Randolph forgot to beg his friend to
explain. After having mentioned the precious confessions of Mr. Randolph,
"these," says he, I have not yet communicated to my colleagues. And why? --
Because, adds he, " the motives, already mentioned, lead to this reserve, and
still less permit me to open myself to them at the present moment. How is this,
then? Why was this cautious reserve necessary, even toward his colleagues of
the legation, if there was nothing to communicate but mere "opinions," that
were the subject of public conversation? What an over-and-above close man this
must have been! Would to God Mr. Randolph had been as close! But what were
these "motives already mentioned?" We must consult the paragraph again here.
The Citizen, after stating that he allowed the dispatches, signed by his
colleagues, to be confined to a naked recital of events, scarcely exceeding
what might be gathered from the newspapers, observes, that he has reserved to
himself the task of giving a key to these joint reports, and adds: when it
comes in question to explain the secret views of a foreign government, it would
be imprudent to give oneself up to men, whose known partiality for that
government, and similitude of passions and interests with its chiefs, might
lead to confidencies, the issue of which is incalculable. -- Here we have the
motives that prevented Citizen Fauchet from communicating the precious
confessions to his colleagues. Ordinary information, hardly exceeding what was
to be learnt from the gazettes, he suffered them to participate; but as to the
secret views of the government, and the precious confessions of Mr. Randolph,
he kept them in his own breast; because his colleagues were men who had a known
partiality for the government, and a similitude of passions and interests with
its chiefs! This reason for not trusting the colleagues of Citizen Fauchet is
corroborated by a sentence of Mr. Randolph himself, who certainly forgot what
he was about when he wrote it. Two persons, says he, were in commission with
Mr. Fauchet, and it was suspected, from a quarter in which I confided, that
these persons were in a political intimacy with members of our government, not
friendly to me. I am sure the reader will agree with me, that this was a
reason, and a substantial one too, for not communicating to them the precious
confessions of Mr. Randolph, if those confessions went to expose the secret
views of the government; but, if, on the contrary, they went no further than
"opinions," that were the subject of public conversation, the precaution was
perfectly ridiculous. It was like the secret of the idiot, who, whispering a
by-stander, told him the sun shined, but begged him to let it go no further.

In short, all the parts of this account correspond so exactly, that they only
want to amount to a proof of innocence instead of guilt to render them a
subject of pleasing contemplation. Citizen Fauchet receives certain precious
confessions from Mr. Randolph, which he keeps from his colleagues, because they
have a partiality for the government, and because, from their intimacy with
some of the members of it, they might make dangerous discoveries. The
inevitable conclusion, then, is, that these precious confessions were not of
opinions, that were the subject of public conversation, and that they were of a
nature hostile to the government; and whether this be a conclusion honorable
to Mr. Randolph, or not, I leave the reader to determine.

Citizen Fauchet, in that part of his certificate which I have above quoted,
makes an indirect attempt to establish a belief, that Mr. Randolph, in his
confessions, never uttered any thing to the prejudice of the character of the
President of the United States. This is his aim, when he says that none of his
conversations concluded without giving the idea, that the President was a man
of integrity. But, we are to observe, that the certificate was originally
intended for the perusal of the President. Who could tell how far such a
declaration, if it should be believed, might go toward making Mr. Randolph's
peace? It has never yet appeared, that he was in earnest about a public
Vindication, 'till after his return from Rhode Island; that is, 'till he saw
that it was absolutely impossible to smother the affair. To have brought this
declaration into the certificate with any other view than that of softening the
President, would have been pure folly. The President being a man of
incorruptible integrity was surely no precious confession; on the contrary, I
am mistaken if it was not among the most disagreeable information that Citizen
Fauchet ever received from his friend, the Secretary. If this certificate had,
then, been intended for the public, to what purpose was the declaration
concerning the President thrusted into it? Did the framer, or rather framers,
of it imagine; nay, could they possibly imagine, that Mr. Randolph would
acquire favor with the people for having declared that the man he now attempts
to blacken, the man he now represents as under the guidance of a British
faction, is a man of incorruptible integrity? The President's character stood
in no need of the eulogy of Mr. Randolph, or the certificate of a mushroon
French minister. The people of the United States knew General Washington to be
a man of integrity, long before Citizen Fauchet was called from among a troop
of itinerant play-actors, to strut on the diplomatic stage of the newfangled
Republic. Whether the Citizen formerly paid his addresses to Thalia or
Melpomene, I know not; whether he has wielded the dagger or worn the mask on
the grand theater of the revolution (which has brought forth such eminent
talents in both walks), is also unknown to me; I should, however, from his
behavior in this country, be led to imagine, that the mask has ever been his
favorite.


The desperate Vindicator makes one struggle more. He endeavors to back the
evidence of Citizen Fauchet's certificate with a protestation of his own, in
which he denies ever having received a farthing for the communication of
state-secrets; says that he never communicated any such secrets; that he never
uttered a syllable which violated the duties of office; all which, adds he, I
assert, and to the assertion, I am ready to superadd the most solemn sanction.
I shall not throw away my time in attempting to invalidate this kind of
testimony. There was a time when the solemn sanction, or even bare assertion,
of Mr. Randolph, might have been formidable; but that time is, alas! no more.

We now come to the overtures for money, to be applied to some purpose relative
to the insurrection in the Western counties of Pennsylvania.

Citizen Fauchet, in the 15th paragraph of the fatal letter, had been speaking
of the assembling of the insurgents in Braddock's Field, and of the
preparations of the Federal government to reduce them to order and obedience.
Then, in the 16th paragraph, he comes to speak of the conduct of certain
persons in power, at this momentous crisis. In the mean time, says he, although
there was a certainty of having an army, yet it was necessary to assure
themselves of co-operators among the men whose patriotic reputation might
influence their party, and whose lukewarmness or want of energy in the existing
conjunctures might compromit the success of the plans. Of all the governors
whose duty it was to appear at the head of the requisitions, the governor of
Pennsylvania alone enjoyed the name of republican; his opinion of the Secretary
of the Treasury, and of his systems, was known to be unfavourable. The
Secretary of this State possessed great influence in the popular society of
Philadelphia, which in its turn influenced those of other States; of course he
merited attention. It appears therefore that these men, with others unknown to
me, all having without doubt Randolph at their head, were balancing to decide
on their party. Two or three days before the proclamation was published, and of
course before the cabinet had resolved on its measures, Mr. Randolph came to me
with an air of great eagerness, and made me the overtures of which I have given
you an account in No. 6. Thus, with some thousands of dollars, the Republic
could have decided on civil war or on peace! Thus, the consciences of the
pretended patriots of America have already their prices! It is very true that
the certainty of these conclusions, painful to be drawn, will forever exist in
our archives! What will be the old age of this government, if it is thus early
decrepid!

From this paragraph we learn, that certain men of weight and influence were
balancing as to the side they should take at the time of the insurrection; that
two or three days before the issuing of the proclamation for the assembling of
a military force to march against the insurg^nts, Mr. Randolph went to Citizen
Fauchet, and made to him certain vertures; and that, from the nature of th^se
overtures, Citizen Fauchet concluded, that, if he had had some thousands of
dollars at his disposal, he could have decided on civil war, or on peace. From
this latter circumstance, it is evident that the overtures were for money, to
be applied to some purpose relative to the insurrection; and, therefore, our
inquiries (if, indeed, inquiries are at all necessary), are naturally confined
to two questions: who was to receive this money? and for what purpose?

The shortest way of determining the first of these questions, is, to resort to
the fair and unequivocal meaning of the paragraph itself. Suppose the following
passage of it alone had come to light: these men, with others unknown to me,
all having without doubt Randolph at their head, were balancing to decide on
their party. Two or three days before the proclamation was published, Mr.
Randolph came to me with an air of great eagerness, and made to me the
overtures of which I have given you an account in my No. 6. Thus, with some
thousands of dollars, the Republic could have determined on civil war or on
peace. Suppose, I say, that of all the letter, this passage alone had been
found; what should we have wanted to know further? -- Why, certainly, who these
men were. This is what we should have cursed our stars for having kept from us.
-- Randolph, we should have said, is at the head of them; but who are these
men? To whom do these important words refer? -- Luckily, Citizen Fauchet's
letter leaves us nothing to wish for on this head: these words are relative to
"the governor of Pennsylvania," the "Secretary of this State I keep to the very
words of the letter; but that, by "this State," is meant the state of
Pennsylvania cannot be doubted, especially when we see that the letter is dated
at Philadelphia.
", and other persons unknown to the writer. These men, according to Citizen
Fauchet's letter, were, with Randolph at their head, balancing to decide on
their party; and, while they were thus balancing, Mr. Randolph, being the
leader, went to Citizen Fauchet, and made him such overtures as would have
enabled him, had he had "some thousands of dollars," to decide on civil war or
on peace.

I shall not amuse myself with drawing conclusions here, as I am fully
persuaded, that no one, who shall do me the honor of reading these sheets,
will find any difficulty in doing it for himself. It is, however, necessary to
notice what has been advanced with an intention of doing away the impression,
that this part of Citizen Fauchet's letter must inevitably leave on our minds,
with respect to the persons in whose behalf the money overtures were made.

The reader has observed that Citizen Fauchet mentions a dispatch, which he
calls his No. 6. and to which he refers his government for the particulars of
Mr. Randolph's overtures. An extract from this No. 6. the Vindicator has
obtained from Citizen Ade^, the present French minister, which he has published
in his Vindication, and which I here insert. Scarce was the commotion known,
when the Secretary of State came to my house. All his countenance was grief. He
requested of me a private conversation. It is all over, he said to me. A civil
war is about to ravage our unhappy country. Four men, by their talents, their
influence and their energy, may save it. But, debtors of English merchants,
they will be deprived of their liberty, if they take the smallest step. Could
you lend them instantaneously funds, sufficient to shelter them from English
persecution? This inquiry astonished me much. It was impossible for me to make
a satisfactory answer. You know my want of power, and my defect of pecuniary
means. I shall draw myself off from the affair by some commonplace remarks,
and by throwing myself on the pure and unalterable principles of the Republic.
-- God of Heaven! what must be the situation of a man, who publishes such a
piece as this in order to weaken the evidence against him!

We should certainly be at full liberty to reject the testimony contained in
this extract; not on account of the person who signs it (though his not being a
Christian might, with some weak minded people, be a weighty objection), but on
account of its being but a part of the No. 6. referred to. I do not, however,
wish to derive any advantage from this circumstance: I admit the validity of
the testimony contained in the extract; and well I may; for, the greatest enemy
of Mr. Randolph, and of those who are involved with him, could wish for no
better confirmation of the 16th paragraph of Citizen Fauchet's letter.

The only circumstance in which the extract from No. 6. appears to differ from
the letter, is, that, in the extract, mention is made of four men, and, in the
letter, of only three. But, let it be observed, that though only three persons
are named in the letter, yet Citizen Fauchet adds to them, others unknown to me.

The next piece of exculpatory evidence produced, is the certificate of Citizen
Fauchet. But, before we quote this paper again, it is necessary to see how it
was obtained.

When Citizen Fauchet's letter was first shown to Mr. Randolph, in the
council chamger, and he was asked to explain it, he hesitated; desired time to
commit his remarks to writing; went to his office, locked up his own appartment
there, and gave the key to the messenger; then went home, from whence he wrote
to the President, requesting a copy of the letter, and informing him that, if
Citizen Fauchet had not quitted the continent, he would go after him, to
prepare himself for an inquiry. -- Was this the behavior of a man grossly
calumniated? Such a man would have said: I see, Sir, by this letter, that I am
charged with crimes which my heart abhors; I declare the writer to be an
infamous slanderer; but, as appearances are against me, here are the keys of my
office, and even of my private papers: examine them all, and I will remain here
till the examination is ended. Send also for Citizen Fauchet, if he be yet in
the country: bring him here, and let him avow this to my face if he dares. -- I
appeal to the reader's breast, whether there is any thing that a man, strong in
his integrity, would have so ardently desired, as to be confronted with his
accuser; or any thing he would have so obstinately refused as to be the
messenger to seek him? Allowing, however, that a man, falsely accused of such
heinous crimes, had, in a paroxysm of rage, quitted the Council Chamger to
pursue the assassin of his reputation; would he not have instantly departed?
Would he have closed his eyes till he came up with him? Would any mortal means
of conveyance have been swift enough for his pursuit? And, once arrived, would
he not have rushed into his presence? Would not the sight of the perfidious
miscreant have almost driven him to madness? Had he found him in the arms of
his harlot, or grovelling at the altar of his pagan gods, would he not have
dragged him forth to chastisement? The heart that swells with injured
innocence, is deaf to the voice of discretion!

How different from all this was the cool, and gentle and genteel deportment of
the Vindicator! He stays, very quietly, two days at Philadelphia, before his
departure for Rhode Island, and loiters away no less than ten days in
performing a journey that the common stages perform in five. When he arrives,
he goes and has a tete-a-tete with Citizen Fauchet, and so mild and so
complaisant is he, and so little malice does he bear on account of the wound
given to his honor, that he afterward writes the Citizen a note, in which he
styles himself his humble servant. In consequence of this tete-a-tete, in which
the Citizen and Secretary re-examined the fatal letter, and refreshed each
other's memories, a certificate was made out by the former; but not delivered
into Mr. Randolph's hands, for fear we should believe that he had penned it as
well as furnished the hints for it, till after his return to Philadelphia, when
it was sent to him by Citizen Adet. This tete-a-tete on the unfortunate letter
resembles the consultation of a couple of physicians over a patient gasping in
a desperate disease: they at last prescribe a remedy, and, physician like,
leave it to be administered by their Apothecary.

I pass by the certificates of a tipstaff and a pilot, which are brought in as
auxiliaries to that of Citizen Fauchet, and come to the questions that were to
be put, but which were not put, to Citizen Fauchet, before Mr. Merchant, a
judge of the district of Rhode Island, and Mr. Malbone, a member of the House
of Representatives. This play at question and answer must have been fine sport
for Messrs. Merchant and Malbone, who would have had the dramatis personae
before their eyes; but, when committed to paper, a perusal of it would have
been quite flat and insipid to us. No question, I am positive, would, on this
occasion, have drawn truth from the lips of Citizen Fauchet; except, perhaps,
the question formerly employed in the Inquisition: for, as to oaths upon the
Holy Evangelists, what power could they have had upon the conscience of a man
whose creed declares the Bible to be a lie, and who alternately adores, the
goat, the hog, the dog, the cat, and the jack-ass If the reader has never seen
one of the Calendars of the enlightened and regenerated French, it may not be
amiss to inform him here, that, in lieu of the Saints whom they placed in their
Calendar formerly, and to whom they addressed their prayers no longer than four
years ago, they have now filled it with brutes, trees, and plants. Each day of
the republican year is consecrated to some one of these their animal and
vegetable saints, and it is a circumstance truly singular, that the day, on
which Citizen Fauchet was to be cross-examined, is consecrated to Hemp. --
There is something like fatality in this. -- Should any one wish to satisfy
himself of the fact, he has only to look in one of the Calendars, printed in
France, for the month of V^ndemaire, a copy of which I have now before
?

After these remarks on the manner in which this certificate, which we are
called upon to give credit to, was procured, we may venture to quote it,
without running the risk of being misled by its protestations. Let us, then,
hear what it says with respect to the persons in whose behalf the overtures for
money were made. About the month of July or August, in the last year, he [Mr.
Randolph] came to see me [Citizen Fauchet], at my house. We had a private
conversation of about twenty minutes. His countenance bespoke distress. He said
to me that he was afraid a civil war would soon ravage America. I enquired of
him what new information was procured. He said that he began to believe that in
fact the English were fomenting the insurrection, and that he did not doubt,
that Mr. Hammond and his Congress would push some measures with respect to the
insurrection, with an intention of giving embarrassment to the United States.
He demanded of me, if, as my Republic was itself interested in these
maneuvers, I could not by the means of some correspondents procure some
information of what was passing. I answered him that I believed I could. He
replied upon this, that having formed many connections by the means of flour
contracts, three or four persons, among the different contractors, might, by
talents, energy, and some influence, procure the necessary information and save
America from a civil war, by proving that England interfered in the troubles of
the West. After this, the certificate says, that Mr. Randolph stated a doubt as
to the pecuniary affairs of these contractors, and observed that those whom
Citizen Fauchet might be able to employ, might perhaps be debtors of English
merchants; and that, in that case, might perhaps be exposed to be harrassed and
arrested; and, therefore, he asked if the payment of the sums, due them by
virtue of the existing contracts, would not be sufficiently early to render
them independent of British persecution.

So! here are all these men who were balancing to decide on their party; these
men, who by their talents, influence, and energy might save the country; these
men, who could have decided on civil war or on peace, are, by this barefaced
certificate, turned into industrious peaceable flour-merchants! This
explanation exceeds even the impudence of Lord Peter, who swore that the words
gold-lace meant a broom-stick.

It would now be necessary to turn to Mr. Randolph's own explanation of what
passed between him and Citizen Fauchet, on this occasion, if his account did
not perfectly agree with the one here given, with such trifling variation of
phraseology excepted as was requisite to encourage the belief, that both were
not the work of the same hand. It does, indeed, appear, that Mr. Randolph
imagined in good earnest, that we should yield an implicit confidence to what
Citizen Fauchet has said in his certificate; for, he seems to have been anxious
about nothing but consuming it with his own protestations, without attempting
to do away the charge contained in the intercepted letter. Our inquiries,
however, are not thus to be diverted. We are not thus to be fobbed off with an
ex-post-facto certificate, and the commentaries thereon. How came Mr. Randolph
to be of opinion that flour-merchants would, above all others, be the persons
to unravel the intrigues of Mr. Hammond. He is the first statesman, I believe,
that ever thought of employing men of this profession to dive into the secrets
of foreign ministers. And why should he suppose, that the flour merchants of
Citizen Fauchet were in the confidence of the English faction, and that the
very ones whom he should choose from amongst them, were debtors, and debtors,
too, to British merchants? Poor fellows! he would have broken his heart, if
they had been "harrassed and arrested," in consequence of their zeal! It was
something extraordinary also, that he did not know the law of this country
better than to fear that they might be kept in prison for debt. He will make
but a poor solicitor in the courts of Virginia, if he does not know how to keep
a fradulent debtor out of jail; and it is very probable, that this little slip
of the pen may hurt him more, in the opinion of his present neighbors, than
his precious confessions, or even than his overtures for money.

Mr. Randolph pretends that, so far from having made overtures for himself and
Co. he rejects with horror the idea of giving a pair of gloves even to these
honest flour-men. Citizen Fauchet, it is true, did understand Mr. Randolph as
advising him to obtain intelligence, by assisting with loans those who had
contracted with him for flour; but now, calling to mind all the circumstances,
he has an intimate conviction, that he was mistaken in the propositions of Mr.
Randolph, who only asked if these good people could not be accommodated with
the sums due them on their contracts! Hence, then, they wish to infer, that all
was fair and honest; that no such thing as corruption was ever dreamt of. Admit
them this, for a moment, and then let them account for the following
expressions, which come immediately after the money overtures, mentioned in the
dispatch, No. 6. This inquiry astonished me much. It was impossible for me to
make a satisfactory answer. You know my want of power, and my defect of
pecuniary means. I shall draw myself off from the affair by some commonplace
remarks, and by throwing myself on the pure and unalterable principles of the
Republic. Now, why pure? Why throw himself on the pure principles of his
Republic? How could the pure principles of his Republic forbid him to yield to
a proposal that had nothing impure in it? And, why does he talk of his want of
power and of pecuniary means? Would it not be the height of stupidity for a man
to talk this way, if he was required to do nothing but to pay three or four
flour-men the sums due them on their contracts?

Nor was such a trifling proposal better calculated to awaken in Citizen
Fauchet these reflections: Thus with some thousands of dollars, the Republic
could have decided on civil war, or on peace! Thus, the consciencies of the
pretended patriots of America have already their prices! It is very true that
the certainty of these conclusions, painful to be drawn, will for ever exist in
our archives! What will be the old age of the government, if it is thus early
decrepid! -- Would any man, except a madman or a fool, have made these
reflections on a proposal to pay certain merchants sums due them, and
particularly when those sums were to enable them to serve their country, by
exploring the secret machinations of an hostile power? Mr. Randolph's proposing
to come at the secrets of the English minister by prevailing on Citizen Fauchet
to pay the sums due to his contractors, would certainly have excited a laugh in
Fauchet: and, if he had thought such a silly proposition worth a mention in his
dispatches, he would naturally have said: what a loggerheaded fellow they have
chosen for Secretary of State here! Would you imagine that he has proposed to
me, to pay my flour-contractors what I owe them, as a mean of inducing them to
penetrate into the designs of the English government! The man must certainly be
out of his wits, or he never would be foolish enough to suppose, that these
people, in gratitude for having received no more than their due from me, would
be induced to undertake a dangerous and expensive service for him. However, the
poor man, though a little crack-brained, is a good patriot, and has no other
motive in all this than to serve his country. -- These would have been the
remarks of Citizen Fauchet, had the overtures been of the nature he now
pretends they were. He would have had all the reason in the world to accuse the
Secretary of folly, but none to accuse him of guilt; none to authorize those
bitter reflections on the saleableness of the consciences of the pretended
patriots of America, or on the decrepitude of the government.

This is not all. If the overtures for money were in behalf of Citizen
Fauchet's flour-men, there remains a very important passage of his intercepted
letter, which both he and the Vindicator have left unexplained. It is this. As
soon as it was decided that the French Republic purchased no men to do their
duty, there were to be seen individuals, about whose conduct the government
could at least form uneasy conjectures, giving themselves up with a scandalous
ostentation to its views, and even seconding its declarations. The Popular
Societies soon emitted resolutions stamped with the same spirit, and who,
although they may have been advised by love of order, might nevertheless have
omitted, or uttered them with less solemnity. Then were seen coming from the
very men whom we had been accustomed to regard as having little friendship for
the system of the Treasurer, harrangues without end, in order to give a new
direction to the public mind. The militia, however, manifest some repugnance,
particularly in Pennsylvania; at last by excursions or harrangues, incomplete
requisitions are obtained. How much more interesting than the changeable men I
have painted above, were those plain citizens, etc.

That Citizen Fauchet understood the money overtures to be made on the part of
these changeable men, is evident; for the passage here transcribed follows
immediately after the paragraph in which those overtures are mentioned. And,
the passage itself is too unequivocal to be misunderstood. All this scandalous
ostentation, he says, these secondhand declarations, and harrangues without
end, in favor of the government, took place, among these changeable men, as
soon as it was known (and not before) that the French Republic purchased no men
to do their duty. Now, then, let Mr. Randolph, or any one of these changeable
men, twist this passage till it applies to his flour-merchants, if he can.
What! did the flour-merchants give themselves up to the views of the government
with a scandalous ostentation? What harrangues did these poor devils ever make,
I wonder, to disguise their past views, and give a new direction to the public
mind? We all know that the Democratic Societies and the good Governor of
Pennsylvania issued declarations seconding that of the government; but the
flour-merchants never issued any, or, at least, that I know of. And yet the
Citizen tells us that all these harrangues and declarations took place as soon
as it was decided, that the French Republic purchased no men to do their duty.
How, then, in the name of all that is vile and corrupt, could the money
overtures be made in behalf of three or four flour-merchants?

But, I must not let these harranguers go off so. Then, says Citizen Fauchet,
were seen coming from the very men whom we had been accustomed to regard as
having little friendship for the system of the Treasurer, harrangues without
end. Who, then, were the persons that Citizen Fauchet had been accustomed to
regard as having little friendship for the system of the Treasurer* Of all the
governors, says Citizen Fauchet, in the 16th paragraph, already quoted, of all
the governors whose duty it was to appear at the head of the requisitions, the
governor of Pennsylvania alone enjoyed the name of republican: his opinion of
the Secretary of the Treasury and of his systems was known to be unfavourable.
In another part of the letter, when speaking about the behavior of several of
the general officers on the Western expedition, he says: the governor of
Pennsylvania, of whom it never would have been suspected, lived intimately and
publicly with Hamilton. As to the fact concerning the harrangues without end,
those of my readers whose memories are not very faithful, have only to open the
Philadelphia newspapers for the months of August and September, 1794. -- Let
the reader, particularly if he be a Pennsylvanian, treasure up all these things
in his mind.

I have but one more observation to add here, and that does not arise from any
thing said in the Vindication: but from a paragraph which appeared in Mr.
Bache's gazette of the 22d December, signed, A. J. Dallas, and which contained
the following words: The publication of Mr. Fauchet's intercepted letter,
renders any remark unnecessary on my part, or on the part of the governor, upon
the villainous insinuations of the libeller [meaning Mr. Wilcocks, who had said
that it was reported, that Citizen Fauchet's letter charged the governor of
Pennsylvania, Mr. Randolph, and Valerius (by which name Mr. Dallas looks upon
himself as designated) of bribery and corruption] in relation to the contents
of that letter; but we may expect to derive a perfect triumph on the occasion,
from the candor of those, who have incautiously circulated injurious
conjectures; and from the mortification of those who have, wilfully, fabricated
iniquitous falsehoods.

It seems, that this A. J. Dallas is the self same "Secretary of this State,"
and that this governor is the same "governor of Pennsylvania," of whom Citizen
Fauchet has made such honorable mention, and of whom we have been talking all
this time: for my part, I do not know the men, nor either of them; nor have I
any ambition to know them; but, if they can see any thing in Citizen Fauchet's
intercepted letter, from which they expect to derive a perfect triumph, I
congratulate them on their penetration with all my heart. Should they triumph,
their triumph will be "perfect," indeed; for, conscious I am, that it will be
attended with this singular and happy circumstance, that it will excite envy in
no living soul Citizen Franklin Bache, too (willing to be in the fashion, I
suppose), has thought proper to come forward with a voluntary Vindication. He
tells the public that, another means of intimidating him into silence, has been
the circulation of false and scandalous insinuations against his integrity, of
his having received French money, etc. To all such he thus positively and
explicitly gives the lie, -- Fair and softly, good master Surgo ut Pr^sim: if
you rise for our good, do not, for mercy's sake, flash our eyes out. If you
have not touched French money, if they have wronged you of your share, why, it
is an agreeable surprise to us, and there is an end of the matter. But, let me
tell you, that it was treating the good people of the United States a little
cavalierly to give them the lie direct thus, and seems to be very incompatible
with your interests, unless you had a sufficiency of customers elsewhere. You
are not, it is true, named in Citizen Fauchet's intercepted letter, and of this
lucky circumstance you were, I presume, acquainted, before you gave the public
the lie; but, as President pro tem. of the Democratic Society of Pennsylvania,
you certainly come in for a share of his sarcasm on those changeable men. No
more boasting, then, master Surgo; for "the more you stir it.... you know the
rest of the proverb.
.

As I am pretty confident that no further remark is necessary with respect to
the persons who were to receive the product of Mr. Randolph's overtures, I
shall now speak to the second question: for what purpose were they to receive
it?

I believe, few people have read the intercepted letter, without being fully
convinced, that the money, if obtained, was to be so employed as to enable the
receivers openly to espouse the cause of the Western insurgents, and overturn
the Federal government; or, at least, counteract its measures so far as to
oblige those at the head of it, to abandon it to the direction of those corrupt
and profligate men, who wished to prevent any accomodation's taking place with
Great Britain, and to plunge their devoted country into a war on the side of
France. The passage of the letter, where the overtures are mentioned,
authorizes this conclusion; and, when we come to examine the other paragraphs,
together with the extract from the dispatch, No. 6. and to compare the whole of
Citizen Fauchet's account with the well known conduct of those who are clearly
designated, as the persons in whose behalf the money overtures were made, the
evidence becomes irresistible.

To weaken this evidence nothing has been advanced, that does not, if possible,
add to its force, by showing to what more than miserable shifts and subterfuges
the Vindicator has been driven. Nevertheless, as we profess to make
observations on the Vindication, all that it contains, however false and
absurd, claims some share of our attention; and, therefore, we must now take a
view of what has been said concerning the application of the money to be
obtained by the overtures of Mr. Randolph, beginning, as before, with the
certificate of Citizen Fauchet.

After telling us that he had frequently had conversations with Mr. Randolph
about the insurrection, and that he himself suspected the English of fomenting
and supporting it, he says: I communicated my suspicions to Mr. Randolph. I had
already communicated to him a Congress, which at this time was holden at
New York. I had communicated to him my fears, that this Congress would have for
its object, some maneuvers against the Republic of France, and to render
unpopular some virtuous men, who were at the head of affairs; to destroy the
confidence which existed on one hand, between General Clinton [late governor of
New-York] and his fellow-citizens, and on the other, that which united Mr.
Randolph to the President. He then tells us the old story about the
flour-merchants.

Now comes Mr. Randolph's turn. Our discourse, says he, turned upon the
insurrection, and upon the expected machinations of Mr. Hammond and others at
New York, against the French Republic, Governor Clinton, and myself. -- Fresh
as the intelligence was upon my mind, that the British were fomenting the
insurrection, I was strongly inclined to believe, that Mr. Hammond's Congress,
would not forego the opportunity of furnishing, to the utmost of their
abilities, employment to the United States, and of detaching their attention
and power from the European war. I own, therefore, that I was extremely
desirous of learning what was passing at New York. I certainly thought, that
those men, who were on an intimate footing with Mr. Fauchet, and had some
access to British connections, were the best fitted for obtaining this
intelligence. And for this reason he recommended the flour-men To give the
reader some faint idea of the volubility of these gentlemen when they got
together, it will be sufficient to tell him, that all this plan for coming at
the secret machinations of the English; that all the questions, and answers,
and observations, and determinations, took them up but just " twenty minutes,"
according to both their accounts. They tell us this, because, if they had staid
longer closeted together, we might have suspected some foul play; but they
should have taken care, then, to render their recital of what passed short; for
I, for my part, cannot read what they say passed between them, in double the
time.
. Oh master Randolph! master Randolph Oh!

Here, then, this worthy statesman was endeavoring to render a most important
service to his country. His only object being to dive into the machinations,
that the English minister and his Congress were hatching against the United
States. A very laudable pursuit. -- This story has something in it so
flattering to human nature, that it is a pity it should be the most abominable
falsehood that ever issued from the procreant brain of a petty fogging
politician.

In the first place, nobody sincerely believed, that English had even the
slightest correspondence or ^^ction with the insurgents; nor did any body (...)
from first to last, pretend to avow such a be^ I know of, except Mr. Randolph
and a (...) Governor. These two gentlemen endea^d to impress the idea of such a
connection as (...) on the mind of the President as on that of the ^lic; but
neither of these yielded to the insidious ^tion. Both very naturally demanded
proofs, (...) proofs were not to be found; unless the insurgents' howling out
liberty and equality, their planting liberty trees, and their wearing cockades
a la tricolor, were proofs of their attachment to the English. No one
circumstance that has yet come to light is a stronger proof of a deep-laid plot
against the Federal government than the efforts of these men to give this false
direction to the public mind. While they were making overtures to the French
minister; while they were endeavoring to feed the insurrection from that
source, they threw out, in order to disguise their views, insinuations that
another nation was at the bottom of it.

And, what was this pretended Congress of Mr. Hammond at New York, that it
should so alarm our Vindicator, and make his friend Fauchet fear, that
something would be attempted by it to the prejudice of Mr. Randolph and the "
virtuous" father-in-law of Citizen Genet? Who composed this Congress? Why, Mr.
Hammond was the President, and his wife, a sick child, and a nurse, were the
members! A pretty Congress this to form machinations against the government of
the country, and to stir up a rebellion in a quarter four or five hundred miles
distant! This Congress, too, was assembled at New York, or rather on Long
Island, where I do not believe that Citizen Fauchet had three or four, nor even
one, flour-contractor; and, if so, how came the wise Mr. Randolph to imagine
that the contractors would have made a journey from Virginia, were the greatest
part of them were, or even from this city, to New York, in order to dive into
Mrs. Hammond's and her maid's secrets? The fellows must necessarily have
remained some time there to effect the object of their mission; they must have
went skulking about incognito like other spies, and must, of course, have run
the risk of kickings and rib-roastings in abundance; and all this for what? why
truly, for nothing! for it would have been for nothing, if they were to
receive no more than what was " due them on their contracts," and both our
certificate makers declare that they were not to have another farthing.

If the overtures had been for money to be employed in the procuring of
intelligence of what the English minister was about, is it not natural to
suppose, that Citizen Fauchet would have mentioned this circumstance in his
very confidential letter? Yet, we see, that he has not let fall a word about
it, either in his letter or in his dispatch, No. 6. Again, what would his
reflections on such overtures have been? He would probably have exclaimed:
Thus, with some thousands of dollars, the Republic could have dived into all
the machinations of the English! Instead of: Thus with some thousands of
dollars, the Republic could have decided on civil war or on peace! Thus the
consciences of the pretended patriots of America have already their prices! --
And, let me repeat, what could induce him to talk, in his dispatch, No. 6. of
throwing himself on the pure principles of his Republic, if nothing was in
contemplation but the unravelling of the treacherous designs of the English?

But, I do not rest upon this negative evidence to disprove all that the
certificate makers have attempted to impose on us, on this subject. Citizen
Fauchet has let fall a sentence in his intercepted letter that proves, that he
did not look upon the money overtures as being made with an intention of coming
at the secrets of the English; that he never thought the English at all
concerned in fomenting the insurrection; that he was well persuaded that the
insurgents never looked for support from them; and that he was fully convinced
of the meanness and baseness of all those who attempted to propagate such an
opinion. "But," says he in the 15th paragraph of the letter, But, in order to
obtain something on the public opinion, it was necessary to magnify the danger,
to disfigure the views of those people [insurgents], to attribute to them the
design of uniting themselves with England. -- This step succeeded, an army is
raised, etc. etc. I cannot help, on this occasion, giving an extract from the
first part of the Bone to Gnaw for the Democrats, which was written soon after
Citizen Fauchet's intercepted letter.

I must be excused also, if I do not give full credit to what the Governor of
Pennsylvania asserted on this subject, when he was harranguing the militia
officers to persuade them to assemble their quotas, for the purpose of marching
against the "Western Brethren." "Listen," said he, to the language of the
Insurgents, and your spirit will rise with indignation. They not only assert
that certain laws shall be repealed, let the sense of the majority be what it
may, but they threaten us with the establishment of an independent government,
or a return to the allegiance of Great Britain.

Most people thought this was a bolt shot; but they forgot, that he said, in
the same harrangue, that, "from defects in the militia system, or some other
unfortunate ca^, the attempts to obtain the quota of militia by regular drafts
had failed." If they had recollected, that, under (...) circumstances, the end
of a harrangue was to "stir men's bloods," and not to be very nice in the
statement of facts, they would not have been surprised, that our Solomon (I can
have no intention to hint, that the wise Governor h^s ever had three hundred
concubines at a time; human nature cannot stand that, now a days) they would
not, I say, have been surprised that our Solomon should choose Great Britain as
a spur.

Render, when you were a little boy, did you never carry on a secret
correspondence with the pl^sand tarts; and, when, by the rattling of the
plates, or some other accident, you were like to be caught at it, did you never
raise a hue and cry against the poor dogs and cats? Those who look upon the
conduct of our Democrats as unnatural, forget their own little roguish tricks.


Here, then, he unequivocally gives the lie to every word that he has said on
the subject in his certificate, and to every word that Mr. Randolph has been
awkward enough to repeat after him. If he was so well informed that all these
malicious tales about the inteference of the English, were invented and
propagated merely in order to obtain something on the public opinion, by
magnifying the danger and disfiguring the views of the insurgents, all which,
it is clear, he learnt from the precious confessions of Mr. Randolph; if he was
so thoroughly convinced of all this, at the time of writing his letter, in
October, 1794, how comes he to recollect, in the month of August, 1795, that
both he and Mr. Randolph did really suspect, that the English were fomenting
the insurrection? No; they never suspected any such thing, and they, and all
others who pretended to suspect it, have only discovered to what pitiful
tricks, what political quackery, they were reduced.

One closing observation on this subject. If money had been wanted to obtain
intelligence concerning the pretended Congress of Mr. Hammond; if this object
was so near Mr. Randolph's heart as he hypocritically declares it was; whom
ought he to have applied to? Whom would he naturally have applied to for the
necessary sums? Whom but the President of the United States, under whose
authority alone he could have acted in so delicate a conjuncture? He would have
laid before him his suspicions of the dreadful Congress, and proposed to him
the means the most likely of unveiling its machinations; and, if money had been
necessary, it would, of course, have been granted. But, instead of this, away
he runs to a foreign minister, and unbosoms himself to him, as if the secret
was of too much importance to be deposited in the breast of the President, or
as if the French had more interest in quelling the insurrection than the United
States had. He appears to have looked upon Citizen Joseph Fauchet as his Father
Confessor, and for that reason it was, I suppose, he reserved for his ear, like
a pious and faithful penitent, those precious secrets that he kept hidden from
all the world besides. In the Council Chamger at Philadelphia he was troubled
with a locked jaw; but the instant he entered the confessional on the banks of
the Schuylkill, to which the Citizen seems to have retired on purpose, the
complaint was removed, and he said more in "twenty minutes," than he will be
able to unsay in twenty years.

To the side of a stream, in a deep lonely dell,
Father Joseph retired, as a hermit to dwell.
His hermitage, crowned with a ca^ tricolor Citizen Fa^chet's Houses, both in
town and country, were decorated with this symbol of orthodox republican^.
,
Brought a beggarly pilgrim his aid to implore.
First the holy-man promised, and, for his professions,
The penitent made him most precious confessions.
Now tell me, dear son, said the hermit, your needs: --
Give me, good Father Joseph, a string of gold beads. --
A string of gold beads, says the hermit, Parbleu!
Your request, my dear son, appears devilish now.
He told him, in (...), he was damnably poor;
Kicked him out of his d^n, and flamed to the door.
It is a great pity we are obliged to quit this delightful theme, to return to
the dry mercenary overtures of Mr. Randolph.

As it appears that he cannot persuade us, that the money was to be employed
for the purpose of coming at the machinations of the English, let us now see to
what purpose it is much more likely it was to have been applied.

From the intercepted letter we learn, that, the complying with the overtures
would have enabled the French Republic to decide, for this country, on civil
war or on peace; and, we are told, in the extract No. 6. which has been
intruded on us purposely to give a favorable turn to this passage of the
letter, that the money, if obtained, would have put it in the power of four men
to save the country. Mr. Randolph, in handling these two passages, has gone
rather beyond his usual degree of assurance. He has taken a phrase from one and
a phrase from the other, and tacked them together to suit himself. This done,
he boldly asks: What were to be the functions of these men? And then comes out
his triumphant answer: To save the country from a civil war. This is Lord Peter
again with his totidem verbis. By running ove^ the two papers, or either of
them, this way; cu^ling a phrase here and a phrase there, he may mal^ them say
any thing he pleases; and he may d^ the same thing with any other writing. In
the manner he may make even the New Year's Gift sa^ that he is an upright,
worthy, incorruptible man and God knows how far that is from the sentime^ of
the author. Is this phrase, which he compou^ded of ingredients taken from two
differe^ places, to be found in any part of Citizen Fauche^ dispatches? Has
this tattling Father Confessor a^ where said, that the overtures were for money
save the country from a civil war? Has he said a^ thing that will countenance
such an interference? No; his dispatches, in every rational construction they
will bear, clearly lead to a contrary conclusion.

He could have decided on civil war or on peace. If we are to understand by
civil war, a successful opposition to the Federal government, the whole of his
letter, from one end to the other, proves that nothing was so near his heart.
He every where exclaims against the ambitious views of the government, and
defends the cause of the insurgents. He speaks of them as an oppressed people,
and of the laws which they were armed to oppose, as harsh and unnecessary. The
anarchical assembly in the neighborhood of Pittsburgh, those outrageous
villains who insulted the officers of justice, plundered the mail, drove
peaceable and orderly people from their dwellings, dragged others forth to
endure every other cruelty short of death, and who, in a word, were daily
committing robbery and murder; this assembly of ruffians he calls, the very
pacific union of the counties in Braddock's Field! a union which could not
justify the raising of so great a force as fifteen thousand men. -- Besides,"
adds he, " the principles uttered in the declarations of these people, rather
announced ardent minds to be calmed than anarchists to be subdued. When he
comes to speak of those who wished to enforce the excise law, he gives way to
the most bitter invectives, and almost curses the officers of government, who
counseled the marching of the troops. But, at last, he is compelled to give an
account of the triumph of the Federal army; and here we plainly perceive, by
the chagrin he expresses at that event, what he would have desired. He laments
that the government will acquire stability from it, "for one complete session
at least," the discredit it will throw on the insurgent principles of the
patriots, and concludes with this, to him, melancholy reflection: Who knows
what will be the limits of this triumph? Perhaps advantage will be taken by it
to obtain some laws for strengthening the government, and still more
precipitating the propensity, already visible, that it has toward aristocracy!

Who, then, can be stupid enough to believe, that if this man had had some
thousands of dollars to advance, he would have advanced them to aid the
government, either directly or indirectly, against the insurgents, and to save
the country from a civil war? And yet, this we must believe, before we believe,
that Mr. Randolph, who was in all his secrets, would have made him overtures
for that purpose.

As to the words, in the dispatch No. 6. which are allowed to signify, save the
country, they must not be thus disjointed from what precedes them. The passage
is this: Scarce was the commotion known, when the Secretary of State came to my
house. All his countenance was grief. He requested of me a private
conversation. It is all over, said he to me. A civil war is about to ravage our
unhappy country. Four men by their talents, their influence, and their energy,
may save it. -- Save it from what? Not from a civil war; it was, it seems, too
late to do that; for it was all over. A civil war was to take place, that was a
settled point, though the commotion was scarcely known; but four men, with the
help of Citizen Fauchet's dollars, might save the country. That is, bring it
out of that civil war, refined and regenerated, and unclogged with the Federal
government, or, at least, with those men who thwarted the views of Citizen
Fauchet and his nation.

Of all the expressions to be found in the Babylonish vocabulary of the French
Revolution, there is not one, the value of which is so precisely fixed as that
before us; to save the country. When their first Assembly, the fathers of all
the miseries of their country, violating the powers with which they were
invested, reduced their king to an automaton, laid their crooked fingers on the
property of sixty or seventy thousand innocent persons, drove the faithful
pastors from their flocks, and replaced them by a herd of vile apostates, they
had the impudence to declare, that they had saved their country! When their
worthy successors hurled this degraded monarch from his throne, and, after a
series of injustices, insults and cruelties, as unmerited as unheardof, put an
end to his sufferings on a scaffold, they, too, had saved their country! They
have saved it, alas! again and again! Every signal act of their folly and
tyranny, every one of their massacres, has ended with a declaration of their
having saved their country. Even when they exchanged the Christian Religion,
the words of eternal life, for the impious and illiterate systems of a Pain
and a Volney; when they declared the God of Heaven to be an impostor, and
forbade his worship on pain of death; even then they pretended they had saved
their country! -- If Mr. Randolph meant to save his country in this way, he is
welcome, for me, to the exclusive possession of the honor due to his zeal. He
might surely venture to make overtures to Citizen Fauchet for operating a
salvation of this kind, without the least fear of a rebuff. But, stopping short
of French salvation, he might wish to save it from the excise; from the
Treasurer's plans of finance; from a treaty with England; and, above all, from
that strengthening the government, which had so visible a propensity to
aristocracy. Besides, when a man comes to ask for a bribe, he must have some
excuse; for, base as he may be, and lost to shame, and well as he may be
convinced, that the person whom he addresses, is as base as himself; yet, there
is a something about the human form, though disfigured with a tricolor cockade,
which reminds the wretch, that he has a soul.

As a convincing proof that the overtures mentioned by Citizen Fauchet ought to
be understood, as made to obtain money for supporting, in some way or other,
the insurrection in the West, and that the whole letter inevitably conveys this
meaning, we need no other proof than that furnished by Mr. Randolph himself. It
will certainly be supposed, that he, above all others, would read this essay on
bribery and corruption with an anxious and scrutinizing eye? We may fairly
presume, that he conned it over with more attention than ever schoolboy did his
lesson, or monk his breviary; and that, from the moment he was in his
penitential weeds, he repeated the some-thousand-dollar sentence as often as a
devotee catholic repeats her Ave-Maria. Yet, notwithstanding all this;
notwithstanding the interest he had in finding some other meaning for it;
notwithstanding even his talent at warping and twisting and turning every thing
that falls in his way, we find him, on the 19th of August; writing to the
President thus: For I here most solemnly deny, that any overture ever came from
me, which was to produce money to me [and not to flour-merchants], or any
others for me; and that in any manner directly or indirectly, was a shilling
ever received by me; nor was it ever contemplated by me, that one shilling
should be applied by Mr. Fauchet to any purpose, relative to the insurrection.
-- He understood, then, the letter to mean, that money was to be received by
him, and that it was to be applied to some purpose relative to the
insurrection. This was the charge that he at first thought the letter contained
against him. And when did he begin to think otherwise? -- After he had been to
see Citizen Fauchet at Rhode Island, and not a moment before. It was after this
edifying tete-a -- tete with his old Father Joseph, that he began to recollect
all about the flour-merchants and Mr. Hammond's Congress; and so, with his
memory thus refreshed, he comes back, and tells us in his Vindication. Mr.
Fauchet's letter, indeed, made me suppose, that No. 6. possibly alluded to some
actual or proffered loan or expenditure, for the nourishment of the
insurrection: and, therefore, I thought it necessary to deny, in my letter of
the 19th of August, that one shilling was contemplated by me to be applied by
Mr. Fauchet relative to the insurrection.

Citizen Fauchet's memory, too, was, it seems, furbished up by this
tete-a-tete; for he tells us, in his certificate, that, now calling to mind all
the circumstances, to which the questions of Mr. Randolph call my attention, I
have an intimate conviction that I was mistaken in the propositions, which I
supposed to have been made to me. -- So, here is a pretty story for you: Mr.
Randolph forget all about the flour merchants, till he talks to Citizen
Fauchet, and Citizen Fauchet forgets all about them, till he talks to Mr.
Randolph! Their memories, like a flint and steel, could bring forth no light
but by friction with each other. If this do not prove a close connection, I do
not know what does. Even "their minds," as the poet says, in wedlock's bands
were joined.

There is another singularity worth notice here. Citizen Fauchet's intercepted
letter was written on the 31st of October, 1794; and, at that time (though it
was just after the overtures were made), he did not recollect a word about the
flour-men, nor about the machinations of the English: but, on the 27th of
September, 1795, that is to say, ten months and twenty-seven days afterward,
he has an intimate conviction of the whole matter; and tells as good a tough
story about it, as one can in conscience expect from a being that kneels down
at the shrine of a Jack-Ass. Mr. Randolph, also, recollected nothing about it
on the 19th of August, but, in some thirty days after, it all came as pat into
his head, as if it had but that moment happened. -- Rhode Island must be like
the cave of the Dervise, where every one that entered saw, written in large
characters; all the actions of his past life. If so, no wonder our Adventurers
made such haste to quit it.

I cannot dismiss this subject, without begging the reader once more to call to
mind the sarcasms that Citizen Fauchet pours out on the changeable men, who
seconded the views of the government with the most scandalous ostentation, who
uttered resolutions and harrangues without end, and who made excursions to
collect troops, as soon as it was decided that the French Republic purchased no
men to do their duty. Mr. Randolph lays hold of this word duty, too, as a
drowning man would of a straw, and to just as much purpose; for, if, by this
word, Citizen Fauchet meant the real duty of these harranguers, they were here
in the performance of it. Their duty, their allegiance to the United States,
required them to speak forcible to the people, to second the declarations of
the general government, and, if ordered, to make excursions to collect troops;
and yet, he tells us, or rather he tells the French government, that they did
all this; as soon as it was decided that the French Republic purchased no men
to do their duty. Hence it is a clear case, that what he conceived to be their
duty, and what he would have paid them to perform, if he had had money, was
exactly the contrary of all this; and exactly the contrary of this would have
been, an opposition to the general government, it is probable defeat, and
consequent destruction.

After all, to fix the blackest guilt on the conspirators, it is not necessary
to prove what their precise intentions were. It is sufficient, that we have the
clearest evidence, that, in consideration of some thousands of dollars, they
would have enabled a foreign nation to decide on civil war or on peace for this
country. After having, then, satisfied ourselves with respect to who they are,
this is the crime we have to lay to their charge. All their asseverations, all
their windings and subterfuges are vain: they will never wash away the stain,
as long as words shall retain their meaning, and as long as virtue shall hold
her seat in our hearts and reason in our minds.

I have already trespassed on the reader's patience much longer than I
intended, and, I fear, longer than he will excuse; but, as I have promised to
take some notice of the Vindicator's attempt at recrimination, I must be as
good as my word.

He has exerted his labyrinthian faculties to the utmost, in order to make it
believed, that the President of the United States ratified the Treaty with
Great Britain, under the influence of what he modestly terms, a British
faction. With this object in view, he says, as addressing himself to the
President: By my advice the United States would have been masters of all
contingences at the end of the campaign. To my unutterable astonishment, I soon
discovered that you were receding from your determination. You had been
reflecting upon your course from the 26th of June to the 16th of July; on the
latter day you decided on it; a communication was made to the British minister
in conformity with it; letters were addressed to our own ministers a conformity
to it; they were in^pected by you, before you rescinded your purpose; no
imperious circumstances had arisen, except the strength of the popular voice,
which would, according to ordinary calculation, corroborate, not reverse, your
former resolution; you assigned no new reasons for the new measures; and you
disregarded the answer to Boston, although it had committed you upon a special
fact, namely, a determination not to ratify during the existence of the
provision-order. While I was searching for the cause of this singular
revolution; and could not but remember, that another opinion, which was always
weighty with you, had advised you not to exchange ratifications, until the
provision-order should be abolished, or the American minister should receive
further instructions, if it were not abolished; after duty had dictated to me
an acquiescence in your varied sentiments, and I had prepared a memorial to Mr.
Hammond adapted to them; after you had signed the ratification on the 18th of
August; Mr. Fauchet's letter brought forth a solution of the whole affair;
thence it was that you were persuaded to lay aside all fear of a check from the
friends of France; thence it was that myself and the French cause were
instantaneously abandoned.

This appears to be the sum of Mr. Randolph's statement, the correctness of
which is, at least, very doubtful; but, not to tire the reader with a
discussion of little importance as to the main point, and in which I might
possibly err, I shall take it for granted, that all that he has said and
insinuated here is strictly true; and then his charge amounts to this: that the
President, even after the decision of the Senate with respect to the Treaty was
known, hesitated, from the 26th of June to the 13th of July, as to what course
he should pursue in regard to the ratification; that, on the day last
mentioned, he came to a resolution not to ratify, until the orde^ ^f His
Britannic Majesty, for seizing provisions destined from this country to France,
should be withdrawn; and that, notwithstanding this resolution, he did
afterward ratify, leaving the order in force, and that he was induced to this
change of conduct from the discovery made by Citizen Fauchet's intercepted
letter.

Now, admitting all this to be so, it requires* greater degree of penetration
than I am master of, to perceive how it proves the President to have ratified
the Treaty under the influence of a British faction, or any faction at all.

It would seem, that the Vindicator imagines, that, when a man has once taken a
resolution, he can never change it, without incurring the censure of acting
under some undue influence. How far such a maxim is from being founded in truth
the experience of every day will prove. A voluntary resolution must ever be
supposed to be formed upon existing circumstances; and, of course, if any thing
arises that totally alters those circumstances, it would be mere obstinacy to
adhere to the resolution. If, for instance, a man determines on giving up a
part of his income to a friend, and the next day finds that friend plotting
against his life, must he, notwithstanding the discovery, put his determination
in practice, or be subjected to the charge of acting under some undue
influence? To maintain such a position appears to have been reserved for Mr.
Randolph alone. The true question, therefore, is this: Was the discovery, made
by Citizen Fauchet's intercepted letter, sufficient to justify the President's
altering his resolution, or not?

The only objection that it is pretended the President ever had to ratify the
Treaty, as advised by the Senate, was, the existence of the order of the King
of Great Britain for seizing provisions destined from this country to France;
because, he was given to understand that ratifying while this order remained in
^e, might look like acknowledging the legality (...) the seizure, and might
embroil the United States with the French Republic. That this was the
suggestion of Mr. Randolph he now avows; and he even owns; nay, boasts, that he
never would have given his advice in favor of the ratification at all, if he
had not remembered, that if the people were adverse to the Treaty, it was the
constitutional right of the House of Representatives to refuse, upon original
grounds, unfettered by the Senate and President, to pass the laws necessary for
its execution. He has been tempted to make this avowal in order to ingratiate
himself with the Opposition; and the need they have of a man, able and willing
to expose every secret of the Executive, may, perhaps, insure him a momentary
success; but the avowal furnishes, at the same time, an irresistible proof of
his double dealing. We plainly perceive from this, as well as from all the
documents he has brought forward, on the subject, that he was the great, if not
the only cause, of the delaying of the ratification. First he starts
objections; then proposes conferences between himself and the English minister;
then he drafts memorials; in short, he was taking his measures for undoing all
that had been done, or, as Mr. Pickering well termed it, for throwing the whole
up in the wind.

The situation of the President was, at this time, truly critical. On the one
hand, he saw an instrument ready for his signature, which completed the
long-desired object, an amicable termination of all differences with Great
Britain; an object that twenty long years of war and disputation had not been
able to accomplish: on the other hand, he was haunted with the feigned, but
terrific forebodings of an artful Secretary of State, who lost no opportunity
of representing the consummation of the act as a just cause of offense to
France, the faithful ally of the United States and the favorite of the people.
At this embarrassing moment arrives the intercepted letter of Citizen Fauchet.
The charm, that held him in suspense, is at once dissolved. Here he sees that
the hypocrite in whom he had confided, who first awakened doubts in his mind,
who had been the cause of all the procrastination, and who had hitherto
withheld his hand; here he sees him at the head of a faction opposed to his
government, unveiling all its most secret views to a foreign minister, and even
making overtures for money, which, if acceded to, would have enabled that
minister to decide on civil war or on peace for this country. Was it not
natural to imagine, that he should now see the advice of this "pretended
patriot" as a lure to lead him into a snare, to render the Treaty abortive, and
eventually plunge the United States into a war with Great Britain? And was it
not, then, I ask, as natural, that he should turn from it with indignation and
horror? "Hence it was," says the Vindicator, that myself and the French cause
were instantaneously abandoned. And, upon my soul, I think it was high time.

In this letter the President saw also, what it was he had to expect from the
friendship of the regenerated French. Here he finds a foreign minister writing
a letter that breathes, from the first syllable of it to the last, the most
treacherous hostility to the Federal government. He finds him caballing with
some of the leading men in the state; reviling his administration; representing
him as the head of an Aristocracy; approving of an open rebellion; regretting
its want of success, and that he had not the means of nourishing it. And all
this he sees addressed to the rulers of a nation professing the sincerest
friendship for himself and the people of America. Was it possible that he
should see any thing here to induce him to delay the ratification of an
instrument, calculated to insure peace and uninterrupted prosperity to his
country, merely for the take of obtaining an advantage for that nation?
"Hence," says the Ex-Secretary, in his plaintive style, Hence it was that he
was persuaded to lay aside all fear of a check from the friends of France. And
well he might; for, what more had he to fear from them? Open war with such
people is as much preferable to their intrigues, as a drawn sword is preferable
to a poisoned repast.

The Vindicator, pursuing his plan for opening to himself a welcome from the
adverie (and might say perverse) party, insiduously brings forward the
remonstrances against the Treaty as a reason that ought to have prevented its
ratification. Few people, who consider how these remonstrances were obtained,
ever looked upon them as a reason of any weight: but, whatever attention they
might merit before the discovery made by the intercepted letter, they merited
none at all afterward; for, there was, and there is, all the reason in the
world to believe, that they originated from the same all-powerful cause as did
the suggestions, difficulties and delays of the Vindicator. He would fain
persuade us, indeed, that no money overtures ever passed between him and
Citizen Fauchet, after the little affair of the flour-merchants; but the method
he takes of doing this is rather calculated to produce admiration at his
effrontery than conviction of his repentance. Addressing himself to the
President he says: Do you believe, Sir, that if money was pursued by the
Secretary of State, he would have been rebuffed by an answer, which implied no
refusal; and would not have renewed the proposition; which, however, Mr.
Fauchet confesses, he never heard of again? -- I do not know what the President
might believe of the Secretary of State; but one would imagine that even such a
rebuff as the Vindicator met with would have prevented any man from returning
to the charge; however, I shall not contradict him here, as he must understand
these things better than I, or, perhaps, any other man living. I haste to the
declaration he quotes from Citizen Fauchet's dispatch, No. 6. Yes, it is very
true that the Citizen says in that dispatch: I have never since heard of
propositions of this nature. But when was this dispatch written? -- Before the
31st of October, 1794, and, consequently, before the intercepted letter; and
Mr. Randolph has the conscience to make this declaration apply to the month of
November, 1795. This is another of those little twists for which our Vindicator
is so renowned.

There was great plenty of time for the Citizen to receive a reinforcement from
France, before the Treaty made its appearance on this side of the Ocean; and
the regret he expresses at his want of pecuniary means, when the first
overtures were made to him, seems to be a tolerable good reason for presuming
that he would strain every nerve to be able to give a more "satisfactory
answer" another time, than that concerning "the pure principles of his
Republic." I leave any one to guess at the low ebb to which he must be reduced,
when he was obliged to throw himself on the purity of the French nation, for
want of a little of the ready to purchase the " consciences of the pretended
patriots of America," which were just going off as cheap as neck-beef, or
damaged goods at vendue! What must be the mortification of this speculator in
consciences, when he had not one single dollar to give those changeable men, to
prevent them from harranguing and issuing declarations to second the views of
the government! Indeed, when the Citizen is upon this subject he seems to be
quite unmanned. His situation was like that of a prodigal, who, after having
squandered his last sou on his bawds and parasites, sees himself deserted and
despised by them. -- And the popular societies too, says he, giving way to all
the anguish of his soul, And the Popular Societies too, emitted resolutions
stamped with the same spirit! The poor Citizen's grief at this ungrateful
defection of his darling Club, puts one in mind of the lamentation of King
James, when he heard that his favorite daughter had quitted his palace to join
the invader. God help me, said he, I am deserted by my very children! -- This
was not the case with Citizen Genet: his purse was ever full, and he had ever a
troop of Democrats at his heels. He made his court like Jupiter of old, in a
golden shower, and, like Jupiter, he succeeded. Then was the time for trade:
then a patriot's conscience was as good to him as a little estate: he was not
then obliged to hawk it about from door to door, like stinking fish or rotten
peaches.

That Citizen Fauchet would press the necessity of a supply there can be no
reason to doubt, at least from any thing that he has said to the contrary; for,
it was the want of power and defect of pecuniary means, that prevented him from
yielding to the overtures that were made him; and not his want of inclination
to nourish the insurrection in the West. I shall draw myself off, says he, by
some common place remarks, and by throwing myself on the pure principles of the
Republic. He says this with a laugh, that very well indicates what he thought
of that purity. But, we are not reduced to the necessity of forming an opinion
on any thing that he says on this subject. We know what the pure principles of
his Republic are. We have seen from a report, made in the Convention, that, at
Genoa, these pure principles had made sure of a party, who engaged to open the
gates of the City to the French army, and that this plan, after having cost
some millions, failed of success. In Switzerland, the Convention declares they
have spent more money in bribes, than would have maintained an army of a
hundred thousand men in the field; but, point d'argent point de Suisse,
according to their own proverb. In Denmark they expended such immense sums in
consequence of their pure principles, to the wife of one, and the whore of
another, and the laquay of another, and all this under the pretense of
purchasing corn, that the reporter declares, that those who eat the bread made
of the corn coming from that country, might be said to swallow pure gold Might
not this circumstance give our certificate makers the idea of flour-merchants?
They knew that the thing had succeeded in Denmark, and though it was rather
inconsistent for such a " true republican as Mr. Randolph to adopt the
practices of monarchical countries, yet, in such a desperate case, the thing
might pass, with a mental reservation; and, at any rate, should it be a sin
against the "pure principles' he professed, as he was with his old Father
Confessor, it was easy to obtain absolution.
. Consciences were high there; and yet the expenditure in Denmark is estimated
at no more than a thirtieth part of what was expended among the republics. It
was at Geneva that the success of their pure principles was complete. Their
minister at that place adhered to them so rigidly, that, in the space of a few
months, that devoted City became a little Paris. The constitution was
destroyed, the sans-culottes let loose upon the rich; confiscations, banishment
and death followed The influence of French money at Genoa was such, that when
they appeared in its neighborhood, the patriots planted liberty trees on every
conspicuous part of the fortifications. On each of these trees was the
following inscription: This tree will defend our ramparts better than we can.
-- Let the reader cast his eye on this scene of baseness; let him view this
venal cowardly race, hoisting the colors of a nation of whose treacherous
designs they were convinced; kissing the hand that held the scourge over them.
And, when he has contemplated this spectacle as long as contempt and
indignation will permit him, then let him transfer that contempt and
indignation to the cockade-men and civic-feasters of America.

This is a proper place to remark, that Citizen Genet was one of those employed
in accomplishing the destruction of Geneva. This circumstance accounts for the
following sentence of his letter of credence to the Congress: The proofs of
zeal and patriotism which he has hitherto given, persuade us, that he will
conduct himself in a manner to render his person agreeable. -- He rendered his
person agree^ble to M.. C... and to the Democratic Societies, but to nobody
else, I believe.


. -- After this, it is diverting to hear Citizen Fauchet solemnly declare [in
his certificate, mind that], that the morals of his nation, and the candor of
his government, severely forbid the use of money in any circumstances, which
could not be publicly avowed. -- Consummate impudence! The morals of a nation
that do not now so much as know the meaning of the word! The morals of a nation
that, one day in the year, have Hemp for their god! -- And the candor of his
government, too! A pretty sort of candor, truly, to profess the tenderest
affection for the President and Congress, while they were preparing to blow
them all up. While they were endeavoring to foster a nest of conspirators, who
would have sent them all to the guillotine, like the magistrates of Geneva, or
swung them up in the embraces of their elastic god! From the morals and candor
of such people, God defend us!

When Citizen Fauchet informed the Convention of the great bargains that were
offered him here, when they found at what a low rate the consciences of the
pretended patriots of America were selling off, it would be to contradict every
maxim of trade, to suppose that the purity of their principles and the morals
of their nation would prevent them from enabling him to make a purchase; and
particularly at the important moment, when the Treaty with Great Britain was to
be ratified or rejected. There was, indeed, one difficulty; and that was, the
Treasury of the Convention was nearly as empty as Father Joseph's purse or the
pouch of his mendicant pilgrim. And, as to assignats, besides their being a
tell-tale currency, they never would, as we have no guillotine in the country,
have been convertible into food and raiment; so that, of course, they would
have been as despicable and despised waste-paper, as the Aurora of
Philadelphia, the Argus of New York, or Chronicle of Boston. This difficulty,
however, formidable as it was, appeared as nothing in competition with the
object in view. We may well suppose that their indefatigable financiers would
make a last effort; would give the nation another squeeze, to come at the means
of defeating the Treaty. They have a greater variety of imposts than Mr.
Hamilton or even Mr. Pit: and in a pressing occasion like the one before us,
they had only to set the national razor at work for two or three days, upon the
heads of the bankers and merchants, to collect the sum required: or, if these
should be grown scarce, a drowning of four or five thousand women might bring
them in ear-bobs and other trinkets It appears from a relation of the
transactions at Nantz, that, in that city only, more than three thousand women
were either drowned or shot, in the space of a few months, merely for the sake
of their rings, etc. The murderers, as is often the case, quarrelled, when they
came to divide the booty, published accusations against each other, and so the
world has been informed of the pure principles of the Republic; the morals of
the nation!

The American ladies will do well to (...) upon their guard with respect to
French baubles; for it is very probable that their lovely persons may bear
about them ornaments, torn from the bleeding ears and fingers of those females,
who were formerly beloved and respected like themselves.


sufficient to stir up fifty town-meetings, and to cause two thirds of the
Federal Senators to be roasted in effigy. I would by no means insinuate, that
the citizens, in general, who were assembled on these occasions, participated
in any donation whatever, foreign or domestic, for I have never heard of any
thing of the kind; except, indeed, at Philadelphia, where, after having
hollowed like lusty fellows to "damn the Treaty," they were taken and regaled
with grog and muddy porter, at a tavern belonging to Patriot Plato. This little
gentleman, whom the French ladies call the Garc^n fendu, is said to delight in
mischief like a Jack-Daw. He ^as amassed a great deal of money together, God
knows how, which he appears determined to employ in doing this country all the
harm in his power. He fully justifies the maxim of the naturalists, who tells
us, that the most impotent reptiles are ever the most malicious. We have,
however, this consolation: there will be none of his breed to torment our
children.

It seems to me rather inconsistent that this Pope Jone should be admitted into
a masculine assembly like the Congress of the United States; for, though I am
far from approving of the indelicate scrutiny of the Roman Conclave, yet, I
must confess, that, where there are such grounds for suspicion, I think a
legislator should be obliged to produce ^me proofs, before he be allowed to
assist in making laws to govern fathers, mothers, and their progeny. Let him
speechify in the Boarding Schools till he is hoarse, but not in a legislative
assembly.

Sage Plato mounted on a three-legg'd stool,
Harrangu'd the Misses of the Boarding-School,
In accents soft as any Eunuch's song.
Blithe Phyllis thought the speech confounded long.
Two craving appetites her soul divide:
She longed for dinner, and for Damon sighed.
With nose up-turn'd, she eyes the spouting Sage;
Each lisping period, but augments her rage.
Oh! god o^ dinners, says the impatient maid,
And you, Oh! god of love, now lend your aid!
From this vile spouter set your vot'ry free,
Let her once more roast-duck and Damon see!
But, if she is doomed, for some unknown offense,
To hear a frothy babbler, void of sense,
Send her a man, ye gods! and take this pigmy hence.

Donations, or "loans," of this sort, seldom extend further than the chairman,
orators, and committee men: the multitude, when their vociferations are
finished, are generally suffered to retire to their cabins, their minds
inflated with the ideas of their sovereignty, but their bellies as gaunt as
those of fasting wolves.

Let any one look at the conduct of the leaders in this opposition to the
treaty, and believe, if he can, that they were not actuated by some powerful
motive which they dared not openly to avow. They began to emit their anathemas
against it, long before it was even laid before the Senate. Mr. Randolph
protests, that he never divulged its contents to any one. How he came to
imagine this un-asked for declaration necessary in his Vindication, I know not;
but this I know, that almost every article of it was attacked in the Democratic
papers, immediately after it was received by the President, and that too, with
such a confidence of its being what it has since appeared to be, that it
requires something more than the protestation of Mr. Randolph, to persuade me
that it was not divulged before its appearance from Mr. Bache's press. I will
go further, and say, that I am well convinced, that the Letters of Franklin,
which were the first pieces that appeared on the subject, and to which I more
particularly allude here, were originally the work of a Frenchman As a proof
that this is not a new opinion with me, I here insert an extract from Plain
English; page 89.

Before I proceed any further, it is necessary to give you a brief history of
the Letters of Franklin. Whoever reads these letters with the smallest
attention, must perceive, that they are, originally, a French production. Every
one of them ends with an address to the passions of the sovereign people. These
declamatory parts betray their origin in a more striking manner than the rest
of the performance. Here we see a close and servile imitation of the illiterate
newfangled jargon of the French Convention; a heterogeneous mixture of
insolence, servility, vaunting, and lamentation.

Such was my opinion of the Letters of Franklin in the month of July last;
before Mr. Randolph's scandalous affair was ever talked or dreamt of, in this
country, and consequently before I could suspect that the contents of the
treaty had been divulged by him.


. Father Joseph, believe me, did not bury himself alive on the banks of the
Schuylkill purely and simply to have leisure to say his Angelus and tell his
beads. His retirement was not so much the effect of piety as of politics.

And who has forgotten the diligence of the opposers, the moment the treaty was
published? Did they give it time to circulate? Did they let it come before the
people as public acts in general do, and leave them to form a fair and
unprejudiced opinion on it? On the contrary, was not every spring put in motion
to prepossess them; to fix in their minds a hatred to the measure, that truth
would not be able to remove? How can we account for individual's quitting their
homes, neglecting their business, and sacrificing, to appearance, their
interests, to carry this instrument to the extremities of the Union, and there
form combinations against it, in order to intimidate the President from a
ratification? How can we possibly account for the French flag being hoisted at
the town-meetings as a signal of opposition to the treaty See Plain English,
page 108.
? What can solve this mystery, unless it be Citizen Fauchet's intercepted
letter?

We all remember the hue and cry that was raised by the adverse party, their
alarm, when the old Father Confessor and his dispatches were like to be taken
by the English ship, the Africa. They trembled, and not without reason. If his
nine (I believe there were nine of them) cartons had fallen into the hands of
the President, we should then, indeed, have seen real machinations unravelled.
Then might we have examined the whole account, run over all the items of
corruption, known the price current of consciences, and the exact value of
every individual patriot. We should then have seen, perhaps, how much it cost
the French Republic to have a stone hurled at the head of Mr. Hamilton Ibid.
; how much she pays for an essay from Valerius, an harrangue from the
Garcon-fendu, and a sentence of "damnation" from the President of the
Democratic Society Ibid. p. 109.
. Then, too, might we have discovered, what sum is necessary, to make one judge
quit his awful functions, to head a tumultuous populace, and another, make a
silly, vulgar, butcher-like proposal for "seizing Great Britain by the throat
and strangling her." And then might we have seen, what could induce the
versatile "Pennsylvania Farmer," to forget the meek, the humble, the peaceful
principles of his society, utter a phillipic of sublimated nonsense, breathing
nothing but rancour and opposition, and accept of the burning of the Senators
of Delaware before his door, as a sacrifice to his patriotic zeal.

Unfortunately these cartons were not intercepted; but all the proceedings of
the opposers were such, that, when explained by the intercepted letter, there
could remain little or no doubt with respect to their real views; and no one,
except a willing dupe, could any longer hesitate to declare, with the Secretary
of War, that the struggle to defeat the Treaty was the act of a detestable and
nefarious conspiracy.

Will any one believe, then, that the President, with this conviction on his
mind, stood in need of British influence to determine on a ratification? What
other determination could he possibly take? Was he, though he saw the pit open
before his eyes, to plunge headlong into it? Was he, after having discovered
the conspiracy, tamely to yield to its machinations, and assist in the ruin of
his country? There was but one course for him to pursue to make the government
respected, and blast all the hopes of the conspirators, and that was to ratify
the Treaty. By this act he preserved to us the inestimable blessings of peace,
gave stability to the Constitution, not only for one, but for many sessions, by
a legal and manly exercise of the powers it has vested in him, convinced the
French that the interests of the Union are not to be sacrificed to her
vengeance or caprice, and showed to the whole world, that we wish to live in
friendship with all nations, but that we are determined to be the slaves of
none. And yet this act, Mr. Randolph would persuade us, was the work of a
British faction!

Thus has the Vindicator failed in all his attempts. On the article of
corruption, of which we before doubted, we now doubt no longer; and as to his
indirect accusation against the President, it only serves to show that one who,
with unblushing front, can ask a bribe, will never be ashamed to publish his
ingratitude and apostasy.

I will not, like him, conclude by calling on the people to judge between him
and the President of the United States. Their respect for the latter would not,
I trust, for a moment endure the competition; for, in spite of all the
desperate efforts of a disappointed faction, their confidence in General
WASHINGTON is, and will remain, unshaken. His name will be handed down to their
children's children, and ever accompanied with gratitude, love, and admiration.
It will be the ornament of the historian's page, while that of Randolph, should
it be so unfortunate as not to sink into oblivion, will be thrown into some
dark corner, among the "changeable men" and "pretended patriots of America."

FINIS.
ENTERED ACCORDING TO LAW.

T. BRADFORD, Has constantly for sale a large assortment of the LATEST
POLITICAL PUBLICATIONS, among those on hand at present are the following:
Peter Porcupine's works, neatly bound and lettered. The Democratiad, a poem.
The Political Progress of Britain, 1st and 2d parts. The Letters of Camillus on
the Treaty. The Letters of Cato on the Treaty. American Remembrancer, 2 vols.
Randolph's Vindication. Letters to the Prince of Wales. Brackenridge's
Incidents of the Insurrection in the West. Marten's Law of Nations, a new work.
Features of Mr. Jay's Treaty. Spirit of Despotism. Correspondence between
Jefferson and Genet. The Treaty with Great Britain, with a copious Appendix.
Stewart's Political Economy, 2 vols. 4to. Barlow's work's Female Jockey Club.
The Democrat; or, Adventures of Jean Le Noir. Bone to Gnaw, 1st. and 2d. parts.
Plain English.

