No. 1. A PROSPECT FROM THE CONGRESS-GALLERY, DURING THE SESSION, BEGUN
DECEMBER 7th, 1795. WITH OCCASIONAL REMARKS.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA: SOLD AT THE POLITICAL BOOK-STORE, SOUTH FRONT-STREET. No. 8.

Entered according to law.

A PROSPECT FROM THE CONGRESS-GALLERY, DURING THE SESSION, BEGUN DECEMBER 7,
1795.

CONTAINING, The President's Speech, the addresses of both Houses, some of the
debates in the Senate, and all the principal debates in the House of
Representatives; each debate being brought under one head, and so digested and
simplified as to give the reader the completest view of the proceedings with
the least possible fatigue.

WITH OCCASIONAL REMARKS, BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY THOMAS BRADFORD, PRINTER BOOKSELLER and STATIONER,
No. 8, South Front-Street, 1796.

PREFACE.
THE serenity, that reigned in our political hemisphere at the close of the
last session of Congress, was soon succeeded by the boisterous conflict for and
against the treaty with Great Britain. This struggle, the cause as well as the
circumstances of which are too unpleasant to be dwelt on here, ended in the
determination of the discomfited party to petition the House of
Representatives, and thus renew the fight. Hence most people looked toward the
meeting of Congress with unusual anxiety: every real American had his hopes and
his fears; of course, I had mine: and, as I look upon it to be the duty of
every man to keep the deck during a storm, I resolved to be a punctual
attendant in the Gallery from one end of the session to the other.

Most of the members will, without doubt, recollect seeing a little dark man,
clad in a gray coat something the worse for wear, sitting in the west corner of
the front seat: that has been my post; and I can boldly say, that I never
deserted it; except during the five days that I was employed in writing the New
Year's Gift.

During this my contemplative attendance, I made a number of remarks, which,
because they appeared pertinent to me, I naturally imagined would be useful to
my countrymen; and this, together with considerations of a domestic nature,
tempted me to present them to the public, accompanied with the debates to which
they refer.

But, I should be wanting in justice to myself on this occasion, were I to omit
mentioning other motives that had a share in inducing me to undertake the
compilation. I had observed, with a good deal of pain, that a certain Mr.
Callender, amused himself, during one half of the summer, in re-publishing the
debates from the Philadelphia Gazette, with the voluminous addition of the
minutes of the House. This laborious task appeared to me to answer no earthly
purpose, but that of keeping half a dozen lusty fellows pent up in the city, at
work in ink and filth, to the evident detriment of their health, while they
might be so much more wholesomely as well as profitably employed in getting in
the harvest. It was also certain, that, while Mr. Callender himself was this
way engaged, he could not apply the whole force of his genius to his other
important studies; and that, should he be suffered to proceed the ensuing
summer, the people of the United States might, perhaps, be deprived of a third
"Political Progress of Britain," foretelling the long-hoped-for ruin of that
"insular Bastile."

Thus then, in spite of my cruel and implacable persecutors, the Democrats,
from whose malice no degree of inofensiveness has been able to shelter me, I
hope the world will be convinced, that this undertaking of mine has been
dictated by the purest patriotism and urbanity; a circumstance that assuredly
does not render it less worthy of the patronage of my fellow citizens.

A PROSPECT, etc.
MEETING OF CONGRESS. -- A SPEAKER CHOSEN. -- PRESIDENT's SPEECH.
MONDAY, 7th December, 1795.
THE House being met, proceeded to the choice of a Speaker and a Clerk, when
Mr. Jonathan Dayton, one of the Representatives for the state of New Jersey was
chosen Speaker, and Mr. John Beckley, Clerk.

TUESDAY, 8th December, 1795.
The Senators and Representatives being assembled in the chamber of the latter,
the President of the United States entered, took the chair, and opened the
session with the following speech:

Fellow Citizens of the Senate, and House of Representatives,
I TRUST I do not deceive myself, while I indulge the persuasion, that I have
never met you at any period, when, more than at the present, the situation of
our public affairs has afforded just cause for mutual congratulation, and for
inviting you to join with me in profound gratitude to the Author of all Good,
for the numerous and extraordinary blessings we enjoy.

The termination of the long, expensive and distressing war, in which we have
been engaged with certain Indians, North West of the Ohio, is placed in the
option of the United States, by a Treaty which the Commander of our army has
concluded, provisionally, with the hostile tribes in that region. In the
adjustment of the terms, the satisfaction of the Indians was deemed an object
worthy no less of the policy, than of the liberality of the United States, as
the necessary basis of durable tranquillity. This object, it is believed, has
been fully attained. The articles agreed upon, will immediately be laid before
the Senate, for their consideration.

The Creek and Cherokee Indians, who alone of the Southern tribes had annoyed
our Frontiers, have lately confirmed their pre-existing Treaties with us; and
were giving evidence of a sincere disposition to carry them into effect, by the
surrender of the prisoners and property they had taken: -- But we have to
lament, that the fair prospect in this quarter, has been once more clouded by
wanton murders, which some citizens of Georgia are represented to have recently
perpetrated on hunting parties of the Creeks; which have again subjected that
frontier to disquietude and danger; which will be productive of further
expense, and may occasion more effusion of blood. Measures are pursuing to
prevent or mitigate the usual consequences of such outrages; and with the hope
of their succeeding -- at least to avert general hostility.

A letter from the Emperor of Morocco, announces to me his recognition of our
treaty made with his father, the late Emperor, and consequently the continuance
of peace with that power. With peculiar satisfaction I add, that information
has been received from an agent deputed on our part to Algiers, importing, that
the terms of a treaty with the Dey and Regency of that country, had been
adjusted in such a manner, as to authorize the expectation of a speedy peace,
and the restoration of our unfortunate fellow citizens from a grievous
captivity.

The latest advices from our envoy at the court of Madrid, give, moreover, the
pleasing information, that he had received assurances of a speedy and
satisfactory conclusion of his negotiation. While the event, depending upon
unadjusted particulars, cannot be regarded as ascertained, it is agreeable to
cherish the expectation of an issue, which, securing amicably very essential
interests of the United States, will, at the same time, lay the foundation of
lasting harmony with a power, whose friendship we have uniformly and sincerely
desired to cultivate.

Though not before officially disclosed to the House of Representatives, you,
gentlemen, are all apprized, that a treaty of amity, commerce and navigation,
has been negociated with Great Britain; and that the Senate have advised and
consented to its ratification, upon a condition, which excepts part of one
article. -- Agreeably thereto, and to the best judgment I was able to form of
the public interest, after full and mature deliberation, I have added my
sanction. The result on the part of his Britannic Majesty is unknown. When
received, the subject will, without delay, be placed before Congress.

This interesting summary of our affairs, with regard to the foreign powers,
between whom and the United States, controversies have subsisted; and with
regard also to those of our Indian neighbors, with whom, we have been in a
state of enmity or misunderstanding, opens a wide field for consoling and
gratifying reflections. -- If by prudence and moderation on every side, the
extinguishment of all the causes of external discord, which have heretofore
menaced our tranquillity, on terms compatible with our national rights and
honor, shall be the happy result; how firm and how precious a foundation will
have been laid for accelerating, maturing and establishing the prosperity of
our country!

Contemplating the internal situation, as well as the external relations of the
United States, we discover equal cause for contentment and satisfaction. While
many of the nations of Europe, with their American dependencies, have been
involved in a contest unusually bloody, exhausting and calamitous, in which the
evils of foreign war have been aggravated by domestic convulsion and
insurrection; in which many of the arts most useful to society, have been
exposed to discouragement and decay; in which scarcity of subsistence has
embittered other sufferings -- while even the anticipation of a return of the
blessings of peace and repose, are alloyed by the sense of heavy and
accumulating burdens, which press upon all the departments of industry, and
threaten to clog the future springs of government -- our favored country,
happy in a striking contrast, has enjoyed general tranquillity; a tranquillity
the more satisfactory, because maintained at the expense of no duty. --
Faithful to ourselves, we have violated no obligation to others. -- Our
agriculture, commerce and manufactures prosper beyond former example; the
molestations of our trade (to prevent a continuance of which, however, very
pointed remonstrances have been made) being overbalanced by the aggregate
benefits which it derives from a neutral position. Our population advances with
a celerity, which, exceeding the most sanguine calculations, proportionally
augments our strength and resources, and guarantees our future security. Every
part of the Union displays indications of rapid and various improvement, and
with burdens so light as scarcely to be perceived; with resources fully
adequate to our present exigencies; with governments founded on the genuine
principles of rational liberty; and with mild and wholesome laws; is it too
much to say, that our country exhibits a spectacle of national happiness never
surpassed, if ever before equalled?

Placed in a situation every way auspicious, motives of commanding force impel
us, with sincere acknowledgement to Heaven, and pure love to our country, to
unite our efforts to preserve, prolong and improve our immense advantages. --
To cooperate with you in this desirable work, is a fervent and favorite wish
of my heart.

It is a valuable ingredient in the general estimate of our welfare, that the
part of our country which was lately the scene of disorder and insurrection,
now enjoys the blessings of quiet and order. The misled have abandoned their
errors, and pay the respect to our constitution and laws, which is due from
good citizens to the public authorities of the society. These circumstances
have induced me to pardon, generally, the offenders here referred to; and to
extend forgiveness to those who had been adjudged to capital punishment. -- For
though I shall always think it a sacred duty to exercise with firmness and
energy, the constitutional powers with which I am vested; yet it appears to me
no less consistent with the public good, than it is with my personal feelings,
to mingle in the operations of government, every degree of moderation and
tenderness, which the national justice, dignity and safety may permit.

Gentlemen,

Among the objects which will claim your attention in the course of the
session, a review of our military establishment is not the least important. It
is called for by the events which have changed, and may be expected still
further to change the relative situation of our frontiers. In this review, you
will doubtless allow due weight to the considerations, that the questions
between us and certain foreign powers are not yet finally adjusted; that the
war in Europe is not yet terminated; and that our western posts, when
recovered, will demand provision for garrisoning and securing them. A statement
of our present military force will be laid before you by the department of war.

With the review of our army establishment, is naturally connected that of the
militia. It will merit enquiry, what imperfections in the existing plan,
further experience may have unfolded. The subject is of so much moment, in my
estimation, as to excite a constant solicitude, that the consideration of it
may be renewed, till the greatest attainable perfection shall be accomplished.
Time is wearing away some advantages for forwarding the object, while none
better deserves the persevering attention of the public councils.

While we indulge the satisfaction, which the actual condition of our western
borders so well authorizes, it is necessary that we should not lose sight of an
important truth, which continually receives new confirmations, -- namely, that
the provisions heretofore made with a view to the protection of the Indians
from the violences of the lawless part of our frontier inhabitants, are
insufficient. It is demonstrated that these violences can now be perpetrated
with impunity. And it can need no argument to prove, that unless the murdering
of Indians can be restrained, by bringing the murderers to condign punishment,
all the exertions of the government to prevent destructive retaliations by the
Indians, will prove fruitless, and all our present agreeable prospects
illusory. The frequent destruction of innocent women and children, who are
chiefly the victims of retaliation, must continue to shock humanity; and an
enormous expense, to drain the treasury of the Union.

To enforce upon the Indians the observance of justice, it is indispensable
that there shall be competent means of rendering justice to them. If these
means can be devised by the wisdom of Congress; and especially if there can be
added an adequate provision for supplying the necessities of the Indians, on
reasonable terms, (a measure, the mention of which I the more readily repeat,
as in all the conferences with them, they urge it with solicitude) I should not
hesitate to entertain a strong hope of rendering our tranquillity permanent. I
add, with pleasure, that the probability even of their civilization, is not
diminished by the experiments which have been thus far made, under the auspices
of government. -- The accomplishment of this work, if practicable, will reflect
undecaying luster on our national character, and administer the most grateful
consolations that virtuous minds can know.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,

The state of our revenue with the sums which have been borrowed and
re-imbursed, pursuant to different acts of Congress, will be submitted from the
proper departments; together with an estimate of the appropriations necessary
to be made for the service of the ensuing year.

Whether measures may not be advisable to reinforce the provision for the
redemption of the public debt, will naturally engage your examination. --
Congress have demonstrated their sense to be, and it were superfluous to repeat
mine, that whatsoever will tend to accelerate the honorable extinction of our
public debt, accords as much with the true interest of our country, as with the
general sense of our constituents.

Gentlemen of the Senate, and House of Representatives,

The statements which will be laid before you relative to the mint, will show
the situation of that institution; and the necessity of some further
legislative provisions, for carrying the business of it more completely into
effect; and for checking abuses which appear to be arising in particular
quarters.

The progress in providing materials for the frigates, and in building them;
the state of the fortifications of our harbors; the measures which have been
pursued for obtaining proper scites for arsenals, and for replenishing our
magazines with military stores; and the steps which have been taken toward the
execution of the law for opening a trade with the Indians; will likewise be
presented for the information of Congress.

Temperate discussion of the important subjects which may arise in the course
of the session; and mutual forbearance where there is a difference of opinion,
are too obvious and necessary for the peace, happiness and welfare of our
Country, to need any recommendation of mine.

UNITED STATES, 8th December, 1795.
REMARKS.
WHEN the President arrived at the House this day, he found it in that state of
composed gravity, of respectful silence, for which the Congress is so
remarkable, and which, whatever witlings may say, is the surest mark of sound
understanding. -- The gallery was crowded with anxious spectators, whose
orderly behavior was not the least pleasing part of the scene.

The President is a timid speaker: he is a proof, among thousands, that
superior genius, wisdom, and courage, are ever accompanied with excessive
modesty.

His situation was at this time almost entirely new. Never, till a few months
preceding this session, had the tongue of the most factious slander dared to
make a public attack on his character. This was the first time he had ever
entered the walls of Congress without a full assurance of meeting a welcome
from every heart. He now saw, even among those to whom he addressed himself,
numbers who, to repay all his labors, all his anxious cares for their welfare,
were ready to thwart his measures, and present him the cup of humiliation,
filled to the brim. When he came to that part of his speech, where he mentions
the treaty with His Britannic Majesty, he cast his eyes toward the gallery. --
It was not the look of indignation and reproach, but of injured virtue, which
is ever ready to forgive. I was pleased to observe, that not a single murmur of
disapprobation was heard from the spectators that surrounded me; and, if there
were some amongst them, who had assisted at the turbulent town-meetings. I am
persuaded, they were sincerely penitent. When he departed, every look seemed to
say: God prolong his precious life.

DEBATE (IN THE SENATE) When no mention is made of the House in which the
debate has taken place, the reader will please to observe, that it is meant, in
the House of Representatives.
ON THE ADDRESS TO THE PRESIDENT IN ANSWER TO HIS SPEECH.
FRIDAY, Dec. 11.
THE address in answer to the President's speech was taken up by paragraphs.

The two last clauses but one, which are as follows, were moved to be struck
out by Mr. Mason.

The interesting prospect of our affairs with regard to the foreign powers,
between whom and the United States controversies have subsisted, is not more
satisfactory than the review of our internal situation; if from the former we
derive an expectation of the extinguishment of all the causes of external
discord that have heretofore endangered our tranquillity, and on terms
consistent with our national honor and safety, in the latter we discover those
numerous and wide spread tokens of prosperity, which in so peculiar a manner
distinguish our happy country.

Circumstances thus every way auspicious demand our gratitude and sincere
acknowledgements to Almighty God, and require that we should unite our efforts
in imitation of your enlightened example, to establish and preserve the peace,
freedom, and prosperity of our country.

Mr. MASON observed, that he had hoped, nothing contained in the address
reported as an answer to the President's speech, would have been such as to
force the Senate to precipitate decisions. The two clauses he objected to
disappointed him in that hope. They were calculated to bring again into view
the important subject which occupied the Senate during their June session. This
he conceived would answer no good purpose; the minority on that occasion were
not now to be expected to recede, from the opinion they then held, and they
could not therefore join in the indirect self-approbation which the majority
appeared to wish for, and which was most certainly involved in the two clauses
which he hoped would be struck out. If his motion were agreed to, the remainder
of the address would in his opinion stand unexceptionable. He did not see, for
his part, that our situation is every way auspicious. Notwithstanding the
treaty, our trade is grievously molested.

Mr. KING observed, that the principal features observable in the answer
reported to the President's address, were, to keep up that harmony of
intercourse which ought to subsist between the legislature and the President,
and to express confidence in the undiminished firmness and love of country
which always characterise our chief executive magistrate. He objected to
striking out especially the first clause, because founded on undeniable truth.
It only declares, that our prospects, as to our external relations, are not
more satisfactory, than a review of our internal situation would prove. Was not
this representation true, he asked; could it be controverted? This clause, he
contended, contained nothing reasonably objectionable; it did not say as much
as the second, to which only most of the objections of the member up before him
applied, an answer to which he should defer, expecting that a question would be
put on each in order.

The clause, he said, appeared to him drawn up in such terms as could not
offend the nicest feelings of the minority on the important decision in June;
it was particularly circumspect and cautious. If liable to objection it was in
not going as far as the truth would warrant.

Some conversation took place as to the mode required by order of putting the
question; whether it should not be put on each clause separately, or whether
upon striking out both at once.

The chair requested that the motion should be reduced to writing. Mr. Mason
accordingly reduced it to writing, and it went to striking out both clauses at
once.

Mr. MASON agreed most cordially that the situation of our external relations
were not more a cause of joy than our situation at home. But the obvious
meaning of the clause he conceived was an indirect approval of our situation
relative to external concerns; and to this he could not give his assent, as he
did not consider their aspect as prosperous or auspicious.

Mr. BUTLER said, that when the committee was appointed to draft an answer, he
hoped they would have used such general terms as to have secured an unanimous
vote. He was willing to give the chief magistrate such an answer, as respect to
his station entitled him to, but not such a one as would do violence to his
regard for the constitution and his duty to his constituents. He could not
approve of long and detailed answers, however unexceptionable the speech might
be in matter, and however respectable the character might be from whom it came.
He had hopod, from the peculiar situation of the country, and of the Senate,
that nothing would have been brought forward in the answer on the subject which
agitated the June executive session, calculated to wound the feelings of
members. He had been disappointed; it was evident, that some members of the
Senate could not give their vote in favor of the address in its present shape,
without involving themselves in the most palpable inconsistency.

He had long since for his own part, declared himself against every article of
the treaty, because in no instance as it bottomed on reciprocity, the only
honorable basis. After this declaration, how could he, or those who coincided
in opinion with him, agree to the present address without involving themselves
in the most palpable inconsistency.

He did not agree with the gentlemen of New York in his exposition of the
meaning of the clauses objected to. They certainly declare our situation as to
our external relations to be favorable. Our situation as far as it respects
Great Britain, he contended was not in the least ameliorated. -- Their
depredations on our commerce have not been less frequent of late than at any
other period since the beginning of her war with France. Her orders for the
seizure of all our vessels laden with provisions cannot surely be a subject for
congratulation. When it became authenticated that our trade was relieved from
these embarrassments, then he was confident members of Senate, who were with
him in sentiment, would readily express their satisfaction at the auspicious
prospect, opened for this country to the enjoyments of tranquillity and
happiness. But until that happy time should arrive, he could not give his voice
to deceive the inhabitants of the United States, remote from the sources of
information, to hoodwink them by sanctioning with his vote a statement
unwarranted by truth, and presenting to them a picture of public happiness not
sanctioned by fact.

The sentence objected to, notwithstanding the explanation of the gentleman
from New York, appeared to him so worded as to lead the citizens at large to
believe, that the spoliations on our commerce were drawing to a fortunate
close. This was not, he conceived, warranted by the existing state of things.
Indeed he protested, he knew no more of the actual situation of the treaty
negotiation, than the remotest farmer in the union, could he then declare, he
asked, that it was drawing to a happy close. Indeed from the latest information
received, far from our situation having been ameliorated by the negotiation of
our executive, he conceived our trade as much in jeopardy as ever.

As to the internal prosperity, he owned there was some cause for
congratulation; but even in this his conviction could not carry him as far as
the clauses in the address seemed to go. In a pecuniary point of view, the
country had made a visible progress; but he saw in it no basis of permanent
prosperity. There were no circumstances attendant on it, that gave a fair hope
that the prosperity would be permanent. The chief cause of our temporary
pecuniary prosperity is the war in Europe, which occasions the high prices our
produce at present commands, when that is terminated, those advantageous prices
will of course fall.

Mr. BUTLER came now to speak of the second objectionable clause. He regretted
whenever a question was brought forward that involved personality in the most
indirect manner. He wished always to speak to subjects unconnected with men;
but the wording of the clause was unfortunately such as to render allusion to
official character unavoidable. He objected principally to the epithet firm
introduced in the latter clause as applied to the supreme executive. Why
firmness? he asked. To what? or to whom? Is it the manly demand of restitution
made of Great Britain for her accumulated injuries, that called forth the
praise; for his own part he could discern no firmness there. Is it for the
undaunted and energetic countenance of the cause of France, in her struggle for
freeing herself from despotic shackles? He saw no firmness displayed on that
occasion. Where then is it to be found? Was it in the opposition of the
minority of the Senate and the general voice of the people against the treaty
that that firmness was displayed? If it is, that firmness in opposing the will
of the people, which is intended to be extolled, the vote shall never, said Mr.
Butler, "leave the walls of this Senate with my approbation.

He could not approve, he said, that firmness that prompted the executive to
resist the unequivocal voice of his fellow-citizens from New Hampshire to
Georgia. He would have applauded the firmness of the President, if in
compliance with the unequivocal wish of the people he had resisted the voice of
the majority on the treaty, and refused his signature to the treaty.

This was, he understood (and it should be mentioned to the honor of the
President) his first intention -- Why he changed it, time, he said, must
disclose.

He concluded by proposing an amendment to be substituted in lieu of the
objectional clauses, should they be struck out.

Mr. READ said, he was not in the habit of giving a silent vote, and as many of
his constituents were averse to the instrument to which he had given his
assent, he thought this a fit opportunity to say something on the subject.

Gentlemen on the other side had spoken of their feelings; did they suppose, he
asked, that those who were in the majority had not feelings. Also, gentlemen
declared, they would not recede from their former determinations; did they
expect that the majority would recede?

He had, he said, taken the question of the treaty in all its aspects, and
considered it maturely, and though he lamented that he differed in opinion on
that subject with his colleague and a portion of the people of his state, he
nevertheless remained convinced that the ratification of it was advisable: it
rescued the country from war and its desolating horrors.

After reading that part of the President's speech to which the clauses
objected to were an echo, he asked, whether any one could say, under the
conviction that the measures of government had prevented a war, that a view of
our foreign relations was not consolatory. On all hands, he observed, the idea
of a war was deprecated, both sides of the house wished to avoid it, then is it
not a consolatory reflection to all that its horrors have been averted. Is
there a man, who does not believe that had the treaty not been ratified we
should have had war? If the country had been plunged into a war would it be as
flourishing as it is? The trifling vexations our commerce has sustained are not
to be compared to the evils of a state of hostility. What good end could have
been answered by a war? -- the address in the part under discussion says no
more, than that we rejoice at the prospect that the blessings of peace will be
preserved; and does not this expectation exist?

Great Britain in the plentitude of her power had availed herself of the right
she had under the law of nations, of seizing enemies' goods in neutral vessels;
but has allowed compensation to some Americans, and a system of mild measures
on our part is the best security for further.

He adverted to that part of Mr. Butler's observations, which related to the
probable fall of provisions at the peace. We ought not to be grieved if Europe
was rid of the calamities of war at that price. But he contended, that from the
measures of administration permanent advantages were secured to this country.
The value of our soil has been enhanced; wealth has poured in from various
parts of the globe, and many permanent advantages secured.

There had been one assertion made, which by repetition had by some almost been
taken for granted, but which required proof to induce him to believe it, and
that was, that a majority of the citizens of the United States are opposed to
the treaty. In the part of the country he came from he owned there might be a
majority of that opinion, but he believed the contrary of the United States at
large; he expressed a conviction, that when his constituents came to consider
the measure maturely they would change their opinions; and, indeed, understood
that the false impressions by which they were at first actuated were already
wearing off.

But the Senate and President are the constitutional treaty making powers. If
mistaken in their decisions, they cannot be accused of having been misled by
sudden and immature impressions. He should conceive himself unfit to fill a
chair in Senate if he suffered himself to be carried away by such impressions.
The People could not in their town meetings, deprived of proper information,
possibly form an opinion that deserved weight, and it was the duty of the
executive not to be shaken in their determination by tumultuous proceedings
from without. Upon this ground he much approved the President's conduct and
thought it entitled to the epithet firm.

In local questions, affecting none but the interests of his constituents, he
should attend to their voice, but on great national points he did not consider
himself as a representative from South Carolina, but as senator for the Union.
In questions of this last kind, even if the wishes of his constituents were
unequivocally made known to him, he should not conceive himself bound to
sacrifice his opinions to theirs. -- He viewed the President as standing in
this situation, and though he might hear the opinions of the people from every
part of the United States, he should not sacrifice to them his own conviction;
in this line of conduct he has shown his firmness, and deserves to be
complimented for it by the senate.

The address reported, he said, contained nothing that would wound the feelings
of any member. The senate would not, in his opinion, act improperly if they
expressed opinions in coincidence with their act in June session. The feelings
of the majority should be as much consulted as those of the minority. The
minority are not asked to retract; but there is a propriety in the senate's
going as far in their address as the speech went, though it should be styled a
vote of self-approbation. He hoped the clauses would not be struck out.

Mr. ELLSWORTH was opposed to striking out. The clause records a fact, and if
struck out the senate deny it. The President asserts it, in the address
reported, senate assent, a motion is made to strike out, is it because the
truth of it is doubted? It cannot be called an unimportant fact, therefore its
omission will not be imputed to oversight. The latter part of the clause
expresses our gratitude to Almighty God. Will the senate refuse to make an
acknowledgment of that kind? Do they not admit that he is the source of all
good, and can they refuse to acknowledge it? And if so, is it possible that in
admitting the fact and expressing the sentiment which so naturally flows from
it, the senate would wound the feelings of any friend to his country?

The truth of the fact is as clear as that the sun now shines, the sentiment is
unexceptionable, he therefore recommended to his friend the mover not to insist
upon striking out merely but that he should vary the motion and propose a
substitute.

To bring the mind to the point with precision, it was necessary to attend to
the wording of the clause. He read it. As to the signification of that part
which relates to our foreign concerns, he did not consider it as hypothetical,
but a positive declaration of a conviction that their situation is
satisfactory, and on that ground he wished to meet the question.

The clause objected to expresses an expectation that the causes of external
disagreement which have unhappily existed will be peaceably done away. He said
he had that expectation; many have it not. Those who have it not will negative
the clause, those who have it will vote in its favor, the result will be the
sense of a majority; the senate could not be expected, more than on other
occasions to be unanimous: If the declarations contained in those clauses are
supported, they will be considered as the sense of the majority of senate,
others may dissent; but because unanimity could not be obtained it was no
reason why the majority should give a virtual negative to the declaration which
they conceived founded on truth.

He examined in detail the situation of our external relations to show the
foundation on which he rested his expectation of a satisfactory arrangement of
them, and of our general prosperity in that respect. With Morocco our treaties
are renewed. With Algiers assurances are given by the Executive that a peace is
not far distant. With Spain on the same authority it is understood, that our
prospects are favorable in that quarter; with the hitherto hostile Indians, a
peace is within reach, and the only quarter in which doubt can arise is from
Great Britain. But even with respect to that nation his expectation was, that
our differences there would terminate amicably; and he believed this to be the
expectation of the senate, as a collective body.

Mr. ELLSWORTH then went into the examination of some other parts of the
clauses objected to, and vindicated the propriety of the epithets enlightened,
firm, persevering, and concluded by lamenting that there existed a difference
of opinion; but hoped that this would not deter the majority from an expression
of their sense.

Mr. TAZEWELL said, -- The discussion had taken a turn different from that
which he expected when he heard the motion. He understood the motion at the
time it was made, and still so understood it, as not intending to question the
propriety of any thing which was contained in the President's commmunication to
both houses of Congress. But from what had been said, (by Mr. Read of S. C.)
that part of the answer to the President's communications which had given rise
to the motion, was intended to have a further operation than he originally
believed. He asked what had given rise to the practice of returning an answer
of any kind to the President's communications to Congress in the form of an
address. There was nothing he said, in the constitution, or in any of the
fundamental rules of the Federal government which required that ceremony from
either branch of the Congress. The practice was but an imitation of the
ceremonies used upon like occasions in other countries, and was neither
required by the constitution or authorized by the principles upon which our
government was erected. -- But having obtained, he did not intend now to
disturb it. -- To allow the utmost latitude to the principle which had begotten
the practice, it could only tolerate the ceremony as a compliment to the Chief
Magistrate. It could not be permitted to forestall opinions previous to regular
discussions, nor to operate as a mean of pledging members to the pursuit of a
particular course which subsequent and more full inquiries might show to be
extremely improper.

Every answer, therefore, to the President's communications ought to be drawn
in terms extremely general, neither seducing the President into a belief that
this House would pursue a general recommendation into points not at first
contemplated by them, nor pledging themselves to the world that that state of
things was just which time had not permitted them thoroughly to examine. The
clauses now under consideration had at least in one instance deviated from this
principle. They declare to the world -- "That the interesting prospect of our
affairs with regard to the foreign powers, between whom, and the United States
controversies have subsisted, is not more satisfactory than the review of our
internal situation." The communications from the President have not uttered so
bold a sentiment, nor is there any thing in those communications that justifies
the assertion of this fact: Placing the treaty with Great Britain out of the
question, which seems to have been the uppermost consideration when this
sentence was penned, the seizure of our provision vessels since the signature
of that treaty and the unwarrantable imprisonment of our seamen are acts which
cloud our prosperity and happiness. The minds of the Americans must be brought
to consider these things as trivial incidents in our political affairs, before
the sentence under consideration can be approved. He said he must therefore
vote for the motion to strike out the two clauses of the answer in order that
some fit expressions might then be introduced to succeed them. He hoped the
answer might be couched in terms just and delicate toward the President
without wounding the feelings of any Senator; and he believed both might be
done without any difficulty after the two clauses were expunged.

The motion for striking out being put, was negatived.

NOES.
Messrs. Bingham, Cabot, Ellsworth, Foster, Frelinghuysen, King, Latimer,
Livermore, Marshall, Pain, Read, Ross, Strong, Trumbull, 14.
AYES.
Messrs. Bloodworth, Brown, Butler, Langdon, Martin, Mason, Robinson, Tazewell,
8.
After a further attempt to amend the address, against which the Senate divided
-- 15 and 7 -- the address was agreed to -- 14 to 8.

THE ADDRESS. TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES.
SIR,
IT is with peculiar satisfaction that we are informed by your Speech to the
two Houses of Congress, that the long and expensive war in which we have been
engaged with the Indians north west of the Ohio, is in a situation to be
finally terminated; and though we view with concern the danger of an
interruption of the peace so recently confirmed with the Creeks, we indulge the
hope, that the measures that you have adopted to prevent the same, if followed
by those legislative provisions that justice and humanity equally demand, will
succeed in laying the foundation of a lasting peace with the Indian tribes on
the Southern as well as on the Western Frontiers.

The confirmation of our treaty with Morocco, and the adjustment of a treaty of
peace with Algiers, in consequence of which our captive fellow citizens shall
be delivered from slavery, are events that will prove no less interesting to
the public humanity, than they will be important in extending and securing the
navigation and commerce of our country.

As a just and equitable conclusion of our depending negociations with Spain,
will essentially advance the interest of both nations, and thereby cherish and
confirm the good understanding and friendship, which we have at all times
desired to maintain, it will afford us real pleasure to receive an early
confirmation of our expectations on this subject.

The interesting prospect of our affairs with regard to the foreign powers,
between whom and the United States controversies have subsisted, is not more
satisfactory, than the review of our internal situation; if from the former we
derive an expectation of the extinguishment of all the causes of external
discord, that have heretofore endangered our tranquillity, and on terms
consistent with our national honor and safety, in the latter we discover those
numerous and wide spread tokens of prosperity, which in so peculiar a manner
distinguish our happy country.

Circumstances thus every way auspicious demand our gratitude and sincere
acknowledgements to Almighty God, and require that we should unite our efforts
in imitation of your enlightened, firm, and persevering example, to establish
and preserve the peace, freedom, and prosperity of our country.

The objects which you have recommended to the notice of the Legislature, will
in the course of the session receive our careful attention, and with a true
zeal for the public welfare, we shall cheerfully cooperate in every measure
that shall appear to us best calculated to promote the same.

JOHN ADAMS, Vice President of the United States, and President of the Senate.
Dec. 12, 1795.
To which the President was pleased to make the following reply.
GENTLEMEN,
WITH real pleasure I receive your Address, recognizing the prosperous
situation of our public affairs; and giving assurances of your careful
attention to the objects demanding legislative consideration; and that with a
true zeal for the public welfare, you will cheerfully cooperate in every
measure which shall appear to you best calculated to promote the same.

But I derive peculiar satisfaction from your concurrence with me in the
expressions of gratitude to Almighty God, which a review of the auspicious
circumstances that distinguish our happy country have excited; and I trust that
the sincerity of our acknowledgements will be evidenced by a union of efforts
to establish and preserve its peace, freedom and prosperity.

Go. WASHINGTON.

DEBATE ON THE MANNER OF PRESENTING THE ADDRESS IN ANSWER TO THE PRESIDENT's
SPEECH.
WEDNESDAY, 9th December, 1795.
THE House of Representatives went into a committee of the whole House, on the
speech of the President, Mr. Muhlenberg in the chair. The clerk then read the
speech.

Mr. VANS MURRAY (Maryland) next moved that a committee should be appointed to
draw up a respectful address in answer to the speech. The resolution was in
these words.

"Resolved, That it is the opinion of this committee, that a respectful Address
ought to be presented by the House of Representatives to the President of the
United States, in answer to his speech to both Houses of Congress, at the
commencement of this session, containing assurances, that this House will take
into consideration the various and important matters recommended to their
attention.

Mr. SEDGWICK (Massachusetts) seconded the motion.

Mr. PARKER (Virginia) offered an amendment, which was seconded by Mr. Macon
(N. C.)

The substance of this amendment was to strike out all that part of the
resolution which goes before the word assurances; in place of which Mr. Parker
proposed to appoint a committee, who should personally wait on the President,
and assure him of the attention of the House, etc. and concluding as above. Mr.
Parker had the highest respect for the President, but he had always disapproved
of this practice of making out addresses in answer to these speeches, and of
the House leaving their business to go in a body to present it. Last session
the framing of this address had cost very long debates, and produced very great
irritation. Some of the most disagreeable things that happened, during the
session, occurred in these debates. He wished unanimity, and the dispatch of
business, and so could not consent that any address should be drawn up, as he
preferred ending the affair at once by sending a committee with verbal answer.

MR. MURRAY replied, that the practice of drawing up such an address was coeval
with the constitution. It was consistent with good sense, and he did not see
that any arguments had been employed by the gentlemen who spoke last against
it. It was true that the House might send a verbal answer, and it was likewise
true that the President might have sent them his speech by his secretary,
without coming near them at all. He had come to Congress, and Mr. Murray could
perceive no impropriety in Congress returning the compliment by waiting on him.

The committee divided on the amendment proposed by Mr. Parker. Eighteen
members rose in support of it, so it was lost. The committee then agreed to the
resolution, as offered by Mr. Murray. They rose, and the Chairman reported
progress. The resolution was agreed to by the House. The next question was of
how many members the select committee should consist, that were to be employed
in framing a draft of the address. The different numbers of five and three were
proposed. A division took place on the former motion, when only thirty-one
gentlemen rose in its favor. The motion for a committee of three members to
report an address was of course carried. Mr. Madison, Mr. Sedgwick and Mr.
Sitgreaves were appointed.

REMARKS -- HERE was a direct attempt, on the part of Mr. Parker, to set aside
a respectful custom, which was coeval with the operation of the Constitution of
the United States. One would imagine that this instrument was grown out of
favor with the member from Virginia; but we shall be less surprised at this,
when we come, by and by, to see the instructions of his state to its Senators
in Congress.

DEBATE ON THE ADDRESS IN ANSWER TO THE SPEECH.
TUESDAY, 15th December, 1795.
The house went into a committee on the report of the select commit of an
address in answer to the President's speech.

The following paragraph gave rise to some discussion.

"Contemplating that probably unequalled spectacle of national happiness, which
our country exhibits, to the interesting summary which you, Sir, have been
pleased to make, in justice to our own feelings, permit us to add the benefits
which are derived from your presiding in our councils resulting as well from
the UNDIMINISHED confidence of your fellow citizens, as from your zealous and
successful labors in their service."

MR. PARKER (Virginia) moved to strike out the words probably unequalled, which
was carried, 43 against 39.

He then moved to strike out from the word resulting to the end of the
paragraph.

MR. MURRAY, (who, as the chairman was about to put the question on Mr.
Parker's motion) said that he could not in justice to the opinions of his
constituents, etc. of the state of Maryland at large, give a silent vote. He
would state to the committee a recent fact that warranted him in declaring that
the President possessed in the amplest manner, the confidence of the citizens
of Maryland. The Legislature of that state probably foreseeing the efforts of
certain persons to diminish the confidence of the public in the chief
magistrate, had passed a resolution which appears to have been unanimous, by
which they declare to the world, the most perfect confidence in the President.

This fact though known certainly to many, might not be known to all present;
and as in this solemn testimony of approbation and confidence, he totally
co-incided he could neither be entirely silent when a question like this
implies the contrary sentiment, nor withold from gentlemen a great fact so
recently displaying the undiminished confidence of the state of Maryland.

MR. GILES (Virginia) hoped that the latter amendment would not take any
disagreeable turn. He was not prepared to go, at length, into the propositions.
He did not think it inconsistent with all due respect for the President to
shorten this clause.

A member proposed to restrict this amendment to merely striking out the word
undiminished.

MR. HARPER (S. Carolina) thought the President as wise as honest and faithful
a public servant as possiby could be. He was not prepared to say that the
President was as popular as he formerly has been, but there is no doubt of his
being reinstated in the confidence of the public. Mr. Harper was confident that
four fifths of us still trust in him. But Mr. Harper thought that objections
might be made to the clause as it now stands, and he designed, when the present
question had been discussed to move an amendment.

MR. PARKER informed the house that, with much respect for the President, his
confidence had diminished. He agreed to limit his amendment to striking out the
word undiminished, in the clause above quoted.

MR. SEDGWICK (Massachusetts) observed, that it had now, in consequence of the
motion for striking out the word undiminished, became a question of fact,
whether our own and our constituents confidence in the President was or was not
diminished? To suppose the former, in his opinion, was unsupported by facts,
was disgraceful to our constituents, and must in the end prove baneful to that
system of government which we were attempting to administer.

That so far as he was acquainted with the actual disposition of the people, of
that part of the country, where alone he could have obtained competent
knowledge, he was as certain as he could be, of any public sentiments, that
confidence in the President, so far from having been diminished by the
artifices which had been made, on the contrary had been increased; and he felt
perfectly sure, that at no antecedent period, had the tide of popular
affection, set so strongly toward him as at the present moment.

This part of the address expressed our own and our constituents undiminished
confidence in the President; and an acknowledgment of his zealous and
successful labors in the public service. That he had approved of this part of
the address, as a member of the select committee, and on reviewing, since, the
subject, he had found no cause to reject the opinion whith he had then formed.
He did believe, and he loved to believe, because it was honorable to his
constituents, that the late efforts, which had been made, had, instead of
diminishing, increased the public confidence. That a late measure of the
Executive had indeed provided a fit occasion for a disclosure of enmities which
prudence and policy had heretofore concealed, but had not shaken the well
founded reliance of the public on the wisdom and integrity of the President. To
suppose an abatement of confidence, in his opinion, was to suppose in the
people a want of a due sense of gratitude, for the distinguished blessings
which they enjoyed; it was to suppose a baseness of disposition unworthy of
their former conduct, unworthy of freemen. "Who," he asked, "of a candid mind,
and fair and honorable sentiments, can take a review of the glorious conduct
of our chief during the conflict of the revolulution; his zealous and
successful labors for the public good; his bravery, moderation and humanity:
who can follow him to the place of his happy retirement, and there again behold
him, covered with glory, attended by the gratitude and affection of his fellow
citizens, and the applauses of the world; who can see him again, issuing at the
call of his countrymen, from this retirement, and putting at hazard for their
benefit, the mighty mass of reputation which he had collected, that best reward
of virtuous minds; who can review the situation of this country for the six
years of his administration, the dangers to which we have been exposed, and the
happy escapes we have experienced, effected by his prudence, sagacity, and
firmness; who can review the conduct of the president in those interesting
scenes, but with a heart filled with gratitude, affection and confidence?"

No man, he hoped, in his heart; no man, he believed, would, consistent with a
due regard to his own reputation, deny to the President his just claims of
merit. No man could without disgracing his constituents, deny their
participation in this sentiment. It only remained, then, to be enquired whether
these just feelings of their, and our hearts, ought under the existing
circumstances, to be published to the world. He held this declaration to be, at
this moment, an indispensable obligation, due from the representatives of the
people, from a regard to themselves, their constituents, and the permanent and
beneficial existence of the government which they had chosen.

Although the President had twice been called, by the unanimous and unsolicited
voice of his countrymen, to preside in their government; though to comply with
their wishes, he had sacrificed more than any other man could have done, and
although the only reward he sought or would accept, was their approbation; yet
licentious and turbulent presses, had teemed with scandalous and infamous
abuse. What sentiments by these causes might be produced in his mind, whether
pity, contempt or indignation, or a mixture of them all, he could not
determine, nor was it necessary to enquire further to determine whether we
should attempt to defeat their effects. In no manner could this be done, so
effectually, as by declaring our own and our constituents confidence in him.

The President had told the Legislature, that it was the favorable wish of his
heart, to unite with us, in our efforts to preserve, prolong, and improve our
immense advantages. Did we believe this declaration? why then should we not
unite in counteracting, the malignant efforts of sedition, by publishing the
sentiment, at once just to him and honorable to ourselves?

The efforts which had been made to depreciate the character of that first of
men and of patriots; instead of producing the nefarious intention, he believed
in his conscience, had increased as it ought, the public confidence and regard.
Thus feeling and believing, he wished to rescue our country from the imputation
of baseness and ingratitude, which otherwise it would appear to merit.

But it was said that an expression of confidence, at this time, might be
construed into a declaration of approbation of a late measure of the Executive,
and preclude the right of examining that measure according to its merit,
whenever it should be laid before the Legislature. To this he answered, that,
for himself he had no such intention, and he believed it incapable of such a
construction. Confidence did not imply an approbation of every part of the
officer's conduct, to whom it belonged, it did not exclude the idea of
falibility; but it only implied an approbation of the general tenor of his
conduct.

If when the first officer of our government was thus attacked, he was left to
be overwhelmed by a torrent of abuse, without the countenance and support of
his constituents, or their representatives; what man, he asked, who had talents
to be useful, reputation to lose, or feelings to be wounded, would put all at
hazard to serve an ungrateful country? What would such mean and base desertion
produce, but to make the first offices of our government, posts to which merit
would be uncongenial -- what! but to provide vacancies to be filled by harpies
who would prey on the vitals of the Republic?

There was another circumstance which pressed itself on his reflections on this
occasion. It was the character -- the just character which the President
possesses throughout the civilized world. What would it be, to reject this part
of the address, but to justify those, he hoped, unfounded aspersions, which had
been made on Republican governments? What! but to verify those malign
predictions which had been pointed at our own system?

Thus had he exposed to the committee, as concisely as he could, his own views
of this important subject. He would only add, that when the President entered
first on the execution of the important duties of his office, the man who would
have dared to predict, that the present question would at this time, have
become a subject of bebate, would have been considered as predicting the infamy
of his country.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said that there were many whose confidence was impaired by a
late transaction. He could not therefore consent to the expression in the draft
of the address. Mr. Sedgwick had said that consenting to strike out the word
undiminished, would be telling the world that our confidence actually is
diminished; and the member from Massachusetts adds, that the House are thus
brought into a distressing dilemma. If there is a distress in the case, it
originates with this member himself, as one of the committee who brought in
this draft of an address. He moved, to prevent any unconciliating debates, that
the address might be recommitted. The motion was seconded by Mr. Sedgwick. The
committee rose, and the resolution for recommitting past.

It was then moved that two members should be added to the committee on
draughting the address. Mr. Tracy considered the present number as sufficient.
Mr. Freeman and Mr. Baldwin were added.

WEDNESDAY, 16th December 1795.
THE select committee reported the following address to the President, in
answer to his Speech to both Houses of Congress, which was unanimously agreed
to:

TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
SIR,
AS the Representatives of the people of the United States, we cannot but
participate in the strongest sensibility to every blessing which they enjoy,
and cheerfully join with you, in profound gratitude to the author of all good,
for the numerous and extraordinary blessings which he has conferred on our
favored country.

A final and formal termination of the distressing war, which has ravaged our
North Western Frontier, will be an event, which must afford a satisfaction
proportioned to the anxiety with which it has long been sought; and in the
adjustment of the terms, we perceive the true policy of making them
satisfactory to the Indians, as well as to the United States, as the best basis
of a durable tranquillity. The disposition of such of the southern tribes, as
had also heretofore annoyed our frontier, is another prospect in our situation
so important to the interest and happiness of the United States, that it is
much to be lamented, that any clouds should be thrown over it, more especially,
by excesses on the part of our own citizens.

While our population is advancing with a celerity which exceeds the most
sanguine calculations -- while every part of the United States displays
indications of rapid and various improvement -- while we are in the enjoyment
of protection and security, by mild and wholesome laws, administered by
governments founded on the genuine principles of rational liberty, a secure
foundation will be laid for accelerating, maturing and establishing the
prosperity of our country; if, by treaty and amicable negotiation, all those
causes of external discord, which heretofore menaced our tranquillity, shall be
extinguished, on terms compatible with our national rights and honor, and with
our constitution, and great commercial interests.

Among the various circumstances in our internal situation, none can be viewed,
with more satisfaction and exultation, than that the late scene of disorder and
insurrection, has been completely restored, to the enjoyment of order and
repose. Such a triumph of reason and of law, is worthy of the free government,
under which it happened, and was justly to be hoped, from the enlightened and
patriotic spirit, which pervades and actuates the people of the United States.

In contemplating that spectacle of national happiness, which our country
exhibits, and of which, you, Sir, have been pleased to make an interesting
summary, permit us to acknowledge and declare the very great share, which your
zealous and faithful services have contributed to it, and to express the
affectionate attachment, which we feel for your character.

The several interesting subjects, which you recommend to our consideration,
will receive every degree of attention, which is due to them: And whilst we
feel the obligation of temperance and mutual indulgence, in all our
discussions, we trust and pray, that the result to the happiness and welfare of
our country may correspond with the pure affection we bear to it.

THURSDAY, 17th December 1795.
THE Speaker, attended by the House, waited on the President with the address,
to which they received the following reply.
GENTLEMEN,
COMING, as you do, from all parts of the United States, I receive great
satisfaction from the concurrence of your testimony in the justness of the
interesting summary of our national happiness, which, as the result of my
enquiries, I presented to your view. The sentiments we have mutually expressed,
of profound gratitude to the source of those numerous blessings, the AUTHOR OF
ALL GOOD, are pledges of our obligations, to unite our sincere and zealous
endeavors, as the instruments of Divine Providence, to preserve and perpetuate
them.

Accept, Gentlemen, my thanks for your declaration, that to my agency you
ascribe the enjoyment of a great share of these benefits. So far as my services
contribute to the happiness of my country, the acknowledgment thereof, by my
fellow citizens, and their affectionate attachment, will ever prove an abundant
reward.

REMARKS -- THUS ended this part of the proceedings, in a manner, which,
perhaps, reflects but little honor on the House of Representatives.

The sentiment contained in the proposed address, expressing an undiminished
confidence in the President, seemed to me the most proper that any combination
of words could convey; and particularly on the present occasion. The measures
of the chief Magistrate had been most violently opposed; he had been all but
menaced, in order to deter him from the exercise of powers vested in him by the
constitution; his motives had been disfigured, and his character reviled. This
was to be expected from the leaders of a faction, averse to his administration
and even to the government, and from those among the people whom they had been
able to mislead. But, were the declarations of these turbulent demagogues; were
the licentious aspersions and abominable falsehoods of Valerius, and the rest of
that hired tribe, to be seconded by the legislators of the union? On this
address the malcontents had fixed their eyes: from it they expected
encouragement or reproof. To be silent was to encourage. The Representatives
knew that the feelings of the President had been deeply wounded, and it was
their place to administer the healing balm. To effect this, and at once to
silence the hydra of faction, nothing was so well calculated as a firm and
explicit declaration, that their confidence was undiminished.

However, had not the word undiminished been introduced into the proposed
address, the omission of that epithet would have been of less consequence; but,
when once proposed, to expunge it by a vote of the House, was to declare to the
whole union, and even to the whole world, that the President had lost the
confidence of his fellow citizens; a declaration that in some countries
precedes a dismission from office, downfall, and disgrace!

Mr. PARKER, who made the motion for striking out the word undiminished, tells
us plainly, that, "with much respect for the President, his confidence was
diminished;" and thus, in this short sentence, advances the most palpable
inconsistency that ever fell from the lips of mortal man. His confidence
diminishes, while his respect remains undiminished! Unless, indeed, we are to
imagine that his respect was in a consumption as well as his confidence. Such a
paradoxical avowal might shine in the lunatic reveries of a Rousseau; but is
little congenial with the sobriety of legislative debate.

These observations are far from being inapplicable to the address finally
agreed on by the house. On the 16th of December, they acknowledge and declare,
that the zealous and faithful services of the President have had a very great
share in contributing to the happiness of the country; and express the
affectionate attachment, they feel for his character, when, but the very day
before, they had determined that their confidence in him was diminished! If
they were persuaded, that his zeal and faithful services had so eminently
contributed to the happiness of the country, what reason had they to declare
that their confidence was diminished? And, if their confidence was diminished,
how could his character deserve their affectionate attachment? There is no
medium here: confidence in a public man, is like virtue in a woman; as long as
it exists at all, it must be unimpaired. It is entire, or it is no more.

It was easy to perceive why this medley of respect and want of confidence was
introduced into the debate. Twenty years of military and civil services,
attended with a success unexampled in the annals of the world, and backed with
a life of piety and spotless virtue, were not to be annihilated at a blow. This
citadel of reputation could not be carried by assault. The more prudent,
because, perhaps, the more sure way, was to attack it by a hidden and
circuitous route.

There is no telling with what success this may be attended; but certain it is,
that it will not be the fault of Mr. Parker, and those who sided with him on
this occasion, if General Washington, or any other man who has a reputation to
lose, should again be seen at the head of the government. The three branches
should be checks on each other, it is true; but, if they are not also mutual
supports, the whole fabric will soon crumble to the ground; and the degree of
popular strength, whatever that may be, acquired by the Representative branch
through the present decision, must inevitably tend to enfeeble the other two.

DEBATE ON THE ATTEMPT AT CORRUPTION BY RANDALL AND WHITNEY.
MONDAY, December 28th, 1795.
Mr. SMITH (S. C.) requested the attention of the House, for a moment, to a
subject of a very delicate nature. He understood that a memorial was, this
morning, to be presented from some individuals, applying for a grant of a large
tract of Western Territory, and as the House had referred all such applicants
to the committee for bringing in the land office bill, of which he was
Chairman; and as it was probable that the memorial about to be presented would
be disposed of in the same manner, he conceived it a duty incumbent on him to
disclose to the House, at this time, some circumstances which had come to his
knowledge. Mr. Smith then said, that on Tuesday evening last, a person of the
name of Randall, called on him, requesting an hour of confidential
conversation: In the interview which took place, Randall made a communication
to the following effect. He intended to present a memorial on the Monday
following to Congress, for a grant of all the western lands, lying between
lakes Michigan, Erie, and Huron, to the amount of about twenty millions of
acres. He, and his associates, some of whom were Canada merchants, who had
great influence over the Indians, proposed to form a company and to undertake
the extinction of the Indian title, provided Congress would cede to them the
fee simple of the land. The property would be divided into forty shares,
twenty-four of which should be reserved for such members of Congress as might
favor the scheme, and might be inclined to come into it, after the adjournment
of Congress, on the same terms as the original associators. Randall himself had
the disposal of twelve shares, for members from the southern states, and
colleagues of his, a like number for those of the eastern states. A certain
number of shares were to be the property of those Canada merchants, who had an
unbounded influence over the Indians occupying those lands, and who would, if
this plan succeeded, pacify those Indians, who were the most hostile to the
United States: that General Wayne's treaty was a mere delusion, and that
without the cooperation of those influential persons, the United States would
never have peace in that quarter. Mr. Smith said, that he had communicated this
overture the next morning to Mr. Murray, one of the members from Maryland,
requesting his advice how to proceed on so delicate an occasion; that Mr.
Murray recommended a disclosure to Mr. Henry of the Senate, and that, on a
consultation with those gentlemen, it was resolved that it was Mr. Smith's duty
to make an immediate communication of the matter to the President, which was
accordingly done.

Mr. MURRAY rose next. He had received an application of the same nature, but
having already heard of the proposal, "I was," said Mr. Murray, "in a state of
preparation, and my virtue had not such a shock to encounter, as that of the
gentleman last up."

Mr. MURRAY corroborated what Mr. Smith had said as to the communication of
this affair to himself. He added, he advised Mr. Smith to give Randall another
meeting for the purpose of developing his scheme and expectations more fully.

Mr. MURRAY said that Mr. Smith informed him on Wednesday morning; next day in
the morning, he informed Mr. Henry of the Senate. Mr. Smith, on that day,
informed the President. On that day (Thursday) Mr. Randall was introduced to
him, and asked an interview at his lodging; he gave him an appointment at five
in the afternoon. Mr. Henry and he were together when Randall came in. Randall
talked about the policy of extinguishing the Indian title to the Peninsula,
formed by lakes Erie, Huron, and Michigan, containing about eighteen or twenty
millions of acres of very good land; and talked in terms that he might have
employed from a pulpit. He did not make any corrupt overtures, till Mr. Murray
had carried him into his own apartment. There Randall opened his proposals, as
had been before mentioned by Mr. Smith, observing, that if Congress would sell
this land to him and his company, they intended to divide it into forty or
forty-one shares. Twenty-four shares were to be appropriated to such members of
Congress, as chose to support the memorial, which would be presented on Monday.
The members were to have their shares on the same terms on which his company
should obtain the land. The company would give five hundred thousand, or
perhaps a million of dollars; but on Mr. Murray's apparent acquiescence in his
views, he said that the shares would be given to the members who advocated the
measure, if they pleased to accept them, after they returned to their homes.
Mr. Murray started a difficulty about the embarrassment of land speculations,
for which he, personally, had no genius; and then Randall instantly turned out
the cat, and told him, that if he did not choose the share of land, he should
have cash in hand for his share. Mr. Smith and Mr. Murray had resolved to
disclose this to the House, lest some innocent member might offer a memorial,
and become liable to suspicion. Randall had hinted that larger proportions
would be assigned to the more active members, and lesser ones for the small
fish.

The Speaker then rose, and expressed a wish that some gentleman would move for
an order to apprehend Randall. Upon this Mr. Smith again rose, and said that a
warrant to this effect had yesterday been issued by the President, and to
support which, Mr. Smith had made oath before a magistrate to the particulars
above mentioned. He hoped that by this time the person was taken.

Mr. GILES rose next, and observed that an application from the same Mr.
Randall had been made to himself. Besides a repetition of some particulars
already stated, he told Mr. Giles that he had already secured thirty or forty
members of this House, but he wanted to secure three other members, if Mr.
Giles recollected right. He added, that he had already secured a majority in
the Senate. When this proposal was first made, which he thought was about ten
days ago, a member from New York (Mr. Livingston) was present. Randall had even
gone so far as to say, that a written agreement was drawn out, and subscribed
by a number of eastern members, and he wished Mr. Giles to extend another
obligation of the same kind for the southern members, the purport of which
paper was understood to be, that the members who voted in support of the
disposal of the lands, were to be secured in a stipulated share of them,
without having their names mentioned in the deed. Mr. Giles was solicitous to
learn the names of the members who had already entered into the negotiation,
but Randall assured him, that, from motives of delicacy, he durst not
communicate any of the names. Mr. Giles then desired a sight of the agreement,
that he might be able to comprehend its meaning, before he should attempt to
draw any similar paper. The man called a second time, and, as Mr. Giles
conceived, about four days ago, but never could produce either the deed or any
draft of it. Mr. Giles had already communicated the proposal to several
members, and, in particular, to the Speaker.

The Speaker (Mr. Dayton) mentioned, that Mr. Giles had, some time ago,
informed him of the proposal. He replied, that if an opportunity offered, he
would take care to select a committee consisting of members sure to detect the
guilty, if any such could exist; adding, that he expected the House to believe
that he would not have used such words, but on so extraordinary an occasion.

Mr. CHRISTIE said that he was the person who introduced Randall to Mr. Smith
and Mr. Murray. He had long known him as a respectable man. He had mentioned to
Mr. Christie, in general, that it was a landed speculation; and hinted that he,
Mr. Christie, might accept of a share. In reply, that gentleman assured him,
that he could not possibly have a concern in any such transaction. Randall had
not, to Mr. Christie, insinuated that any undue advantages would accrue to
members supporting the intended purchase.

Mr. Buck, a member from Vermont, mentioned, that a person of the name of
Whitney, who appears to have been an associate with Randall, had called upon
him in the country, with a proposal of this kind.

REMARKS. -- I never was more surprised in my life, than when I heard Mr.
Dayton, the Speaker, avow, that he had told Mr. Giles, he would take care to
select such a committee as should detect the guilty, if any such could exist.

This sentence from the Speaker discovers to us, that he had but an indifferent
opinion of the integrity of some of the members of the House: for, had not this
been the case, he would not have fallen on a plan of detecting the guilty. The
qualifying phrase, "if any such could exist," does by no means do away the
existence of suspicion in his mind; for, if no suspicion existed, why should he
talk of taking care to select a committee for the purpose of detection. This
last expression has also something of a party nature in it. Mr. Dayton should
have presumed that every member in the House would be anxious to detect guilt:
to say that he would take care to select such a committee as would do this, was
not only to presume, that there were some members who would not do it, but it
was to hint, at the same time, that he knew, or, at least, guessed, who those
members were. This conclusion is inevitable; for, it would have been an
absurdity, which so sensible a man as the Speaker could not have fallen into,
to propose to himself the selecting of such a committee as would be sure to
detect the guilty, if he had had an equal confidence in all the members of the
House, or if he had not had some particular members in his eye, whom he looked
upon as men of more integrity than some others.

I know not how the House felt on this occasion; but, had I been a member, I
freely declare, that I should have felt my honor much more deeply wounded by
this suggestion of the Speaker, than by any thing that could possibly have been
advanced, or even proved, by the land-jobbers themselves. If he had
incautiously let fall such expressions to Mr. Giles, there was certainly no
kind of necessity for repeating them in public, unless called upon to that
effect. This is by no means the least exceptionable circumstance, as, the
unasked-for repetition of the suggestion, seems to have been merely a lure for
popularity; a trick always beneath an independent member of Congress, and more
especially so, when that popularity is to be obtained at the expense of his
colleagues.

TUESDAY, Dec. 29th.
Mr. BLOUNT brought forward a resolution in nearly the following words:
Resolved, that it be made a charge against Robert Randall, that he declared to
a member of this House, that a number, consisting of not less than thirty
members of this House had engaged to support his memorial.

Mr. MURRAY called upon gentlemen, by their sensibility to personal dignity,
and the character of the House, to arrest the motion. Its tendency certainly
was to place the honor of the House, or a very great part of it, in the power
of a man of whose known profligacy of principles there could now be no doubt.
Will you, he observed, permit, nay invite him, whom you arraign at the bar of
this House, to be a public accuser! Will you adopt a charge against him, which
is in its nature an imputation that however lightly and wickedly made, will
implicate perhaps innocent men. These men to rescue their own reputations will
be obliged to risque their characters, on the weight of their veracity, by
denying this man's charge in the face of a world but too prone to suspect -- By
this motion Randall's assertion to the gentleman from Virginia (Mr. Giles) the
only member who has mentioned it, is to be alleged against Randall as an
offense. That Randall said to the gentleman, that there were thirty or forty
members secured he had no doubt -- but he believed the fact to be that Randall
was both deceived himself and attempted to deceive the gentleman -- "Why," said
Mr. Murray, "the fellow told me that there were thirty members secured." -- Mr.
Murray had not thought proper to state that circumstance, because he did not so
much consider it as a fact material to the detection of Randall's guilt, as it
was one which if mentioned might possibly afford to malice an opportunity of
affixing a stigma to any thirty or forty names at which personal enmity might
point -- no public good could result from such a disclosure -- for the
assertion of such a man as Randall could not among men of honor be deemed a
sufficient ground of suspicion; and yet the malice of the world, or the rancour
of personal enemies might attach suspicion and dishonor to almost the whole
House, from the indefiniteness of the charge. When Randall informed him, on
Thursday night, that there were thirty members, who would support his measures,
he had felt in the very conduct which he was then himself pursuing to detect
Randall, to arrest his scheme, a principle of candor toward others, which
taught him that other gentlemen to whom Randall had communicated his scheme
confidentially, were probably determined as honestly as himself to crush the
infamous plot against the honor of the House. He knew that he who would be
wicked enough to attempt seduction, might be weak enough to use this
intelligence artfully, for the purpose of leading him the more readily to
accept terms of infamy; because the object was painted as easily attainable;
and that Randall might wish to diminish all qualms, by exhibiting a pretended
group of accomplices whose company would at least diminish the appearance of
singularity. -- I entertained, said Mr. Murray, no suspicion of any man -- I
knew Randall to be a corrupt man from his offers to myself -- I therefore
placed all his intelligence to the score of flimsy art -- I knew that such a
man was not to be fully believed, where his interest was to magnify his success
-- I drew favorable auspices with respect to the corpse to which I belong, from
another piece of intelligence of his, which was, that he communicated to some
members, one of whom he had named, and whom I knew to be a man of honor, in
what he called the general way. -- This general way was a display of the
sounder part of his scheme merely, and not the corrupt: -- consisting in
developing the advantages which would result to the Union in the disposal of
their lands, provided the harmony of the Indians could be secured -- In this
view of his plan he gave the subject an attitude far from unimposing; -- and I
conceived that as in proportion to the numbers engaged confidentially he must
know that the hazard of detection increased, he would not communicate the
corrupt view as long as he found the more honest part of the policy might
appear to strike any gentleman as a measure useful to his country -- I
therefore did not believe Randall, in the sense he evidently intended.
Therefore, Sir, I did not feel myself at liberty to mention the assertion which
I conceived to be unavailing as a circumstance necessary to the example I
wished to make, but which if communicated I thought might cast a stain, by the
mystery that enveloped it, upon a body whose character ought to be held sacred
to the confidence of the country. My duty was to bring Randall's attempt to
corrupt unequivocally into light, not by repeating all the arts which he
excited to corrupt; nor by exhibiting them in a way that might wound the
feelings of men of honor, who, if charged even personally by Randall, would
have no refuge from odium but in their characters and counter-assertion -- this
though always conclusive with those who personally know them, is not a
protection to minds of sensibility against the stings of calumny. The voice of
fame is not composed from the voice of men of honor.

It was he said in the spirit of such reflections, that he and the gentleman
with whom he had concerted the mode and time of disclosure [Mr. W. Smith] had
determined to trust rather to the as yet unstained honor of the House, than to
the loose declarations of Randall; and therefore had resolved on Friday morning
to make the disclosure, before that some gentlemen, innocent of the corrupt
scheme, and acquainted with the sounder part of the plan only, might have cause
to blush at having presented a memorial which it would be their duty to defeat
and cover with infamy. If this charge is exhibited against Randall he will
confess or deny it; if he confesses it, and in the disposition that often
accompanies detected guilt, should name particular gentlemen, though their
counter-assertion, would completely, in his own mind, outweigh the charge of a
corrupt and profligate accuser like Randall, yet would every man of delicacy
have cause to regret, that merely for the purpose of adding to the charges
against a man proved to be wicked, a stain had glanced from him upon a name
innocent and honorable. Let gentlemen act with magnanimity upon this occasion
-- Let them resist a motion, which, however purely conceived, may eventually
wound honest fame, without detecting guilt. -- Mr. Murray solemnly believed,
that Randall's assertion was either false totally, or true only as it respected
those who had listened to him, for the purpose of making an example -- or those
to whom he had spoken in what he had called the general way. If Randall denied
this charge, it would rest on the assertion of the gentleman from Virginia, but
could not affect members farther, than as the measure of enquiry seemed to
imply suspicion. He and the gentleman from South Carolina had both acted upon
the presumption of innocence in members, and they had resolved on the timely
disclosure yesterday, lest even one member, however innocent, might be placed
in a painful situation by presenting the memorial. If Randall is charged with
this as an offense, he verily believed the House betrayed its own honor to the
malice of the world -- he would therefore vote decidedly against it.

Mr. Murray, in the course of his speech, added several other observations. He
did not doubt that in every district on the continent, thirty favorites would
be pointed out, whom the people in that quarter, or at least some among them,
would be disposed to consign to infamy, and perhaps there was not one district
in the Union, where the same thirty members would be named. It would be said,
"Sir, they are not named, but I know who are the men." So rapid were the
communications of the press, so keen the appetite for scandal, that when once
the story was circulated, it might be impossible ever to get rid of it.

Mr. GILES replied. He was in favor of the motion of Mr. Blount. He said it
was evident from the way in which this whole communication had been brought
forward, that there had been no previous correspondence between Mr. Murray and
himself. They had felt differently. Mr. Giles had informed the Speaker of the
House. M. Murray and his friend [Mr. W. Smith] had communicated the affair to
the President, a measure of which, as it struck Mr. Giles, he did not
distinctly perceive the propriety. Mr. Giles had considered it as best to wait
in silence, till the petition of Randall should come forward. Mr. Murray had
suggested a variety of delicate motives for breaking the matter to the House,
lest the petition should come forward, and hurt the feelings of an innocent and
unsuspecting member. Mr. Giles did not wish to diminish the credit fully due to
the gentleman in this respect. He himself had felt somewhat differently. He had
acted differently.

Mr. HILLHOUSE was convinced that there was not a gentleman in the house, whose
character rested on so slender a foundation, as to be affected by any thing
this man could say. He felt no anxiety for the reputation of the House, for he
knew that it was not in the smallest danger. The resolution went merely to make
Randall confess, that he had said so and so. It implied nothing tending to
affect members. A man covered with infamy making such charges could not expect
credit, or obtain it from any body. Mr. Hillhouse was, for these reasons, in
favor of the resolution for interrogating Randall.

The resolution passed in the affirmative.

REMARKS -- In the deliberations of this day there is nothing that seems to
demand a particular remark, except it be the different manner of proceedings of
Messrs. Giles and Murray. Both these gentlemen had had the very same overtures
made to them; but the former had informed the speaker of the House, and
considered it as best to wait in silence, 'till the petition of Randall should
come forward; while Mr. Murray, on the contrary, had given information to the
President of the United States, and had broke the matter to the house, lest the
petition should come forward, and hurt the feelings of an innocent and
unsuspecting member.

I do not pretend to determine what were the motives of Mr. Giles: God forbid I
should imagine them any other than those of the purest patriotism. But, I must
confess, that the manner of his proceeding might, if adopted, become a very
evil precedent. Suppose, for instance, some determined party-man, some fiery
demagogue, whose only food is popular applause, and whose only object is to
trouble or overturn: Suppose a patriot of this stamp, should, at some future
period, wish to crush, at all events, the moderate and upright part of the
House? What would be the method he would take, if an opportunity like the
present offered itself? -- He would listen to the land-jobbers, give them no
positive refusal or discouragement, and would endeavor to get from them the
names of the members said to be already gained. Then he would communicate the
matter to the Speaker, if he knew him to be of the same party with himself.
This done, they would wait in silence, keeping the affair a profound secret
from all the members, except those of their own faction. The trap thus set, the
hunters would lie close, and the instant some innocent unsuspecting man
(perhaps pointed out by themselves) fell into it, they would rush in upon him
with all the ready-sharpened weapons of misconstruction, calumny and reproach;
and, when they had effected his destruction, that of his friends, and of the
government itself, they would shout out, glorious sport!

It is possible, too, that such an unprincipled faction might themselves
already lie under the imputation of having been corupted; and, in that case, a
stroke of retaliation like this would be particularly agreeable. Men are but
too prone to seek for companions in disgrace. Revenge is sweet, at whatever
price it be purchased. A faction already sunk to the bottommest pit of infamy,
would feel a kind of consolation in dragging down their colleagues, and even
their country after them.

Mr. MURRAY'S manner of proceeding was exactly the opposite of all this. He
laid no baits, set no springes. He did not break the matter to one member or
one party, but to the whole house; and, if he showed less desire to "detect the
guilty," than Messrs. Giles and Dayton, he showed a much greater desire to put
innocence on its guard, and preserve the honor of the House unblemished.

WEDNESDAY, 30th December 1795.
RANDALL and WHITNEY being in custody, a debate took place with respect to
allowing them counsel at the bar of the House, which was also determined in the
affirmative. On this occasion Mr. Christie observed, that he had known Randall
for many years, and had never heard of any thing against him before. He had
lately been at Detroit, and Mr. Christie believed that he had been injured by
keeping bad company. -- He was not the first man in the country who had been
corrupted by British influence and British company. He moved that Randall
should be allowed until tomorrow at twelve o'clock. This was negatived.

REMARKS -- IT appeared to me particularly cruel to negative this motion of Mr.
Christie's seeing that poor Randall, whom Mr. Christie had known for so many
years, had been injured by keeping bad company. But, as to British influence, I
could not for my life perceive, with what propriety it was brought in here. It
seemed rather a wanton attack on the character of a nation, whose influence in
the line of corruption has not been made apparent in this country; and, I may
add, it was a wanton attack on the people of this country too, to say that
Randall "was not the first man in it who had been corrupted by British
influence," Mr. Christie seems, indeed, to have fallen into the cant of the
opposers of the treaty; for, we know, that they attributed its conclusion and
ratification to the influence of British Gold. We have seen the firm, candid
and upright man, who negociated that treaty, and the Senators who advised its
ratification, burnt in an effigy, representing them as receiving the gold of
Great Britain; we have been long scandalized at these scenes, and at the
atrocious falsehood of the opinion they were intended to propagate; one would
have hoped therefore, that no member of Congress, would have sanctioned, in any
manner, however indirect, proceedings from which every well informed and honest
man turns with indignation.

The pleadings of the counsel, on the part of the prisoners, which took place
on the 31st of Decemare are by far too long to find a place here. It is hardly
necessary to observe, that they contended for the innocence of the prisoners;
nor, when the reader is informed that the defense was committed to Messrs.
Tilghman and Lewis, is it necessary to say, that it was ably conducted.

As to the innocence of the land-jobbers, it would be wrong to say any thing
positive about it, after the decision of the House; but, it was not to be
wondered at if men of that profession should imagine it possible to bribe the
members of Congress, after what they had heard of other people in the
government. After having heard of the "precious confessions" and "overtures" of
Mr. Randolph, on behalf of himself and others, one would not have been
surprised if they had attempted to bribe the President himself. They found
however, other sort of men to deal with. The affair terminated to the honor of
the members, and I hope I may say, to the universal satisfaction of their
constituents.

ON THE RECEPTION OF THE FRENCH FLAG.
TUESDAY, January 5th, 1796.
I WAS rather late in my attendance this day, a circumstance the more
distressing, as I found, not only the gallery, but even the passage also, full
of spectators. I, at last, made shift to reach my post; but not without an
infinite deal of difficulty; for, the citizens I had to deal with, being in
general brim full of the doctrine of equality, pay but very little respect to
old age.

Every person within the walls of the house, seemed to be waiting for the
developement of some great and important mystery. The members were paired off,
laying their heads together, whispering and listening with great eagerness;
while the Speaker, seated with his chin supported between his right finger and
thumb, and his eyes rivetted to the floor, appeared lost, buried alive, as it
were, in profundity of thought. Never did wisdom appear more lovely in my eyes.
"Two such statues," said I to myself, would have become the shrine of Minerva
much better than the blinking twilight mousers, that her votaries formerly
placed on it.

This seriousness of the members of the House naturally produced the most
anxious expectation in the minds of the good citizens in my quarter. A thousand
ridiculous inquiries were made in the twinkling of an eye, which were answered
by a thousand still more ridiculous conjectures. One said that a law was going
to be read to oblige the Virginians to free their slaves and pay their just
debts; but another swore that was impossible. A third declared a second embargo
was to be laid, and a fourth observed, that it was to hinder the cruel English
from carrying off our poor horses, to eat them in the West Indies. In short,
were I to repeat all that I heard, I should never have done; for, of two
hundred of us, no two individuals were of the same opinion. One thing, however,
we all agreed in: an impatience that I should in vain endeavor to describe,
but of which the half-successful lover, who has waited for an answer to a
supplicating billet-doux, may have some faint idea.

To tell the reader the truth of my opinion, I was afraid that some new
confiscating or sequestrating project was on foot; and when Mr. Dayton, the
Speaker, awoke from his reverie, and began to speak, "Lord have mercy," said I,
upon the poor British creditors. My fears on this account were soon dissipated,
for he informed the House, that, as he understood, a message from the President
was about to be delivered, and I knew that the President was much too honest
and honorable a man to think of any such thing. The Speaker told us that this
message was of the most "solemn" and "serious" nature, and he therefore
requested both the members of the House and the strangers in the gallery to
observe the profoundest silence.

The reader will easily imagine, that a warning like this increased the torture
of suspense. It was now that we felt the value of the hearing faculty. I
observed my neighbors brushing aside their matted and untutored locks, that
nothing might impede the entrance of the glad tidings. We were, as the poet
says, "all eye, all ear." But there was a little man down below whose anxiety
seemed to surpass that of all the rest. He crept to within a very few paces of
the leeward side of the chair, and, turning himself sidewise, lifted up the
left corner of his wig, placing the auricular orifice, open and extended, in a
direct line with the Speaker's mouth, so that not a single breath of the
precious sounds could possibly escape him. His longing countenance seemed to
say, in the language of his countryman Macbeth: Speak! speak! had I three ears,
by heaven I Would hear thee.

The attitude of this subaltern quid nunc had like to have shaken the
inflexibility of my muscles; I made a shift, however, to mould them up into a
gravity adapted to the awfulness of the scene that was preparing for my view.
-- All at once, as if by the power of magic, the doors flew open, grating on
their hinges harsh thunder, and the President's Secretary was introduced with
an American officer bearing a Flag, which I took to be a representation of the
day of judgment. It had a thunderbolt in the center, with a cock perched upon
it; the emblems of Almighty vengeance and of watchfulness. At two of the
corners the globe was represented in a flame. The staff was covered with black
velvet, sad color of death, and crowned with a Parisian pike, fatal
instrument, on which the bleeding and ghastly heads, nay, even the palpitaring
hearts of men, women and children have so often been presented to the view of
the polite and humane inhabitants of that capital.

Curiosity now gave way to another passion, that of fear. For my part, I am not
ashamed to confess, that I never was in such trepidation since I first saw the
light of day. Nor were my companions in a more enviable state. I looked round
and beheld the affrighted group huddled up together, like a brood of chickens
waiting the mortal grip of the voracious kite. In this general picture of
consternation one object attracted particular notice. It was a democrat, who
was so fully persuaded that the Flag was the harbinger of fate, that he began
to anticipate the torments of the world to come. Never did I before behold such
dreadful symptoms of a guilty conscience. He was as white as paper, his knees
knocked together, his teeth chattered, he wrung his hands and rolled his eyes,
but durst not lift them toward heaven. His voice was like the yell of the
inhabitants of the infernal regions. Oh! Valerius! cursed Pittachus! Franklin
Bache! Franklin Bache! Oh! that infernal atheistical Calendar! -- This was all
we could get from him; but this was enough to assure me, that he was one of
those unhappy wretches, who had been led astray by the profligate
correspondents of Mr. Bache, and by the atheistical decadery calendar, which
that gentleman has, with so much unholy zeal, endeavored to introduce amongst
us, in place of the Christian one, we, as yet, make use of.

My attention was called off from this terrific picture of despair by a voice
from beneath. A tall spare man, dressed all in black from head to foot, who
seemed to be "A Calm Observer," was beginning, in a hollow voice, to read (as I
expected) the decrees of fate, but, to my agreeable surprise, I found it was a
decree of the National Convention. -- It was in the following words:

To the Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled.
Citizens Representatives,
The connections which nature, reciprocal events, and a happy concurrence of
circumstances, have formed between two free nations, cannot but be
indissoluble. You have strengthened those sacred ties by the Declarations,
which the Minister Plenipotentiary of the United States has made, in your name,
to the National Convention and to the French People. They have been received
with rapture by a nation, who know how to appreciate every testimony which the
United States have given to them of their affection. The colors of both
nations, united in a center of the National Convention, will be an everlasting
evidence of the part which the United States have taken in the success of the
French Republic.

You were the first Defenders of the Rights of Man, in another hemisphere. --
Strengthened by your example, and endowed with an invincible energy, the French
people have vanquished that tyranny, which, during so many centuries of
ignorance, superstition and baseness, had enchained a generous nation.

Soon did the people of the United States perceive that every victory of ours,
strengthened their independence and happiness. They were deeply affected at our
momentary misfortunes, occasioned by treasons purchased by English gold. They
have celebrated with rapture the successes of our brave armies.

None of these sympathetic emotions have escaped the sensibility of the French
nation. They have all served to cement the most intimate and solid union that
has ever existed between two nations.

The Citizen Adet who will reside near your Government in quality of Minister
Plenipotentiary of the French Republic, is specially instructed to tighten
those bands of fraternity and mutual benevolence. We hope that we may fulfill
this principal object of his mission, by a conduct worthy of the confidence of
both nations, and of the reputation which his patriotism and virtues have
acquired him.

An analogy of political principles, the natural relations of commerce and
industry; -- the efforts and immense sacrifices of both nations in defense of
liberty and equality; -- the blood which they have spilled together; -- their
avowed hatred for despots; -- the moderation of their political views; -- the
disinterestedness of their councils; -- and especially the success of the vows
which they have made in presence of the Supreme Being, to be free or die, --
all combine to render indestructable the connections which they have formed.

Doubt it not, Citizens; we shall finally destroy the combination of Tyrants;
you, by the picture of prosperity, which in your vast countries, has succeeded
to a bloody struggle of eight years; -- we, by the enthusiasm which glows in
the breast of every Frenchman. Astonished nations, too long the dupes of
perfidious Kings, Nobles and Priests, will eventually recover their rights, and
the human race, will owe to the American and French nations, their regeneration
and lasting peace.

PARIS, 30th Vendemaire, 3d year of the French Republic, one and indivisible.
The Members of the Committee of Public Safety. J. S. B. DELMAS, MERLIN (of
Douai) etc.

"This Merlin," says Doctor Moore, in his journal, is not thought to be quite
so great a conjurer as his namesake of old. The opinion here related by the
Doctor, seems to be pretty well confirmed by the dispatch before us; and I
think we may add, that the rest of the committee of Public Safety, who
participated in drawing it up, were no greater conjurers than their colleague.

Passing by the general style of this Anglo-Gallican epistle, let us examine a
passage or two of its contents.

The connections which nature, reciprocal events and a happy concurrence of
circumstances, have formed between two free nations, cannot but be
indissoluble.

By this we are to understand, that, in our nature and in the events of our
revolution, we resemble the French. In the first place, what has nature given
us in common with them? Are we descended from the same race? Is the resemblance
to be found in our persons, in our language, or in our dispositions? Did ever
any body hear an American (except he was a frenchified Democrat) running on
with an eternal bombastical babble about nothing? Do we sing, dance, and cut
throats, all in the same instant? Place one of our plain, sober, sensible young
men by the side of a profligate prig of the revolution, and see if you can find
any two animals of God's creation between which there is so little likeness.
What, then, has nature done to draw us together, as they call it? It appears to
me, that she has acted in a sense directly opposite. Like a tender and
solicitous mother, seeing her favorite children forming connections contrary
to her laws, she has exerted all her efforts to draw them from their ruin. May
we listen to her voice! and not suffer ourselves to be sucked into the
rattle-snake embraces of those anarchists, whom she says: avoid, as you would
avoid my curse!

As the nature of a people is a thing entirely independent of their own agency,
I see no great reason that we have to be offended at the Convention, for
aspiring to resemble us in natural dispositions and affection; but, with
respect to the events of our two revolutions, the work of our own hands, to
tell us that we are connected by a similarity here, is what we may, and ought
to be offended at, and highly too. In what historian, I beseech them, did they
find out that the events of our revolution ressembled the events of theirs? Did
we begin our revolution by robbery and murder? Was our declaration of
independence, like their declaration of rights, promulgated midst the cries of
the dying? Or did the heralds stand to read it under the dripping head of some
innocent victim? Was our Congress ever divided into impious factions, striving
to outvie each other in cruelty and blasphemy? Did they decree the word of God
to be a lie, and write over our burial places: "this is the place of eternal
sleep?" Did we ever see the guillotine permanent in our marketplaces; children
bound beneath it, while the blood of their parents flowed on the scaffold; our
gutters running with the streams of life? Did we cut off the heads of our
fathers and mothers, drag our children to death? and did these Representatives
of the French people ever hear, that our Congress applauded such hellish acts?
Did they ever hear, that we roasted people alive, and cut off their flesh to
eat; that we stripped poor innocent defenseless women, and shot them by
hundreds, with infants in their arms? Did they ever hear of men, born in
America, or in any other country except France, savage enough to tear out the
heart of a human being and bite it with their teeth; rip open women with child,
and stick the quivering embryo on the point of their bayonets? Is there any
American base enough to say that we were guilty of these things? And if we
never were, in the name of all that is impudent, how durst they thus insult us
by comparing the events of our revolution to those of their own? -- Never, till
I heard this dispatch read, did I wish for a seat among the Legislators of the
Union. Had I been on that floor, this hectoring epistle should never have gone
into the world, without being accompanied with a proof, that one American at
least, felt as he ought to do, the indignity offered to the character of his
nation. Lest the reader should imagine, that the horrid deeds, glanced at in
this paragraph, are advanced at random, I take this opportunity of informing
him, that a work, which I have had long in hand, and which will very soon be
published, will not only convince him, that I have never exagerated the
cruelties of the French revolutionists; but that I have kept far within the
bounds of truth. In this work the affrighted reader will see clear convincing
proofs, of such consummate villainy, such refinement in barbarity, as never
before entered into the heart of the most savage butcher of the human species.


But let us proceed to another passage. -- Soon did the people of the United
States perceive that every victory of ours, strengthened their independence and
happiness. They were deeply affected at our momentary misfortunes, occasioned
by treasons purchased by English gold. They have celebrated with rapture the
successes of our brave armies.

Now, let me ask who are those people of the United States, that "soon
perceived" that what Master Merlin pleases to call victories strengthened their
independence and happiness? For my part, I was so far from perceiving this
soon, that I have never perceived it at all; no, nor even imagined either. It
would be but a poor pitiful independence, I am afraid, were it dependent on
their victories. Their victories, if we ought to call victories what has been
purchased by the ruin of an empire, have been in a quarter where we have
neither territory nor commercial connections. What is their overrunning the Low
Countries to us? What safety can we possibly derive from their successes in
Savoy, or their late victory on the Rhine? Had they sallied out, indeed, and
destroyed the great Leviathan, and established for ever the liberty of the
seas, as they faithfully promised us they would, I should have listened to
them; but, alas! the sea monster still rolls about, sweeping them from the face
of the waters, when ever he meets with them. This is fine strengthening of our
independence.

Besides, there is something in the very idea of an independence that stands in
need of the strength of another nation, which, to me, appears ridiculous.
Independence ought to imply, a capacity to stand alone. If, then, we have this
capacity, what need have we of French aid? And, if we have it not, we do wrong
to talk about independence at all; for, a dependent independence is the most
unenviable state into which a poor helpless nation ever fell. -- It is easy to
discover why they are continually plying us with this old threadbare tale; but
it is not so easy to discover how it happens, that so many among us are still
their dupes.

We now come to the "English Gold." They tell us, that the people of this
country were deeply affected at their momentary misfortunes, occasioned by
treasons purchased by English Gold. -- This is an excellent way of accounting
for misfortunes. When the French gain a victory, it is by their valor, but
when they are beaten, it is by the gold of their enemies. There is one
circumstance here, which, it would seem, our dear friend Merlin overlooked; and
that is; where there are treasons there must be traitors, and where there is
corruption there must be receivers as well as givers. This being the case, it
naturally follows, that this English gold has been received by corrupt French
traitors. Whether this does them honor or not, or whether it be a circumstance
that ought to excite our confidence in their nation, I leave the reader to
determine.

But, how does this apply to ourselves? What have we to do with their money
matters? Ah! perhaps the reader does not see why this English gold was glided
into the flag epistle. It was not without a motive, I can assure him. The
writers knew that their epistle would be published in this country, and they
looked upon it as a fine opportunity to hint at English corruption, when the
treaty was about to arrive among us. This epistle was written in October 1794,
and consequently, they expected it would arrive here before Mr. Jay.
They knew also, that they had made abundant use of gold themselves, and we
have ever seen that it is the practice of the world, to cry out on others,
while the sin lies at their own door.

We have heard much talk about English gold, or, as it is commonly called the
"gold of Pit;" but I would venture my life, that there is not a single person
in the United States, who believes that it has been employed among us. A proof,
an infallible proof, that it has not, we hear it exclaimed against. Gold has a
different effect: it ever makes converts: it opens the mouth of the boisterous
demagogue against every body else but the donor. Had Mr. Pit known the
pretended patriots of America, as well as Citizen Fauchet did; had he known
that their consciences were going off dog-cheap, he might have employed a few
thousand guineas to good purpose. He might have bought up all the Democratic
Societies in the country at the reasonable rate of twenty pounds per club.
These remarks may possibly reach Billy Pit; if they should, I hereby engage,
if he will send me a bank bill of ten thousand pounds, to turn the hearts of
all this horde of patriots in the course of one month from the date of my
receipt. I will not only silence their execrations against him, but will turn
their cerberean howlings into songs of praise. Instead of the bloody Ca Ira and
the brutal Carmagnole, I will make them bawl out, "Britannia rule the waves;"
nay, even "God save Great George our King." And all this I undertake to do for
the reasonable commission of twenty five per cent. The reader may, perhaps,
look upon this as presumption in me; but, when he recollects that I have to do
with Democratic Societies; when he recollects that Citizen Fauchet could have
determined on civil war or on peace" with the aid of only "a few thousands of
dollars, he will be ready to allow, that I could perform what I here promise
with ten thousand good pounds sterling.

In the next sentence of the passage above quoted, Merlin tells us, that the
people of America celebrated with rapture the successes of the brave French
armies. -- Aye, aye, and of the brave French fleets too. I wish Master Merlin
had spoken as little truth here as he has done in the rest of his epistle. For
my part I have ever been ashamed of these celebrations of the French successes:
they appeared to me to be indications of a spirit of partiality, very
unbecoming in a people who were continually putting in their claims to the
rights and privileges of neutrality. But, let us do justice here. Who were
these civic-feasters? The people of America, says Merlin; but Merlin is a
little mistaken here. They were composed of the drunken rabble of some great
towns, headed by those who were very probably in the pay of the Convention. I
am aware that I shall be told here, that the cannons of the State of
Pennsylvania were fired at these feasts, that the G...... assisted in person,
and that honorable mention is made of him, in the proces-verbal (or minutes of
the proceedings) sent to the French government; but this will not make me
retract what I have said about drunken rabble, nor about those who were very
probably in the pay of the Convention; on the contrary, I produce this
circumstance as a proof of these my assertions.

I shall take particular notice of but one passage more of this loving
legislative epistle. -- An analogy of political principles, the natural
relations of commerce and industry; the efforts and immense sacrifices of both
nations, in the defense of liberty and equality; -- the blood which they have
spilled together; -- their avowed hatred for despots; -- the moderation of
their political views; the disinterestedness of their councils; and especially
the success of the vows which they have made in the presence of the Supreme
Being, to be free, or die, -- all combine to render indestructable the
connections which they have formed.

And do they tell us, that our vows to the Supreme Being resemble theirs? And
have they the assurance to talk to us about the Supreme Being, after the
publication of their decrees! Do we not know, that one of this very Convention
who writes to us thus, mounted the tribune of the Assembly, and called on them
to throw down the altars of God? And, do we not know, that the Convention, in
consequence of this impious motion, decreed, that the French people
acknowledged no other god, or rather goddess, but Reason? They not only
instituted and celebrated a festival to this newfangled deity, but a strumpet
was accoutered in the habiliments of Reason, seated on a throne of turf,
surrounded with the insignia of what she was said to represent, and in this
guise received the adorations of the Convention, as well as of the people of
Paris. Can we have forgotten these things? Can we have forgotten the decree
that orders all religious books to be burnt, and can we have forgotten that
this was really done? Who were the men, then, that did all this? The very
Convention, that now talks to us about the Supreme Being. -- But, we are told,
that they have now abjured their errors; that they have now decreed, that there
is a God. -- Decreed that there is a God! What blasphemy! As if it were as easy
to overturn the throne of Heavan, as that of their own country! Is there any
Christian, is there any man, that can hear language like this without
shuddering? Are these our principles? -- No: we imitate them in nothing. And I
hope in God we never shall.

I must now insert the letter of the French Minister and that of the President,
which were communicated to the House immediately after the dispatch I have just
been remarking on. But, first of all, it will be necessary to give the letter
of the President, by which the business was opened to the Congress.

Gentlemen of the Senate, and of the House of Representatives,
A letter from the Minister Plenipotentiary of the French Republic, received on
the 22d of last month, covered an address dated the 21st of October 1794, from
the Committee of Public Safety, to the Representatives of the United States in
Congress; and also informed me that he was instructed by the Committee to
present to the United States the colors of France. I therefore proposed to
receive them last Friday, the first day of the new year, a day of general joy
and congratulation. On that day the Minister of the French Republic delivered
the colors, with an address, to which I returned an answer. By the latter the
House will see that I have informed the minister, that the colors will be
deposited with the archives of the United States. But it seemed to me proper
previously to exhibit to the two Houses of Congress these evidences of the
continued friendship of the French Republic, together with the sentiments
expressed by me on the occasion in behalf of the United States. They are
herewith communicated.

Go: WASHINGTON.

FRENCH MINISTER's LETTER.
MR. PRESIDENT,
I come to acquit myself of a duty very dear to my heart; -- I come to deposit
in your hands and in the midst of a people justly renowned for their courage
and their love of liberty, the symbol of the triumphs and of the
enfranchisement of my nation.

When she broke her chains; -- when she proclaimed the imprescriptible rights
of man; -- when, in a terrible war, she sealed with her blood the covenant she
had made with Liberty, -- her own happiness was not alone the object of her
glorious efforts; -- her views extended also to all free people. She saw their
interests blended with her own, and doubly rejoiced in her victories, which in
assuring to her the enjoyment of her rights, became to them new guarantees of
their independence.

These sentiments, which animated the French nation, from the dawn of their
revolution, have acquired new strength since the foundation of the Republic.
France, at that time, by the form of its government, assimilated to, or rather
indentified with, free people, saw in them only friends and brothers. Long
accustomed to regard the American people as her most faithful allies, she has
sought to draw closer the ties already formed in the fields of America, under
the auspices of victory, over the ruins of tyranny.

The National Convention, the organ of the will of the French nation, have more
than once expressed their sentiments to the American people; -- but above all,
these burst forth on that august day, when the Minister of the United States
presented to the National Representation, the colors of his country. Desiring
never to lose recollections as dear to Frenchmen as they must be to Americans,
the Convention ordered that these colors should be placed in the hall of their
sittings. They had experienced sensations too agreeable not to cause them to be
partaken of by their allies, and decreed that to them the National colors
should be presented.

Mr. President, I do not doubt their expectations will be fulfilled; and I am
convinced that every citizen will receive, with a pleasing emotion, this flag,
elsewhere the terror of the enemies of liberty, here the certain pledge of
faithful friendship; especially when they recollect that it guides to combat,
men who have shared their toils, and who were prepared for liberty by aiding
them to acquire their own.

(Signed) P. A. ADET.

PRESIDENT's ANSWER.
Born, Sir, in a land of liberty; having early learned its value; having
engaged in a perilous conflict to defend it; having in a word devoted the best
years of my life to secure its permanent establishment in my own country; my
anxious recollections, my sympathetic feelings, and my best wishes are
irresistibly excited, whenever in any country I see an oppressed nation
unfurl the banners of freedom. But above all, the events of the French
Revolution have produced the deepest solicitude, as well as the highest
admiration. To call your nation brave, were to pronounce but common praise.
Wonderful people! Ages to come will read with astonishment the history of your
brilliant exploits! I rejoice that the period of your toils and of your immense
sacrifices is approaching. I rejoice that the interesting revolutionary
movements of so many years have issued in the formation of a constitution
designed to give permanency to the great object for which you have contended. I
rejoice that liberty, which you have so long embraced with enthusiasm, --
liberty, of which you have been the invincible defenders, now finds an asylum
in the bosom of a regularly organized government; -- a government, which, being
formed to secure the happiness of the French people, corresponds with the
ardent wishes of my heart, while it gratifies the pride of every citizen of the
United States, by its resemblance to their own. -- On these glorious events,
accept, Sir, my sincere congratulations.

In delivering to you these sentiments, I express not my own feelings only, but
those of my fellow-citizens, in relation to the commencement, the progress, and
the issue of the French Revolution: and they will cordially join with me in
purest wishes to the Supreme Being, that the citizens of our sister republic,
our magnanimous allies, may soon enjoy in peace, that liberty, which they have
purchased at so great a price, and all the happiness which liberty can bestow.

I receive, Sir, with lively sensibility, the symbol of the triumphs and of the
enfranchisement of your nation, the colors of France, which you have now
presented the United States. The transaction will be announced to Congress; and
the colors will be deposited with those archives of the United States, which
are at once the evidences and the memorials of their freedom and independence.
May these be perpetual! and may the friendship of the two Republics be
commensurate with their existence.

Go: WASHINGTON.

THERE is nothing in this letter of the French Minister, which seems to call
for a remark, after what I have said on the letter of the Committee of Public
Safety, except it be the closing sentence; where he tells us, that the Flag
guides to combat men who have shared our toils, and who were prepared for
liberty by aiding us to acquire our own.

The first thing I shall take notice of here, is, their aiding us to acquire
liberty. If this be true, we knew not what liberty was before their arrival. We
were, then, slaves to the king of Great Britain. Take care, Mr. Adet; you have
touched on a tender string here! What! Sir, were we slaves? And are we yet the
sons of slaves? If you find me one single American (of British descent) who
will allow, that he is the son of a slave, I Will give you leave to guillotine me
tomorrow morning, fresh and fasting.

The President begins his answer by rejecting this degrading idea. " Born, Sir,
in a land of liberty." As if he had said: No, no, Sir, I am no freed man; I was
never a slave; I was born free. -- Born, Sir, in a land of liberty; having
early learned its value having engaged in a perilous conflict to defend it; and
not to acquire it. This is the language of every American that has too much
respect for himself and his ancestors, to allow that he is no better than a
freed negro. To talk of aiding us to acquire our liberty, what is it but to put
us on a footing with those deluded wretches, whom Victor Hughes is now aiding
to acquire their liberty at St. Vincent's and Granada?

And with respect to the aid that we received from France; there are but very
few of us nowadays who are not well convinced, that that aid was afforded
from motives, that call for no mighty degree of gratitude; and even if we could
ever have had a doubt of this, the express declarations of the Convention would
have removed it. But, supposing the aid to have been given from motives of pure
love to us, and regard to our welfare; who gave it? Not the National
Convention. It was a king, whom that Convention has put to death. -- The
Minister tells us, that the Flag guides to combat, men who have shared our
toils. What! did the armies of the Convention ever share our toils? I fancy we
shall find, that few of the men who shared our toils have escaped the fatal ax.
Those that did, are pining away their days in a dismal dungeon, or are fled
into some foreign land; nay, some of the men who shared our toils, are now
sharing the toils of the British, instead of the French armies.

Any hint of this kind might, then, have been spared at the presenting of the
thunderbolt Flag; but, it seems, we are never to hear the last of this
assistance received from France. Not a letter, not a communication, be it ever
so short or so trifling, do we ever receive without being reminded of it. It is
a maxim, that, when once an obligation is mentioned by the obliging party, the
obligation ceases. How often, then, has our obligation ceased? "Time was," says
Macbeth, when the breath was out, men ceased to exist; but now they rise from
their graves with twenty mortal murders on their heads, and push us from our
stools. So it is with our obligation to the French; in vain do we pay, in vain
do we discharge it, in vain do they forfeit all demand on us; still, like the
grisly ghost of Bancquo, does it rise and stare us in the face. I hope our
children, at any rate, will have the courage to say: Shake not thy gory locks
at us; thou can not say 'twas we.

I do not know how my neighbors may think on this subject; but, for me, I
cannot bear the idea of this everlasting debt of gratitude. It lies like a
mountain on my breast. Is it redeemable? if it be, for the love of heaven, let
us pay it off, and have done with it. If I can find but ten men to join me,
I Will petition Congress to lay a poll tax of an eagle an head for that purpose;
that we may be able, once before we die, to say we are out of debt.

But, it is time to come to the manner in which the House of Representatives
received the Flag, this pledge of the friendship of the Convention.

Mr. GILES informed the House, that having been aware, that the flag would be
presented to the House this day, considering it as an additional testimony of
the affection of France, and it having been the practice on analogous occasions
for the House to express their sentiments independent of the other branch, he
had prepared a resolution expressive of what he conceived would be their sense
on the occasion. It was nearly in the words following.

" Resolved, That the President of the United States be requested to make known
to the Representatives of the French People, that the House has received with
the most lively sensations the communication of the Committee of the Public
Safety, on the 21st of October 1794, accompanied with the colors of the French
Republic, and to assure them that the presentation of the colors of France to
the Congress of the United States is deemed a most honorable testimony of the
existing sympathy and affections of the two republics, founded upon their solid
and reciprocal interests, that the House rejoices in the opportunity of
congratulating the French Republic on the brilliant and glorious achievements
accomplished under it, during the present afflictive war, and that they hope
those achievements will be attended with a perfect attainment of their object,
the permanent establishment of the liberty and happiness of that great and
magnanimous people."

Mr. SEDGWICK wished that a thousand copies of the communications might be
printed, and the farther consideration of the message deferred till tomorrow.

Mr. HARPER and Mr. W. Smith, also recommended a delay. In the sentiments of
the resolution, they both agreed. Perhaps the wording might be somewhat altered.

Mr. SWANWICK was against postponing the consideration of the message, and
observed that the Convention, on receiving a similar present from this country,
had proceeded instantly to a vote respecting it.

Mr. W. SMITH recommended to alter the wording of the resolution, by inserting
the executive of France, instead of the representatives of the French people,
to whom the message in reply was to be directed.

Mr. SHERBOURNE observed, that the difference of opinion respecting the branch
of government to which the answer of the House should be addressed, furnished
an additional reason for a postponement. He highly respected the author of the
motion, and believed his own feelings on the present occasion as fervent as
those of any member. And though the feelings of the House might not be as
ardent on the morrow as at this moment, yet he presumed that the sentiment
would be the same. He conceived that it would be more satisfactory to the
Republic, and more consistent with the dignity of the House, that their answer
should be the result of cool deliberation, than a sudden impulse of enthusiasm,
which the present occasion was calculated to inspire. He would therefore move
that the farther consideration of the resolution on the table, be postponed
till tomorrow.

Mr. SWANWICK thought a postponement in this case, as in many others, would
only be a waste of time. The motion was negatived. Mr. W. Smith's amendment was
then taken up, and, after some conversation, was also negatived.

Mr. PARKER moved an amendment as follows: "That this House has received with
the most sincere and lively sensibility," etc. The amendment was for inserting
the two words in Italicks, to which the House consented. The message was then
voted unanimously, and a thousand copies of the communications and resolutions
were ordered to be printed. A committee of two members was appointed to wait on
the President, and inform him of the resolution agreed to by the House.

OH, fie! Mr. Sedgwick! how could you propose to put off the consideration of
this charming subject till the next day? A delay of a whole twenty-four hours!
Upon my word, Sir, such a proposition indicated but little regard for our
Sister Republic. How different the conduct of Mr. Giles! He comes to the House
with a resolution in his pocket, ready prepared, even before the communication
is received. Happy member! He has thus got the start of you all in the
affections of our very dear allies. Mr. Parker made, indeed, a push to come in
with him, by adding the word sincere; but we all know, that the first step is
every thing in like cases. -- Sincere and lively are not, it is true, the
properest epithets that could be placed before the word sensibility; but it
would be mere pedantry to subject to rules of propriety, a resolution dictated
by that sudden impulse of enthusiasm, which the present occasion was calculated
to inspire.

Mr. SWANWICK (don't smile reader) saw, at once, the impropriety of postponing
the consideration; because -- because what! -- because the Convention, on
receiving a similar present from this country, had proceeded instantly to a
vote respecting it. -- And who told you, my dear little orator, that the
Convention had received a similar present from this country? -- Who is this
country? What is it? I am well informed that neither the government nor the
legislature knew any thing at all about the matter, 'till an account of it
appeared in the newspapers; and you are not to learn, I presume, that whatever
an Ambassador does of his own head, is in no wise binding on his country. But,
suppose even, that the American flag delivered to the Convention, had been a
present from this country, their manner of receiving it could have but little
weight here, with men who were not devoted to their interests rather than to
those of America. How long, I pray, have their measures became precedents here?
They proceeded to a vote instantly. And when did they do otherwise? When did
they hesitate? When they decreed that each department should build a ship of
the line, there was no hesitation, any more than when they decreed that there
should be no more beggars in France, and no more kings in Europe. Besides, if
you are to imitate the Convention, I Will assure you, you must make a very
considerable change in the House of Representatives. You must have half a dozen
negroes and mulattoes amongst you; and it would have been necessary, the day
before the reception of this pretty present, for your Speaker to receive and
embrace an old negro woman at the head of her many-coloured progeny. Even the
ceremony itself must have undergone a change; for the American flag was carried
to the Convention by an American; consequently the French flag should have been
brought in by a Frenchman; and, if the imitation was to be perfect in all its
parts, your Speaker should have descended from his seat, and given this bearer
the fraternal hug. How vain, then, was it to talk about imitations. Before you
aspire to this sublime perfection in patriotism, you and your party must raise
us to the height of the French people; a change more easy to attempt than
accomplish, whatever you may please to think of it.

As I have already taken up so much of the reader's time with this flag, I
shall not, at present, enter into an inquiry whether it was proper, or not, to
make the President of the United States a sort of go-between to the Congress
and the Convention; nor shall I ask how the American Ambassador at Paris came
to think of involving his government in such an affair; I shall only observe,
that, as I believe it is the first instance of legislative assemblies sending
presents to each other, so, I hope, it will be the last.

END OF THE FIRST NUMBER.
POLITICAL PUBLICATIONS, FOR SALE AT PRESENT At No. 8, South Front-Street,
PETER PORCUPINE'S works; containing, 1st. Observations on Dr. Priestly. 2d.
Bone to Gnaw, 1st and 2d parts. 3d. Kick for a Bite. 4th. A little Plain
English; and 5th. The New Year's Gift to the Democrats. Robert Goodloe Harper's
Address to his Constituents; to which is added, Governor Jay's Letter. The
Guillotina; or, Democratic Dirge. Fauchet's intercepted Letter. The Political
Register, 1st and 2d parts. The American Remembrancer, 3 vol. The Treaty, with
a copious Appendix. Remarks on the Treaty. Cato's Letters on the Treaty. Letter
to the Prince of Wales. Correspondence between Jefferson and Genet. History of
Excite Laws. Marten's Law of Nations. Brackenridge's Incidents of the
Insurrection in the West. Spirit of Despotism. Stewart's Political Economy.
The Democrat; a political novel. Trial of Hamilton Rowan. -- of Joseph Gerrald.
-- of Thomas Muir. Political Progress of Britain, 1st and 2d parts. The Signs
of the Times, by J. Bicheno. Paine's war and paper currency. Moore's view of
the causes and progress of the French Revolution. Maria Williams' Letters;
containing, a Sketch of the Politics of France, from the 31st of May '93, to
the 28th of July, '94, and of the scenes which have passed at Paris.
Lately published by THOMAS BRADFORD, (Price Two Dollars.) A SUMMARY OF THE LAW
OF NATIONS, FOUNDED ON THE TREATIES AND CUSTOMS, OF THE MODERN NATIONS OF
EUROPE; WITH A LIST OF THE PRINCIPAL TREATIES, CONCLUDED SINCE THE YEAR 1748
DOWN TO THE PRESENT TIME, INDICATING THE WORKS IN WHICH THEY ARE TO BE FOUND.

BY MR. MARTENS, PROFESSOR OF LAW IN THE UNIVERSITY OF COTTINGEN.


