HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN JACOBINS, COMMONLY DENOMINATED DEMOCRATS.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

History, who keeps a durable record of all our acts, and exercises her awful
censure over all sorts of sovereigns, will not forget these events.

BURKE. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR WILLIAM COBBETT, NORTH SECOND STREET,
OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH.

Nov. 1796.

DEDICATION. TO MR. WILLIAM PLAYFAIR, AUTHOR OF THE HISTORY OF JACOBINISM.
DEAR SIR,
I HAVE seldom known a greater pleasure than I now feel, in rendering you my
thanks, in this public manner, for your spirited efforts in the cause of order
and true liberty. Your work, Sir, has met with the approbation of all who have
read it on this side the Atlantic, the enemies of mankind excepted; and, as to
myself, I presume I could not give a more unequivocal proof of my high opinion
of it, than by submitting it to the perusal of the people of the United States
of America.

The History of the American Jacobins, commonly denominated Democrats, which I
have attempted in the following pages, seemed necessary to supply a deficiency,
which, undoubtedly, is to be attributed to your want of authenticated
materials. I am well aware, that the reader will, at every step, regret that
this part of the task also did not fall to your lot; but, the experience I have
had of the indulgence of the public, emboldens me to trust to it once more,
though under the enormous disadvantage of following such a writer as Mr.
Playfair.

I am, Sir, Your most obliged humble servant, PETER PORCUPINE.
Philadelphia, 10th Nov. 1796.
HISTORY OF THE AMERICAN JACOBINS, etc.
WHEN the Jacobins of Paris sent forth their missionaries of insurrection and
anarchy, their professed object was to enlighten the ignorant and unchain the
enslaved. There was somehitng preposterous in the idea of Frenchmen giving
liberty to the world; but, had it been possible for men in their senses to
believe, that a club of distracted Monsieurs, who knew not the meaning of the
word liberty, were calculated for this arduous task and were serious in their
professions, such credulous persons must have been at once undeceived, when
they observed, that the newly-enlightened missionaries were dispatched to those
countries alone where the greatest degree of civil liberty was already to be
found. Had the Propagande at Paris been sincere in their professions, why were
not their envoys directed toward Russia and Turkey, instead of England,
America, and other free states? The fact is, Brissot and his philanthropic
colleagues wanted to draw as many foreign nations as possible within the vortex
of their own savage system, and they well knew, that where the voice of the
people has the most weight in public affairs, there it is most easy to
introduce novel and subversive doctrines.

In such states too, there generally, not to say always, exists a party, who,
from the long habit of hating those who administer the government, become the
enemies of the government itself, and are ready to sell their treacherous
services to the first bidder. To this description of men the sect of the
Jacobins have attached themselves, in every country they have been suffered to
enter. They are a sort of flesh flies, that naturally settle on the excremental
and corrupted parts of the body politic. It is well known what aid they have
received from the disaffected of several European nations; but, neither the
Malcontents in Geneva, the Patriots in Holland, nor the Reformers in Great
Britain and Ireland, were half so well adapted to the reception of Jacobinical
doctrines and Louis d'ors as the Anti-federalists in America. This faction was
co-existent with the General Government of the Union. Notwithstanding the
necessity of establishing this government, and its mild and equitable
principles, it did not fail to meet with a formidable opposition. The persons
who composed this opposition, and who thence took the name Anti-federalists,
were not equal to the Federalists, either in point of riches or respectability.
They were, in general, men of bad moral characters, embarrassed in their
private affairs, or the tools of such as were. Men of this cast naturally
feared the operation of a government endued with sufficient strength to make
itself respected, and with sufficient wisdom to exclude the ignorant and wicked
from a share in its administration.

However, the Anti-federalists attracted notice, and acquired consequence. A
hypocritical anxiety for the preservation of the liberties of the people made
up for a want of every real virtue. Some of the states refused, for a long
time, to accede to the new Confederation, and many individuals, in those states
which did accede to it, remained obstinately opposed to its principles.

Thus did the Federal Government receive, at its birth, the seeds of a disease,
which, unless its friends discover more zeal than they have hitherto done, will
one day accomplish its destruction. It began its career in defiance of a party,
organized and marshalled, and ready to seize the favorable moment for
attacking it with open force. We shall soon see that this moment was at no
great distance.

The happy effects of the new system, which were almost instantaneously felt,
operated so forcibly on the minds of the people at large, that the
Anti-federalists began to feel themselves abashed. Seeing their numbers daily
diminish, they found it prudent to hide their discontent; nor would their
clamors have since been revived, had they not been encouraged and backed by the
usurpers in France. The successful example, the promises, and, above all, the
gold of these latter, have emboldened them again to show their heads; as the
rays of the sun draw the adder from the loathsome retreat, where he has lain
engendering and bloating over his poison.

The French usurpers, from the moment they had got a firm grasp of the reins of
power, lost no time in engaging this desperate faction in their views, which
were, to acquire a perfect command of the American government, and force it
into the war of Liberty and Equality. Monsieur Ternant, the then ambassador
here, was, besides his being sent by a king, very justly looked upon as unfit
for managing the intrigues of Brissot and his brother regicides. He had ever
been accustomed to live on terms of friendship with the officers of government,
and to treat their communications with becoming respect. Citizen Genet was
therefore dispatched to supply his place: a man every way qualified for the
million he had to execute. Educated in the subaltern walks of the most
intriguing court in Europe, he was versed in all the menial offices of
corruption; and unencumbered with the family pride of the French Chevaliers, he
could visit a democratic club, and give the fraternal buss to its shirtless
members, with that kind of cordiality, which gives a zest to flattery, and
seldom fails to gain the affections of the grovelling heart. If the Citizen has
hitherto failed of ultimate success, we must attribute his failure to the deep
penetration and inflexible integrity he had to encounter, rather than to any
want of cunning, industry or liberality on his part.

The attachment of the Federal Government to a pacific system was well known in
France. Genet was therefore instructed, in case he should not be able to shake
this attachment either by promises or threats, to apply himself to the
sovereign people themselves, whose partiality, it had been represented, and
with but too much truth, had received a strong bias in favor of the usurpers.
In order to pave the way for acting in the last resort, he disembarked at a
point the most distant from the seat of government, that he might have it in
his power to act on some part of the people at least, before the sentiments of
their government respecting him and his mission were known. He accordingly
landed at Charleston, South Carolina, where he remained caballing for some
time, and then proceeded to Philadelphia.

The inhabitants of Charleston, and, indeed, of most parts of South Carolina,
were admirably disposed for a warm reception of Genet. Not long before his
landing, a proposition had been published for a solemn abolition of the use "of
all aristocratical terms of distirction and respect." The levellers had even
proposed having an engagement to this effect, printed and stuck up in the
ma^^et-places, court-houses, etc. for the signature of the citizens. In a state
where sansculottism had already made such a progress, the animating presence of
the Parisian Missionary was all that could be wanted to complete the farce. The
Carolinians had cut the strings of their culottes, and the Citizen pulled them
down about their heels.

The frigate, L'Ambuscade, that brought Genet to America, brought also the news
of war being declared by France against England. The inhabitants of Southern
climes have never been famous for their wisdom; accordingly, the people of
Charleston looked upon a prize, which the Ambuscade brought in with her, as an
earnest of success, and an indubitable indication of French naval superiority.

No sooner was Genet on shore, than he began to exercise his powers, as
sovereign of the country. He commissioned land and sea officers, to make war
upon the Spanish and English; he fitted out privateers, and opened rendezvouses
for the enrolling of both soldiers and sailors. The French flag was seen waving
from the windows in this sans-culotte city, just as if it had been a seaport
of France. Genet was sent expressly to engage the country to take a part in the
war, and such was his contempt for the government, that he did not look upon
its consent as a thing worth asking for, or thinking about.

The Citizen found more volunteers than he knew what to do with, particularly
of the higher ranks: Captains and Commodores, Majors and Colonels, flocked to
his standard in such crowds, that had he had a hundred reams of paper in blank
commissions, he might have filled them all up in the State of Carolina. Whether
these men of high rank and empty purses were encouraged by the confidence they
had in the power of the French, or by their own instinctive bravery, I know
not; but as to the end they had in view, there can be little doubt. For one of
them, who was actuated by a love of liberty, there were five hundred who were
actuated by a love of plunder. Some of them longed for a dive into the Spanish
mines, and, in idea, already heard the chinking of the doubloons; while others
were eyeing the British merchantmen with that kind of savage desire, with
which the wolf surveys a herd of fat oxen.

After having remained at Charleston from the 9th to the 19th of April 1793,
the Sans-culotte corpse Diplomatique, marched off for Philadelphia, where it
arrived on the 9th of May.

I avoid mentioning the processions, banquets, etc. that attended the Citizen
during his journey; nor should I think it worth while to give an account of his
reception at the capital, were I not assured that the civilians of the Rights
of Man will hereafter quote it as a precedent in the laws of their ceremonial.

The city had been duly prepared for this famous public entry by paragraphs in
the papers, announcing the Citizen's arrival at the different stages on the
road. Expectation was kept on tip-toe for several days. The best penmen among
the patriots were at work composing congratulatory addresses, and their
choicest orators were gargling their throats to pronounce them. At last, on the
happy 16th of May, a salve from the cannons of a frigate lying in the port,
gave notice that the Citizen would soon be arrived a place called Gray's Ferry,
about three miles distant from the city. Thither all the patrioticly disposed
went, to meet him, and escort him to his dwelling. In the evening of the same
day there was, what was called, a meeting of the citizens of Philadelphia, when
it was agreed to appoint a committee to draft an address to him. An address was
accordingly prepared, submitted to the sovereign citizens, at a second meeting,
highly approved of, and another committee, consisting of about half a hundred
persons, appointed to carry it up. -- But I must now avail myself of their own
account of the business, feeling a total want of capacity to do it justice. See
the Gazette of Poor Richard's Grandchild, of the 20th of May 1793.


The citizens assembled expressing a desire to accompany their committee in
presenting the address to the Citizen minister, two gentlemen were dispatched
to know what time it would be convenient for him to receive it, and they
returned in a few minutes with the following report: "That Mr. Genet had
expressed a high sense of the compliment intended to be paid him by the
citizens of Philadelphia; that he was solicitous to avoid giving them the
trouble of another meeting, and that if they would accept the spontaneous
effusions of his heart, which, however deficient in point of form, would not be
deficient in sincerity, as an answer to the address, he would be happy to
receive it immediately, leaving to the ensuing day the ceremony of a written
reply." -- "The citizens testified their approbation of the minister's
proposition by reiterated shouts of applause.

The committee, headed by their chairman, and followed by an immense body of
citizens, walking three abreast, having arrived at the City-tavern, were
introduced into the presence, and after the acclamations, as well in the house
as in the streets, had ceased, the address was delivered, at the close of which
the house and streets again resounded with congratulations and applause.

Citizen Genet, evidently affected with the warmth of the public attachment,
thus conveyed, delivered an extemporaneous reply, in terms which touched the
feelings of every auditor, etc. -- It is impossible to describe, with adequate
energy, the scene that succeeded. Shouts and salutations were not unattended
with other evidences of the effect, which this int^^^^^^ing interview had upon
the passions of the parties who were engaged in it. -- From the citizens in the
room the minister turned his attention to the citizens in the street, and
addressed them in a few short but emphatic sentences, from one of the windows.

In this instance we see the sovereign people taking the liberty to act for
themselves, while their servants, the officers of government, stand looking on.
What right, I would be glad to know, had the people of Philadelphia, even
supposing them all assembled together, to acknowledge any man as a public
minister, before he had been acknowledged and received as such by the General
Government? No wonder that this insolent missionary should conceive, that that
government was a mere cipher; and many of those who afterward complained of
his appeal to the people, should have recollected, that they had encouraged him
so to do.

For some time after the Citizen's arrival, there was nothing but addressing
and feasting him. It may not be amiss to give an account of one of these
treats; the memory of such scenes should be preserved, and often brought into
view.

On Saturday last a republican dinner was given at Oellers's hotel, to Citizen
Genet, by a respectable number of French and American citizens. After dinner a
number of patriotic toasts were drunk, of which the following is a translation:
1. Liberty and Equality. 2. The French Republic. 3. The United States, etc. etc.


After the third toast, an elegant ode, suited to the occasion, composed by a
young Frenchman, was read by Citizen Duponceau, and universally applauded. The
society, on motion [to be sure, on motion] ordered that Citizen Freneau should
be requested to translate it into English verse, and that the original and
translation should be published.

After a short interval, the Marseillois's Hymn was, upon the request of the
citizens, sung by Citizen Bournonville, with great taste and spirit, the whole
company joining in the chorus. -- I leave the reader to guess at the harmony of
this chorus, bellowed forth from the drunken lungs of about a hundred fellows,
of a dozen different nations. Who would have thought five and thirty years ago,
when the inhabitants of Pennsylvania were petitioning King George for
protection against the French and their allies, the scalping Indians, that in
the year 1793, the people of Philadelphia would carry their complaisance to a
French minister so far, as to ape his outlandish howling in the chorus of a
murderer's song! But, let us proceed with the feast. -- Two additional stanzas
to the Marseillois's Hymn, composed by Citizen Genet, and suited to the navy of
France, were then called for, sung, and encored.

Before the singing of the Hymn, it should be mentioned, that a deputation from
the sailors of the frigate, L'Ambuscade, made their appearance, embraced, and
took their seats.

The table was decorated with the tree and cap of liberty, and with the French
and American Flags. The last toast being drunk, the cap of liberty was placed
on the head of Citizen Genet, and then it traveled from head to head, round
the table [just as the guillotine has since traveled round France] each wearer
enlivening the scene with a patriotic sentiment.

These tokens of liberty, and of American and French fraternity, were delivered
to the officers and mariners of the frigate, L'Ambuscade, who promised to
defend them till death.

Thus rolled Genet's time away, in a variety of such nonsensical, stupid,
unmeaning, childish entertainments, as never were heard or thought of, till
Frenchmen took it into their heads to gabble about liberty.

On the very day that this liberty-cap feast took place, the citizen minister
was formally received, and acknowledged in his diplomatic capacity, by the
President of the United States. There, indeed, his reception was not quite so
warm. He afterward complained, that the first object that struck his eye in
the chamber, was the bust of Louis XVI. I never heard whether he started back
or not, at the sight; but it is certain he looked upon it as an ill omen. He
saw that he had not to do with a man, whose friendship shifted with the changes
of fortune. He saw that the President had not been deceived by the calumnies
heaped on the unfortunate king; and that, though the welfare of his country
induced him to receive an envoy from his murderers, he was far from approving
of their deeds.

This silent reproof, which must, however, be attributed to mere accident,
stung the insolent Genet to the soul. His resenting it is a striking instance
of that overbearing spirit which the rulers of the deluded French have ever
discovered. Because they had killed their king, hurled down the statues of his
ancestors, and dug their rotten bones from the tomb, they had the presumption
to think, that the governors of other nations ought to follow the savage
example.

But, a cold reception was not the rub that Genet most complained of. The
Federal Government, informed of his bold beginnings at Charleston, made no
doubt that his instructions went to the engaging it in the war. Indeed these
instructions were made known from the moment of his landing; and it cannot be
doubted but this had influence on the conduct of the government; for an article
appeared in the Charleston papers, the day after, specifying that a report had
gained ground, that the Federal Government must take a part in the war; and
this article made its appearance at Philadelphia, on the very day that the
President's proclamation, declaring it the resolution of the United states to
remain neuter, was first promulgated.

This wise and determined step Genet's masters had not foreseen; or, if they
did foresee it, they were not aware that it would be taken, before their
missionary could find time to make his warlike proposals. This was a most cruel
disappointment to the Citizen, and completely baffled all his projects. In vain
did he endeavor to draw the old General from his ground, neither promises nor
threats had any effect on him, and Genet soon found, that he had no hope but in
rousing the people to oppose their government.

A man of more penetration than Genet might have conceived such a project
feasible, from the violent partiality that every where appeared toward the
French, from the little respect testified for the opinion of the government,
and particularly from the freedom, not to say audacity, with which its conduct,
in issuing the proclamation of neutrality, was arraigned. Besides, the
Anti-federal faction began to appear with more boldness than ever. Genet was
continually surrounded with them; and, as they sighed for nothing so much as
for war, they strengthened him in the opinion, that the people would ultimately
decide in his favor.

But, there wanted something like a regular plan to unite their forces, and
bring them to act in concert. A dinner here and a supper there, were nothing at
all. The drunkards went home, snorted themselves sober, and returned to their
employments. It was not as in France, where a single tap upon a drum head,
would assemble canaille enough to overturn forty Federal Governments in the
space of half a night. In America there existed all the materials for a
revolution, but they were scattered here and there; affiliated clubs were
wanting to render them compact, and manageable, as occasion might demand.

Genet did not judge it prudent to give to the American Jacobins the same name,
that had been assumed by those in France: that would have been too glaring an
imitation. Democratic was thought less offensive, at the same time that it was
well adapted to a society of men, who were about to set themselves up for the
watch-dogs of a government, which they pretended was already become too
aristocratic, and was daily growing more so; but that a Democrat was but
another name for a Jacobin no one had the folly to deny, when, afterward, some
of these very clubs were known to send petitions for having their names entered
on the registers of the Jacobin club at Paris.

The Mother Club, in America, met at Philadelphia on the 3d of July, 1793,
about six or seven weeks after Genet's arrival in the city, during which space,
it is well ascertained, more than twenty thousand Louis d'ors had been
distributed.

As it is here, properly speaking, that the History of the American Jacobins,
or Democrats, begins, it seems necessary to give some account of their
constitution, as they termed it. This anarchical act sets out with a preamble
containing the principles under which the members had united, and it then
proceeds to the rules and regulations for transacting the business of the
institution.

ART. I.
The Society shall be co-extensive with the State; but, for the convenience of
the members, there shall be a separate meeting in the city of Philadelphia, and
one in each county, which shall choose to adopt this Constitution. A member
admitted in the city, or in any county, shall of course be a member of the
Society at large; and may attend any of the meetings, wherever held.

ART. II.
A meeting of the Society shall be held in the city of Philadelphia, on the
first Thursday in every month, and in the respective counties as often, and at
such times as they shall by their own rules determine. But the President of
each respective meeting may convene the members on any special occasion.

ART. III.
The election of new members, and of the officers of the society, shall be by
ballot, and by a majority of the votes of the members present. The names of the
members proposing any candidate for admission shall be entered in a book kept
for that purpose. Every member on his admission shall subscribe this
Constitution, and pay the sum of half a dollar to the treasurer for the use of
the Society.

ART. IV.
The officers of the meeting in the city of Philadelphia shall consist of a
President, two vice Presidents, two Secretaries, one Treasurer, and one
corresponding committee of five members; and the meetings of the respective
counties shall choose a President and such other officers as they think proper.

ART. V.
It shall be the duty of the corresponding committee, to correspond with the
various meetings of the Society, and with all other Societies, that may be
established on similar principles, in any other of the United States.

ART. VI.
It shall be the duty of the Secretaries to keep minutes of the proceedings of
the several meetings; and of the treasurer to receive and account for all
moneys to them respectively paid.

Now, what was the object of all this balloting and corresponding and meeting?
This we are to look for, they tell us, in their first circular letter: here it
is then.

Fellow Citizen,
We have the pleasure to communicate to you a copy of the constitution of the
Democratic Society, in hopes that after a candid consideration of its
principles, and objects, you may be induced to promote its adoption, in the
county of which you are an inhabitant.

Every mind, capable of reflection, must perceive, that the present crisis in
the politics of nations is peculiarly interesting to America. The European
Confederacy, transcendent in power, and unparalleled in iniquity, menaces the
very existence of freedom. Already its baneful operation may be traced in the
tyrannical destruction of the Constitution of Poland: and should the glorious
efforts of France be eventually defeated, we have reason to presume, that, for
the consummation of monarchical ambition, and the security of its
establishments, this country, the only remaining depository of liberty, will
not long be permitted to enjoy in peace, the honors of an independent, and the
happiness of a republican government.

Nor are the dangers arising from a foreign source, the only causes, at this
time, of apprehension and solicitude. The seeds of luxury appear to have taken
root in our domestic soil: and the jealous eye of patriotism already regards
the spirit of freedom and equality, as eclipsed by the pride of wealth and the
arrogance of power.

This general view of our situation has led to the institution of the
Democratic Society. A constant circulation of useful information, and a liberal
communication of republican sentiments, were thought to be the best antidotes
to any political poison, with which the vital principles of civil liberty might
be attacked: for by such means, a fraternal confidence will be established
among the citizens; every symptom of innovation will be studiously marked; and
a standard will be erected, to which, in danger and distress, the friends of
liberty may successfully resort.

To obtain these objects, then, and to cultivate on all occasions, the love of
peace, order, and harmony; an attachment to the constitution, and a respect to
the laws of our country, will be the aim of the Democratic Society, etc.


Never did a piece of political hypocrisy come forth to public view under such
a flimsy disguise as this circular letter. People stared to see that there were
men amongst them possessed of impudence enough, thus to invite them to revolt
against the constitution, under the pretext of preserving it in its purity. The
Americans can swallow a pretty comfortable dose of any thing that is strongly
seasoned with liberty and equality, but there were few, above the mere vulgar,
whose stomachs did not turn at this.

How democratic societies were to protect the country against the monarchs of
Europe seemed a mystery. What standard were they to raise for the people to
find shelter under, in the hour of danger and distress? Nothing is clearer,
than that the combination was intended to operate against the General
Government, and against that alone. They set out with talking about the dangers
to be apprehended from foreign powers, but they soon come to the point; the
spirit of freedom and equality, they say, is eclipsed by the pride of wealth
and arrogance of power. It is to combat these, that they invoke the aid of
their fellow citizens.

Indeed a political club, if it is not intended to strengthen the government,
must be intended to act against it. The very foundation of such a club must
imply a systematic opposition to the lawful rules of the land; it is an act of
rebellion, unpunishable by law it is true, but which will ever be punished by
the abhorrence of all peaceable and honest men.

No one can read the concluding paragraph of this letter, without calling to
mind the professions of the French and English Jacobins: the former united
themselves under the name of, Les Amiss de la Constitution (the friends of the
Constitution), and the latter, under that of, "The Constitutional Society."
What sort of friends to the Constitution (of 1791) the Jacobins of Paris were,
their subsequent conduct, and the sat of that Constitution, have fully proved;
and it would be sinning against conviction to suppose, that those of England
and America exceeded them in sincerity. The patriots, or reformers (call them
which you please) who emigrate from England, throw off the disguise as soon as
their feet touch the shore. They tell you, that their intention was to destroy
"the old rotten constitution of Britain," from which they took their name; and
there is not the least doubt, but the Democrats would be as candid with respect
to the American constitution, were they landed in France.

As to those who placed themselves at the head of the Democrats, speaking of
them generally, they were very little esteemed, either as private or public
characters. Few of them were men of property, and such as were, owed their
possessions to some casual circumstance, rather than to family, industry, or
talents. The bulk of political reformers is always composed of needy,
discontented men, too indolent or impatient to advance themselves by fair and
honest means, and too ambitious to remain quiet in obscurity. Such, with very
few exceptions, are those who have appeared among the leaders of the American
Jacobins. The Officers, as they were called, of the Mother Club, and who must
ever be looked upon (under Genet) as the chief instruments in founding the
sect, were: DAVID RITTENHOUSE, President. WILLIAM COATS, Vice President.
CHARLES BIDDLE, Vice President. JAMES HUTCHINSON, Committee of Correspondence.
ALEXANDER J. DALLAS, Committee of Correspondence. MICHAEL LEIB, Committee of
Correspondence. JONATHAN SERGEANT, Committee of Correspondence. DAVID JACKSON,
Committee of Correspondence. ISRAEL ISRAEL, Treasurer. J. PORTER, Secretary. P.
S. DUPONCEAU, Secretary.


These names should never be forgotten.




The effects of the institution soon became apparent from one end of the United
States to the other. The blaze did not, indeed, communicate itself with such
rapidity as it had done in France, nor did it rage with so much fury when it
had caught; but this must be ascribed to the nature of the materials, and not
to any want of art or malice on the part of the incendiaries. The Americans are
phlegmatic, slow to act; extremely cautious and difficult to be deceived.
However, such was the indefatigableness of the Democratic Clubs, that I venture
to say, without running the risk of contradiction, that more enmity to the
General Government was excited in the space of six months, by the barefaced
correspondencies and resolves of these clubs, than was excited against the
colonial government at the time of the declaration of Independence.

The leading object was to stimulate the people to a close imitation of the
French Revolutionists, who had just then begun the career of pure unadulterated
sansculottism. Every act or expression that bore the marks of politeness or
gentility soon began to be looked upon, to use their own words, as a sort of
leze republicanism. All the new fangled terms of the regenerated French were
introduced and made use of. The word citizen, that stalking horse of modern
liberty-men, became almost as common in America as in France. People, even
people of sense, began to accustom themselves to be-citizen each other in as
shameful a manner as the red-headed ruffians of the Fauxbourg St. Antoine.

The news-printers were in some sort the teachers of this new cant; and it was
diverting enough sometimes to observe their embarrassment in rendering the
French political jargon into English. One of them having a wedding to announce,
found himself at a stand when he came to the word citoyenne. Our good ancestors
had not foreseen these days of equality, and had therefore never thought of a
termination to express the feminine of a freeman. To say that citizen A. was
married to citizen B. would have had a brutal sound, even in the ears of a
Jacobin, and therefore the ingenious news-man invented a termination, and his
paragraph ran thus: On -- Citizen -- was married to Citess -- by Citizen --.
This article is to be found in the Federal Gazette, for the year 1793.


The citizens of France had just given signal proof of their patriotic valor,
in making war upon the old busts and statues of their kings and nobles, and
those of America were determined not to be behind hand with them, as far as lay
in their power. Lord Chatham's statue, erected by the people of Charleston,
South Carolina, as a mark of their esteem for the part he took in pleading the
cause of America, was drawn up into the air, by means of a jack and pullies,
and absolutely hanged, not till it was dead, but till the head separated from
the body. The statue of Lord Bettertout, a piece of exquisite workmanship,
which stood in the town house of Williamsburgh in Virginia, was beheaded by the
students of that place, and every mark of indignity, such as ignoble minds can
show, was heaped on the resemblance of a man, to whom the fathers of these
students had yielded all possible testimony of love and esteem.

The rage for re-baptism, as the French call it, also spread very far. An alley
at Boston, called Royal Exchange Alley, and the stump of a tree, in the same
town, which had borne the name of Royal, were rebaptized with a vast deal of
formality: the former was called Equality Lane, and the latter Liberty Stump.
At New York the names of several streets and places were changed; Queen Street
became Pearl Street, and King Street, Liberty Street.

Those who were unacquainted with the influence of the Democratic Clubs, were
astonished at these marks of political insanity. Indeed, the follies of the
French seemed to be wafted over the instant they had birth, and the different
districts seemed to vie with each other in adopting them. The delirium seized
even the women and children; the former began to talk about liberty and
equality in a good masculine style: I have heard more than one young woman,
under the age of twenty, declare that they would willingly have dipped their
hands in the blood of the Queen of France. A third part of the children, at
least, were decorated, like their wise sires, in tricolored cockades. "Dansons
la Carmagnole," pronounced in a broken accent, was echoed through every street
and every alley of Philadelphia, by both boys and girls. Some ingenious
democratic poet had composed the following lines: "Englishman no bon for me,
"Frenchman fight for liberty."


This distich, which at once shows the prevailing sentiments, and exhibits an
instance of that kind of jargon which was become fashionable, was chanted about
by young and old. Poor devils! thought I when I used to hear them, little do
you know about liberty.

Nor were marks of ferocity wanting. At a dinner at Philadelphia (at which a
man high in office was present) a roasted pig became the representative of
Louis XVI. and it being the anniversary of his murder, the pig's head was
severed from his body, then carried round to each of the convives, who, after
placing the liberty-cap upon his own head, pronounced the word tyrant, and gave
the poor little grunter's head a chop with his knife.

Never was the memory of any man so cruelly insulted as that of this mild and
humane monarch. He was guillotined in effigy, in the capital of the union,
twenty or thirty times every day, during one whole winter, and part of the
summer. Men, women, and children, flocked to this tragical exhibition, and not
a single paragraph appeared in the papers to shame them from it. -- Much has
been said about the cruelty of English sports, and the humane French have
now-and-then stigmatized them as barbarians, for the delight they take in
seeing a pair of courageous animals spur each other to death; nay, the charge
has been often repeated by Americans, and I must confess, that nothing can be
said in its defense; but I defy both French and Americans to bring me an
instance of cruelty from the English sports, that will bear a comparison with
the exhibition above mentioned.

One cannot think of this exhibition without reflecting on the honors that
Louis formerly received on the same spot. On the triumphal arch that was
erected at Philadelphia, in 1783, was a bust of Louis XVI, with this motto:
MERENDO MEMORES FACIT.
His Merit makes us remember him.


On another part of the arch were the Three Lillies, the arms of France, with
this motto: GLORIAM SUPERANT.
They exceed in Glory.


When a representation of this Triumphal Arch was sent to the King of France,
what would he have done to one of his courtiers, who should have said to him:
Sire, be not too vain; depend not too much on the sincerity of the Americans;
for, ten years from this day, they will shake hands with your murderers, and on
the very spot where this arch was erected, they will murder you in effigy; and
these Lillies, now surpassing in glory, will they trample under foot.

It is just, however, to observe, that a very great majority of the people of
America, abhorred these demonstrations of a sanguinary spirit; nor would it be
going too far to assert, that two-thirds of the Democrats were foreigners,
landed in the United States since the war. The charge that attaches to the
people in general, is, that these things were suffered to pass unreproved. The
friends of order and of humanity were dilatory; like persons of the same
description in France, they seemed to be waiting, till the sons of equality
came to cut their throats; and if they have finally escaped, it is to be
ascribed to mere chance, or to any thing, rather than to their own exertions.

While the Democratic Societies were thus poisoning the minds of the people,
familiarizing them to insurrection and blood, Genet was not idle. He had
surrounded himself with a troop of horse, enlisted and embodied in
Philadelphia. These were, in general, Frenchmen, and no one can doubt but they
were intended to act, either on the offensive or defensive, as occasion might
require. This force rendered his adherents bold; they threw off all reserve,
and issued their invitations to rebellion with an unsparing hand. The clubs at
a distance followed the example, and, in some instances, improved upon it.

As the Democrats increased in strength and impudence, other men grew timid. No
one ventured to whisper his disapprobation of the conduct of the French; every
one, even of their most savage acts, was applauded: robbery and murder were
called national justice in America as well as in France. The people, properly
so called, were fairly cowed down, and things seemed as ripe for a revolution
here, as they were in France, in the month of July, 1790.

The country was saved from this dreadful scourge by the hasty indiscretion of
the Citizen Minister. The lightheaded Frenchman was intoxicated with his
success, and conceived that the moment was arrived for him to set the
government at defiance, and call on the people for support. But no sooner had
he expressed his intention of appealing from the President to the sovereign
people, than he found he had been too sanguine. He found that the people of
America were yet more attached to General Washington than to the French
Minister or the French nation. Their love and veneration for their old and
tried friend seemed to be revived by this insult; and though the Democratic
Clubs defended the conduct of their founder, they found themselves too weak to
take any decided step in his favor.

When Genet discovered that he had been too rash, he strove to recover himself
by denying that he had threatened the government with an appeal to the people,
and his friend Dallas, who, as Secretary of the State of Pennsylvania, had been
the bearer of the threat, was prevailed on to deny that it was made. Dallas
published an explanation of his contradictory account of the matter,
endeavoring to exculpate both the Frenchman and himself; but this explanation
had no other effect than that which a lie added to an offense never fails to
produce.

From this time forward the clubs were a little more cautious in their
resolves. When they met it was by night, and under lock and key. Genet became
timid, attempted to justify himself, and seemed to tremble for his fate. He saw
that his resources decreased, and that the remainder would be wanted for other
purposes than that of nourishing a nest of hungry Democrats. The vital
principle being extinct, the body began to dwindle: the old leaders skulked off
one by one, and at last none remained but the mere tools.

Among these were the Democrats from England, a set of mortals whose stupidity
is equalled by their obstinacy, and by that alone. They, poor devils, who had
never been suffered even to smell the loaves and fishes, persevered with as
good heart as ever, after the feast was all over; and wondered why others
abated in their zeal. Englishmen are said to be changeable and fickle minded;
but when foreigners lay this to our charge, they should make an exception of
one case, and that is, when we are in the wrong. No men on earth abandon their
errors with so much reluctance as the inhabitants on the south of the Tweed.

One Pearce, who had had the honor to be a delegate to the London
Corresponding Society, and who, on that account, was admitted a member of the
Jacobin club of Philadelphia, proposed a negro man as worthy of a seat. Pearce
was a philanthropist, a true equality man, a disciple of Winchester. He was
silly enough to suppose that the Democrats were really what they professed to
be, and therefore he foresaw no kind of opposition to the introduction of his
charcoal-faced friend, and having an extraordinary degree of zeal for the
increase of the society, took the earliest opportunity to propose him. The club
being met and the doors locked, he rose in all the pride of conscious
sans-culottism, and proposed brother Pompey as a member; but he soon found that
the American Democrats did not carry their ideas of equality quite so far as he
did. "No, no, no," resounded from every quarter, and when the votes came to be
taken, there appeared but two or three, out of about fifty, in favor of the
admission; and thus Pompey, whom Pearce describes as a d -- d honest fellow,
escaped inevitable corruption and disgrace.

This refusal, however, lost them the Delegate: he told them, that he had
joined the club in the persuasion that it was composed of pure Democrats, and
that his conscience would not permit him to remain among them a moment, after
what he had been a witness of that night.

The business of the clubs was reduced to trifling discussions of this sort,
when the recall of Genet seemed to forebode their total extinction. Genet's
insolence had produced a complaint on the part of the American Government, and
this complaint had produced his recall. The corner stone of the Jacobin
affiliation being removed, every one expected the superstructure to fall to the
ground; how deceitful appearances were we shall see by-and-by, after having
made a remark or two on this act of friendly condescension, as it has been
termed, of the French usurpers.

First, it must be remembered, that at the time the complaint was made, the
faction, by whom Genet had been sent out, were hurled from their thrones, and
another had got possession of them. Robespierre and Marat were glad of having
an opportunity to accuse their rivals of having offended the American
Government, and to take to themselves the credit of healing the wound.
Displacing Genet instantly, upon application, was a step, too, which they knew
would render them popular in America, and silence those who began to arraign
the conduct of the Convention. Thus, by the means of this "condescension," they
secured to themselves three advantages: it furnished them with one more crime
to heap on the heads of their rival faction; they completely supplanted that
faction in the partiality of the people of the United States; and, which was of
still greater importance, they pursued the same treacherous maneuvers, without
being suspected. These were the motives of this act of friendly condescension.

That they did not, in their hearts, disapprove of the proceedings of Genet, is
clear from their suffering him to remain in the United States. When did they
forgive those who offended them? Had they demanded him, the government must,
and, they knew, would, have given him up; but no such demand was ever made, and
this circumstance alone sufficiently proves, that, had he succeeded, a civic
crown would have been the mede of his machinations.

Fauchet, the successor of Genet, trod exactly in his steps, but with a little
more caution. The Democratic Clubs made not the least hesitation in
transferring their obedience from one minister to the other. Indeed, all the
disciples of the new-light philosophy are made of the same commodious kind of
stuff. All that they do is, to ask who directs the storm of anarchy, and they
instantly become his ardent admirers, if not his tools. In this respect no set
of beings, I cannot call them men, ever approached so near to the herd of
Paris, as did the Democrats of America. One day saw the faction of Brissot
exalted to the skies, and the very next, saw the same compliments, the very
same turgid effusions of patriotic admiration, heaped on their murderers. From
the first assembling of the States General to this very hour, every leader,
while he continued such, has been the god of those wretches who nowadays
style themselves patriots. I have now a bundle of gazettes before me, published
all by the same man, wherein Mirabeau, Fayette, Brissot, Danton, and
Robespierre, are all panegyrized and execrated in due succession; nor do I yet
despair of living to see Talien and Louvet added to the list. The versatile mob
of Paris, who first canonized Mirabeau and Voltaire, and afterward scattered
their remains to the winds; and who, after having given Marat's ugly carcass a
place in their temple of fame, and his name to a city, dug him up, put his
ashes into a chamber pot, by way of urn, and then threw them into the common
sewer; this versatile, stupid and venal mob, does not surpass in either
quality, the Democratic news-printers in the United States of America; and
sorry am I to say, that they are not few in number. At the head of these we may
venture to place Benjamin Franklin Bache, a grandson (whether in a straight or
crooked line, I know not) of Old Doctor Franklin. This is the man whom the
doctor left his books and printing-office to, and good use has he made of them.
The history of the types of this office would be an amusing performance: it
would be curious to trace them from the opposition of the British Colonial
government to as determined an opposition against the government raised on its
ruins; from the old saws of hypocritical morality, contained in the pages of
Poor Richard's Almanac, to the blasphemous nonsense of the French Republican
Calendar. These types were, indeed, a rich legacy. Their proprietor may, with a
trifling change, join in chorus with the highwayman in the Beggar's Opera.

"See the types I hold!
"See the types I hold!
"Let the chemists toil like asses,
"My ink their fire surpasses,
"And turns my lead to gold!
"And turns my lead to gold!
It must be confessed, however, that, in one instance, he did, for a moment,
discover more consistency than the rest of his fellow laborers. He did defend
his friends Barrere, Collot d' Herbois, and (...) de Varennes, even after he
looked upon them as dead! Of "the three" says he, " Barrere is most to be
regretted." -- And why? -- Because he presided in the convention when Louis was
condemned, and expressly declared, that the Tree of Liberty must be watered
with the blood of the Tyrant. -- These are the humane and grateful Citizen
Bache's reasons for regretting the fall of Barrere! Would not one imagine that
he must have been suckled with blood? His friends defend him (God defend me
from the defense of such friends) by insisting that he is a fool, and the mere
cat's-paw of the supporters of his paper. Of the two, I must confess, that a
hireling is less detestable than a savage, and as I wish to excite as little
detestation against Bache, as justice will admit of, I leave him to take his
choice of the two characters.




A circumstance that strongly seconded the endeavors of Fauchet and the Clubs,
was, the discontents that existed among the people of the Western Counties of
Pennsylvania, on account of the excise on whisky. These discontents were, in
some measure, done away, or, at least, they produced no serious consequences,
before the institution of the Democratic Societies: with this institution they
revived, and assumed a more determined aspect: the malcontents had now a
rallying point; by means of the affiliation they communicated their pretended
grievances to every corner of the Union, from whence they instantly received
assurances of aid and support of the clubs. Thus encouraged, they proceeded
from one excess to another, till, at last, several counties were officially
declared to be in a state of actual insurrection.

To give a detailed account of this insurrection, were it consistent with my
circumscribed plan, would be of little use. That fifteen thousand men were
obliged to quit their homes and business, to encounter a campaign of uncommon
hardship and toil; that many of these peaceable, orderly citizens (citizens in
the true sense of the word) lost their lives in consequence of the fatigues
they underwent, leaving their ashes to be trod on by the vile insurgents; that
the expenses of the armament to a million and a half of dollars, are to be
deducted from the fruits of industry; these are well known, and will be long
remembered facts, and therefore need no historian. It is to the influence that
the Democratic Clubs had in producing the insurrection, and its consequent
calamities, that I wish to direct the reader's attention.

As soon as the Club at Philadelphia was formed, similar ones were formed in
the Western Counties, composed entirely of men, who were not only opposed to
the excise law, but to the government which had enacted it. Messengers and
emissaries passed continually between the clubs in the East and those in the
West. From this time the resolves of the malcontents assumed another tone.
These refractory people had hitherto confined their demands to a repeal of the
excise law; but they now talked of forcing the government to open the
navigation of the Mississippi, and complained, in the style of Genet and the
Clubs, against the Proclamation of Neutrality, and, in short, against the whole
of the conduct of the Federal Government.

Let any one read their toasts and resolves, and observe their manner of
proceeding, and compare these with those of the Democratic Societies; and then
believe, if he can, that they were not both actuated with the same spirit, and
had not the same objects in view; namely, a war with Britain, and the
destruction of the General Government. During two years had the Western
complaints existed: the complainants had often assembled, and had passed
resolves without number about their detestable drink; but never till now did
they join their cause to that of France: never till now did they wear national
cockades, or rally under the tree of liberty mounted with a bloody Parisian
cap. Will any man in his senses believe that these were mere whims, freaks of
fancy, that came athwart their brains by chance, without the least advice or
prior instruction from their friends in the East?

Let us hear our old friend Citizen Fauchet's opinion on this subject. In
giving his masters an account of the breaking out of the insurrection, he says:
In the mean time popular societies are formed; political ideas concentre
themselves; the patriotic party unite and more closely connect themselves, etc.
-- Then, after giving them a description of the Western people and the nature
of their drink, etc. he adds: Now, as the common dispatches inform you, these
complaints were systematizing by the conversations of influential men, who
retired into these wild countries, and who, from principle, or by a series of
particular heart-burnings, animated discontents already near effervescence. At
last, the local explosion is effected. The Western people calculated on being
supported by some distinguished characters in the East, and even imagined they
had in the bosom of the government some abettors, who might share in their
grievances or their principles.

I shall not attempt to point out these distinguished characters in the East;
but let the reader recollect that Mr. Dallas was one in the leaders of the
Mother, and then let him read the following extract from another part of
Fauchet's Letter.

Of all the governors, whose duty it was to appear at the head of the
requisitions, the governor of Pennsylvania alone enjoyed the name of
Republican; his opinion of the Secretary of the Treasury and of his systems was
known to be unfavourable. The secretary of this state possessed great influence
in the Popular Society of Philadelphia, which in its turn influenced those of
other states; of course he merited attention. It appears therefore that these
men, with others unknown to me, all having without doubt Randolph at their
head, were balancing to decide on their party. Two or three days before the
proclamation was published, and of course before the cabinet had resolved on
its measures, Mr. Randolph came to see me with an air of great eagerness, and
made to me the overtures, of which I have given you an account in my No. 6.
Thus, with some thousands of dollars, the Republic could have decided on civil
war or on peace! Thus the consciences of the pretended patriots of America have
already their prices! It is very true that the certainty of these conclusions,
painful to be drawn, will for ever exist in our archives! What will be the old
age of this government, if it is thus early decrepid!

From the conduct of the democrats prior to the breaking out of the
insurrection, we naturally come to that which they observed subsequent to that
event; and here we shall find nothing but what tends to strengthen the charge
against them. Immediately upon the issuing of the President's proclamation, all
the papers devoted to the French Minister and his clubs, and particularly
Bache's, which might be looked upon as the mirror of their sentiments,
attacked, with all their malice, both those who issued, and those who were
ready to obey it. Every art was used to instill into the minds of the militia,
that they were called on to cut the throats of their fellow citizens merely to
support the rich creditors of the State; and, of course, that they ought not to
obey the summons to attend. As violent means, (says Bache's paper of the 20th
of August) As violent means appear the desire of high-toned government men, it
is to be hoped that those who derive the most benefit from our revenue laws,
will be the foremost to march against the Western Insurgents. Let
stock-holders, bank directors, speculators, and revenue officers arrange
themselves immediately under the banners of the treasury, and try their prowess
in arms, as they have done in calculation. The prompt recourse to hostilities
will no doubt operate upon the knights of our country to appear in military
array, and then the poor but industrious citizen will not be obliged to spill
the blood of his fellow citizen to gratify certain resentments, and expose
himself to the loss of life and of limb to support a funding order. In the same
paper of the 26th of August: The discontents which have taken place in the
Western Counties, and which have appeared in the form of open hostility to law,
and indeed the dissatisfactions that are to be found in every part of the
continent, may be readily accounted for, by a reference to the proceedings of
our government from its birth. The bantling fancied itself something royal,
before it was able to stand alone, and since it has been progressing toward
manhood, the State dignity, superciliousness and manners of a monarch have
characterized its actions. To support itself in royal pomp, arose the funding
and banking systems, excises, etc. Nothing but coronets and stars are wanting,
to the stockholders. Is this a land of liberty? Is this a land where citizens
are equal? It would be no wonder if every citizen, who is not immediately
interested in the funding system, should rise up, and with one word exclaim
against its iniquity, or, in other words, join the insurgents.

Such was the language of the democrats, at the very moment that the
insurrection wore the most threatening aspect, and such was the effect it had
on some descriptions of the people, that it was with the utmost difficulty a
sufficient number of men were collected to make up the quota of the State of
Pennsylvania.

Mr. Findley, the ingenious historian of the Western Insurrection, and a
principal actor in it, insists, with a modesty becoming his country, that the
insurrection ought to be attributed entirely to the irritable heat of the
weather, during the dog days of 1794; and, of course he wishes us to believe,
that it was quelled by the returning coolness of October and November. It must
be confessed that the insurgents were afflicted with a sort of canine malady,
for they snapped at the hand that yielded them protection; but, I believe, few
people, after what has been said above, will not remain well convinced, that
the insurrection was fomented by democratic fuel, paid for with French Gold;
and that it was cooled again by the approach of General Washington, at the head
of fifteen thousand men.

For the sake of preserving connection, some striking traits of sans-culottism,
which took place prior to the epoch at which we are now arrived, have been
omitted; but they are too characteristic of the sect whose history I am
writing, to pass altogether unnoticed.

As I have more than once observed, that the Democrats aped the regenerated
French in all their follies, and in all their crimes as far as they were able,
it will be understood, that they made a boast of being atheists or deists as
the Convention changed its creed. When the faction of Danton seemed to
preponderate, and members exclaimed against the "aristocracy of heaven;" when
the infamous Dupont exclaimed: Oh! shame, Legislators of the Universe! You have
hurled down the thrones of kings, and you yet suffer the altars of God to
remain! Then the Democrats made an open profession of Atheism. But when
Robespierre obtained the ascendency, and ordered the Convention to decree, that
there was a Supreme Being (Etre Supreme); then did our good sans-culottes burn
incense on the altars of deism, with as much devotion as the ragged groups of
St. Marceau and the whores and bullies of the Palais de L'Egalite.

It has been often observed, that, however widely atheism and deism may differ
in theory, in practice, that is in their effects, they are nearly the same. So
it happens now; for, whether they professed the opinions of Danton or those of
his bloody successor, they still testified the same hatred of the Christian
Religion, and persecuted, with every insult they durst offer, all those who had
courage enough to stand forward in its defense.

The first assault of this kind was on the Reverend Mr. Abercrombie of the
Episcopal Church, Philadelphia. This gentleman had preached a sermon, warning
his congregation against the contagion of French atheism and deism. For this
instance of becoming zeal in the discharge of the most imperious of all duties,
he was attacked in the public papers; accused of bigotry, of being an enemy to
the cause of liberty, and of the French people. There was not a worthy man in
the city, who did not feel an indignation against the authors of this
unprovoked calumny, and who did not regret, that the injured clergyman should
see the necessity of answering it. Dreadful times indeed are those, when the
servants of the Lord are brought to the bar of the public, for daring to obey
the commands of their master! For daring to defend him against those, who brand
him with the name of cheat and impostor! About the same time that this insult
was offered to Mr. Abercrombie, a paragraph appeared in the Philadelphia
Gazette, published by one Brown, containing a list of eminent men, who had
arisen on "the democratic floor," and concluding with, Marat, St. Paul, and
Jesus Christ.

I have mentioned this scandalous paragraph in so many places, that I should
not have done it here, had not its existence been denied in a pamphlet lately
published by a Scotch runaway, whose name is Calender, and who was, it seems,
the editor of the gazette at the time. The paragraph appeared in the paper
abovementioned, on the 20th of June, in the memorable 1794.




This pulpit evesdropping having, in some measure succeeded, they cast their
scrutinizing scowling eyes over the outside of the church. Here they found a
small wooden bust of George II. This bust, like the Old Stump at Boston, had
remained very quiet during the American revolution; but could not endure the
fiery ordeal of the French revolution. Trifling circumstances like these show
the difference in the influence which these revolutions have had on men's
minds, in a stronger light than the most important events can do, and prove
what I have always asserted; namely, that the moderation which marked the
American character in the last revolution, must not be counted upon, should
another take place.

The discovery of the bust was no sooner made, than the Democrats formed the
resolution of destroying it; or, in the language of Gregoire, of committing an
act of vandalism. They accordingly published the following card, as they called
it, in their printer Bache's gazette of the 21st July, 1794.

To the Clergy and Vestry of Christ Church.
GENTLEMEN,
It is the wish of many respectable citizens, that you would cause the image
and crown of GEORGE II. to be removed as readily as possible. It has nothing to
do with the worship of the most high God, nor the government under which we
exist: it has a tendency to cause that church to be disliked, while bearing the
mark of infamy: it has a tendency, to the knowledge of many, to keep young and
virtuous men from attending public worship: it is therefore a public nuisance.

M.


One is at a loss which to admire most, the logic, the impudence, or the
hypocrisy of this intimation. How exactly, too, does it imitate the style of
the Convention; " young and virtuous men!" Canting rascals! How willingly would
you have led those young and virtuous men to cut the throats of their fathers
and mothers, and of the ministers to whom they were attached!

In consequence of the democratic card, which was rightly looked upon as a
threat, a vestry was called, and it was thought more advisable to abandon the
bust to the fury of the vandals, than to expose the church itself to danger.
Accordingly, the barbarians assembled with ladders, mallets and chissels. The
crown and the projecting part of the bust were chipped off; but the profile,
with G on one side of it and II. on the other, are still as conspicuous as
ever. All that the Democrats effected, was, a change in the ideas awakened by
the sight of the bust. From a monument of well-placed esteem and gratitude, it
is become a monument of democratic folly and baseness and rancour and
undistinguishing revenge.

It was easy to perceive, that they did not mean to stop here, and therefore
few people were surprised at their next pointing out the propriety of taking
the mitre from the steeple. See Bache's gazette of the 21st August, 1794.
This demand was not made in such direct and positive terms, and therefore it
was not complied with; but there is little doubt but both mitre and church
would have had a tumble long ago, had not the Western Insurrection excited a
general hatred against the clubs, and thus rendered them less daring and
insolent.

At the same time that we are recording the violences of the clubs against
Christian institutions, truth requires that we should confess, that but too
many of the clergy appeared either contaminated with French principles, or
cowardly enough not to attempt an opposition to their progress. All that can be
said in the defense of such (...), is, that they feared to offend their
congregations, on whom they were totally dependent for support. This is surely
a very weak defense; but, I am afraid, it is one that must often be made, where
the pastor is removable at the pleasure of his flock.

But, there were others who were not merely passive; who were not ashamed to
mingle in the bacchanalian orgies of the civic festivals, held to celebrate the
successes of atheists over the religion of which they professed to be
believers, and of which they were teachers. Among these the Reverend Citizen
Prentiss, of Reading, Massachusetts, and the Reverend Citizen Doctor M'Knight,
of New York, claim the scandalous pre-eminence.

Nor were the places dedicated to the instruction of youth securely guarded
against the approaches of sans-culottism. Of this the conduct of Doctor Rogers,
a teacher in the University at Philadelphia, exhibits a striking proof. He gave
the boys of his class a speech out of Shakespeare's Harry V. to get by heart.
It was the king's animating address to his army before Harfleur: "Once more to
the breach, dear friends," etc. which, in Shakespeare ends thus: "Follow your
spirit, and, upon this charge,
"Cry -- God for Harry! England! and St. George!"


This conclusion the Doctor parodied: "Cry -- God for Freedom! France! and
Robespierre!"

All the class repeated it with the democratic emendation, except a little
English boy about ten or eleven years of age, who boldly said: "Cry -- God for
Harry! England! and St. George!"

Nor could he be prevailed upon to alter the text. This brave little fellow's
name is Whitlock, who, though a child, certainly possessed more taste, more
sense, more patriotism and more piety than his Reverend teacher.

When the sweet Warwickshire bard put this noble speech into the mouth of his
favorite hero, he was not blessed with the hope, that, hundreds of years
afterward, and thousands of miles distant, it would call forth such a noble
spirit in a child of ten years of age.

Before I return to take my leave of the Democratic Societies, I trust the
reader will not be displeased with an account of the civic fete of the 23d
Thermidor (10th of August, "style of the slaves"), which was celebrated at
Philadelphia in 1794.

To ward off every charge of misrepresentation, I shall confine myself to a
literal translation of the Process Verbal (Minutes of the proceedings), sent to
the Convention, and which may be seen in the French Philadelphia gazette of the
25th Thermidor, 12th of August, "style of the slaves," as the humane French
Governor of Gaudaloupe calls it.

At sunrise the fete was announced by a salve of 22 guns, in allusion to the
22d of Sept. -- At eight o'clock another salve of 10 guns, at once announced
the fete of the 10th August, and the hour of assembling.

The French and American citizens now repaired to the center square, where the
order of march was to be settled on the greatest part of the citizens wore
oak-boughs, and little bunches of ears of wheat, ornamented with tricolored
ribbons.

In the middle of the square there was an obelisk [made of paste board],
decorated with attributes of liberty. On the four sides of the obelisk were
engraven [engraven on paste-board mind] the following inscriptions:

"To Immortality.
"The French Republic one and indivisible.
"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity.
"Tremble Tyrants, your reign is over.
A deputation of French citizens then went to the French Minister's where the
chiefs civil and military of the State of Pennsylvania were assembled. A deputy
announced to the minister that the good people were waiting for their
representatives. They immediately came to the square preceded by the flags of
the two nations, marching to the noise of drums and cannons, and amidst the
cries, a hundred times repeated, of Vive la Republique Francoise! [I will not
disgrace our language by translating the vile acclamation]; and warlike music
played, by intervals, airs analogous to the transports which burst forth from
every quarter.

When every thing was ready, ten guns were fired as a signal for the march. Two
pieces of cannon, followed by French and American cannoneers, took the lead.
The hatred that we were going to swear against tyrants, was written on every
countenance. The anniversary of the destruction of despotism painted on every
face patriotism, liberty, and equality.

The obelisk was carried by four citizens, two French and two American, in red
liberty caps: these were followed by a French grenadier, bearing a pike
surmounted with a liberty cap.

Now comes the prettiest part of the procession.

Twelve young citoyennes (or she citizens), dressed in pure white, adorned with
civic crowns and cestuses tricolor, each bearing a little basket of flowers,
surrounded the obelisk.

What a contrast there was between these little innocent lambs, with their
flower-baskets, and the swarthy grenadier with his bloody pike and cap!

The French Minister, the Consuls, the chiefs civil and military of
Pennsylvania, marched in the center of the procession.

Indeed it was diverting enough to see these great personages, the good
sober-looking, pot-bellied chiefs of Pennsylvania, come squeezing, and
shouldering, and zigzaging along, like so many raw recruits at drill. They were
formed into what military men call a platoon, and never did my eyes behold so
awkward a squad.

There is a small omission in this part of the Process Verbal, which I shall
supply. -- Before the procession left the center square, the English flag,
which had been brought thither reversed, under the flags of France and America,
was burnt before the obelisk, amidst the triumphant hootings of the brave sons
of liberty and equality. -- This was by way of retaliation for Lord Howe's
victory over the sans-culotte fleet, the news of which had arrived the day
before.

The procession advanced to the garden of the Minister Francois, where there
was an altar erected to the country, on which stood the goddess of liberty. The
flags of the two nations were planted on each side of her, while the little she
citizens were ranged round the altar.

Patriotic hymns were now sung, accompanied with music; and while the most
tender and melting invocations were put up, the she citizens made to the
goddess a sweet smelling offering of the flowers they had brought, with which
they covered her altar, with an innocent zeal peculiar to their age.

The patriotic hymns being ended, an oration was made by a Citizen Francois, It
is well worthy of remark, that this oration, which was sent to the convention,
contained a high strained compliment to Robespierre, just at the very time that
the convention and their mob were hacking and shooting and guillotining him. --
Had the virtuous civic feters known this, they would have cursed him most
heartily; as, indeed, they did two months afterward. -- What a pity it is,
that there is no means by which our sans-culottes can come at the exact state
of things in France at the moment they are framing their toasts and resolves!
and then the Minister Francois made another, and then the whole swore to be
faithful to the Republic. The best of this was, three-fourths of the audience
did not understand a word of what they heard, of what they swore to, or even of
the oath they took.

The Minister had hardly time to conclude, when the cries [or howlings] of Vive
(...) Republique Francois une et indivisible! burst forth from every throat.

A discharge of cannon, a warlike march, and a roll of the drums, expressed
the joy of the people, and signified that every heart was glad. -- Instantly
the ranks broke off, and dances were formed round the altar of liberty, and
over all the enclosure.

These dances were the finest fun I ever enjoyed. The patriotic hymns were well
enough; four hundred fellows howling out French bombast, without understanding
a word of it, was not a bad specimen of fraternal dissonance; but to behold
fifty or sixty groupes, promiscously formed, whistling, singing and capering
about they knew not why nor wherefore; and to see the "chiefs civil and
military of Pennsylvania," heaving up their legs, and endeavoring to ape the
light-heeled mounseers, was a spectacle which, I trust, has been seldom
equalled. -- In one part of the garden you heard the chorus of the bloody Ah!
ca ira, ca ira, ca ira,
Les Aristocrats a la Lantern.


In another: Dansons la carmagnole,
Vive le son, vive le son
Du canon.


While in another, Alons enfans de la patrie seemed to issue from the lungs of
twenty infernals. But what was still most ludicrous, was, to hear all this
uttered, by the greatest part of the chanters, in an accent barbarous beyond
description. But, to proceed with my translation:

During the rest of the day, public joy was manifested all over the city. --
That Is a lie. One half of the people of the city cared nothing at all about the
fete, and were astonished and ashamed that the cannons of the state should be
employed on such an occasion; and I venture to affirm, that not one-twentieth
part of those who assisted at it, would have assisted, had they known they were
celebrating the anniversary of the fall of Louis XVI. and the horrid and
cowardly murder of the Swiss guards. This remark justice demanded in defense of
those who attended through ignorance. With regard to the chiefs, civil and
military of Pennsylvania, as I have too much respect for them to accuse them of
ignorance, I leave them to defend themselves.

We must now return to the Democratic Clubs. In what remains to be said of them
I shall be very concise.

Though they were instituted for the express purpose of clogging the wheels of
government, weakening its power, and exciting a spirit of discontent among the
people, that might acquire strength enough to force it into a war on the side
of France, or totally annihilate it; yet there were three measures in this
continued opposition, against which the Democrats made a bolder stand than
usual, and called forth more than ordinary exertions; namely, the Proclamation
of Neutrality, the enforcing obedience to the Excise-Law, and the sanctioning
of the British Treaty. They had entered their solemn protest against the two
former, and had used every means in their power to effect a forcible, and even
an armed opposition to them; and their conduct with respect to the latter was
exactly of the same description. But, of every part of this conduct, their
resolves against the appointment of the man best calculated to bring about an
accommodation; their publishing the treaty in a mutilated form with their own
invidious misrepresentations; their dispatching runners to all the principal
towns, to exasperate the discontented, and deceive the weak; their
dishonorable means of obtaining petitions to Congress against it; the
intrigues of Randolph and Fauchet, and the embarrassment and alarm their
machinations spread through the country; all these are so fresh in every one's
memory, that it is useless to dwell on them here. Certain it is that they ought
not to be forgotten, nor will they be, while Peter Porcupine's writings are
remembered; and though these latter are assuredly not destined to long life, I
hope they will outlive the infernal sect of the Jacobins, and if this hope be
to be realized, I sincerely wish they may sink into oblivion tomorrow.

The Western Insurrection and its effects had already rendered the Democrats
extremely odious; here their mischievous efforts touched the pockets and the
lives of the people; and their failure in the last attempt to trouble the peace
of the Union, obliged them to hide their heads. The dark caballing clubs do,
indeed, still exist; but they either never meet, or they dare not publish their
resolves. However, let not the friends of the General Government, of order, of
peace and of general happiness and prosperity, imagine that the sect is
annihilated. They only wait for a more favorable moment, and should the
indiscretion or supineness of the sound part of the community suffer that
moment to arrive, they will obtain an ascendency that will enable them to
inflict signal vengeance for their past disappointments. From their reign God
defend me and mine!

From one justified by his talents in being anxious about his reputation as a
writer, the imperfectness of this sketch would require an apology. As this is
not my case, I shall make none. However, as publisher of the history of
Jacobinism, I hope I can promise myself, that the satisfaction the reader will
derive from the book itself, will induce him to excuse the faults of the
Appendix.

END.

