FRONTISPIECE.


THE Children's Miscellany: IN WHICH IS INCLUDED THE HISTORY OF LITTLE JACK;

By THOMAS DAY, ESQUIRE. AUTHOR OF THE HISTORY OF SANDFORD AND MERTON.

Bid him, besides, his daily pains employ,
To form the tender manners of the boy;
And work him, like a waxen babe, with art,
To perfect symmetry in every part.
DRYDEN. FIRST AMERICAN EDITION; Embellished with THIRTY-FIVE CUTS and
FRONTISPIECES.

BOSTON: PRINTED AND SOLD BY WILLIAM SPOTSWOOD 1796.

Advertisement.
As the Editor of this collection is conscious there may appear some defects in
the arrangement of his materials, he thinks it necessary to acquaint the Public
with the true reason of their appearing in a less finished state than he could
have wished to present them. Some gentlemen of fortune and literary abilities
had once conceived the scheme of contributing to the entertainment and
instruction of the rising generation by a selection of the most interesting and
improving histories from different authors. They intended to translate from the
different languages of Europe whatever might engage the minds of children to
the improvement of their knowledge, and inspire them with an early love of
virtue. To these they were to have added a judicious selection from natural
history, and the most entertaining descriptions that are to be found in the
ample collection of modern voyages; together with many original pieces of their
own composition. All these it was presumed, would contribute a pleasing and
useful miscellany for the use of children, which they intended to have
published in periodical numbers. After they had made some progress in the
execution of this scheme, they were compelled, by accidents which it is
unnecessary to relate, to abandon their design. But, though the modesty of the
authors would rather have led them to suppress what they could not engage to
finish, the Editor, to whom their papers were entrusted, has judged them too
valuable to be entirely suppressed. He has, therefore, collected them into a
volume, with the hopes that this Miscellany may not appear undeserving of the
public favor, and may be deemed no contemptible addition to that branch of
literature which proposes to itself the important object of pleasing and
instructing children.

CONTENTS.
History of Little Jack 1 History of the Little Queen 48 Natural History of the
Be 61 Natural History of the Silkworm 78 Epistle to a Friend on his return
from the Army 87 The Universal Prayer 92 History of Philip Quarll 97 Sketch of
Universal History 193 Lines on Thomas Day, Esquire. 210 Gray's Elegy, written in a
Country Churchyard 211 Natural History of the Elephant 216 Natural History of
the Lion 225 Natural History of the Nightingale 241 History of Three Brothers
245 History of Three Sisters 266 The Contrast 274 Diverting History of John
Gilpin 279 Fatal Effects of Delay 289 The Nosegay 295 Courage inspired by
Friendship 307 The Duel, OF Man of True Courage 314 History of Emmeline and
Jenny 323
THE HISTORY OF LITTLE JACK.
THERE was once a poor lame old man that lived in the midst of a wide
uncultivated moor, in the north of England. He had formerly been a soldier, and
had almost lost the use of one leg by a wound he had received in battle, when
he was fighting against the enemies of his country This poor man, when he found
himself thus disabled, built a little hut of clay, which he covered with turf
dug from the common. He had a little bit of ground which he made a shift to
cultivate with his own hands; and which supplied him with potatoes and
vegetables; besides this, he sometimes gained a few halfpence by opening a gate
for travelers, which stood near his house. He did not indeed get much, because
few people passed that way. What he earned was, however, enough to purchase
clothes, and the few necessaries he wanted. But though poor, he was strictly
honest, and never failed night and morning to address his prayers to God; by
which means he was respected by all who knew him, much more than many who were
superior to him in rank and fortune. This old man had one domestic. In his
walks over the common, he one day found a little kid that had lost its mother,
and was almost famished with hunger: he took it home to his cottage, fed it
with the produce of his garden, and nursed it till it grew strong and vigorous.
Little Nan, (for that was the name he gave it) returned his cares with
gratitude, and became as much attached to him as a dog. All day she browzed
upon the herbage that grew around his hut, and at night reposed upon the same
bed of straw with her master. Frequently did she divert him with her innocent
tricks and gambols. She would nestle her little head in his bosom, and eat out
of his hand part of his scanty allowance of bread; which he never failed to
divide with his favorite. The old man often beheld her with silent joy, and,
in the innocent effusions of his heart, would lift his hands to heaven, and
thank the Deity, that, even in the midst of poverty and distress, had raised
him up one faithful friend.

One night, in the beginning of winter, the old man thought he heard the feeble
cries and lamentations of a child. As he was naturally charitable, he arose and
struck a light, and, going out of his cottage, examined on every side. It was
not long before he discerned an infant, which had probably been dropped by some
strolling beggar or gypsy. The old man stood amazed at the sight, and knew not
what to do. Shall I, said he, who find it so difficult to live at present,
incumber myself with the care of an helpless infant, that will not for many
years be capable of contributing to its own subsistence? And yet, added he,
softening with pity, can I deny assistance to an human being still more
miserable than myself? -- Will not that Providence which feeds the birds of the
wood and the beasts of the field, and which has promised to bless all those
that are kind and charitable, assist my feeble endeavors? -- At least, let me
give it food and lodging for this night; for without I receive it into my
cottage, the poor abandoned wretch must perish with cold before the morning.
Saying this, he took it up in his arms, and perceived it was a fine healthy
boy, though covered with rags; the little foundling too seemed to be sensible
of his kindness, and smiling in his face, stretched out his little arms, as if
to embrace his benefactor.

When he had brought it into his hut, he began to be extremely embarrassed how
to procure it food: but looking at Nan, he recollected that she had just lost
her kid, and saw her udder distended with milk: he, therefore, called her to
him, and, presenting the child to the teat, was overjoyed to find, that it
sucked as naturally as if it had really found a mother. The goat too seemed to
receive pleasure from the efforts of the child, and submitted without
opposition to discharge the duties of a nurse. Contented with this experiment,
the old man wrapped the child up as warmly as he could, and stretched himself
out to rest with the consciousness of having done an humane action. Early the
next morning he was awakened by the cries of the child for food, which with the
assistance of his faithful Nan, he suckled as he had done the night before. And
now the old man began to feel an interest in the child, which made him defer
some time longer the taking measures to be delivered from its care. Who knows,
said he, but Providence which has preserved this child in so wonderful a
manner, may have destined it to something equally wonderful in his future life;
and may bless me as the humble agent of his decrees? At least, as he grows
bigger, he will be a pleasure and comfort to me, in this lonely cabin, and will
assist in cutting turf for fuel, and cultivating the garden. From this time he
became more and more attached to the little foundling; who, in a short time,
learned to consider the old man as a parent, and delighted him with its
innocent caresses. Gentle Nanny too, the goat, seemed to adopt him with equal
tenderness as her offspring: she would stretch herself out upon the ground,
while he crawled upon his hands and knees toward her; and when he had
satisfied his hunger by sucking, he would nestle between her legs and go to
sleep in her bosom.

It was wonderful to see how this child, thus left to nature, increased in
strength and vigor. Unfettered by bandages or restraints, his limbs acquired
their due proportions and form; his countenance was full and florid, and gave
indications of perfect health; and, at an age when other children are scarcely
able to support themselves with the assistance of a nurse, this little
foundling could run alone. It was true, that he sometimes failed in his
attempts, and fell to the ground; but the ground was soft, and little Jack, for
so the old man called him, was not tender or delicate; he never minded thumps
or bruises, but boldly scrambled up again and pursued his way. In a short time,
little Jack was completely master of his legs; and as the summer came on, he
attended his mamma, the goat, upon the common, and used to play with her for
hours together; sometimes rolling under her belly, now climbing upon her back,
and frisking about as if he had really been a kid. As to his clothing, Jack
was not much incumbered with it; he had neither shoes, nor stockings, nor
shirt; but the weather was warm, and Jack felt himself so much lighter for
every kind of exercise. In a short time after this, Jack began to imitate the
sounds of his papa the man, and his mamma the goat; nor was it long before he
learned to speak articulately. The old man delighted with this first dawn of
reason, used to place him upon his knee, and converse with him for hours
together, while his pottage was slowly boiling amid the embers of a turf fire.
As he grew bigger, Jack became of considerable use to his father; he could
trust him to look after the gate, and open it during his absence: and, as to
the cookery of the family, it was not long before Jack was a complete
proficient, and could make broth almost as well as his daddy himself. During
the winter nights, the old man used to entertain him with stories of what he
had seen during his youth; the battles and sieges he had been witness to, and
the hardships he had undergone; all this he related with so much vivacity that
Jack was never tired of listening. But what delighted him beyond measure was to
see daddy shoulder his crutch, instead of a musket, and give the word of
command. To the right -- to the left -- present -- sire -- march -- halt -- all
this was familiar to Jack's ear as soon as he could speak, and before he was
six years old, he poized and presented a broom-stick, which his daddy gave him
for that purpose, with as good a grace as any soldier of his age in Europe.



The old man too instructed him in such plain and simple morals and religion,
as he was able to explain. "Never tell an untruth, Jack, said he, even though
you were to be flayed alive; a soldier never lies." Jack held up his head,
marched across the floor, and promised his daddy that he would always tell the
truth like a soldier. But the old man, as he was something of a scholar, had a
great ambition that his darling should learn to read, and write; and this was a
work of some difficulty; for he had neither printed book, nor pens, nor paper
in his cabin. Industry, however, enables us to overcome difficulties; in the
summer time, as the old man sat before his cottage, he would draw letters in
the sand, and teach Jack to name them singly, until he was acquainted with the
whole alphabet, he then proceeded to syllables; and after that to words; all
which his little pupil learned to pronounce with great facility: and, as he had
a strong propensity to imitate what he saw, he not only acquired the power of
reading words, cut of tracing all the letters which composed them, on the sand.

About this time, the poor goat which had nursed Jack so faithfully, grew ill
and died. He tended her with the greatest affection and assiduity during her
illness, brought her the freshest herbs for food, and would frequently support
her head for hours together upon his little bosom. But it was all in vain; he
lost his poor mammy, as he used to call her, and was for some time
inconsolable; for Jack, though his knowledge was bounded, had an uncommon
degree of gratitude and affection in his temper. He was not able to talk as
finely about love, tenderness, and sensibility, as many other little boys, that
have enjoyed greater advantages of education; but he felt the reality of them
in his heart, and thought it so natural to love every thing that loves us, that
he never even suspected it was possible to do otherwise. The poor goat was
buried in the old man's garden, and thither little Jack would often come and
call upon his poor mammy Nan, and ask her why she had left him? One day, as he
was thus employed, a lady happened to come by in a carriage, and overheard him
before he was aware. Jack ran in an instant to open the gate; but the lady
stopped, and asked him whom he was bemoaning so pitifully, and calling upon?
Jack answered, that it was his poor mammy, that was buried in the garden. The
lady thought it very odd to hear of such a burial place, and therefore
proceeded to question him, "How did your mammy get her living?" said she. "She
used to graze here upon the common all day long," said Jack. The lady was still
more astonished; but the old man came out of his hut, and explained the whole
affair to her, which surprised her very much; for though this lady had seen a
great deal of the world, and had read a variety of books, it had never once
entered into her head that a child might grow strong and vigorous by sucking a
goat, instead of eating pap. She therefore looked at Jack with amazement,
admired his brown but animated face, and praised his shape and activity. "Will
you go with me, little boy, said she, and I will take care of you, if you
behave well?" "No, said Jack, I must stay with daddy; he has taken care of me
for many years, and now I must take care of him; otherwise I should like very
well to go with such a sweet, good-natured lady." The lady was not displeased
with Jack's answer, and putting her hand in her pocket, gave him half a crown,
to buy him shoes and stockings, and pursued her journey.

Jack was not unacquainted with the use of money, as he had been often sent to
the next village to purchase bread and necessaries; but he was totally
unacquainted with the use of shoes and stockings, which he had never worn in
his life, or felt the want of. The next day, however, the old man bade him run
to town, and lay his money out as the lady had desired; for he had too much
honor to think of disobeying her commands, or suffering it to be expended for
any other purpose. It was not long before Jack returned; but the old man was
much surprised to see him come back as bare as he went out. "Heigh, Jack! said
he, where are the shoes and stockings which you were to purchase?" "Daddy,
answered Jack, I went to the shop, and just tried a pair for sport, but I found
them so cumbersome, that I could not walk, and I would not wear such things,
even if the lady would give me another half crown for doing it; so I laid the
money out in a warm jacket for you, because the winter is coming on, and you
seem to be more afraid of the cold than formerly." Many such instances of
conduct did Jack display; from which it was easy to perceive, that he had an
excellent soul, and generous temper. One failing, indeed Jack was liable to;
though a very good natured boy, he was a little too jealous of his honor. His
daddy had taught him the use of his hands and legs, and Jack had such
dispositions for the art of boxing, that he could beat every boy in the
neighborhood, of his age and size. Even if they were a head taller, it made no
difference to Jack, provided they said any thing to wound his honor; for
otherwise he was the most mild, pacific creature in the world. One day that he
had been sent to the village, he returned with his eyes black, and his face
swelled to a frightful size: it was even with difficulty that he was able to
walk at all, so sore was he with the pomelling he had received. "What have you
been doing now, Jack?" said the old man. -- "Only fighting with Dick the
butcher." "You rogue, said the old man, he is twice as big as you are, and the
best fighter in all the country." "What does that signify, said Jack, he called
you an old beggarman, and then I struck him; and I will strike him again
whenever he calls you so, even if he should beat me to pieces; for you know,
daddy, that you are not a beggarman, but a soldier."

In this manner lived little Jack, until he was twelve years old; at this time
his poor old daddy fell sick and became incapable of moving about. Jack did
every thing he could think of for the poor man; he made him broths, he fed him
with his own hands, he watched whole nights by his bedside supporting his head
and helping him when he wanted to move. But it was all in vain; his poor daddy
grew daily worse, and perceived it to be impossible that he should recover. He
one day therefore called little Jack to his bedside, and pressing his hand
affectionately, told him that he was just going to die. Little Jack burst into
a flood of tears at this information, but his daddy desired him to compose
himself, and attend to the last advice he should be able to give him. "I have
lived, said the old man, a great many years, in poverty, but I do not know that
I have been worse off than if I had been rich. I have avoided, perhaps, many
faults, and many uneasinesses, which I should have incurred had I been in
another situation; and though I have often wanted a meal and always sared hard,
I have enjoyed as much health and life as usually falls to the lot of my
betters. I am now going to die; I feel it in every part; the breath will soon
be out of my body; then I shall be put in the ground, and the worms will eat
your poor old daddy." At this Jack renewed his tears and sobbings, for he was
unable to restrain them. But the old man said; "Have patience, my child; though
I should leave this world, as I have always been strictly honest and
endeavored to do my duty, I do not doubt but God will pity me, and convey me
to a better place; where I shall be happier than I have ever been here. This is
what I have always taught you, and this belief gives me the greatest comfort in
my last moments. The only regret I feel, is for you, my dearest child, whom I
leave unprovided for. But you are strong and vigorous, and almost able to get
your living. As soon as I am dead, you must go to the next village and inform
the people, that they may come and bury me. You must then endeavor to get into
service, and work for your living; and, if you are strictly honest and sober, I
do not doubt that you will find a livelihood, and that God, who is the common
father of all, will protect and bless you. Adieu, my child, I grow fainter and
fainter; never forget your poor old daddy, nor the example he has set you; but
in every situation of life discharge your duty, and live like a Soldier, and a
Christian." When the old man had with difficulty uttered these last
instructions, his voice entirely failed him, his limbs grew cold and stiff, and
in a few minutes he expired without a groan. Little Jack, who hung crying over
his daddy, called upon him in vain, in vain endeavored to revive him. At
length he pulled off his clothes, went into his daddy's bed, and endeavored
for many hours to animate him with the warmth of his own body; but finding all
his endeavors fruitless, he concluded that he was indeed dead; and therefore,
weeping bitterly, he dressed himself, and went to the village as he had been
ordered. The poor little boy was thus left entirely destitute and knew not what
to do; but one of the farmers, who had been acquainted with him before, offered
to take him into his house, and give him his victuals, for a few months, till
he could find a service. Jack thankfully accepted the offer, and served him
faithfully for several months; during which time he learned to milk, to drive
the plough, and never refused any kind of work he was able to perform. But, by
ill luck, this good-natured farmer contracted a fever, by over-heating himself
in the harvest, and died in the beginning of winter. His wife was therefore
obliged to discharge her servants, and Jack was again turned loose upon the
world, with only his clothes, and a shilling in his pocket, which his kind
mistress had made him a present of. He was very sorry for the loss of his
master; but he was now grown bigger and stronger, and thought he should easily
find employment. He therefore set out upon his travels, walking all day, and
inquiring at every farm-house for work. But in this attempt he was unfortunate,
for nobody chose to employ a stranger: and though he lived with the greatest
economy, he soon found himself in a worse situation than ever, without a
farthing in his pocket, or a morsel of bread to eat. Jack, however, was not of
a temper to be easily cast down; he walked resolutely on all day, but toward
evening was overtaken by a violent storm of rain, which wetted him to the skin
before he could find a bush for shelter. Now, poor Jack began to think of his
old daddy, and the comforts he had formerly enjoyed upon the common, where he
had always a roof to shelter him, and a slice of bread for supper. But tears
and lamentations were vain; and therefore, as soon as the storm was over, he
pursued his journey, in hopes of finding some barn or out-house to creep into
for the rest of the night. While he was thus wandering about, he saw at some
distance a great light, which seemed to come from some prodigious fire. Jack
did not know what this could be; but, in his present situation, he thought a
fire no disagreeable object, and therefore determined to approach it. When he
came nearer, he saw a large building which seemed to spout fire and smoke at
several openings, and heard an incessant noise of blows, and the rattling of
chains. Jack was at first a little frightened, but summoning all his courage,
he crept cautiously on to the building, and looking through a chink, discovered
several men and boys employed in blowing fires and hammering burning masses of
iron. This was a very comfortable sight to him in his present forlorn
condition; so finding a door half open, he ventured in, and placed himself as
near as he dared to one of the flaming furnaces. It was not long before he was
discovered by one of the workmen, who asked him, roughly, what business he had
there? Jack answered with great humility, that he was a poor boy, looking out
for work; that he had had no food all day, and was wet to the skin with the
rain, which was evident enough from the appearance of his clothes. By great
good luck, the man he spoke to was good-natured, and therefore not only
permitted him to stay by the fire, but gave him some broken victuals for his
supper. After this, he laid himself down in a corner, and slept without
disturbance till morning. He was scarcely awake the next day, when the master
of the forge came in to overlook his men, who finding Jack, and hearing his
story, began to reproach him as a lazy vagabond, and asked him why he did not
work for his living. Jack assured him there was nothing he so earnestly
desired, and that if he would please to employ him, there was nothing that he
would not do to earn a subsistence. Well, my boy, said the master, if this is
true, you shall soon be tried; nobody need be idle here; so calling his
foreman, he ordered him to set that lad to work, and pay him in proportion to
his deserts. Jack now thought himself completely happy, and worked with so much
assiduity, that he soon gained a comfortable livelihood, and acquired the
esteem of his master. But unfortunately, he was a little too unreserved in his
conversation, and communicated the story of his former life and education. This
was great matter of diversion to all the other boys of the forge; who, whenever
they were inclined to be merry, would call him little Jack the beggar-boy, and
imitate the baaing of a goat. This was too much for his irascible temper, and
he never failed to resent it; by which means he was engaged in continual
quarrels and combats, to the great disturbance of the house; so that his
master, though in other respects perfectly satisfied with his behavior, began
to fear that he should at last be obliged to discharge him.

It happened one day, that a large company of gentlemen and ladies were
introduced to see the works. The master attended them, and explained, with
great politeness, every part of his manufacture. They viewed with astonishment
the different methods by which that useful and necessary ore of iron is
rendered sit for human use. They examined the furnaces where it is melted down,
to disengage it from the dross, with which it is mixed in the bowels of the
earth, and whence it runs down in liquid torrents like fire. They beheld with
equal pleasure the prodigious hammers which, moved by the force of water, mould
it into massy bars, for the service of man. While they were busy in examining
these different processes, they were alarmed by a sudden noise of discord,
which broke out on the other side of the building; and the master inquiring
into the cause, was told, that it was only little Jack, who was fighting with
Tom the collier. At this, the master cried out, in a passion, there is no peace
to be expected in the furnace, while that little rascal is employed; send him
to me, and I will instantly discharge him. At this moment Jack appeared, all
covered with blood and dirt, and stood before his angry judge in a modest, but
resolute posture. "Is this the reward, said his master, you little audacious
vagabond, of all my kindness? Can you never refrain a single instant from
broils and fighting? But I am determined to bear it no longer; and therefore
you shall never, from this hour, do a single stroke of work for me." "Sir,
replied Jack, with great humility, but yet with firmness, I am extremely sorry
to have disobliged you, nor have I ever done it willingly, since I have been
here; and if the other boys would only mind their business as well as I do, and
not molest me, you would not have been offended now; for I defy them all to
say, that since I have been in the house, I have ever given any one the least
provocation, or ever refused to the utmost of my strength, to do whatever I
have been ordered." "That Is true, in good faith, said the foreman; I must do
little Jack the justice to say that there is not a more honest, sober, and
industrious lad about the place. Set him to what you will, he never sculks,
never grumbles, never slights his work; and if it were not for a little passion
and fighting, I don't believe there would be his fellow in England." "Well,
said the master a little mollified, but what is the cause of all this sudden
disturbance?" "Sir, answered Jack, it is Tom that has been abusing me and
telling me that my father was a beggarman and my mother a nanny-goat; and when
I desired him to be quiet, he went baaing all about the house; and this I could
not bear; for as to my poor father he was an honest soldier, and if I did suck
a goat, she was the best creature in the world, and I will not hear her abused
while I have any strength in my body." At this harangue, the whole audience
were scarcely able to refrain from laughing, and the master, with more
composure, told Jack to mind his business, and threatened the other boys with
punishment, if they disturbed him.

But a lady who was in company seemed particularly interested about little
Jack, and when she had heard his story, said, this must certainly be the little
boy who opened a gate several years past for me upon Norcot Moor. I remember
being struck with his appearance, and hearing him lament the loss of the goat
that nursed him. I was very much affected with his history, and since he
deserves so good a character, if you will part with him, I will instantly take
him into my service. The master replied, that he should part with him with
great satisfaction to such an excellent mistress; that indeed the boy deserved
all the commendations which had been given; but since the other lads had such
an habit of plaguing, and Jack was of so impatient a temper, he despaired of
ever composing their animosities. Jack was then called, and informed of the
lady's offer, which he instantly accepted with the greatest readiness, and
received immediate directions to her house.

Jack was now in a new sphere of life. His face was washed, his hair combed, he
was clothed afresh, and appeared a very smart active lad. His business was, to
help in the stable, to water the horses, to clean shoes, to perform errands,
and to do all the jobs of the family; and in the discharge of these services,
he soon gave universal satisfaction. He was indefatigable in doing what he was
ordered, never grumbled, or appeared out of temper, and seemed so quiet and
inoffensive in his manners, that every body wondered how he had acquired the
character of being quarrelsome. In a short time, he became both the favorite
and the drudge of the whole family; for, speak but kindly to him and call him a
little soldier, and Jack was at every one's disposal. This was Jack's
particular foible and vanity; at his leisure hours, he would divert himself by
the hour together, in poizing a dung fork, charging with a broom stick, and
standing centry at the stable door. Another propensity of Jack's, which now
discovered itself, was an immoderate love of horses. The instant he was
introduced into the stable, he attached himself so strongly to these animals,
that you would have taken him for one of the same species, or at least a near
relation. Jack was never tired with rubbing down and currying them; the
coachman had scarcely any business but to sit upon his box; all the operations
of the stable were entrusted to little Jack, nor was it ever known that he
neglected a single particular. But what gave him more pleasure than all the
rest, was sometimes to accompany his mistress upon a little horse, which he
managed with infinite dexterity.

Jack too discovered a great disposition for all the useful and mechanic arts.
He had served an apprenticeship already to the manufactory of iron, and of this
he was almost as vain as being a soldier. As he began to extend his knowledge
of the world, he saw that nothing could be done without iron. How would you
plough the ground, said Jack; how would you dig your garden; how would you even
light a fire, dress a dinner, shoe a horse, or do the least thing in the world,
if we workmen at the forge did not take the trouble of preparing it for you?
Thus Jack would sometimes expatiate upon the dignity and importance of his own
profession, to the great admiration of all the other servants.

These ideas naturally gave Jack a great esteem for the profession of a
blacksmith, and in his occasional visits to the forge with the horses, he
learnt to make and fix a shoe as neatly as any artist in the country.

Nor were Jack's talents confined to the manufactory of iron; his love of
horses was so great, and his interest in every thing that related to them, that
it was not long before he acquired a very competent knowledge in the art of
saddlery.

Jack would also sometimes observe the carpenters when they were at work, and
sometimes by stealth attempt the management of their tools; in which he
succeeded as well as in every thing else; so that he was looked upon by every
body as a very active, ingenious boy.

There was in the family, where he now lived, a young gentleman, the nephew of
his mistress, who had lost his parents, and was therefore brought up by his
aunt. As Master Willets was something younger than Jack, and a very
good-natured boy, he soon began to take notice of him, and be much diverted
with his company. Jack, indeed, was not undeserving this attention; for
although he could not boast any great advantages of education, his conduct was
entirely free from all the vices to which some of the lower class of people are
subject. Jack was never heard to swear, or express himself with any indecency.
He was civil and respectful in his manners to all his superiors, and uniformly
good-natured to his equals. In respect to the animals entrusted to his care, he
not only refrained from using them ill, but was never tired with doing them
good offices. Added to this, he was sober, temperate, hardy, active, and
ingenious, and despised a lie as much as any of his betters. Master Willets now
began to be much pleased with playing at cricket and trap-ball with Jack, who
excelled at both these games. Master Willets had a little horse which Jack
looked after; and not contented with looking after him in the best manner, he
used to ride him at his leisure hours with so much care and address, that in a
short time he made him the most gentle and docile little animal in the country.
Jack had acquired this knowledge partly from his own experience, and partly
from paying particular attention to an itinerant riding-master that had lately
exhibited various feats in that neighborhood. Jack attended him so closely,
and made so good an use of his time, that he learned to imitate almost every
thing he saw, and used to divert the servants and his young master with acting
the tailor's riding to Brentford.

The young gentleman had a master who used to come three times a week to teach
him accounts, and writing, and geography. Jack used to be sometimes in the room
while the lessons were given, and listened according to custom with so much
attention to all that passed, that he received very considerable advantage for
his own improvement. He had now a little money, and he laid some of it out to
purchase pens and paper and a slate, with which at night he used to imitate
every thing he had heard and seen in the day: and his little master, who began
to love him very sincerely, when he saw him so desirous of improvement,
contrived, under one pretense or another, to have him generally in the room
while he was receiving instruction himself.

In this manner Jack went on for some years, leading a life very agreeable to
himself, and discharging his duty very much to the satisfaction of his
mistress. An unlucky accident at length happened to interrupt his tranquillity.
A young gentleman came down to visit Master. Willets, who, having been educated
in France, and among genteel people in London, had a very great taste for
finery, and a supreme contempt for all the vulgar. His dress too was a little
particular, as well as his manners; for he spent half his time in adjusting his
head, wore a large black bag tied to his hair behind, and would sometimes strut
about for half an hour together with his hat under his arm, and a little sword
by his side. This young man had a supreme contempt for all the vulgar, which he
did not attempt to conceal; and when he had heard the story of Jack's birth and
education, he could scarcely bear to be in the same room with him. Jack soon
perceived the aversion which the stranger entertained for him, and at first
endeavored to remove it, by every civility in his power; but when he found
that he gained nothing by all his humility, his temper, naturally haughty, took
fire, and, as far as he dared, he plainly showed all the resentment he felt.

It happened one day, after Jack had received some very mortifying usage from
this young gentleman, that as he was walking along the road, he met with a
showman, who was returning from a neighboring fair with some wild beasts in a
cart. Among the rest was a middle sized monkey, who was not under cover like
the rest, and played so many antic tricks, and made so many grimaces, as
engaged all Jack's attention, and delighted him very much, for he always had a
propensity for every species of drollery. After a variety of questions and
conversation, the showman, who probably wanted to be rid of his monkey,
proposed to Jack to purchase him for half a crown. Jack could not resist the
temptation of being master of such a droll diverting animal, and therefore
agreed to the bargain. But when he was left alone with his purchase, whom he
led along by a chain, he soon began to repent his haste, and knew not how to
dispose of him. As there was however, no remedy, Jack brought him carefully
home, and confined him safe in an out-house, which was not applied to any use.
In this situation he kept him several days, without accident, and frequently
visited him at his leisure hours, with apples, nuts, and such other presents as
he could procure. Among the other tricks which the monkey had been taught to
perform, he would rise upon his hind legs at the word of command, and bow with
the greatest politeness to the company. Jack, who had found out these
accomplishments in his friend, could not resist the impulse of making them
subservient to his resentment. He, therefore, one day, procured some flour,
with which he powdered his monkey's head, fixed a large paper bag to his neck,
put an old hat under his arm, and tied a large iron skewer to his side, instead
of a sword; and thus accoutred led him about with infinite satisfaction,
calling him Monsieur, and jabbering such broken French as he had picked up from
the conversation of the visitor. It happened very unluckily at this very
instant, that the young gentleman himself passed by, and instantly saw at one
glance the intended copy of himself, and all the malice of little Jack; who was
leading him along, and calling to him to hold up his head and look like a
person of fashion. Rage instantly took possession of his mind, and drawing his
sword, which he happened to have on, he ran the poor monkey through with a
sudden thrust, and laid him dead upon the ground. What more he might have done
is uncertain, for Jack, who was not of a temper to see calmly such an outrage
committed upon an animal whom he considered as his friend, flew upon him like a
fury, and wresting the sword out of his hand, broke it into twenty pieces. The
young gentleman himself received a fall in the scuffle, which, though it did
him no material damage, daubed all his clothes, and totally spoiled the whole
arrangement of his dress. At this instant, the lady herself, who had heard the
noise, came down, and the violence of poor Jack was too apparent to be excused.
Jack, indeed, was submissive to his mistress, whom he was very sorry to have
offended; but, when he was ordered to make concessions to the young gentleman,
as the only conditions upon which he could be kept in the family, he absolutely
refused. He owned, indeed, that he was much to blame for resenting the
provocations he had received, and endeavoring to make his mistress's company
ridiculous; but as to what he had done in defense of his friend the monkey,
there were no possible arguments which could convince him he was in the least
to blame; nor would he have made submissions to the king himself. This
unfortunate obstinacy of Jack's was the occasion of his being discharged, very
much to the regret of the lady herself, and still more to that of Master
Willets. Jack therefore packed up his clothes in a little bundle, shook all his
fellow servants by the hand, took an affectionate leave of his kind master, and
once more sallied out upon his travels.



He had not walked far before he came to a town, where a party of soldiers were
beating up for volunteers. Jack mingled with the crowd that surrounded the
recruiting sergeant, and listened with great pleasure to the sound of the fifes
and drums; nor could he help mechanically holding up his head, and stepping
forward with an air that showed the trade was not entirely new to him. The
sergeant soon took notice of these gestures, and seeing him a strong likely
lad, came up to him, clapped him upon the back, and asked him if he would
enlist? "You are a brave boy, said he, I can see it in your looks -- come along
with us, and I don't doubt in a few weeks, you will be as complete a soldier as
those who have been in the army for years." Jack made no answer to this, but by
instantly poizing his stick, cocking his hat fiercely, and going through the
whole manuel exercise. -- "Prodigious, indeed, cried the sergeant, I see you
have been in the army already, and can eat fire as well as any of us. But come
with us, my brave lad, you shall live well, have little to do, but now and then
fight for your king and country, as every gentleman ought; and in a short time,
I don't doubt but I shall see you a captain, or some great man, rolling in
wealth, which you have got out of the spoils of your enemies." -- "No, said
Jack, captain, that will never do -- no tricks upon travelers -- I know better
what I have to expect if I enlist -- I must lie hard, live hard, expose my life
and limbs, every hour of the day, and be soundly cudgelled every now and then
into the bargain." -- "O'ons, cried the sergeant, where did the young dog pick
up all this? He is enough to make a whole company desert." -- "No, said Jack,
they shall never desert through me; for though I know this, as I am at present
out of employment, and have a great respect for the character of a gentleman
soldier, I will enlist directly in your regiment." "A brave fellow, indeed,
said the sergeant; here, my boy, here is your money and your cockade, both
which he directly presented, for fear his recruit should change his mind; and
thus in a moment little Jack became a soldier.

He had scarcely time to feel himself easy in his new accoutrements, before he
was embarked for India in the character of a marine. This kind of life was
entirely new to Jack; however, his usual activity and spirit of observation did
not desert him here, and he had not been embarked many weeks, before he was
perfectly acquainted with all the duty of a sailor, and in that respect equal
to most on board. It happened that the ship, in which he sailed, touched at the
Cormo Islands, in order to take in wood and water; these are some little
islands near the coast of Africa, inhabited by blacks. Jack often went on shore
with the officers, attending them on their shooting parties to carry their
powder and shot, and the game they killed. All this country consists of very
lofty hills, covered with trees and shrubs of various kinds, which never lose
their leaves, from the perpetual warmth of the climate. Through these it is
frequently difficult to force a way, and the hills themselves abound in
precipices. It happened that one of the officers whom Jack was attending upon a
shooting party, took aim at some great bird and brought it down; but as it fell
into some deep valley, over some rocks which it was impossible to descend, they
despaired of gaining their prey. Jack, immediately, with officious haste, set
off and ran down the more level side of the hill, thinking to make a circuit
and reach the valley into which the bird had fallen. He set off, therefore, but
as he was totally ignorant of the country, he, in a short time, buried himself
so deep in the wood, which grew continually thicker, that he knew not which way
to proceed. He then thought it most prudent to return; but this he found as
difficult to effect as the other. He therefore wandered about the woods with
inconceivable difficulty all day, but could never find his company nor even
reach the shore, or obtain the prospect of the sea. At length the night
approached, and Jack, who perceived it to be impossible to do that in the dark,
which he had not been able to effect in the light, lay down under a rock, and
composed himself to rest, as well as he was able. The next day he rose with the
light, and once more attempted to regain the shore: but unfortunately he had
totally lost all idea of the direction he ought to pursue, and saw nothing
around him but the dismal prospect of woods and hills and precipices, without a
guide or path. Jack now began to be very hungry, but as he had a fowling piece
with him, and powder and shot, he soon procured himself a dinner; and kindling
a fire with some dry leaves and sticks, he roasted his game upon the embers,
and dined as comfortably as he could be expected to do in so forlorn a
situation. Finding himself much refreshed, he pursued his journey, but with as
little success as ever. On the third day, he indeed came in sight of the sea,
but found that he was quite on a different side of the island from that where
he left the ship, and that neither ship nor boat was to be seen. Jack now lost
all hopes of rejoining his comrades, for he knew the ship was to sail at
farthest upon the third day, and would not wait for him. He, therefore, sat
down very pensively upon a rock, and cast his eyes upon the vast extent of
ocean which was stretched out before him. He found himself now abandoned upon a
strange country, without a single friend, acquaintance, or even any one who
spoke the same language. He at first thought of seeking out the natives, and
making known to them his deplorable state; but he began to fear the reception
he might meet with among them. They might not be pleased, he thought, with his
company, and might take the liberty of treating him as the white men generally
treat the blacks when they get them into their possession; that is, make him
work hard with very little victuals, and knock him on the head if he attempted
to run away. And therefore, says Jack, as he was meditating all alone, it may,
perhaps, be better for me to stay quiet where I am. It is true, indeed, I shall
not have much company to talk to, but then I shall have nobody to quarrel with
me, or baa, or laugh at my poor daddy and mammy. Neither do I at present see
how I shall get a livelihood, when my powder and shot are all expended; but
however I shall hardly be starved, for I saw several kinds of fruit in the
woods, and some roots which look very much like carrots. As to clothes, when
mine wear out, I shall not much want new ones; for the weather is charmingly
warm; and therefore, all things considered, I don't see why I should not be as
happy here as in any other place. -- When Jack had finished his speech, he set
himself to find a lodging for the night. He had not examined far before he
found a dry cavern in a rock, which he thought would prove a very comfortable
residence; he therefore went to work with an hatchet he had with him, and cut
some boughs of trees, which he spread upon the floor, and over those a long
silky kind of grass, which he found in plenty near the place, to make himself a
bed. His next care was, how to secure himself in case of any attack, for he did
not know whether the island contained any wild beasts or not. He therefore cut
down several branches of trees, and wove them into a kind of wicker work, as he
had seen the men do hurdles when he lived with the farmer; with this
contrivance he found he could very securely barricade the entrance of his cave.
And now, as the evening was again approaching, he began to feel himself hungry,
and seeking along the seashore, he found some shellfish, which supplied him
with a plentiful meal. The next day Jack arose, a little melancholy indeed,
but, with a resolution to struggle manfully with the difficulties of his
situation. He walked into the woods and saw several kinds of fruit and berries,
some of which he ventured to eat, as the birds had pecked them, and found the
taste agreeable. He also dug up several species of roots, but feared to taste
them lest they should be poisonous. At length, he selected one that very much
resembled a potatoe, and determined to roast it in the embers, and taste a very
small bit. It can hardly, thought Jack, do me much hurt, in so very small a
quantity; and if that agrees with me I will increase the dose. The root was
fortunately extremely wholesome and nutritive, so that Jack was in a very short
time tolerably secure against the danger of wanting food. In this manner did
Jack lead a kind of savage, but tolerably contented life, for several months;
during which time he enjoyed perfect health, and was never discovered by any of
the natives. He used several times a day to visit the shore, in hopes that some
ship might pass that way and deliver him from his solitary imprisonment. This,
at length, happened, by the boat of an English ship, that was sailing to India,
happening to touch upon the coast; Jack instantly hailed the crew, and the
officer, upon hearing the story, agreed to receive him; the captain too, when
he found that Jack was by no means a contemptible sailor, very willingly gave
him his passage, and promised him a gratuity besides, if he behaved well.

Jack arrived in India without any accident, and relating his story, was
permitted to serve in another regiment as his own was no longer there. He soon
distinguished himself by his courage and good behavior on several occasions,
and before long was advanced to the rank of a sergeant. In this capacity, he
was ordered out upon an expedition into the remote parts of the country. The
little army in which he served now marched on for several weeks, through a
burning climate, and in want of all the necessaries of life. At length, they
entered upon some extensive plains, which bordered upon the celebrated country
of the Tartars. Jack was perfectly well acquainted with the history of this
people, and their method of fighting. He knew them to be some of the best
horsemen in the world indefatigable in their attacks, though often repulsed
returning to the charge, and not to be invaded with impunity; he, therefore,
took the liberty of observing to some of the officers, that nothing could be
more dangerous than their rashly engaging themselves in those extensive plains,
where they were every moment exposed to the attacks of cavalry, without any
successful method of defense, or place of retreat, in case of any misfortune.
These remonstrances were not much attended to, and after a few hours farther
march, they were alarmed by the approach of a considerable body of Tartar
horsemen. They, however, drew up with all the order they were able, and firing
several successive vollies, endeavored to keep the enemy at a distance. But
the Tartars had no design of doing that with a considerable loss, which they
were sure of doing with ease and safety. Instead therefore of charging the
Europeans, they contented themselves with giving continual alarms, and menacing
them on every side, without exposing themselves to any considerable danger. The
army now attempted to retreat, hoping that they should be able to arrive at the
neighboring mountains, where they would be safe from the incursions of the
horse. But in this attempt they were equally disappointed; for another
considerable body of enemies appeared on that side, and blocked their passage.
The Europeans now found they were surrounded on all sides, and that resistance
was vain. The commanding officer, therefore, judged it expedient to try what
could be effected by negotiation, and sent one of his officers, who understood
something of the Tartar language, to treat with the general of the enemies. The
Tartar chief received the Europeans with great civility, and after having
gently reproached them with their ambition, in coming so far to invade a people
who had never injured them, he consented upon very moderate conditions to their
enlargement: but he insisted upon having their arms delivered up, except a very
few which he permitted them to keep for defense in their return, and upon
retaining a certain number of Europeans as hostages for the performance of the
stipulated articles. Among those who were thus left with the Tartars, Jack
happened to be included, and while all the rest seemed inconsolable at being
thus made prisoners by a barbarous nation, he alone, accustomed to all the
vicissitudes of life, retained his cheerfulness, and prepared to meet every
reverse of fortune with his usual firmness.

The Tartars, among whom Jack was now to reside, constitute several different
tribes or nations which inhabit an immense extent of country both in Europe and
Asia. Their country is in general open and uncultivated, with out cities or
towns, such as we see in England. The inhabitants themselves are a bold and
hardy race of men that live in small tents, and change their place of abode
with the different seasons of the year. All their property consists in herds of
cattle, which they drive along with them from place to place; and upon whose
milk and flesh they subsist. They are particularly fond of horses, of which
they have a small but excellent breed, hardy and indefatigable for the purposes
of war, and they excel in the management of them, beyond what is easy to
conceive. Immense herds of these animals wander loose about the deserts, but
marked with the particular mark of the person or tribe to which they belong.
When they want any of these animals for use, a certain number of their young
men jump upon their horses with nothing but an halter to guide them, each
carrying in his hand a pole with a noose or cord at the end. When they come in
sight of the herd, they pursue the horse they wish to take at full speed, come
up with him in spite of his swiftness, and never fail to throw the noose about
his neck as he runs. They are frequently known to jump upon young horses that
have passed their whole life in the desert, and with only a girt around the
animal's body to hold by, maintain their seat, in spite of all his violent
exertions, until they have wearied him out and reduced him into perfect
obedience. Such was the nation with whom the lot of Jack was now to reside, nor
was he long before he had an opportunity of showing his talents.

It happened that a favorite horse of the chief was taken with a violent
fever, and seemed to be in immediate danger of death. The khan, for so he is
called among the Tartars, seeing his horse grow hourly worse, at length applied
to the Europeans, to know if they could suggest any thing for his recovery. All
the officers were profoundly ignorant of farriery; but when the application was
made to Jack, he desired to see the horse, and with great gravity began to feel
his pulse, by passing his hand within the animal's fore-leg; which gave the
Tartars a very high idea of his ingenuity. Finding that the animal was in a
high fever, he proposed to the khan to let him blood, which he had learned to
do very dexterously in England. He obtained permission to do as he pleased, and
having by great good luck a lancet with him, he let him blood very dexterously
in the neck. After this operation he covered him up, and gave him a warm potion
made out of such ingredients as he could procure upon the spot, and left him
quiet. In a few hours the horse began to mend, and, to the great joy of the
khan, perfectly recovered in a few days. This cure, so opportunely performed,
raised the reputation of Jack so high, that every body came to consult him
about their horses, and in a short time he was the universal farrier of the
tribe. The khan himself conceived so great an affection for him, that he gave
him an excellent horse to ride upon and attend him in his hunting parties; and
Jack, who excelled in the art of horsemanship, managed him so well as to gain
the esteem of the whole nation.



The Tartars, though they are excellent horsemen, have no idea of managing
their horses, unless by violence; but Jack in a short time, by continual care
and attention, made his horse so docile and obedient to every motion of his
hand and leg, that the Tartars themselves would gaze upon him with admiration,
and allow themselves to be outdone. Not contented with this, he procured some
iron, and made his horse-shoes in the European taste; this also was matter of
astonishment to all the Tartars, who are accustomed to ride their horses
unshod. He next observed that the Tartar saddles are all prodigiously large and
cumbersome, raising the horsemen up to a great distance from the back of his
horse. Jack set himself to work, and was not long before he had completed
something like an English hunting saddle, on which he paraded before the khan.
All mankind seem to have a passion for novelty, and the khan was so delighted
with this effort of Jack's ingenuity, that, after paying him the highest
compliments, he intimated a desire of having such a saddle for himself. Jack
was the most obliging creature in the world, and spared no labor to serve his
friends; he went to work again, and in a short time completed a saddle still
more elegant for the khan. These exertions gained him the favor and esteem
both of the khan and all the tribe; so that Jack was an universal favorite and
loaded with presents, while all the rest of the officers, who had never learned
to make a saddle or an horse-shoe, were treated with contempt and indifference.
Jack, indeed, behaved with the greatest generosity to his countrymen, and
divided with them all the mutton and venison which were given him; but he could
not help sometimes observing, that it was great pity they had not learned to
make an horse-shoe instead of dancing and dressing hair.

And now an ambassador arrived from the English settlements, with an account
that all the conditions of the treaty had been performed, and demanding the
restitution of the prisoners. The Tartar chief was too much a man of honor to
delay an instant, and they were all restored; but before they set out, Jack
labored with indefatigable zeal to finish a couple of saddles and a dozen
horse-shoes, which he presented to the khan, with many expressions of
gratitude. The khan was charmed with this proof of his affection, and in return
made him a present of a couple of fine horses, and several valuable skins of
beasts. Jack arrived without any accident at the English settlements, and
selling his skins and horses, found himself in possession of a moderate sum of
money. He now began to have a desire to return to England, and one of the
officers, who had often been obliged to him during his captivity, procured him
a discharge. He embarked, therefore, with all his property, on board a ship,
which was returning home, and in a few months was safely landed at Plymouth.

But Jack was too active and too prudent to give himself up to idleness. After
considering various schemes of business, he determined to take up his old trade
of forging; and for that purpose made a journey into the North, and found his
old master alive, and as active as ever. His master, who had always entertained
an esteem for Jack, welcomed him with great affection, and being in want of a
foreman, he engaged him at a very handsome price, for that place. Jack was now
indefatigable in the execution of his new office; inflexibly honest where the
interests of his master were concerned, and at the same time humane and
obliging to the men who were under him, he gained the affection of all about
him. In a few years, his master was so thoroughly convinced of his merit, that
growing old himself, he took Jack into partnership, and committed the
management of the whole business to his care. He continued to exert the same
qualities now which he had done before, by which means he improved the business
so much, as to gain a considerable fortune, and become one of the most
respectable manufacturers in the country. -- But, with all this prosperity, he
never discovered the least pride or haughtiness; on the contrary, he employed
part of his fortune to purchase the moor where he formerly lived, and built
himself a small but convenient house, upon the very spot where his daddy's hut
had formerly stood. Hither he would sometimes retire from business, and
cultivate his garden with his own hands, for he hated idleness.



To all his poor neighbors he was kind and liberal, relieving them in their
distress, and often entertaining them at his house, where he used to dine with
them, with the greatest affability, and frequently relate his own story; in
order to prove that it is of very little consequence how a man comes into the
world, provided he behaves well, and discharges his duty when he is in it.

THE LITTLE QUEEN.
THERE reigned once upon a time, in a distant island, a good prince who was
passionately beloved by all his subjects. It could not happen otherwise, for he
was their common father. He provided for all their reasonable wants, he
rewarded those who deserved well of their country, and he let none of the
wicked, nor even of the idle, escape without punishment. This amiable monarch
had but one cause of anxiety; Myra, his only child, by no means requited the
attention which had been given to her education. At twelve years of age she was
shamefully ignorant. Her thoughtlessness made her forget every lesson which she
had been taught, and her presumption kept pace with her want of knowledge; of
consequence as she thought herself perfectly accomplished, she despised all
instruction. One day she was indulging her absurd vanity by hinting, that were
she to govern the island, things would be better managed than they were now.
The King, having been informed of his daughter's sentiments, sent for her
immediately. On her coming, he told her, without the least discomposure, That
as she was destined to reign, one day or other, over his kingdoms, he should
wish to know how far her talents were proper for so important a charge. "We
may, if you please," added this good prince, make the experiment without any
delay. Careless as you always were about the lessons which have been given you
in geography, you cannot but know that The Fortunate Island makes a part of my
dominions; it is a small, but well inhabited district; its people are active,
industrious, good tempered, and thoroughly attached to their sovereigns. Go,
child! reign over them, I shall order a yacht to be instantly fitted up to
convey you to your capital. Then making a most profound reverence to the little
sovereign, "Adieu, "madam," said he, with difficulty concealing a smile.

Myra, for some time, thought that the king meant only to divert himself, but
soon found her mistake, and that every thing was preparing for her voyage. She
was even permitted to form a court to her mind, and accordingly she picked out
a dozen of her playfellows to accompany her. "These young people," said she to
her father, are so very rational and sedate, that there can be no need of their
being attended by governesses or tutors. The king, however, thought otherwise,
and ordered the teachers to embark with their pupils. The young sovereign, on
her part, took care there should be abundance of musicians for her balls, and
that a company of players should be provided for the amusement of herself and
her court. On the morn of her departure, she took an affectionate leave of her
father, but the few tears which she shed, were soon dried up by the
consideration of her being going to a place where she should do "just what she
pleased." "The only advice that I shall give you," said the king at parting,
is, that you would follow the advice of Aristus (the governor of the island
over which you are to reign) in every thing of importance. He is a man for whom
I have a high esteem, and with reason, as he is discreet, honest, and humane. I
could wish that you would make him your first minister; I mean, that you should
consult him in every thing, and entrust him with the execution of all your
orders.

This direction no way suited the taste of our young Queen, who wished to have
given that important charge to one of her favorites, Philintus, a tall,
genteel lad, not indeed many years older than herself, but one who, to
tolerable skill in dancing and singing, added the very agreeable talent of
elegant flattery. He was himself as averse to study, and of consequence as
ignorant as his royal mistress; but he had knowledge enough of his own interest
to excite him never to omit assuring her that every one looked on her as a
model of a perfect princess, although he was conscious that, out of her
hearing, she was universally blamed for being so totally unlike her excellent
father, and for spending her whole time in trifling amusements.

As soon as the little sovereign reached her island, she beheld with pleasure
troops of shepherds and shepherdesses, in elegant fancy dresses of rose color
and white, who sung carols in praise of their new Queen, strewed sweet scented
flowers in her path, and presented her with odoriferous nosegays. Myra, charmed
with this specimen of her subjects gallantry, ordered money to be distributed
amongst them; and, under the conduct of Aristus, repaired to a lovely, though
small palace, fitted up for her reception. Fatigued with the voyage, the Queen
and her young court hastened to their repose; but her Majesty forgot not to
order, for the next day, a comedy to be acted, followed by a ball and a
splendid entertainment. On the next morn, Myra and her court amused themselves
by walking into the capital town, which lay not far from the palace. "Observe,"
said Aristus to his sovereign, the air of content which reigns in every face we
meet. "That," said Philintus, we should attribute to the presence of our lovely
Queen. "Without doubt," replied Aristus, they are sensible of that honor; but
I ought to inform you, that their gaiety is chiefly owing to their being
conscious of the excellent government under which they live, and of the wisdom
of those laws by which their King, whom they look upon as their father, governs
the country. "Let us now," said Myra, "extend our walks into the country." They
did so. An orchard, in full bloom, now tempted her to take a nearer view of its
beauty. "What," said she to Aristus, occasions the buzzing sounds which I hear?
"The bees," replied he; a useful tribe of your Majesty's subjects. At that
instant, most unfortunately, one of these animals, not perfectly acquainted
with the respect due to royalty, and disgusted at the Queen's approaching too
near to his hive, settled on her hand, and made her feel his sting! -- Shocking
creatures, these bees! exclaimed Myra; one of them has half killed me! The
presumptuous, ungrateful wretches ought, said Philintus, to be utterly
extirpated. You are right, said the Queen; I will have them destroyed, not on
my own account, but to preserve my poor people from receiving such cruel
wounds, when they are pursuing their occupations in the country. Permit me,
said Aristus, to observe, that these accidents happen but very seldom, and that
the pain which the bees occasion by their stings, is trifling, when compared
with the vast advantage which accrues from their labors; your subjects, madam,
will suffer severely indeed, if they are deprived of that useful creature. --
Here he was interrupted by Philintus, who bursting with laughter, cried out, A
pretty tale you tell us, Aristus! why sure you take us all for children! Suffer
indeed! what! because that nasty insect is kept from stinging them! Make us
believe that, if you can. I will have every be in my kingdom put to death,
said the young Queen with an air of dignity. Possibly, said Aristus, your
Majesty may see cause hereafter to repent of this hasty command. Nevertheless,
repeated Myra, it shall be executed. Aristus retired with a sigh, and Philintus
loudly applauded the mingled humanity and firmness of his infant sovereign.
That evening the Queen entertained herself at the play, and afterward was
present at a ball, which, with a magnificent supper, lasted until two o'clock
in the morning.

Unluckily among the ladies of the bedchamber were two, who, not having reached
their eleventh year, had been used to eat little or no suppers, to take
moderate exercise, and to go to bed early. But the royal banquet had been so
tempting, the ball so charming, and the whole so perfectly new to them, that
they had despised the admonitions of their governesses, who had very naturally
remonstrated against their launching at once into this new system. In
consequence, they were both extremely ill the next morning. The physician
attended, and ordered proper medicines, which they refused to take. They were
permitted by the Queen, they said, to do what they liked best, and they hated
nasty physic. Their complaints, however, increased; they could neither eat,
drink, or sleep, and one of the two felt the attack of a fever. On this the
governesses were obliged to have recourse to the royal authority, and the Queen
having commanded the young ladies to submit to discipline, they took what was
ordered and all went right again.

One day that the young Queen was walking in the garden of her palace, she was
disgusted at the devastation which had been made by caterpillars on the leaves
of the trees. What vile creatures are these! said she to Philintus: Did you
ever see such a piece of work as they have made here? I think, replied the
courtier, that it would be a good deed to root them out of the island, and to
proclaim rewards for those who would undertake to destroy them. What say you to
that, Aristus, said Myra, can my subjects exist without caterpillars? Your
Majesty, replied Aristus, has not forgot the bees, I find, but here the case is
widely different. The caterpillars which have stripped those trees do much
mischief, and are of no one use to society. I am heartily glad, said the Queen,
that we coincide in opinion, for I am determined to have all the caterpillars
in my dominions destroyed; I hate them, nasty creatures! Your Majesty said
Aristus, certainly means to except from this general massacre, that kind of
caterpillar which produces the silkworm. Do but hear him, said Philintus, in
the Queen's ear; that fellow makes a point of contradicting your Majesty in
every thing. Let every caterpillar in my realm be put to death, exclaimed the
piqued sovereign.

I am tired to death, said Myra, one day, of this eternal verdure. These walks
of turf, and these clumps of laurel, though I like them well enough on the
whole, yet being repeated so often, they fatigue my eyes; -- green, and green,
and nothing but green -- Why can I not have a rose-colour bower? Philintus now
turned all his thoughts toward the accomplishment of his sovereign's rational
wish. He had observed in a distant part of the garden an arbor where a
honeysuckle overspread the green frame work. He ordered the leaves to be
stripped off, the wood to be painted rose color, and he covered the whole with
artificial roses hanging by crimson rib-bands. The Queen was enchanted with
this gaudy retreat, and as soon as she saw it, ordered her dinner to be set out
upon that very spot. The sun shone out with great power, and scarce had the
company sat ten minutes at their meal, before some complained of aching heads,
some of dazzled eyes; all lost their appetites, and the whole was a confusion
of heat and glare. Aristus advised the whole party to abandon the flaring
scene, and to refresh their eyes by gazing on the turf in some shady place.
They did so, and all went well again. In consequence, it was settled by her
Majesty in council, that, during the summer, it were better for the leaves of
the trees to be green, than to be rose color.

Myra was so enchanted with the pleasures of her palace, that she gave herself
little trouble as to what passed in the island at large. Her whole time was
employed in schemes for increasing and varying her amusements: sometimes,
indeed, she walked into the country: but her presence no longer appeared to
give any pleasure to her subjects -- there were no more songs in her praise --
no more cries of "Long live our Queen!" "What," said Myra, can occasion this
strange alteration in the behavior of my people? Are they displeased with any
part of my government? If, said Philintus, they are out of humor with such an
amiable sovereign, they do not deserve the honor of her inquiries. This answer
was not entirely satisfactory to the Queen; she was even for some time, buried
in thought; but the efforts of Philintus, (who had observed the gloom on her
countenance,) and the gay turn of his conversation, together with the novelty
of an entertainment which he proposed for the next evening, drove away all
serious thoughts, and sprightliness resumed its reign again. The plan was, that
all the court should appear in pastoral dresses, and that the company should
dance on one of those elegant lawns with which the palace garden abounded. Myra
approved of this plan, only desiring that the habits might be as elegant as the
plan would allow. They can only be made of linen, madam, said one of the
bedchamber-women. "How so,?" said the Queen.

There is not, in your Majesty's dominions, silk enough for one dress.

You must be mistaken. On my taking the government into my hands, I observed
shops without end, well furnished with silk.

It is true, Madam, there were such; but they are now all shut up, and the
owners have left the island.

"And why so, pray?"

Since your Majesty's orders for the destruction of all caterpillars, the silk
manufacture is entirely stopped.

Aye! why, what have those nasty vermin to do with the manufacture of silk?

There is one species of those caterpillars which produces the materials,
without which silk cannot be made; and as the sellers of silk in the towns are
in general connected, by marriage or relationship, with the breeders of the
silkworms, they have determined all together to quit a country where they are
deprived of the means of subsisting.

That very evening the Queen observed with a surprise, which almost equalled
horror, that the apartments of the palace were lighted with tallow candles.
"Heavens!" exclaimed the affronted Sovereign, what means this filthy sight? She
was told that there were no waxen tapers to be found in the isle. "'It Is
impossible!" she cried; "let Aristus be sent for." He appeared. Have you not
told me, Sir, that my island abounded with wax? Madam, it did so, when I gave
you that information. And how happens it that it is not so now? Because since
your Majesty ordered the bees to be extirpated, no more wax is to be found.
Philintus sneered at this reply, and Myra asked with astonishment, What was the
connection between bees and tapers? Without them, said Aristus, the tapers can
not exist, since the bees supply the materials of which the tapers are
composed. And what is become of those who used to get their living by making
those tapers? Poor souls! replied Aristus they are on the point of quitting a
place, where they cannot earn their bread. Alas! added he, were your Majesty to
make, at this time, the tour of your dominions, you would find the face of the
whole country deplorably altered. Philinus would have turned this account into
ridicule, but Myra, by a look, stopped his buffoonery, and retired to her
chamber with a heavy heart.

The next morning she took Aristus with her, and drove into the environs of her
capital. You were too much in the right, she said, when you bade me expect a
deplorable alteration among my people. I hear no more acclamations! no more
songs! but I see the painfullest of sights; crowds of people in rags, begging
their bread, Formerly, said Aristus, no beggars were to be found here; there
was a large building erected for the poor, where the old were maintained, the
sick cured, and all the young folks set to work; but since your Majesty has
allowed twelve to be the age of discretion, many of these children have refused
to be employed, and choosing to wander about the country, without knowing how
to get their bread, they are of course reduced to rags and misery.

The Queen, having given some relief to these wretched objects, proceeded to
ask Aristus, what was become of the crowds of busy people who were used to
throng in the streets of the capital? "for," said she, half the houses seem to
be shut up, and the whole town appears deserted, in comparison of its state
when I first saw it. The minister told her, that there was a mutual dependence
of one trade upon another, and that, in consequence of the departure of the
silk and wax merchants and manufacturers, those who were used to supply that
large body of men with clothes, shoes and stockings, provisions, and every
other accommodation, having now no market for their goods, had shut up their
shops, and were preparing, one and all, for their departure. He added, that it
was much to be feared, that the farmers, who used to bring to the town corn,
hay, butter, eggs, poultry, etc. together with their families, laborers, etc.
would soon follow this example.

Struck with this painful detail, the young Queen, whose goodness of heart was
equal to the thoughtlessness of her head, exclaimed in an agony of distress, Oh
heavens! why did I leave my father's court? why take upon me a task of which I
was so incapable? I suffer severely for my presumption, but at least I will do
no more mischief here. Then turning to Aristus, she begged him to hasten the
preparations for her return to the kingdom of her father. Her orders were
instantly obeyed, and she with her whole court, took leave of the Fortunate
Island, and soon reached the port they wished for. As soon as Myra saw the
King, she threw herself at his feet, bathed in tears. How is this, said he, my
daughter, are you returned already? are you so soon weary of sovereign power?
Alas! Sire! replied the weeping Myra, never was any being more wretched than
your daughter! I have childishly thrown away my own happiness, and that of
those whom you entrusted to my care. The island which I have governed, no
longer deserves the name of Fortunate. I have, by my own mismanagement, reduced
an industrious people to beggary and ruin! but I conjure you, Sire, to order
all my jewels to be instantly sold, that I may, by their means, in some sort
relieve the miseries which my infantine folly has brought upon them. Make
yourself easy, said the good King, soothing his afflicted daughter, the
mischiefs which your want of consideration has caused, are by no means
irreparable. I foresaw that you would make great mistakes in government, and
managed affairs so as to prevent those mistakes from having any very bad
consequences. Those of your subjects, who have by your errors been forced to
quit your isle, have, by the direction of Aristus, found a comfortable retreat
in this kingdom, have been supplied with all necessaries, and will now return
to their own country, with proper materials, to reassume their several trades
and occupations. You have, my beloved Myra, an excellent heart, and in all the
mischief which you have done, you have had the best intention in the world.
This ought to teach you, that princes ought not to trust to their good
dispositions alone, but that they should take counsel with the most intelligent
of their subjects, concerning the measures of their government, and above all,
that they should guard against forming too high an opinion of their own wisdom.
The errors of private persons can only affect a small number of individuals,
but those of sovereigns may ruin nations.

Myra profited by this lesson, and by her own experience. She dedicated, for
the future, a considerable part of her time to study, and forbade Philantus
ever to appear in her presence again.

The NATURAL HISTORY of the BE.
TO give a complete history of this insect in a few pages, which some have
exhausted volumes in describing, and whose nature and properties still continue
in dispute, is impossible. It will be sufficient to give a general idea of the
animal's operations; which, though they have been studied for more than two
thousand years, are still but incompletely known. The account given us by
Reaumur is sufficiently minute; and, if true, sufficiently wonderful: but I
find many of the facts which he relates, doubted by those who are most
conversant with bees; and some of them actually declared not to have a real
existence in nature.

It is unhappy, therefore, for those whose method demands an history of bees,
that they are unfurnished with those materials which have induced so many
observers to contradict so great a naturalist. His life was spent in the
contemplation; and it requires an equal share of attention to prove the error
of his discoveries. Without entering, therefore, into the dispute, I will take
him for my guide; and just mention, as I go along, those particulars in which
succeeding observers have begun to think him erroneous. Which of the two are
right, time only can discover; for my part I have only heard one side, for as
yet none have been so bold as openly to oppose Reaumur's delightful researches.

There are three different kinds of bees in every hive. First, the laboring
bees, which make up the far greatest number, and are thought to be neither male
or female, but merely born for the purposes of labor, and continuing the
breed, by supplying the young with provision, while yet in their helpless
state. The second sort are the drones; they are of a darker color, longer, and
more thick by one third than the former: they are supposed to be the males; and
there is not above a hundred of them, in a hive of seven or eight thousand
bees. The third sort is much larger than either of the former, and still fewer
in number: some assert, that there is not above one in every swarm; but this
later observers affirm not to be true, there being sometimes five or six in the
same hive. These are called queen-bees, and are said to lay all the eggs from
which the whole swarm is hatched in a season.

In examining the structure of the common working be, the first remarkable
part that offers is the trunk, which serves to extract the honey from flowers.
It is not formed, like that of the other flies, in the manner of a tube, by
which the fluid is to be sucked up; but like a besom, to sweep, or a tongue, to
lick it away. The animal is furnished also with teeth, which serve it in making
wax. This substance is gathered from flowers, like honey; it consists of that
dust or farina which contributes to the fecundation of plants, and is molded
into wax by the little animal, at leisure. Every be, when it leaves the hive
to collect this precious store, enters into the cup of the flower, particularly
such as seem charged with the greatest quantities of this yellow farina. As the
animal's body is covered over with hair, it rolls itself within the flower, and
soon becomes quite covered with the dust, which it soon after brushes off with
its own hind legs, and kneads into two little balls. In the thighs of the hind
legs there are to cavities, edged with hair; and into these, as into a basket,
the animal sticks its pellets. Thus employed, the be flies from flower to
flower, increasing its store, and adding to its stock of wax; until the ball,
upon each thigh, becomes as big as a grain of pepper: by this time, having got
a sufficient load, it returns, the best of its way to the hive.

The belly of the be is divided into six rings, which sometimes shorten the
body, by slipping one over the other. It contains within it, beside the
intestines, the honey-bag, the venom-bag, and the sting. The honey-bag is as
transparent as crystal, containing the honey that the be has brushed from the
flowers; of which the greater part is carried to the hive, and poured into the
cells of the honeycomb; while the remainder serves for the bee's own
nourishment: for, during summer, it never touches what has been laid up for the
winter. The sting, which serves to defend this little animal from its enemies,
is composed of three parts; the sheath, and two darts, which are extremely
small and penetrating. Both the darts have several small points or barbs, like
those of a fish-hook, which render the sting more painful, and make the darts
rankle in the wound. Still, however, this instrument would be very slight, did
not the be poison the wound. The sheath, which has a sharp point, makes the
first impression; which is followed by that of the darts, and then the venomous
liquor is poured in. The sheath sometimes sticks so fast in the wound, that the
animal is obliged to leave it behind; by which the be soon after dies, and the
wound is considerably enflamed. It might at first appear well for mankind, if
the be were without its sting: but, upon recollection, it will be found, that
the little animal would then have too many rivals in sharing its labors. An
hundred other lazy animals, fond of honey, and hating labor, would intrude
upon the sweets of the hive; and the treasure would be carried off, for want of
armed guardians to protect it.

From examining the be singly, we now come to consider it in society, as an
animal not only subject to laws, but active, vigilant, laborious, and
disinterested. All its provisions are laid up for the community; and all its
arts in building a cell, designed for the benefit of posterity. The substance
with which bees build their cells is wax: which is fashioned into convenient
apartments for themselves and their young. When they begin to work in their
hives, they divide themselves into four companies: one of which roves in the
fields in search of materials; another employs itself in laying out the bottom
and partitions of their cells; a third is employed in making the inside smooth
from the corners and angles; and the fourth company bring food for the rest, or
relieve those who return with their respective burdens. But they are not kept
constant to one employment; they often change the tasks assigned them: those
that have been at work, being permitted to go abroad; and those that have been
in the fields already, take their places. They seem even to have signs, by
which they understand each other; for when any of them want food, it bends down
its trunk to the be from whom it is expected, which then opens its honey-bag,
and lets some drops fall into the other's mouth, which is at that time opened
to receive it. Their diligence and labor is so great, that, in a day's time,
they are able to make cells, which lie upon each other, numerous enough to
contain three thousand bees.

If we examine their cells, they will be found formed in the exactest
proportion. It was said by Pappus, an ancient geometrician, that, of all other
figures, hexagons were the most convenient; for, when placed touching each
other the most convenient room would be given, and the smallest lost. The cells
of the bees are perfect hexagons: these, in every honeycomb, are double,
opening on either side, and closed at the bottom. The bottoms are composed of
little triangular panes, which, when united together, terminate in a point, and
lie exactly upon the extremities of other panes of the same shape, in opposite
cells. These lodgings have spaces, like streets, between them, large enough to
give the bees a free passage in and out; and yet narrow enough to preserve the
necessary heat. The mouth of every cell is defended by a border, which makes
the door a little less than the inside of the cell, which serves to strengthen
the whole. These cells serve for different purposes: for laying up their young;
for their wax, which in winter becomes a part of their food; and for their
honey, which makes their principal subsistence.

It is well known that the habitation of bees ought to be very close; and what
their hives want, from the negligence and unskilfulness of man, these animals
supply by their own industry: so that it is their principal care, when first
hived, to stop up all the crannies. For this purpose they make use of a
resinous gum, which is more tenacious than wax, and differs greatly from it.
This the ancients called Propolis: it will grow considerably hard in June;
though it will in some measure soften by heat; and is often found different in
consistence, color and smell. It has generally an agreeable aromatic odor
when it is warmed; and by some it is considered as a most grateful perfume.
When the bees begin to work with it, it is soft, but it acquires a firmer
consistence every day; till at length it assumes a brown color, and becomes
much harder than wax. The bees carry it on their hinder legs; and some think it
is met with on the birch, the willow, and poplar. However it is procured, it is
certain that they plaster the inside of their hives with this composition.

If examined through a glass hive, from the hurry the whole swarm is in, the
whole at first appears like anarchy and confusion; but the spectator soon finds
every animal diligently employed, and following one pursuit, with a settled
purpose. Their teeth are the instruments by which they model and fashion their
various buildings, and give them such symmetry and perfection. They begin at
the top of the hive; and several of them work at a time, at the cells which
have two faces. If they are stinted with regard to time, they give the new
cells but half the depth which they ought to have; leaving them imperfect, till
they have sketched out the number of cells necessary for the present occasion.
The construction of their combs, costs them a great deal of labor: they are
made by insensible additions; and not cast at once in a mold, as some are apt
to imagine. There seems no end of their shaping, finishing, and turning them
neatly up. The cells for their young are most carefully formed; those designed
for lodging the drones, are larger than the rest; and that for the queen-bee,
the largest of all. The cells in which the young brood are lodged, serve at
different times for containing honey; and this proceeds from an obvious cause:
every worm, before it is transformed into an aurelia, hangs its old skin on the
partitions of its cell; and thus, while it strengthens the wall, diminishes the
capacity of its late apartment. The same cell, in a single summer, is often
tenanted by three or four worms in succession; and the next season, by three or
four more. Each worm takes particular care to fortify the pannels of its cell,
by hanging up its spoils there: thus, the partitions being lined, six or eight
deep, become at last too narrow for a new brood, and are converted into
storehouses, for honey.

Those cells where nothing but honey is deposited, are much deeper than the
rest. When the harvest of honey is so plentiful that they have not sufficient
room for it, they either lengthen their combs, or build more; which are much
longer than the former. Sometimes they work at three combs at a time; for, when
there are three workhouses, more bees may be thus employed, without
embarrassment.

But honey, as was before observed, is not the only food upon which these
animals subsist. The meal of flowers, of which their wax is formed, is one of
their most favorite repasts. This is a diet which they live upon during the
summer; and of which they lay up a large winter provision. The wax of which
their combs are made, is no more than this meal digested, and wrought into a
paste. When the flowers upon which bees generally feed, are not fully blown,
and this meal or dust is not offered in sufficient quantities, the bees pinch
the tops of the stamina in which it is contained, with their teeth; and thus
anticipate the progress of vegetation. In April and May, the bees are busy,
from morning to evening, in gathering this meal; but when the weather becomes
too hot in the midst of summer, they work only in the morning.

The be is furnished with a stomach for its wax, as well as its honey. In the
former of the two, their powder is altered, digested and concocted into real
wax; and is thus ejected by the same passage by which it was swallowed. Every
comb, newly made, is white: but it becomes yellow as it grows old, and almost
black when kept too long in the hive. Beside the wax thus digested, there is a
large portion of the powder kneaded up for food in every hive, and kept in
separate cells, for winter provision. This is called, by the country people,
bee-bread; and contributes to the health and strength of the animal during
winter. Those who rear bees, may rob them of their honey, and feed them, during
the winter, with treacle; but no proper substitute has yet been found for the
bee-bread; and, without it, the animals become consumptive and die.

As for the honey, it is extracted from that part of the flower called the
nectareum. From the mouth this delicious fluid passes into the gullet: and then
into the first stomach, or honey-bag, which, when filled, appears like an
oblong bladder. Children, that live in country places, are well acquainted with
this bladder; and destroy many bees to come at their store of honey. When a be
has sufficiently filled its first stomach, it returns back to the hive, where
it disgorges the honey into one of the cells. It often happens that the be
delivers its store to some other, at the mouth of the hive, and flies off for a
fresh supply. Some honey-combs are always left open for common use; but many
others are stopped up, till there is a necessity of opening them. Each of these
are covered carefully with wax; so close, that the covers seem to be made at
the very instant the fluid is deposited within them.

Having thus given a cursory description of the insect, individually
considered, and of the habitation it forms, we next come to its social habits
and institutions: and, in considering this little animal attentively, after the
necessary precautions for the immediate preservation of the community, its
second care is turned to the continuance of posterity. How numerous soever the
multitude of bees may appear in one swarm, yet they all owe their original to a
single parent, which is called the queen-bee. It is indeed surprising that a
single insect shall, in one summer, give birth to above twenty thousand young:
but, upon opening her body, the wonder will cease; as the number of eggs
appearing, at one time, amounts to five thousand. This animal, whose existence
is of such importance to her subjects, may easily be distinguished from the
rest, by her size, and the shape of her body. On her safety depends the whole
welfare of the commonwealth; and the attentions paid her by all the rest of the
swarm, evidently show the dependence her subjects have upon her security. If
this insect be carefully observed, she will be seen at times attended with a
numerous retinue, marching from cell to cell, plunging the extremity of her
body into many of them, and leaving a small egg in each. When the queen-bee has
deposited the number of eggs necessary in the cells, the working bees undertake
the care of the rising posterity. They are seen to leave off their usual
employments; to construct proper receptacles for eggs; or to complete those
that are already formed. They purposely build little cells, extremely solid,
for the young; in which they employ a great deal of wax: those designed for
lodging the males, as was already observed, are larger than the rest; and those
for the queen-bees the largest of all. There is usually but one egg deposited
in every cell. A day or two after it is deposited, the worm is excluded from
the shell of the egg, having the appearance of a maggot rolled up in a ring,
and lying softly on a bed of a whitish colored jelly; upon which also the
little animal begins to feed. In the mean time, the instant it appears, the
working bees attend it with the most anxious and parental tenderness; they
furnish it every hour with a supply of this whitish substance, on which it
feeds and lies; and watch the cell with unremitting care. They are nurses that
have a greater affection for the offspring of others, than many parents have
for their own children. They are constant in visiting each cell, and seeing
that nothing is wanting; preparing the white mixture, which is nothing but a
composition of honey and wax, in their own bowels, with which they feed them.
Thus attended, and plentifully fed, the worm, in less than six days time, comes
to its full growth, and no longer accepts the food offered it. When the bees
perceive that it has no further occasion for feeding, they perform the last
offices of tenderness, and shut the little animal up in its cell; walling up
the mouth of its apartment with wax: there they leave the worm to itself;
having secured it from every external injury.

The worm is no sooner left enclosed, but, from a state of inaction, it begins
to labor, extending and shortening its body; and by this means lining the
walls of its apartment with a silken tapestry, which it spins in the manner of
caterpillars, before they undergo their last transformation. When their cell is
thus prepared, the animal is soon after transformed into an aurelia; but
differing from that of the common caterpillar, as it exhibits not only the
legs, but the wings of the future be, in its present state of inactivity.
Thus, in about twenty, or one and twenty days after the egg was laid, the be
is completely formed, and fitted to undergo the fatigues of its state. When all
its parts have acquired their proper strength and consistence, the young animal
opens its prison, by piercing with its teeth the waxen door that confines it.
When just freed from its cell, it is as yet moist, and incommoded with the
spoils of its former situation; but the officious bees are soon seen to flock
round it, and to lick it clean on all sides with their trunks; while another
band, with equal assiduity, are observed to feed it with honey: others again
begin immediately to cleanse the cell that has been just left; to carry the
ordures out of the hive, and to fit the place for a new inhabitant. The young
be soon repays their care, by its industry; for as soon as ever its external
parts become dry, it discovers its natural appetites for labor, and
industriously begins the task, which it pursues unremittingly through life. The
toil of man is irksome to him, and he earns his subsistence with pain; but this
little animal seems happy in its pursuits, and finds delight in all its
employments.

When bees first begin to break their prisons, there are generally above a
hundred excluded in one day. Thus, in the space of a few weeks, the number of
the inhabitants in one hive, of moderate size, becomes so great, that there is
no place to contain the new comers; and they are scarcely excluded from the
cell, when they are obliged, by the old bees, to sally forth in quest of new
habitations. In other words, the hive begins to swarm, and the new progeny
prepares for exile.

While there is room enough in the hive, the bees remain quietly together; it
is necessity alone that compels the separation. Sometimes indeed, the young
brood, with graceless obstinacy, refuse to depart, and even venture to resist
their progenitors. The young ones are known by being browner than the old, with
whiter hair; the old ones are of a lighter color, with red hair. The two
armies are therefore easily distinguishable, and dreadful battles are often
seen to ensue. But the victory almost ever terminates, with strict political
justice, in favor of the veterans, and the rebellious offspring are driven
off, not without loss and mutilation.

In different countries, the swarms make their appearance at different times of
the year, and there are several signs previous to this intended migration. The
night before, an unusual buzing is heard in the hive; in the morning, though
the weather be soft and inviting, they seem not to obey the call, being intent
on more important meditations within. All labor is discontinued in the hive,
every be is either employed in forcing, or reluctantly yielding a submission;
at length, after some noise and tumult, a queen be is chosen, to guard, rather
than conduct, the young colony to other habitations, and then they are
marshalled without any apparent conductor. In less than a minute, they leave
their native abode, and forming a cloud round their protectress, they set off,
without seeming to know the place of their destination; The world before them,
where to choose their place of rest. The usual time of swarming, is from ten in
the morning, to three in the afternoon, when the sun shines bright, and invites
them to seek their fortunes. They flutter for a while, in the air, like flakes
of snow, and sometimes undertake a distant journey, but more frequently are
contented with some neighboring asylum; the branch of a tree, a chimney top,
or some other exposed situation. It is, indeed, remarkable, that all those
animals, of whatever kind, that have long been under the protection of man,
seem to lose a part of their natural sagacity, in providing for themselves. The
rabbit, when domesticated, forgets to dig holes, the hen to build a nest, and
the be to seek a shelter, that shall protect it from the inclemencies of
winter. In those countries, where the bees are wild, and unprotected by man,
they are always sure to build their waxen cells in the hollow of a tree; but
with us, they seem improvident in their choice, and the first green branch that
stops their flight, seems to be thought sufficient for their abode through
winter. However, it does not appear, that the queen chooses the place where
they are to alight, for many of the stragglers, who seem to be pleased with a
particular branch, go and settle upon it; others are seen to succeed, and at
last, the queen herself, when she finds a sufficient number there before her,
goes to make it the place of her head quarters. When the queen is settled, the
rest of the swarm soon follow; and, in about a quarter of an hour, the whole
body seem to be at ease. It sometimes is found, that there are two or three
queens to a swarm, and the colony is divided into parties; but it most usually
happens, that one of these is more considerable than the other, and the bees by
degrees, desert the weakest, to take shelter under the most powerful protector.
The deserted queen does not long survive this defeat; she takes refuge under
the new monarch, and is soon destroyed by her jealous rival. Till this cruel
execution is performed, the bees never go out to work; and if there should be a
queen-bee, belonging to the new colony, left in the old hive, she always
undergoes the fate of the former. However, it must be observed, that the bees
never sacrifice any of their queens, when the hive is full of wax and honey;
for there is at that time, no danger in maintaining a plurality of breeders.

When the swarm is thus conducted to a place of rest, and the policy of
government is settled, the bees soon resume their former labors.

When a hive sends out several swarms in the year, the first is always the
best, and the most numerous. These, having the whole summer before them, have
the more time for making wax and honey, and consequently their labors are the
most valuable to the proprietor. Although the swarm chiefly consists of the
youngest bees, yet it is often found, that bees of all ages compose the
multitude of emigrants, and it often happens, that bees of all ages are seen
remaining behind. The number of them is always more considerable than that of
some populous cities, for sometimes upwards of forty thousand are found in a
single hive. So large a body may well be supposed to work with great
expedition; and in fact, in less than twenty four hours, they will make combs
above twenty inches long, and seven or eight broad. Sometimes they will half
fill their hives with wax, in less than five days. In the first fifteen days,
they are always found to make more wax than they do afterward during the rest
of the year.

Having mentioned the industry of these admirable insects, it will be proper to
say something of the effects of their labor, of that wax and honey, which are
turned by man to such various uses. Bees gather together two kinds of wax, one
coarse and the other fine. The coarser sort is bitter, and with this, which is
called propolis, they stop up all the holes and crevices of their hives. It is
of a more resinous nature than the fine wax, and is consequently better
qualified to resist the moisture of the season, and preserve the works warm and
dry within. The fine wax is as necessary to the animals preservation as the
honey itself. With this they make their lodgings, with this they cover the
cells of their young, and in this they lay up their magazines of honey. This is
made, as has been already observed, from the dust of flowers, which is
carefully kneaded by the little insect, then swallowed, and having undergone a
kind of digestion, is formed into the cells, which answers such a variety of
purposes. To collect this, the animal rolls itself in the flower it would rob,
and thus takes up the vegetable dust with the hair of its body. Then carefully
brushing it into a lump, with its forepaws it thrusts the composition into two
cavities behind the thighs, which are made like spoons to receive the wax, and
the hair that lines them, serves to keep it from falling.

As of wax, there are also two kinds of honey. The white and the yellow. The
white is taken without fire from the honey-combs. The yellow is extracted by
heat, and squeezed through bags, in a press. The best honey is new, thick and
granulated, of a clear transparent white color, of a soft and aromatic smell,
and of a sweet lively taste. Honey made in mountainous countries, is preferable
to that of the valley. The honey made in the spring, is more highly esteemed,
than that gathered in summer, which last is still more valuable, than that of
autumn, when the flowers begin to fade and lose their fragrance.

Of the SILKWORM.
THIS little creature, which only works for itself, has been made of the utmost
service to man; and furnishes him with a covering more beautiful than any other
animal can supply. We may declaim indeed against the luxuries of the times,
when silk is so generally worn; but were such garments to fail, what other arts
could supply their deficiency?

Though silk was anciently brought in small quantities to Rome, yet it was so
scarce as to be sold for its weight in gold; and was considered as such a
luxurious refinement in dress, that it was infamous for a man to appear in
habits of which silk formed but half the composition. It was most probably
brought among them from the remotest parts of the east; since it was, at that
time of which I am speaking, scarcely known even in Persia.

Nothing can be more remote from the truth, than the manner in which their
historians describe the animal by which silk is produced. Pausanius informs us,
that silk came from the country of the Seres, a people of Asiatic Scythia; in
which place an insect, as large as the beetle, but in every other respect
resembling a spider, was bred up for that purpose. They take great care, as he
assures us, to feed and defend it from the weather; as well during the summer's
heat, as the rigours of winter. This insect, he observes, makes its web with
its feet, of which it has eight in number. It is fed, for the space of four
years, upon a kind of paste, prepared for it; and at the beginning of the
fifth, it is supplied with leaves of the green willow, of which it is
particularly fond; it then feeds till it bursts with fat: after which they take
out its bowels, which are spun into the beautiful manufacture so scarce and
costly.

The real history of this animal was unknown among the Romans till the times of
Justinian; and it is supposed, that silkworms were not brought into Europe till
the beginning of the twelfth century; when Roger of Sicily, brought workmen in
this manufacture from Asia Minor, after his return from his expedition to the
Holy Land, and settled them in Sicily and Calabria. From these the other
kingdoms of Europe learned this manufacture; and it is now one of the most
lucrative carried on among the southern provinces of Europe.

The silkworm is now very well known to be a large caterpillar, of a whitish
color, with twelve feet, and producing a butterfly of the moth kind. The cone
on which it spins, is formed for covering it while it continues in the aurelia
state; and several of these properly wound off, and united together, form those
strong and beautiful threads, which are woven into silk. The feeding these
worms, the gathering, the winding, the twisting, and the weaving their silk, is
one of the principal manufactures of Europe; and, as their luxuries increase,
seems every day to become more and more necessary to human happiness.

There are two methods of breeding silkworms; for they may be left to grow, and
remain at liberty upon the trees where they are hatched; or they may be kept in
a place built for that purpose, and fed every day with fresh leaves. The first
method is used in China, Tonquin, and other hot countries; the other is used in
other places where the animal has been artificially propagated, and still
continues a stranger. In the warm climates, the silkworm proceeds from an egg,
which has been glued by the parent moth upon proper parts of the mulberry-tree,
and which remains in that situation during the winter. The manner in which they
are situated and fixed to the tree, keeps them unaffected by the influence of
the weather; so that those frosts which are severe enough to kill the tree,
have no power to injure the silkworm.

The insect never proceeds from the egg till Nature has provided it a
sufficient supply; and till the budding leaves are furnished, in sufficient
abundance, for its support. When the leaves are put forth, the worms seem to
feel the genial summons, and bursting from their little eggs, crawl upon the
leaves, where they feed with a most voracious appetite. Thus they become larger
by degrees; and after some months feeding, they lay, upon every leaf, small
bundles, or cones of silk, which appear like so many golden apples, painted on
a fine green ground. Such is the method of breeding them in the East; and
without doubt it is best for the worms, and least troublesome for the feeder of
them. But it is otherwise in the colder European climates; the frequent changes
of the weather, and the heavy dews of the evenings render the keeping them all
night exposed, subject to so many inconveniences, as to admit of no remedy. It
is true, that by the assistance of nets, they may be preserved from the insults
of birds; but the severe cold weather, which often succeeds the first heats of
summer, as well as the rain and high winds, will destroy them all: and
therefore, to breed them in Europe, they must be sheltered and protected from
every external injury.

For this purpose, a room is chosen, with a south aspect; and the windows are
so well glazed, as not to admit the least air: the walls are well built, and
the planks of the floor exceeding close, so as to admit neither birds nor mice,
nor even so much as an insect. In the middle there should be four pillars
erected, or four wooden posts, so placed as to form a pretty large square.
Between these are different stories made with ozier hurdles; and under each
hurdle there should be a floor, with an upright border all round. These hurdles
and floors must hang upon pullies, so as to be placed, or taken down at
pleasure.

When the worms are hatched, some tender mulberry leaves are provided, and
placed in the cloth or paper box in which the eggs were laid, and which are
large enough to hold a great number. When they have acquired some strength,
they must be distributed on beds of mulberry leaves, in the different stories
of the square in the middle of the room, round which a person may freely pass
on every side. They will fix themselves to the leaves, and afterward to the
sticks of the hurdles, when the leaves are devoured. They have then a thread,
by which they can suspend themselves on occasion, to prevent any shock by a
fall; but this is by no means to be considered as the silk which they spin
afterward in such abundance. Care must be taken that fresh leaves be brought
every morning, which must be strewed very gently and equally over them; upon
which the silkworms will forsake the remainder of the old leaves, which must be
carefully taken away, and every thing kept very clean; for nothing hurts these
insects so much as moisture and uncleanliness. For this reason their leaves
must be gathered when the weather is dry, and kept in a dry place, if it be
necessary to lay in a store. As these animals have but a short time to live,
they make use of every moment, and almost continually are spinning except at
those intervals when they change their skins. If mulberry leaves be difficult
to be obtained, the leaves of lettuce or holyoak will sustain them: but they do
not thrive so well upon their new diet; and their silk will neither be so
copious, nor of so good a quality.

Though the judicious choice, and careful management of their diet, is
absolutely necessary, yet there is another precaution of equal importance,
which is to give them air, and open their chamber windows, at such times as the
sun shines warmest. The place also must be kept as clean as possible; not only
the several floors that are laid to receive their ordure, but the whole
apartments in general. These things well observed, contribute greatly to their
health and increase.

The worm, at the time it bursts the shell, is extremely small, and of a black
color; but the head is of a more shining black than the rest of the body: some
days after, they begin to turn whitish, or of an ash-colored gray. After the
skin begins to grow too rigid, or the animal is stinted within it, the insect
throws it off, and appears clothed anew: it then becomes larger and much
whiter, though it has a greenish cast: after some days, which are more or less,
according to the different heat of the climate, or to the quality of the food
it leaves off eating, and seems to sleep for two days together: then it begins
to stir, and put itself into violent motions, till the skin falls off the
second time, and is thrown aside by the animal's feet. All these changes are
made in three weeks or a month's time; after which it begins to feed once more,
still in its caterpillar form, but a good deal differing from itself before its
change. In a few days time it seems to sleep again; and, when it awakes, it
again changes its clothing, and continues feeding as before. When it has thus
taken a sufficiency of food, and its parts are disposed for assuming the
aurelia form, the animal forsakes, for the last time, all food and society, and
prepares itself a retreat to defend it from external injuries, while it is
seemingly deprived of life and motion.

This retreat is no other than its cone, or ball of silk, which Nature has
taught it to compose with great art; and within which it buries itself, till it
assumes its winged form. This cone or ball is spun from two little longish
kinds of bags that lie above the intestines, and are filled with a gummy fluid,
of a marigold color. This is the substance of which the threads are formed;
and the little animal is furnished with a surprising apparatus for spinning it
to the degree of fineness which its occasions may require. This instrument in
some measure resembles a wire-drawer's machine, in which gold or silver threads
are drawn to any degree of minuteness; and through this the animal draws its
thread with great assiduity. As every thread proceeds from two gum-bags, it is
probable that each supplies its own; which, however, are united, as they
proceed from the animal's body. If we examine the thread with a microscope, it
will be found that it is flatted on one side, and grooved along its length;
from hence we may infer, that it is doubled just upon leaving the body; and
that the two threads stick to each other by that gummy quality of which they
are possessed. Previous to spinning its web, the silkworm seeks out some
convenient place to erect its cell, without any obstruction. When it has found
a leaf, or a chink fitted to its purpose, it begins to wreathe its head in
every direction, and fastens its thread on every side to the sides of its
retreat. Though all its first essays seem perfectly confused, yet they are not
altogether without design: there appears indeed, no order or contrivance in the
disposal of its first threads; they are by no means laid artfully over each
other, but are thrown out at random, to serve as an external shelter against
rain; for nature having appointed the animal to work upon trees in the open
air, its habits remain, though it is brought up in a warm apartment.

Malpighi pretends to have observed six different layers in a single cone of
silk: but what may easily be observed is, that it is composed externally of a
kind of rough cotton-like substance, which is called floss; within the thread
it is more distinct and even; and next the body of the aurelia, the apartment
seems lined with a substance of the hardness of paper, but of a much stronger
consistence. It must not be supposed, that the thread which goes to compose the
cone, is rolled round, as we roll a bottom; on the contrary, it lies upon it in
a very irregular manner, and winds off from one side of the cone, and then from
the other. This whole thread, if measured, will be found about three hundred
yards long; and so very fine, that eight or ten of them are generally rolled
off into one by the manufacturers. The cone, when completed, is in form like a
pigeon's egg, and more pointed at one end than the other; at the smaller end,
the head of the aurelia is generally found; and this is the place that the
insect, when converted into a moth, is generally seen to burst through.

It is generally a fortnight or three weeks before the aurelia is changed into
a moth; but no sooner is the winged insect completely formed, than having
divested itself of its aurelia skin, it prepares to burst through its cone, or
outward prison: for this purpose it extends its head toward the point of the
cone, butts with its eyes, which are rough, against the lining of its cell,
wears it away, and at last pushes forward, through a passage which is small at
first, but which enlarges as the animal increases its efforts for emancipation;
while the tattered remnants of its aurelia skin lie in confusion within the
cone, like a bundle of dirty linen.

The animal, when thus set free from its double confinement, appears exhausted
with fatigue, and seems produced for no other purpose but to transmit a future
brood. It neither flies nor eats; the male only seeking the female, whose eggs
he impregnates; and their union continues for four days, without interruption.
The male dies immediately after separation from his mate; and she survives him
only till she has laid her eggs, which are not hatched into worms till the
ensuing spring.

However, there are few of these animals suffered to come to a state of
maturity; for as their bursting through the cone destroys the silk, the
manufacturers take care to kill the aurelia, by exposing it to the sun, before
the moth comes to perfection. This done, they take off the floss, and throw the
cones into warm water, stirring them till the first thread offers them a clue
for winding all off. They generally take eight of the silken threads together;
the cones still keep under water, till a proper quantity of the silk is wound
off: however, they do not take all; for the latter parts grow weak, and are of
a bad color. As to the paper-like substance which remains, some stain it with
a variety of colors, to make artificial flowers; others let it lie in the
water, till the glutinous matter which cements it is all dissolved: it is then
carded like wool, spun with a wheel, and converted into silk stuffs of an
inferior kind.

EPISTLE to a FRIEND, ON HIS RETURN FROM THE ARMY
AT length, war's bloody banner's furled,
Peace spreads her influence over the world,
You from the martial field retreat,
To seek your old paternal seat,
And, after five years absence, come
Loaded with debts and glory home.
Of tender parents favorite son,
Behold their happiness begun:
No more the Gazette's glorious tale
Now makes their anxious features pale,
Lest on the verdant laurel's stem
The cypress dark should grow for them.
Joyful they hail the morning ray,
And hope expectant gilds the day;
For sure, they cry, ere close of light,
Our absent son will bless our sight.
Till eve they watch with aching eyes,
And the next morn new hopes supplies.
And now the wished for hour draws near,
That drowns in transport every fear;
Blessed comfort of their waning lives,
Their son, their much-loved son arrives! --
On either side your bosoms glow,
And mutual tears of rapture flow;
I see, I see your generous breast
With filial love and joy possessed:
I feel, my friend! that joy impart
Fire to my sympathizing heart,
And bid my artless pen portray
The scenes that fancy's dreams display.
While yet still night, in sable robe,
Broods over our quarter of the globe;
While slumber wraps each laboring breast,
And care herself is soothed to rest,
Alone impatient of delay,
Your thoughts anticipate the day:
You rouse at once from Morpheus' reign
The landlord and his menial train;
The drowsy ostler cries in vain,
" It Is dark, you cannot see your hand:"
Booted and spurred you ready stand,
And mounting swift your eager steed,
Fearless through night and cold proceed.
Soon as Aurora's ruddy ray
Beams forth to cheer you on your way,
I see you sweep, with loosened rein,
Over hill and dale, through wood and plain:
Now gallop down the steep, and now,
Climbing the mountain's loftiest brow,
Bend over the landscape wide your eye,
Anxious your sire's abode to spy:
The fleeting spot eludes your view,
And seems to fly as you pursue. --
Faint on the horizon's farthest mound,
What hill is that with pine-trees crowned?
The well-known landmark strikes your sight;
Your bosom swells with fond delight;
Fancy's vain hope no longer yields:
" Ye much-loved shades! ye blooming fields!
" My eager steps," you cry, "once more
" Your green recesses shall explore."
And now, as with redoubled speed,
Forward you urge your bounding steed,
You see the well-known spire arise,
And point its summit to the skies;
And now, each envious barrier past,
With heartfelt bliss you view at last
The turrets of the your natal dome,
Your parent's venerable home.
Here memory's fond powers dispense
Their influence over each raptured sense.
'Twas here, to pay a mother's care,
You first imbibed the vital air;
Here each paternal art expressed,
To soothe and charm your infant breast,
Taught you in opening youth to prove
The bliss sincere of filial love.
Think how your parents' bosoms burn
To welcome your long-wish'd return;
Torn from their arms by glory's power,
How have they told each tedious hour!
Already to your eyes appear
The faultering voice, the joyful tear.
Beside the road the peasants throng
To see you swiftly pass along;
And bowing as you gallop by,
" It Is the young captain, sure," they cry:
On you their greetings are all lost,
Forward with eager zeal you post;
Tomorrow you will return each bow,
But warmer duties call you now.
Arrived at length, you touch once more
Your father's hospitable door.
The cheerful family surround
The hearth with crackling faggots crowned;
Some friends partake the genial ray,
Nor is the parish priest away.
Of taxes, hay, and war, they chat,
Of news and weather, this and that;
Of the young soldier too they spoke,
When a loud knock the converse broke.
Astonished by a sound so loud,
Around the window quick they crowd.
When screams of joy their bliss declare,
" It Is he, it is Belville come, I swear!"
Your parents, sisters, round you throng,
And transport loosens every tongue:
Your sire exclaims, "Five years are past
" Since I beheld my Belville last:
" Your country called you to the field,
" And I no more her sword could wield:
" Well have thou filled thy father's place,
" Brave scyon of a warlike race:
" Nor shall my arms your steps detain,
" When ever your country calls again."
Over the brave vet'ran's furrowed cheek
The beams of martial ardor break;
And from the eye where courage glows,
The tear of fond affection flows.
With silent joy your mother stands,
And grasps with trembling bliss your hands:
Her present hopes, her future fears,
Call forth alternate smiles and tears;
And in her face those thoughts are shown,
Which anxious mothers feel alone.
Your sisters, too, the transport share,
And, with soft friendship's mildest air,
Demand if still your bosom prove
The fondness of fraternal love.
" How tedious passed," they cry, "the day,
" When our loved brother was away:
" You promised you would often write;
" But the old proverb -- Out of sight" --
Now ardent friendship's kindling joy,
And filial love, your thoughts employ;
And all the feelings of your breast
Are on your blooming cheek expressed:
A thousand questions, fondly made,
By fond caresses are delayed;
Transport forbids your words to flow,
Nor can you answer yes, or no.
And see the ancient dame appears,
The fosterer of your infant years:
" Lord bless me! how young master's grown?
" I scarce should have the Captain known
" Elsewhere, unless I had been told:
" How well he looks in blue and gold!
" Thank Heaven, he has neither maim nor wound,
" But comes again quite safe and sound:
" For war's at best a dangerous choice;
" Good Sirs! how Madam must rejoice!" --
What social bliss! what charming ties!
From parents, country, friends, arise!
May they who scorn their rights to know,
Never feel the transports they bestow;
And far from me and those I love,
That stubborn breast, kind Heaven, remove,
Who meets unmoved a mother's face,
Who tearless feels a friend's embrace;
Nor smiles to see those scenes revered,
Which infant pastimes have endeared.
THE UNIVERSAL PRAYER.
FATHER of all! in every age,
In every clime adored,
By saint, by savage, and by sage,
Jehovah, Jove, or Lord.
Thou Great First Cause, least understood,
Who all my sense confined
To know but this, that thou art good,
And that myself am blind.
Yet gave me in this dark estate
To see the good from ill;
And binding nature fast in fate,
Left free the human will.
What conscience dictates to be done,
Or warns me not to do,
This teach me more than hell to shun,
That, more than heaven pursue.
What blessings thy free bounty gives,
Let me not cast away;
For God is paid when man receives,
TO enjoy is to obey.
Yet not to earth's contracted span
Thy goodness let me bound,
Or think thee Lord alone of man,
When thousand worlds are round.
Let not this weak unknowing hand
Presume thy bolts to throw,
Or deal damnation round the land,
On each I judge thy foe.
If I am right, O teach my heart
Still in the right to stay!
If I am wrong, thy grace impart,
To find the better way.
Save me alike from foolish pride,
Or impious discontent;
At aught thy wisdom has denied,
Or aught thy goodness lent.
Teach me to feel another's woe,
To hide the fault I see;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
Mean though I am, not wholly so,
Since quickened by thy breath;
O lead me wheresoe'er I go,
Through this day's life or death.
This day be bread and peace my lot;
All else beneath the sun
Thou know if best bestowed, or not,
And let thy will be done.
To thee whose temple is all space,
Whose altar, earth, sea, skies;
One chorus let all beings raise!
All nature's incense rise!
THE HISTORY OF PHILIP QUARLL.
INTRODUCTION.
THE resources of the human mind in struggling against misfortunes are never so
well understood, as in situations of distress and difficulty. Nothing is so
feeble, nothing so helpless, as a being that has been accustomed to subsist by
the labor of others, without the least exertion. This is one of the
disadvantages attending a state of refinement and civilization. Mankind forget
the simple dictates of reason and nature, and make a thousand pernicious
indulgences necessary to their ideas of happiness. One man imagines that it is
impossible to transport himself from place to place, without the assistance of
other animals, who are to relieve him from the fatigue of using his own legs;
another, that it is impossible to supply his hunger without a splendid table,
covered with the productions of every climate; a third cannot sleep unless upon
beds of down, and in a palace. Thus are a thousand things made necessary to our
happiness, which have no natural connection with it, and our lives are consumed
in the acquisition of superfluous trifles. Our vanity, ever ingenious to
torment us, renders us incapable of repose, and prompts us to be continually
making useless comparisons with all around.

Surely, in this respect, the uncultured Savage that inhabits the woods, and
asks no more than a skin to repel the winds of winter, an hut to defend him
from the storms, and a moderate quantity of the coarsest food, is happier far
than we. He views the whole detail of luxury with indifference and contempt,
and prefers his native woods and plains to all the magnificence of our cities;
nor would the most effeminate native of our capital be more mortified to
inhabit the rudest forests, than he to exchange them for the endless restraints
and ceremonies, which we submit to in civilized society. He sleeps as sound
upon a bed of grass and leaves, and gratifies his hunger as satisfactorily with
roasted corn, or millet, as a rich and indolent citizen can do with all the
accumulated inventions of arts and manufactures. But in the entire possession
of all his bodily faculties, how great is the superiority of the Savage! The
inhabitant of cities, pale, feeble, and bloated, drags on a tedious existence
with difficulty, under the encumbrance of an hundred diseases, to which his
intemperance has subjected him. Before half his life is run out, we frequently
behold him incapable of using his limbs; and that idleness, which was at first
voluntary, becomes inevitable, from the imbecility he has contracted. In vain
would the beautiful revolution of the seasons attract his notice, or call him
out to share the common blessings which nature dispenses to all her uncorrupted
offspring. Neither the care of his own necessary affairs, the defense of his
country, nor even fears for his own personal safety, can any longer animate him
to the smallest exertion; and should he not be in a situation to buy the
assistance of others, he must remain for ever attached to one spot, like a
muscle or an oyster. How different from this is the life of an American Indian,
or a Tartar! Accustomed from his infancy to contend with dangers and
difficulties, he becomes hardened against all the vicissitudes of nature,
against all the attacks of fortune. Wherever the earth extends her surface, he
finds a bed; the forest affords him all the shelter he demands; and he can
every where procure, by his own industry, sufficient food to supply his wants.
In the use of his limbs, and the full enjoyment of all his natural powers, he
is not exceeded by the very beasts that fly before him. Such are all the
uncivilized nations with which we were formerly acquainted; such are those
which are lately added to our knowledge by modern discoveries.

But the most extraordinary instances of the exertions of human beings in
difficult situations, are to be found in the lives of such men, as have been
compelled by shipwreck to remain for several years on uninhabited islands.
Deprived in an instant of all the advantages and support which we derive from
mutual assistance, they have been obliged to call forth all the latent
resources of their own minds. From a contemplation of these we are enabled to
form some ideas of the wonderful powers of the human constitution, when
properly stimulated to action by necessity. The following narrative, whether
real or fictitious, seems to be admirably adapted to the illustration of this
subject, and therefore we shall make no apology for re-printing it in this
collection.

FRONTISPIECE, page 97.
It Is with content QUARLL lives, is truly blessed,
Has naught to dread, nor is with aught distressed;
In soft repose, he empire does disdain,
Free from disquiet, solitude's his gain.


THE HISTORY OF PHILIP QUARLL.
PHILIP QUARLL was an English sailor, who assisted to navigate a ship in the
southern seas of America. During his voyage, they were assailed by such a
violent tempest, which lasted, without intermission, for two days and nights,
that the captain and most experienced mariners began to despair of the safety
of the ship. In this exigency, Quarll, being bold and active, took a hatchet in
his hand, and ran up the shrouds, by the captain's order, to cut away the
mainyard, which they could not lower; but by the time he had mounted, there
came a sea, which dashed the ship against a rock, and, with the violence of the
motion, flung Quarll, who was astride upon the mainyard, on the top of the
rock, where, having the good fortune to fall into a clift, he was secured from
being washed back again into the sea and drowned, as all the rest were that
belonged to the ship.

Quarll, in a dismal condition, remained the succeeding night in the clift,
being continually beaten with the dashing back of the sea, and being both
bruised and numbed, pulled off his clothes, which were dripping wet, over
fatigued, lays himself down on the smoothest place of the rock he could find,
being quite spent with the hardship he had undergone, and slept while his
clothes were drying.

His sleep, though very profound, was not refreshing: the danger he had been
lately in, so ran in his mind, that death was ever before his eyes, and
constantly disturbed his rest: but nature, which wanted repose, would be
supplied. Having slept a few hours, he awakes almost as much fatigued as
before, and faint for want of nourishment, having taken none for thirty-six
hours before: so, having looked upon his clothes, which he perceived were not
quite dry, he turned the other side to the sun, and laid himself down to sleep
again: but still nothing but horror entered his mind.

When he awoke, he was very much terrified with his dreams, and stared about
him in a frighted manner, expecting every minute some creature to devour him;
but, taking a little courage, put on his clothes, which by this time were quite
dry. He then looks about him; but, alas! could see nothing but the dreadful
effects of the late tempest; dead corpses, broken planks, and battered chests
floating; and such sights as at once filled him with terror and grief.

Turning from those shocking objects, which presented to his eyes the dreadful
death he so lately had escaped, he sees on the other side, the prospect of one
more terrible, hunger and thirst, attended with all the miseries that can make
life burdensome. Being seized with the terror of the threatening evil, he
turns again toward the sea, and looking on the dead corpses, which the sea now
and then drove to the rock, and back again, Oh! that I was like one of you,
said he, past all dangers! I have shared with you in the terrors of death: why
did I not also partake with you in its relief? But why should I complain? and
have so much reason to be thankful! Had I been cut off, when the cares of
saving this worthless carcass intercepted me from seeking the salvation of my
soul, I should not have had the present opportunity of taking care of it. So,
having returned thanks for his late deliverance, he resigns himself to
Providence, on whom he fully relies; climbs up the rock, and being come to the
top, sees land on the inside, bearing both trees and grass: Heaven be praised!
said he: I shall not perish upon these barren rocks: so made a shift to go down
to it, the weather then being calm.

Being come to the other side of the rock, he finds at the bottom of it a
narrow lake, which separated it from the land: therefore, pulling off his
clothes, the water being but shallow, he wades over with them in his arms; and
dressing himself, walks up a considerable way in the island, without seeing any
human creature, or perceiving any sign of its being inhabited, which struck a
great damp to his spirits. He walks it over and over, cross-ways and long-ways;
yet could see nothing but monkeys, strange beasts, birds, and fowls, such as he
had never seen before.

Having ranged himself weary, he sat down under a cluster of trees, that made
an agreeable arbor. The place being pleasant and cool, made, as it were, for
repose, and he being still very much fatigued, prompted him to lie down and
sleep, during which, his mind is continually alarmed with the frightful aspect
of grim death. Sometimes, he fancies himself striving with the rolling waves,
stretching out his arm to catch hold of a plank tossing by; which, just come
at, is beaten back by the roaring billows, whose terrible noise pronounces his
death. At other times, he thinks himself astride upon a piece of a mast,
laboring to keep himself on, and of a sudden washed away, and sunk down by a
bulkey wave; on every side of him men calling for help; others spent and past
speaking; here some floating that are already perished, and there others
expiring; thus, in every object, seeing his approaching fate.

Being awaked out of that irksome and uneasy sleep, he falls into as anxious
and melancholy thoughts: I have, said he, escaped being drowned, but how shall
I avoid starving? here is no food for man. But why should I despair? Cannot I
eat grass for a few days? by which time, Providence, which has hitherto
protected me, may raise me some means to get from hence. So, being entirely
resigned, he walks about to see the island, which he found surrounded with
rocks, at the bottom of which there was a small lake, which was fordable in
most places, so that he could with ease wade over to the rock; which he did at
every side of the island, to see if he could perceive any ship, whereby he
might get away: but, seeing none, and it drawing toward night, he returns, and
employs the remainder of the day in looking for the most convenient place for
him to pass away the approaching night; and, having fixed upon one of the
highest trees, he gets up as far as he well could, fearing some wild beast
might devour him if he slept below; where, having returned thanks to Heaven for
his late great deliverance, he commits himself to its care; then settles, and
falls to sleep, and slept till hunger awaked him in the morning, having dreamt
over night of abundance of victuals, which he would fain have come at, but was
kept off by a cross cook, who bid him go and fish for some. To which he
answered, that he was ship-wrecked, and had nothing to fish withal. "Well
then," said the cook to him again, go where thou wast like to lose thy life,
and there thou shall find wherewithal to support it.

Being awaked, he makes reflections upon his dream, which he imagined might
proceed from the emptiness of his stomach, being customary for people to dream
of victuals when they go to bed hungry. But, driven by necessity, and led by
curiosity, he went to the same side of the rock he had been cast upon; where,
having stood several hours without seeing shipping, or aught that might answer
his dream, the air coming from the sea being pretty sharp, and he faint, having
taken no manner of food for near three days, he gave over all hopes of relief.
Thus submitting himself to the will of Heaven, which he supposed decreed a
lingering death to punish him for his past sins, he resolves to return where he
lay the night before, and there wait for his doom; but being stopped by a
sudden noise which issued from a creek in the rock, not far from where he
stood, he had the curiosity to go and see what occasioned it.

Being come to the place he heard the noise proceed from, he sees a fine large
codfish, near six feet long, dabbling in a hole in the rock, where the late
storm had cast it.

One under condemnation of death, and just arrived at the place of execution,
could not be more rejoiced at the coming of a reprieve, than he was at the
sight of this fish, having felt several sick qualms, forerunners of the death
he thought he was doomed to. Heaven be praised! said he, here is subsistence
for several days!

So, having taken off both his garters, he gets into the hole where the fish
lay, and having run them through its gills, he hauls it out, and drags it after
him, being heavy, and he very weak. Going along, he finds several oysters,
muscles, and cockles, in his way, which the sea had cast up and down the rock;
and having a knife about him, he sat down and ate a few; so refreshed himself,
his spirits being exhausted for want of food. This small nutriment very much
recruited his decayed strength, and the thoughts of his supply of provision
having dispersed the dull ideas his late want had bred in his mind, he
cheerfully takes his fish, which he drags with much more vigor than before;
and filling his pocket with salt that was congealby the sun, which he found in
the concavities of the rock, away he goes to the place where he lay the night
before, in order to dress some of the cod-fish; where being come, he picks up a
parcel of dry leaves, and with his knife and a flint struck fire, and kindled
them: then getting together a few sticks, made a fire presently, and broiled a
slice of his fish; of which he ate so heartily, that it overcame his stomach,
being grown weak with fasting. Thus sick, and out of order, he applies to the
recourse of the feeble, which was lying down; and having much fatigued and
harrassed himself with hauling the heavy fish up and down the rock, he fell
asleep until the next morning.

Having slept quietly the remainder of the night, he awoke in the morning
pretty fresh and hearty, but anxious about his future destiny; for though he
might for a while subsist upon fish, wherewith he might be supplied by the sea,
yet he could not imagine which way he could be furnished with clothes and bed
against the winter; for want of which he must miserably perish with cold,
unless supplied by some such dismal accident as exposed him to the want
thereof, which he heartily wishes and prays may never happen.

Having made these considerations, he, on his knees, returns kind Providence
his hearty thanks for all its mercies that had been extended to him; begging
the continuance of its assistance. Then, watching the opportunity of getting
away from that melancholy place, he goes to the other side of the rock, to try
if he could perceive any shipping in sight.

The wind being pretty high, fed his hopes, that each succeeding hour would
gratify his wishing look, with that object the preceding could not bring forth:
but he was disappointed. The night approaching, kept back all probability for
that time; however, depending on better success the next day, he returns whence
he came: and being hungry, makes a fire, and broils another slice of the fish,
then lays the rest upon broad green leaves, and strews salt thereon to keep it
from spoiling, and then goes to rest; and as he lay undisturbed the night
before under the trees, and much more easy than at top, he ventured again,
committing himself to the care of Providence.

He slept in safety that night; but with the returning morning, all his
anxieties were renewed, and he determined to lose no time in providing, as well
as he could, for all his necessities. Accordingly, first he begins to think of
making himself an house to preserve him from the injuries of the weather: but
having nothing to make it of, nor any instrument but a knife, which could be of
little service to him, he resolves to go to that part of the rock where he was
shipwrecked, to see if he could discover any thing among the wreck that might
be serviceable to him: and therefore takes a branch of a tree along with him,
and coming to the place, he strips himself and goes into the water, (the water
being low, discovering the tops of several sharp-pointed rocks), and gropes
along with his staff for sure footing, wading as high as his chin, diving to
the bottom frequently, and feeling about with his hands. This he continued
doing for almost two hours, but to no purpose, not daring to go out of his
depth; for he well knew that he could do little good there, because he could
discover no part of the ship, not so much as the mast, or any of the rigging,
but fancied she lay in some deep hole, where it was impossible to get at her.

Thus despairing, and fretting and teazing himself, he calls to mind that he
had a hatchet in his hand when he was cast away, and thought probably it might
lie in that clift of the rock into which he was thrown; thither he went, and
looking about, perceived something like the handle of a hatchet, just above the
surface of the water, at the bottom of the rock; and going down to it, took it
up; which, to his great joy, proved to be the very thing he wanted.

Having got his tool, he dresses himself, and goes on to the island again,
intending to cut down some trees to make himself a hut; looking about,
therefore, for the properest plants, and taking notice of a sort of trees,
whose branches, bending to the ground, took root, and became a plant, he
thought they might be the fittest for this purpose, and cut a sufficient parcel
of them to make his barrack; which was full business for him that day.

The next morning, having paid his usual devotion, he walks out again to look
for a pleasant and convenient place to make his hut or barrack upon. He walked
several hours, and could find none more sheltered from the cold winds than that
where he already lay, being in the middle of the island, well fenced on the
north and east sides with trees, which stood very thick. The place being fixed
upon, he hews down some trees that grew in his way, and clears a spot of ground
about twelve feet square, leaving one tree standing at each corner; and, with
the young plants he provided the day before, filled the distance between quite
round, setting them about six inches asunder, leaving a larger vacancy for the
door. His enclosure being made, he bends the branches at the top from both
sides, and weaves them across one another, making a cover to it, which being
something too thin, he laid other branches over, till they were grown thicker.
Having finished the top, he goes about closing the sides; for which purpose,
taking large branches, he strips off their small twigs, and weaves them between
the plants as they do for sheep-pens, then made a door after the same manner.



His barrack being finished, which took him up fifteen days hard work, "Now,"
said he, here is a house, but where is the furniture? This, indeed, may keep
the weather from me, but not the cold. The ground on which I do and must lie,
is hard, and, doubtless, in the winter, will grow damp, which, with want of
covering, may occasion agues and fevers, the cholic and rheumatism, and twenty
racking distempers, which may cause me to repent my having escaped a milder
death.

In this great consternation and perplexity, he goes to see if he could spy any
shipping riding within sight of the island. As he was walking along, full of
heavy and dull thoughts, which weighed his looks to the ground, he happened to
find a sort of high grass, that grows but here and there, round some particular
sort of trees, of which he never took notice before. Heaven be praised! said
he, I have found wherewithal to keep my poor body from the ground, whilst I am,
by Providence, doomed to remain here. So passes on, intending at his return to
cut down a sufficient quantity of it to make mats that might serve him instead
of bed and bed-cloaths.

Having looked himself almost blind, without seeing the least prospect of what
he desired, he concludes upon going to cut the grass which he stood in such
want of, and spread it to dry, whilst the weather was yet warm. That piece of
work kept him employed the remainder of the day, and best part of the
succeeding, having nothing but a pocket-knife to cut withal. That work being
done, wanting a tool to spread and turn his grass, he takes a branch off the
next tree, which, having stripped of all the small ones about it, all but part of
that at the top, made a tolerable fork. Thus, being equipt for hay-making, he
went on with his work; and as he was at it, he saw, at some distance, several
monkeys as busy as himself, scratching something out of the ground, which they
eat in part upon the spot, and carried the rest to their home.

His hopes that those roots might be for his use, those creatures being
naturally dainty, eating nothing but what men may, made him hasten to the place
he saw them scratching at, that by the herb they they bear (which they tore
off), he might find out the root.

Having, by the leaves which he picked off the ground, found some of the same,
he digs them up, and carried them to his barrack; where he broiled a slice of
fish, and in the ashes roasted them, which cat something like chestnuts, done in
the same manner.

This new found-out eatable much rejoiced him. He returned his hearty thanks to
kind Providence, that had put him in a way to provide himself with bread, and
that of a most delicious kind. As soon, therefore, as he had dined, he went out
on purpose to dig up a good quantity: but, as he was going to the place where
he had taken notice they grew pretty thick, he sees a tortoise, of about a foot
over, crawling before him: "Heaven be praised!" said he, here is what will
supply me both with victuals and utensils to dress it in. He ran, therefore,
and turned it on its back, to keep it from getting away, whilst he went for his
hatchet, that he might cut the bottom shell from the top, in order to make a
kettle of the deepest, and a dish of the flat part.

Being tired of cod-fish, he dresses the tortoise, an animal seldom eaten but
upon extremity, the flesh thereof often giving the flux: nevertheless, he
ventured upon it, and liked it extremely, some part of it eating very much like
veal; which at that time was a very great novelty to him, having eaten no fresh
meat for a long time before.

Happening to eat of that part of the tortoise which is the most seeding and
least hurtful, he was in no wise discomposed; but having boiled it all, he laid
by the remainder, to eat now and then between his fish.

Being provided with a boiling utensil, he often had change, by means of those
admirable roots so lucikly discovered; some of which he roasted for bread,
others he boiled with saltcod. This, in a great measure, mitigated his
misfortune, and softened the hardship he lay under; so that, seeing but little
prospect of changing his present condition, by getting away from thence yet a
while, he thinks on means to make it as easy as possible whilst he remained in
it; for, having projected a bed, and taking the grass, which by that time was
dry, he falls to work; and a mat being the thing concluded upon, he twists his
hay into ropes, the bigness of his leg; then he cuts a pretty number of sticks,
about two feet long, which he drives into the ground, ten in a row, and near
four inches asunder, and opposite to them such another row at six or seven feet
distance from the first, which made the length of his mat; then having fastened
one end of his rope to one of the corner sticks, he brings it round the other
corner stick, and so to the next at the other end, till he has laid his frame;
then he weaves across shorter ropes of the same, in the manner they make
pallions on board ships with old cable ends. When he had finished his mat, he
beat it with a long stick, which made it swell up; and the grass being of a
soft cottony nature, he had a warm and easy bed to lie on.

The comfort and pleasure he found on his soft mat (being grown sore with lying
on the ground for a space of a month or more) so liberally gratified him for
the time and labor he had bestowed in making it, that it gave him
encouragement to go about another, a covering being the next necessary wanted;
for though the weather was as yet pretty warm, and he in a great measure
seasoned by the hardship he had gone through; yet the winter approaching, and
the present season being still favorable for him to make provision against it,
he goes and cuts more grass, which being made ready for use, he lengthens his
loom, to allow for rolling up at one end, instead of a bolster, and makes it
thicker than the first, which he intends, in cold weather, shall lie upon him
instead of blankets.

Being provided with the most necessary furniture he wanted, he thinks on more
conveniences, resolving to make himself a table to eat his victuals upon, and a
chair to sit on. Thus, having cut several sticks about four feet long, he
drives them in a row a little way in the ground, then takes smaller, which he
interweaves between; having made the top, he sets it upon four other sticks,
forky at the upper end, which he stuck in the ground at one side of his
barrack, to the height of a table: this being done, he cuts four more branches,
such as he judged would do best for the seat and back of a chair, which he also
drove in the ground near his table; and having twisted the branches, which grew
to them, with each other, from back to front, and across again, he weaves
smaller between, bottoming his seat; which completes the furniture of his
habitation.

That care being over, another succeeds, of a far greater moment: Here is a
dwelling, said he, to shelter me from the weather, and a bed to rest this poor
body of mine; but where is food to support it? Here I have subsisted near one
month upon a fish, which the same dreadful storm, that took away forty lives,
sent me to maintain my own. Well, since kind Providence has been pleased to
preserve my life preferable to so many, who fatally perished in that dismal
accident, I am bound, in gratitude, to hold it precious; and since my fish is
almost gone, and I am not certain of more, I must by degrees bring myself to
live upon roots, which I hope will never be wanting, being the natural product
of this island: so I must eat of the small remnant of my fish but now and then,
to make it hold out the longer. Dainties or plenty were not allotted for him
that was doomed to slavery, but labor and hard living; and, if I meet here the
latter, Heaven be praised, I have escaped the worse; I can take my rest, and
stand in no dread of any severe inspector or taskmaster.

Now being entirely reconciled to the state of life, Providence, on whom he
fully depended, had been pleased to call him to, he resolves to make provision
of those excellent roots; and with his hatchet he cuts a piece of a tree,
wherewith he makes a shovel, in order to dig them up with more case: with this
instrument he went to the place where he observed they grew thickest, which
being near the monkeys' quarters, they came down from off their trees in great
numbers, grinning as if they would have flown at him; which made him stop
awhile. He might, indeed, with the instrument in his hand, have killed several,
and perhaps dispersed the rest; but would not: "Why," said he, "should I add
barbarity to injustice? It is but natural and reasonable for all creatures to
guard and defend their own: this was given them by nature for food, which I am
come to rob them of: and since I am obliged to get of them for my subsistence,
if I am decreed to be here another season, I will set some in a place distant
from theirs for my own use."

Having stood still a considerable time, those animals, seeing he did not go
forwards, each went and scratched up for itself, afterward retiring; giving
him the opportunity to dig up a few for himself: and as he was not come to the
place where they grew thick, he laid them in small heaps as he dug them up;
while those sly creatures would, whilst he was digging up more, come down from
the trees where they stood hid among the leaves, and steal them away; which
obliged him to be contented for that time with as many as his pockets would
hold, resolving to bring something next time which would contain a larger
quantity; and fearing those animals, which are naturally very cunning, should
dig them up, and hide them, he comes early the morning following to make his
provision; and for want of a sack to put them in, he takes his jacket, which he
buttons up, and ties at the sleeves; and as he had observed, that every root
had abundance of little off-sets hanging at it by small fibers, he pulled off
his shirt also, of which he makes another sack, to put them in.

Being naked, all but his breeches, and the day being pretty hot, he thought he
had as good pull them off too, and fill them, his jacket being but short, and
therefore holding but few; taking, therefore, his bundle in one arm, and having
the shovel in the other hand, he goes to the place he intended to go the day
before; and expecting to find the same opposition as he did then, he brought
with him some of the roots he had dug up the preceding day, in order to throw
them amongst those animals, and so quiet them; but to his great wonder, and as
great satisfaction, those creatures, which the time before had opposed him with
noise and offensive motions, let him now pass by quietly, without offering to
meddle with any when dug up, though he had laid them up by heaps in their way,
and stood at a considerable distance from them.

This surprising reverence from those creatures set him upon deep reflections on
what could be the cause thereof; whether it might not proceed from the
proximity of their shape and his: "but, then," said he, "my stature and color
of skin is so different from theirs, that they cannot but distinguish I am not
of their kind: no, it must be a remnant of that awe, entailed by Nature upon
all animals, to that most noble and complete masterpiece of the creation,
called Man, which, now appearing in the state he was first created in, and
undisguised by clothes, renews an image of that respect he has forfeited by his
fatal transgression, which ever since obliged him to hide the beauty of his
fabric under a gaudy disguise, which often renders him ridiculous to the rest
of mankind, and generally obnoxious to all other creatures; making a pride of
what he ought to be ashamed of. Well, adds he, since my clothes bred the
antipathy, I will remove that cause, which will suit both the nature of those
animals, and my own circumstances." From that time he resolves to go naked,
till the hardness of the weather obliged him to put something on.

Having picked up a sufficient quantity of off-sets to stock about two acres of
land, he returns home, leaving behind him a considerable quantity of roots dug
up for those poor animals, who attended him all the time he was at work,
without offering to touch one till he was gone.

Being come home, he fixes upon a spot of ground near his habitation, and digs
it up as well as he could with his wooden instrument, in order to sow his seed;
which having compassed in about twenty days, he implores a blessing upon his
labor, and leaves it to time to bring it forth. Thus having finished the most
necessary work about his barrack, he resolves to take a more particular view of
the island, which till then he had not time to do; and taking a long staff in
his hand, he walks to the lake, which parts the land from the rock, and goes
along the side of it quite round the island, finding all the way new subjects
of admiration: on the left hand stood a rampart made of one solid stone,
adorned by nature with various forms and shapes, beyond the power of art to
imitate; some parts challenging a likeness to a city, and clusters of houses,
with here and there a high steeple standing above the other buildings: another
place claiming a near resemblance to a distant fleet of shipping, with their
respective signals flying, coming into port: farther, it bears comparison with
the dull remains of some sumptuous edifice, ruined by the often repeated shocks
of time, inciting the beholders to condolence for the loss of its former
beauty. At some distance from thence the prospect of a demolished city is
represented to the sight: in another place large stones, like small mountains,
laid as it were, a-top of one another, impress the mind with an idea of the
tower of Babel; and on the right hand a most pleasant land, covered with
beautiful green grass, like chamomile, and here and there a cluster of trees,
composing most agreeable groves, amongst a vast number of fine lofty trees, of
diverse heights and shapes, which stood more distant, whose irregularity added
to the delightfulness of the place.

As he was walking on, admiring all these wonderful works of nature, having
caught cold (not being used to go naked), he happened to sneeze opposite to a
place in the rock, which hollowed in after the manner of the inside of some
cathedral, and was answered by a multitude of different voices issuing from
that place. The agreeableness of the surprise induced him to rouse those echoes
a second time, by giving a loud hem; which was, like his sneezing, repeated in
different tones, but all very harmonious; again he hemmed, and was so delighted
with the repetition, that he could have spent hours in the hearing of it. But
why should I, said he, waste those melodious sounds, so sit to relate the
Almighty's wonderful works, and set forth his praise? Immediately he sang
several psalms and hymns with as much emulation and devotion, as if he had been
in company with numbers of skilful and celebrated choristers.

Having spent a considerable time there with much pleasure, he proceeds in his
walk, being resolved to make that his place of worship for the future, and
attend it twice a day constantly.

About three or four hundred paces farther, having turned on the other side of
a jetting out part of the rock, he was stopped a second time by another
surprising product of nature; a large stone, growing out of the rock, advancing
quite over the lake at the bottom of it, representing something of a human
shape, out of the breast whereof issued a fountain of exceeding clear water, as
sweet as milk; and, when looked at fronting, was like an antique piece of
architecture, which in old times they built over particular springs; and on the
other side appeared as if springing from the nostrils of a sea horse. These
three so very different and yet rightly compared likenesses, being offered by
one and the same unaltered object, made him curious to examine what parts of
every resemblance helped to make the others; and having spent a considerable
time in the examination, he found every thing, which the front had likeness of,
was employed in making the side representation, by being in some places
shortened, and others lengthened, according to the point of sight.

Being satisfied about that subject, he enters upon another as puzzling: the
basin in which the fountain ran, which was about five yards distant from whence
the water did spring, being but about nine feet over every way, without any
visible place to evacuate its over complement, and yet keeping the same height,
without dashing or running over, although the stream that fell into it ran as
big as his wrist. Having a long time searched into the cause, without any
satisfaction, he conjectures it must make its way out somewhere under ground;
so went on, till he came to the place he had begun his march at, which ended
that day's work.

Having been round the island, which, to the best of his judgment. was about
ten or eleven miles in circumference, of an oblong form, going in and out in
several places, extending from north to south, the south end near twice as
broad as the opposite; he resolves to employ the next day in viewing the inside.

So the next morning he walks along the land, which he found very level,
covered with a delightful green grass, and adorned with trees of diverse sorts,
shapes and height, inhabited with several sorts of curious singing birds, of
various colors and notes, which entertained him with their melodious harmony.
In some places stood a cluster of trees, composing agreeable and delightful
groves, proceeding from only one main body, whose lower branches, being come to
a certain length, applied to the earth for immediate nourishment, as it were,
to ease the old stem that produced them; and so became a plant, and did the
same.

Having for some time admired the agreeableness and curiosity of the plant, by
which nature seemed to give human kind instructions; and looking about, if
perchance he could find any thing in his way for his own proper use, he took
along with him a sample of every different herb he thought might be eatable.
Crossing the island in several places, he comes at a most delightful pond,
about two hundred yards in length, and one hundred and fifty wide, with fine
trees spreading their branchy limbs over its brink, which was surrounded with a
beautiful bank, covered with diverse kinds of flowers and herbs, so naturally
intermixed, which completed it in ornament and convenience, as though intended
by nature for more than mortal's use.

Having walked several times round it with much pleasure, he sat down a while
upon its bank, to admire the clearness of the water, through which, to his
great comfort, he saw many different sorts of fish, of various sizes, shapes,
and colors. Heaven be praised! said he, here is a stock of fresh water fish to
supply me with food, if the sea should fail me.

Being sufficiently diverted with their chasing one another, which were of many
beautiful and different colors, and a most delightful scene, he proceeds in
his walk, and goes to the south of the island, where he finds another subject
of admiration, a noble and spacious wood, whose shades seemed to be made for
the abode of peace and pleasure. He walked round it with much delight, which
made the time seem short; yet he could guess it to be no less than two miles
about.

Having viewed the outside, whose extraordinary agreeableness incited in him an
unsurmountable desire to get into it, but where he was afraid to venture, lest
there might be destructive creatures; yet, having recommended himself to the
care of Providence, he ventured into it, finding several pleasant walks, some
straight, edged with lofty trees, as though planted for pleasure; others
crooked and winding, bordered with a thick hedge of pimentoes, which cast a
most fragrant smell; here and there a large cluster of bushes and dwarf trees,
wherein sheltered several different kinds of wild beasts and fowls: Sure, said
he, this island never was intended by nature to lie waste, but rather reserved
to be the happy abode of some, for whom Heaven had a peculiar blessing in
store. Here is every thing sufficient, not only for the support, but also for
the pleasure of life: Heaven make me thankful, that I am the happy inhabitant
of so blessed a land!

Being hungry, and tired with walking, he goes home in order to get some
victuals, and having made a fire, he boils a slice of his salt fish with some
roots, and then the herbs he brought with him, which proved of diverse tastes,
and all excellent; some eating like artichoaks, others like asparagus and
spinach. Now, said he, what can I wish for more! Here I possess a plentiful
land, which produces both flesh and fish; bears excellent greens and roots, and
affords the best of water, which by nature was ordained for man's drink. Pomp
and greatness are but pageantry, which oftentimes prove more prejudicial to the
actor, than diverting to the beholder; ease and indulgence are apt to breed the
gout, and various distempers, which make the rich more wretched than the poor;
now these evils, thanks to my Maker! I stand in no danger of, having but what
is sufficient, which never can do any harm.

Thus thoroughly easy in his mind, he proposes to spend the afternoon at the
outside of the rock, in viewing the sea, and looking for oysters; so takes in
his hand his long staff to grapple in holes; and his breeches which he ties at
the knees, to bring them in. Being come to a place of the rock he had never
been at before, he sees at a distance something like linen hanging upon it,
which, when he come at, he found to be the main-sail of a ship, with a piece of
the yard fastened to it: "Alas!" said he, a dismal token of insatiable
ambition! which makes men often lose their lives in seeking what they seldom
find; and, if they ever do, it is commonly attended with a world of care. Happy
is he who limits his desires to his ability, aspiring not above his reach, and
is contented with what nature requires. Then he falls a ripping the sheet from
the yard, which he finds in one place tied with one of his garters, (having
himself made use of it for want of another string) Heaven be praised! said he,
this is no effect of another shipwreck, but a fragment of the unfortunate ship,
whose loss was my redemption; which reflection made him shed tears.

Having ripped the sail in pieces, he rolls them in such bundles as he could
conveniently carry, and lays them down till he had got a few oysters,
proceeding to grope in holes with his stick as he went on.

About forty paces farther, he finds a chest in the clift of a rock, which had
been washed up there by the violence of the late storm: -- Heaven! said he,
more fatal effects of fate's cruelty and man's temerity! Was the sea made for
men to travel on? Is there not land enough for his rambling mind to rove? Must
he hunt after dangers, and put death to defiance? What is the owner of this the
better for it now? Or who can be the better in a place so remote, and the
access to it so difficult? being not to be approached but on the wings of
Providence, and over the back of death. Now, was this full of massy gold, or
yet richer things, I thank my God, I am above the use of it; yet I Will take it
home: it was sent hither by Providence, perhaps for the relief of some so
necessitated and destitute. Then going to lift it, he could not; therefore was
obliged to fetch his hatchet to beat it open that he might take away what was
in it by degrees. Having taken as much of the sail cloth as he could
conveniently carry, with the few oysters he had got, he went home and fetched
the tool, wherewith he wrenched the chest open, from which he took a suit of
clothes and some wearing linen: "These," said he, "neither the owner nor I
want;" so laid them down; the next thing he took out was a roll of several
sheets of parchment, being blank indentures and leases: These, said he, are
instruments of the law, and often applied to injustice; but I Will alter their
mischievous properties, and make them records of Heaven's mercies, and
Providence's wonderful liberality to me; so, instead of being the ruin of some,
they may chance to be the reclaiming of others. At the bottom of the chest lay
a runlet of brandy, a Cheshire cheese, a leather bottle full of ink, with a
parcel of pens, and a penknife: As for these, said he, they are of use; the
pens, ink, and parchment have equipped me to keep a journal, which will divert
and pass away a few anxious hours: as for the cheese and brandy, they will but
cause me new cares: before I had them, I wanted them not: now, the benefit and
comfort I shall find in them, when gone, will make me hanker after them more, I
wish I had still been without them; but now they are here, it would be a sin to
let them be lost. I Will take them home, and only use them at my need; which will
both make them hold out the longer, and me grow less fond of them.



So, by degrees, he takes home the chest, and what was in it; and now having
materials to begin his journal, he immediately fell to work, that for want of
other books, he might, at his leisure, peruse his past transactions, and the
many mercies he had received from Heaven; and that, after his decease, whoever
is directed thither by Providence, upon reading his wonderful escapes in the
greatest of dangers; his miraculous living, when remote from human assistance;
in the extremity, might not despair. Thus he begins from his being eight years
old (as well as he can remember, he heard an old aunt of his say) to the day of
his being cast away, being then twenty-eight years of age, resolving to
continue it to his death.

He now resolves to make provision against winter, and the season being pretty
far advanced, he gathers a good store of fuel and roots; begins to line the
outside of his barrack with a wall of turf, and lays the same at top, to keep
out the wet. And as he now and then found small shellfish and oysters upon the
rock, he makes a bridge over the lake, which in warm weather he used to wade,
that in the winter he might go over dry. So, having completed his bridge, which
was made of two strong poles, which reached from the land to the rock, and
several lesser-branches laid across pretty close, he retires home, the day
being far spent. The following night there arose a violent storm, attended with
dreadful claps of thunder, which the many echoes from the rock rendered more
terrible; and lightnings flashing in a most frightful manner, succeeding each
other, before the preceding was well out of the sky, which put poor lonesome
Quarll in such a consternation, that notwithstanding his reliance on Heaven's
protection, he would have given the world (had it been in his possession) to
have been within the reach of human assistance; or at least to have had some
company; solitude adding much to his terror and affliction.

The glorious rising of the next morning's sun having laid the mortifying rage
of the blustering winds, Quarll, whose late alarm was hardly quelled, still
suspecting its most reviving rays to be terrifying glances and flashes of
lightning; but having lain awhile, and hearing no noise, but that which still
raged in his mind, was at last convinced the storm was over; and so gets up
with a resolution to go and see if he could discern any effect of the late
tempest.

Being come at the other side of the rock, he saw indeed surprising objects,
but not afflicting; the mischief that was done, being to the inhabitants of the
sea only, a vast number of which had, by the wind, been diselemented; a
quantity of stately whitings, fine mackerels, large herrings, diverse sizes of
codlings, and several other sorts of fish, with a great number of shells, of
different shapes and bignesses, lying up and down upon the rock. Heaven be
praised! said he, instead of damage to bewail, what thanks have I now to return
for this mighty benefit! Here the powerful agent of mischief is, by kind
Providence, made a minister of good to me: make me thankful! I am now provided
for all the next winter; and yet longer; by which time I am certain to have a
fresh supply.

Thus having taken up as many fish as he could hold in his arms, he carries
them home, and brings his shirt, which he used instead of a sack; so, at
several times, he brought away all the fish, and as many of the shells as he
had occasion for; of some of which he made boilers and stewpans; of others,
dishes and plates; some he kept water in, and others fish in pickle; so that he
was stocked with necessary vessels as well as provision.

Being very weary with often going backwards and forwards with his fish, which
took up all that day to bring them home, he sits down to rest himself; and the
runlet of brandy lying by, he was tempted to take a sup, which was at that time
very much wanted, his spirits being very low; but was loath to taste it, lest he
should grow fond of the liquor, and grieve after it when gone: some moments
were spent before he could come to a resolution; at last, having considered the
use of it, which suited the present occasion, he concludes to take a dram, and
to use it like a cordial, which it was first intended for; but the vessel out
of which he drank, being at his mouth, the cordial turns to a nectar; one gulf
decoys another down; so the intended dram became a hearty draught. The
pleasantness of the liquor made him forget its nature; so that poor Quarll, who
had, for the space of near three months before, drank nothing but water, was
presently overcome with the strength of the brandy, and fell asleep in his
chair, with the runlet on his bare lap, from whence it soon fell to the ground,
and, being unstopt, ran all out.

Being awaked with hunger, having slept from evening till almost noon of
another day, which he knew not whether the succeeding or the next to it; seeing
what had happened, he was sorely vexed, and could have wept at the accident;
but, considering the liquor which occasioned it, might perhaps, in time, have
caused greater mischief, he was soon reconciled to the loss, but could not with
that of the right order of the days, which having entirely forgot, hindered the
going on of his journal; so was obliged to make only a memorial. That damage
being repaired, another appears of a far greater consequence; the Sunday is
lost, which he had so carefully observed to that time: -- how can that be made
up? Now, said he, shall I daily be in danger of breaking the sabbath, knowing
not the day. O fatal liquor! that ever thou were invented to cause so much
mischief! But why should I lay the blame upon the use, when it is the abuse
that does the hurt? and exclaim against a thing, which being taken in
moderation is of so great a benefit, reviving a fainting heart, raising sinking
spirits, warming cold and decayed nature, and assuaging several pains. So
blames himself highly for gratifying his appetite with that wherewith he only
ought to have refreshed nature; and since that often misguided faculty had
prompted him to commit the fault, he dedicated that day, in which he became
sensible of it, to prayers and fasting; and every seventh from that he sets
apart for divine worship only, which he hoped would keep him from breaking the
commandments for keeping holy the sabbath day: so went to the place where the
echoes, in many different and melodious sounds, repeated his thanksgiving to
the Almighty, which he had fixed upon to pay his devotion, and there spent the
rest of the day in prayers and singing of psalms.

The next morning, having breakfasted with some of his usual bread, and a slice
of the cheese he found in the chest, he goes about curing his fish, in order to
salt them; having laid by as many, for the present use, as he thought he could
eat whilst fresh, he improves the fair weather, to dry one part of the
remainder, and keeps the rest in pickle.

The winter being neat at hand, and the weather growing damp and cold, hinders
him from taking his walks; so being confined within doors, he employs his idle
hours in beautifying his utensils, which were not to be used on the fire; and
bestowed some pains in scraping and polishing the rest of his shells, some as
fine as though they had been nakers of pearl; which made them not only more fit
for their intended uses, but also a great ornament to his barrack, which he
shelved round with plaited twigs after the manner of his table, and so set them
upon it.

Thus he spent the best part of the winter, making no farther remarks, but that
it was very sharp, attended with high winds, abundance of nail and snow, which
obliged him to make a broom to sweep it away from about his hut, which
otherwise would have been damaged by it.

But shivering Winter having exhausted his frosty stores, and weary with vexing
nature, retired; Boreas also, grown faint with hard blowing, is forced to
retreat into his cave; gentle Zephyrus (who till then kept up in his temperate
cell) now comes forth to usher in the blooming spring; so mildly slips on to
inform Nature of her favourite's approach, who at the joyful news puts on her
gay enamelled garb, and out of her rich wardrobe supplies all vegetables with
new vesture, to welcome the lovely guest. The feathered choristers also receive
new strength; their tender lungs are repaired from the injuries the foggy and
misty air did occasion; and, thus revived, are placed on every budding tree, to
grace his entrance with their harmonious notes.

Quarll also, whom bad weather had confined within doors a considerable time,
which had in a great measure numbed his limbs, and dulled his senses, now finds
himself quite revived: he no longer can keep within; the fair weather invites
him out; the singing birds on every side call to him; nature itself fetches him
out to behold her treasures.

Having with unspeakable pleasure walked some time, diverted with the sweet
melody of various singing birds, and the sight of abundance of different sorts
of blossomed trees, and blooming flowers; all things within the island
inspiring joy; he had the curiosity to go and view the sea; so goes over his
bridge; and then, at the other side of the rock, where he finds more objects,
requiring as much admiration, but affording a great deal less pleasure; vast
mountains of ice, floating up and down, threatening all that came in their way.

These terrible effects of the winter, which to that time he was a stranger to,
occasioned his making these reflections: He who on billows roves, riches or
wealth to gain,
Is ever in danger, and labors often in vain;
If fortune on him smiles, giving his toil success,
Each day new cares arise, which mar his happiness.
The only treasure then worth laying up in store,
Is a contented mind which never leaves one poor;
He is not truly rich who hankers after more.


So, having returned Heaven thanks for his happy state, he creeps to the
north-east side of the rock, at the foot of which lay an extraordinary large
whale, which the late high wind had cast there, and died for want of water. If
this, said he, is all the damage that has been done last winter, it may be
borne; so went down and measured the length of it, which was above thirty
yards, and proportionable in bigness: there were shoals of small fishes
swimming about it in the shallow water wherein it lay, as rejoicing at its
death. Thus, said he, the oppressed rejoice at a tyrant's fall. What numbers of
these have been destroyed to make this monstrous bulk of fat! Well, happy are
they, who, like me, are under Heaven's government only. So with his knife,
which he always carried in his pocket, cuts several slices of the whale, and
throws them to the small fishes, saying, It is but just you should at last feed
on that which so long fed on you; as oil ran, in abundance, from the places he
had cut the slices out of, it vexed him to see that wasted, which might turn to
good money: But why, said he, should I be disturbed at it? What use have I for
any? Providence takes none, it gives me all gratis. So goes on feeling for
oysters with his staff, which he always walked with.

Having at last found a hole, where by their rattling at the bottom with his
staff, he judged there might be a pretty many, he marks the place, and goes
home to contrive some instrument to drag them up, being yet too cold for him to
go in the water; and as he had no tool but his knife and hatchet, both improper
to make a hole in a board, as requisite to make a rake, which was wanting for
that purpose; he beats out the end of his chest, in which there was a knot: so
having driven it out, he fastens the small end of a pole to it. Thus equipped,
he went and raked up oysters, which added one dish to his ordinary, and sauce
to others; yet at length his stomach growing qualmish with eating altogether
fish, and drinking nothing but water withal, he wishes he could have a little
flesh, which he might easily, there being animals enough in the wood apparently
fit for food; but then he must deprive them of their lives, barely to make his
own more easy.

Thus he debates with himself for some time, whether or no it would not be
injustice for him (who only by a providential accident was brought thither to
save his life) now to destroy those creatures, to whom nature had given a
being, in a land out of man's reach to disturb: yet nature requires what seems
to be against nature for me to grant: I am faint, and like to grow worse, the
longer I abstain from flesh.

Having paused a while; Why, said he, should I be so scrupulous? Were not all
things created for the use of man? Now, whether it is not worse to let a man
perish, than to destroy any other creature for his relief? Nature craves it,
and Providence gives it: now, not to use it in necessity, is undervaluing the
gift.

So, having concluded upon catching some of those animals he had seen in the
wood, he considers by what means, having no dogs to hunt, nor guns to shoot.
Having paused awhile, he resolves upon making gins, wherewith he had seen hares
catched in Europe: thus, taking some of the cords which he found with the sail
at the outside of the rock, he goes to work, and makes several, which he
fastens at diverse gaps in the thickset, within the wood, through which he
judged that sort of beast, he had a mind for, went.

Impatient to know the success of his snares, he gets up betimes the next
morning, and goes to examine them; in one he found a certain animal something
like a fawn, the color of a deer, but feet and ears like a fox, and as big as
a well-grown hare. He was much rejoiced at his game, whose mouth he immediately
opened, to see if he could find out whether it fed upon grass, or lived upon
prey: the creature being caught by the neck, and strangled with struggling,
before it died, had brought up in its throat some of the greens it had been
eating, which very much pleased him; accounting those which lived upon flesh as
bad as carrion.

Having returned thanks for his good luck, he takes it home in order to dress
part of it for his dinner; so cases and guts it: but it proving to be a female,
big with three young ones, grieved him to the heart, and made him repent making
those killing nooses. What pity, said he, so many lives should be lost, and
creatures wasted! One would have served me four days; and here are four killed
at once. Well, henceforth, to prevent the like evil, I will take alive what I
just want and save all the females. So, having stuck a long stick at both ends
in the ground, making a half circle, he hangs one quarter of the animal upon a
string before a good fire, and so roasts it.

His dinner being ready, having said grace, he set to eating with an uncommon
appetite; and, whether it was the novelty of the dish, or that the meat did
justly deserve the praise, he really thought he never eat any thing of flesh,
till then, comparable to it, either for taste or tenderness.

Having dined both plentifully and deliciously, he most zealously returns kind
Providence thanks for the late, and all favors received; then pursuant to his
resolution, he goes to making nets, in order to take his game alive for the
future; and, as he had no small twine to make it with, he was obliged to
unravel some of the sail which he luckily had by him; and with the thread,
twisted some of the bigness he judged proper for that use.

Having made a sufficient quantity, he makes a couple of nets, about four feet
square, which he fastens in the room of the killing snares; so retired, and
resolved to come and examine them every morning.

Several days passed without taking any thing, so that he wanted flesh for a
whole week, which did begin to disorder his stomach, but not his temper; being
entirely resigned to the will of Providence, and fully contented with whatever
Heaven was pleased to send.

One afternoon, which was not his customary time of day to examine his nets,
being too visible in the daytime for game to run in; he happened to walk in
the wood, to take the full dimensions thereof, so chanced to go by his nets; in
one of which were taken two animals, as big as a kid six weeks old, of a bright
dun, their horns upright and straight, their shape like a stag, most curiously
limbed, a small tuft of hair on each shoulder and hip. By their horns, which
were but short, they appeared to be very young, which rejoiced him the more,
being in hopes to tame those which he did not want for present use; so carried
them home joyful of his game, depending upon a good dinner; but was sadly
disappointed: the animals he found were antelopes (calling to mind he had seen
them in his travels,) which proving both females, he had made a resolution to
preserve. Though they were too young to be with kid, and he in great need of
flesh, yet he would not kill them; so with cords fastens them to the outside of
his lodge; and with constant feeding them, in two months time made them so
tame, that they followed him up and down; which added much to the pleasure he
already, took in his habitation, which by that time was covered with green
leaves, both top and sides; the stakes it was made of having struck root, and
shot out young branches, whose strength increasing that summer; to fill up the
vacancy between each plant, he pulled the turfs, wherewith he had covered the
outside and top of the hut between them, to keep the cold out in the winter.

His former hut, being now become a pleasant arbor, gave him encouragement to
bestow some pains about it toward the embellishment of it, which seemed to
depend on being well attended. He resolved upon keeping it pruned and watered,
the better to make it grow thick and fast, which answered his intent; for in
three years time, the stems of every plant that composed the arbor, were grown
quite close, and made a solid wall of about six inches thick, covered with
green leaves without, which lay most regular and even, and within had a most
agreeable smooth bark, of a pleasant olive color.

His late arbor being, by his care and time, and nature's assistance, become a
matchless lodge, as intended by nature for something more than human guests, he
now consults to make it as commodious as beautiful. Here is, said he, a
delightful dwelling, warm in the winter, and cool in the summer; delightful to
the eye, and comfortable to the body; pity it should be employed to any use,
but repose and delight! So resolved upon making a kitchen near it. Thus having
fixed upon a place convenient at the side of his lodge, about six feet from it,
twelve in length, and eight in breadth, which he enclosed with the turfs that
covered the outside of his arbor, before it was sufficiently thick to keep out
the cold; then having laid sticks across the top of the walls, which were about
eight feet high, he lays turf thereon, and so covers it, leaving an open place
for the smoke to go out.

The outside being done, he goes about inside necessaries, as fire-places to
roast and boil at; thus cuts a hole in the ground, at a small distance from the
wall, after the manner of stewstoves in noblemen's kitchens; then, at another
place, he sets two flat stones, about eight or nine inches broad, and one foot
long, edgeways, opposite to one another, near two feet asunder; then puts a
third in the same manner, at the end of the other two; so makes a fireplace fit
to roast at: then, for other conveniences, he weaves twigs about sticks, stuck
in the wall on one side of the kitchen, where he lays the shells fit for
utensils, which both adorned and furnished it.

Having completed that piece of work, he goes and visits his plantations, which
he finds in a thriving condition; the roots being, in six months time, grown
from the bigness of a pea (as they were when first set) to that of an egg: his
antelopes were also come to their full growth and complete beauty, which
exceeded most four footed beasts, having a majestic presence, body and limbs
representing a stag, and the noble march of a horse: so every thing concurred
to his happiness. For which having returned his most liberal benefactor his
grateful acknowledgements, he thinks on means to prevent any obstructions that
may intercept the continuation thereof; and as the want of clothes was the only
cause he could think of to make him uneasy, having but the jacket and hose
which were given him on board, to save his own clothes, which when worn out he
could not recruit; therefore, to accustom himself to go without, he lessens
those he had, and takes away the lining from the outside, in order to wear the
thickest in the coldest weather, and so thins his dress by degrees, till at
last he went quite naked.

Having thus concluded, as being the best shift necessity could raise him, he
falls to ripping his jacket, in the lining whereof he finds seven peace and
three beans, which were got in at a hole at the corner of the pocket.

Those few made him wish for more, which he had no room to hope for, they being
raised by seed, which the island did not produce: These few, said he, which at
present are hardly sufficient to satisfy a woman's longing, may, with time and
industry, be improved to a quantity large enough to serve me for a meal; then
lays them up against a proper time to set them; so spent the remainder of that
summer in walking about the island, watering his lodge, weeding his root
plantation, attending his nets, which now and then supplied him with an
antelope or goat, to eat at intervals between fish he commonly found on the
rock after high winds and storms; never failing to visit the sea three or four
times a week, according as the weather did prove; thus diverting many anxious
hours with the variety of objects that element affords. Sometimes he had the
pleasure of seeing great whales chasing one another, spouting large streams of
water out of their gills and nostrils; at other times, numbers of beautiful
dolphins rolling amongst the waves; now and then a quantity of strange
monstrous fish playing on the surface of the sea, some whereof had heads (not
common to fishes) like those of hogs; others not unlike those of dogs, calves,
horses, lions, bulls, goats, and several other creatures: some chasing another
sort; which, to avoid being taken, would quit their element, and seek refuge in
the air, and fly some yards above the water; till their fins being dry, obliged
them to plunge in again.

These pastimes being generally succeeded with bad weather, and dreadful
storms, checked the pleasure they gave, with a dread of the evil that
threatened to follow. Thus commiserating the case of those whose misfortune is
to be exposed to them; having spent some time in reflection, he goes to his
usual devotion, and calling to mind, that in all that time he never saw a young
fish in the pond, he conjectured that something might destroy the small ones;
and as he imagined so it proved: for at his approach, a large fowl flew out of
the pond with a fish in its bill, being too large for it to swallow.

At that distance, the bird being also upon the wing, he could neither discern
color nor make; but he had the satisfaction of discovering the cause why the
fishes did not increase, they being devoured when young by that creature; which
to prevent for the future, he studies means to kill the destroyer; nets not
being proper instruments, it being requisite, for that purpose, to have one all
round, as also to cover the pond, which was impossible by reason of its
largeness; and a less being of no use, the birds probably not coming to one
certain place. He wished for a gun and ammunition fitting, as being the most
probable things to succeed; but no such instrument being within his reach, he
ponders again; during which time, a crossbow offers itself to his mind, but is
as distant from his reach as the gun. It is true, there was stuff enough in the
island to make many, but no tools except a hatchet and pocket knife, wherewith,
if he made shift to cut and shape a bow, he could not make a latch and spring
necessary to it; so he must not think on it: yet a bow being the only thing he
could apply to, he goes about one forthwith. Thus having picked a branch of a
tree, which had the resemblance of yew, and as tough, of which they are
sometimes made, he, with the tools he had, made a shift to make one about six
feet long, and arrows of the same, which he hardens and straightens over the
fire; then having slit them at one end, about two or three inches, he slips in
a bit of parchment, cut sharp at one end, and about three inches at the other,
then ties the end close, to keep it in, which served for feathers; and, with
the ravelling of some of the sail, he makes a string to it.

Thus equipped for an archer, wanting nothing but skill, which is only to be
gained by practice, he daily exercises shooting at a mark for the space of a
fortnight; in which time he made such an improvement, that at three shots he
would hit a mark of about three inches square, at near fifty paces distance.

Being sufficiently skilled, he goes and lies in wait for his desired game; so
placed himself behind a tree, as near the pond as he could, whither the bird
came in a few hours after.

The creature being pitched upon the bank, never stood still, but kept running
round, watching for a sizeable fish fit to swallow; so that he had no
opportunity to shoot; till having at last, espied out one, it launched itself
into the pond, but rose more slowly, which gave him time to take aim;
nevertheless, he missed it, being in motion; but when come to the top, he
struck it through the body as it opened its wings, and laid it flat on the
other side of the pond. He took it up, wonderfully pleased at his good success
the first time of his practicing his new acquired art; yet, having taken notice
of the bird's beauty, he had a regret for its death, though he might, in time,
have rued its living; the stock of fish weekly decreasing, by his own catching
one now and then with a small net he made for that use, when short of other
provisions, and their recruiting prevented by that bird's daily devouring their
young.

The inexpressible beauty of the feathers, which were after the nature of a
drake, every one distinguished from another by a rim round the edge thereof,
about the breadth of a large thread, and of a changeable color from red to
aurora and green; the ribs of a delightful blue, and the feathers pearl color,
speckled with a bright yellow; the breast and belly (if it might be said to be
of any particular color) was that of a dove's feather rimmed like the back,
diversely changing; the head, which was like that of a swan for make, was purple
also, changing as it moved; the bill like burnished gold; eyes like a ruby,
with a rim of gold round it; the feet the same as the bill; the size of the
bird was between a middling goose and a duck, and in shape resembling a swan.

Having bemoaned the death of that delightful creature, he carefully takes out
its flesh, which, corrupting, would spoil the outside; then fills the skin with
sweet herbs, which he dried for that use; and having sewed up the place he had
cut open to take the flesh out, he set it up in his lodge.

His good success in archery made him love the exercise; so that what odd hours
he had in the day (besides those he set apart for his divine worship, and those
necessary occupations about his lodge, plantations, and making remarks) he
bestowed in shooting at the mark, which in time made him so expert, that he
hardly would miss a standing mark the bigness of a dove, at forty or fifty
yards distance, once in ten times; and would shoot tolerably well flying,
having once occasion to try it upon a monstrous eagle, which often flew round
over the place where his antelopes and goats fed, near his lodge, which he shot
at, fearing it would damage them, and killed it with the second arrow.

The summer being over, during which, having been much taken up about his
habitation and plantations, he had neither time nor opportunity to make
remarks, farther than it was some days very showery, and for the most part
generally very hot; but now the weather being grown something cold, and the
wind pretty sharp, he must be obliged to put on some clothes to keep it off,
being as yet too tender to go any longer without; next to provide for his
antelopes against the approaching winter; so makes a lodge for them, at the
backside of his kitchen, with sticks, which he drove into the ground, about two
feet from the wall, and then bends them about three feet from the ground, and
slicks them in the said wall, and smaller branches he interwove between them:
he shuts up the front, and covers the top, leaving both ends open for the
antelopes to go in at; then lays grass (which he dried on purpose) in the said
lodge, for them to lie on. Thus, having dug up a considerable quantity of
roots, and being already stocked with salt-fish, both dry and in pickle, he was
pretty well provided for his cattle and himself, against the ensuing winter,
which proved much like the preceding one, only not so stormy.

The succeeding spring having awaked slumbering nature, and revived what the
preceding hard season had caused to droop, every vegetable puts on new
clothing and recovers its wonted beauty; each animal assumes fresh vigor; the
beasts in the wood leap and bound for joy, and each bird on the trees sings for
gladness. The whole creation is, as it were, repaired, and every creature
decked with new life. Love by Nature's direction, for the increase of every
kind, warms their harmless breasts; each animal seeks a mate; our tame
antelopes quit their abode, and range the woods for the relief ordained to
quell their innocent passion; which being assuaged, they return home, pregnant
with young, to their master's great satisfaction; who, having given them over,
was doubly rejoiced to see them come again in an increasing condition. Heaven
be praised! said he, I shall have a stock of my own, and will not fear wanting.

So, having made fitting preparations against their kidding, he goes and
examines the improvement of his new plantation, where he found his roots grown
full as large as any of those that grew wild. Make me thankful! said he, I am
new provided with all necessary food. I shall no more need to rob those poor
creatures of that which Nature had provided for their own proper use. Next he
goes and views his small stock of peace and beans, which he found in a very
promising case. So, whilst the weather was fair, he falls to clearing a spot of
ground to set them in, as they increased.

Turning up the ground he found several sorts of roots that looked to be
eatable, some whereof were as big as a large carrot, others less. He broke a
bit of every one, some of which breaking short, and being not stringy, he
judged they must be eatable; then he smells them, and finding the scent not
disagreeable, he tastes them. Some were sweetish, others sharp and hot, like
horseradish; and those he proposes to use instead of spice. Sure, said he,
these being of a pleasant scent and favor, cannot be offensive to nature. So
having manured his ground, he takes a sample of every root which he judged
eatable, and boils them, as the surest way to experience their goodness.

Most of them proved not only passable good, but extraordinary; some eating
like parsnips, others almost like carrots, but rather more agreeable; some like
beets and turnips; every one in their several kinds, as good as ever he eat in
England, but of different colors and make; some being bluish, others black,
some red, and others yellow. These though not wanted, having sufficient to
gratify a nicer taste than his, were, nevertheless, extremely welcome, being
somewhat like his native country fare and product. So having returned thanks
for this most agreeable addition to his ordinary, he sets a mark to every herb
which those roots bore, in order to get some of the seed to sow in the ground
he would prepare: so, being provided with flesh, fish, herbs, and several sorts
of roots, he goes and examines what improvement his peace and beans have made,
which he found increased to admiration; the seven peace having produced one
thousand, and the three beans one hundred: having returned thanks for that vast
increase, he lays them by, in order to set them at a proper season, as he had
done the year before.

By this time his antelopes had kidded, one of them having brought three young
ones, and the second two. This vast addition to his provisions very much
rejoiced him, being sure now not to want flesh at his need, which before he was
in danger of, finding but seldom any thing in his net: so makes account to live
upon two of the young bucks whilst they lasted, killing one as soon as fit for
meat, and so now and then another, saving only five to breed; one whereof
should be a mate to keep the females from the wood; lest at one time or other
they should stay away for good and all.

The old ones being well fed, as he always took care to do, providing for them
store of those greens he knew they loved; as also boiled roots for them now and
then, of which they are very fond; the young ones throve apace, and grew very
fat: so that in three weeks time they were large and fit to eat. He killed one;
which being roasted, proved to be more delicious that any house-lamb, sucking
pig, young fawn, or any other suckling whatever.

Having lived upon that, with now and then a little fish, about one month,
which was as long as he could keep it eatable, having dressed it at two
different times, five days interval; eating the cold remains in several
manners; reserving one of the other two males for a time he should be scanted,
and in want of flesh; but was unluckily disappointed by a parcel of large
eagles, which flying one morning over the place where the young antelopes were
playing, being of a gay, as well as active disposition, launched themselves
with precipitation upon the male he reserved for time of need, and one of the
females which he kept for breed; seeing his beloved diverters carrying away by
those birds of prey, he runs in for his bow, but came too late with it, the
eagles being gone.

Having lost his two dear antelopes, especially the female, having doomed the
male for his own eating, he hardly could forbear weeping to think of their
being cruelly torn to pieces by those ravenous creatures: thus having for some
time lamented the loss, and bewailed their hard fate, he thinks on means to
prevent the like evil for the time to come; and as his bow was not always at
hand, he resolves upon making a net, and fastens it between the trees he saw
them come in at.

The succeeding winter proving very wet and windy, gave him but little
invitation to take his usual walks; so having every thing he had occasion for
at hand, he kept close to his net-making; for which having twine to twist, and
thread to ravel out to make the said twine, kept him employed till the
following spring, which came on apace.

Having finished his net, and every thing which belonged to it, he goes and
fastens it to the trees, as he had proposed; then takes a walk to his new
plantations, which he found in a thriving condition; for which, and other
benefits already received, he resolves, as in duty bound, to attend at his
usual place of worship, and sing thanksgiving psalms, which the hardness of the
weather had kept him from all the late winter; but it now coming into his mind,
that whilst he was at his devotion, returning thanks for the fair prospect of a
plentiful crop, his antelopes would break into the close, the hedge being as
yet but thin, and devour the promising buds, which are the principal occasion
of his devotion; this not altogether improper consideration puts a sad check to
his religious intention: and though there was a vast obligation to prompt him
to the performance of that part of his duty, yet he could not, with wisdom, run
the hazard, out of mere devotion, to lose so promising a crop, which he should
never be able to retrieve; all his stock of seed being then in grass.

As he was debating in his mind between religion and reason, whether the latter
ought not to be a director to the former, he perceived his antelopes making
toward the peace, to which they, doubtless, would have got in, had he not
returned, and driven them another way: which accident convinced him he might
find a more proper time to go about his devotion; no man being required to
worship to his prejudice: so, having put off his religious duty till he had
better secured his peace and beans, he cuts a parcel of branches, wherewith he
stops those gaps to prevent the creatures going in; and having completed his
work, he goes to his devotion, adding to his usual thanksgiving a particular
collect for his luckily being in the way to prevent his being frustrated of the
blessing Heaven so fairly promised to bestow on his labors.

Having paid his devotion, he walks about the island, being all the way
delighted with the birds celebrating their Maker's praise, in their different
harmonious notes! Every thing in nature, said he, answers the end of its
creation, but ungrateful man! who, ambitious to be wise as his Creator, only
learns to make himself wretched. Thus he walks till evening, making several
reflections on the different conditions of men, preferring his present state to
that of Adam before his fall, who could not be sensible of happiness, having
never known a reverse; which, otherwise, he would have been more careful to
prevent. Being come home, and near bedtime, he first ate his supper, and then,
having performed his customary religious service, he goes to bed. The next
morning, after paying his usual devotion, he takes a walk to his plantations,
on which he implores a continuation of the prosperous condition they appear to
be in; next, he goes to examine his nets, in which he finds a brace of fowls
like ducks, but twice as large, and exceeding beautiful: the drake (which he
knew by a colored feather on his rump) was of a fine cinnamon color upon his
back, his breast of a mazarine blue, the belly of a deep orange, his neck
green, head purple, his eyes, bill, and feet, red; every color changing most
agreeably as they moved. The duck was also very beautiful, but of quite
different colors, and much paler than the drake's.

The disappointment in catching those delightful fowls, instead of ravenous
eagles, as he had purposed, no ways displeased him, but he rather was rejoiced
to have such beautiful fowls to look at; yet it went much against his mind to
deprive those creatures of their liberty (the greatest comfort in life) which
nature took such pains to adorn: But, said he, they were created for the use of
man: so, in keeping them for my pleasure, they will but answer the end of their
creation. Their confinement shall be no stricter than my own; they shall have
the whole island to range in. He then pinions them, puts them in the pond, and
makes baskets for them to shelter in, which he places in the branches of those
trees that hung closest to the water, taking particular care to feed them daily
with roots roasted and boiled, and the guts of the fish, and other creatures,
he used for his own eating; which made them thrive mainly, and take to the
place; so that they bred in their season.

The five antelopes had by this time kidded, and brought ten young ones: his
peace and beans also were wonderfully improved, having that season enough to
stock the ground the year following. Thus he returned kind Providence thanks
for the vast increase, and concludes to live upon the young antelopes as long
as they lasted, reserving only one for suck of the old ones, to keep them in
milk, of which he had taken notice they had plenty, designing to draw it daily
for his own use; so that in a little time, he had enough to skim for cream,
which he used for sauce instead of butter, and made small cheeses of the rest.
Now having a pretty store of dairy ware, he resolves to make a place to keep it
in; the kitchen wherein he was obliged to lay his salt fish (which commonly
smells strong,) not being a proper place for cream and milk: for which end he
makes a dairy-house at the other side of his dwelling, with branches of trees,
after the manner of a close arbor, and thatches it over with grass; which
answering the kitchen in form and situation, made uniform wings, that added as
much to the beauty as convenience of the habitation.

Having completed his dairy, he proceeds in his resolution of making cheese,
having learned the way in Holland; and for want of rennet to turn his milk, he
takes some of the horseradish seed, which being of a hot nature, had the same
effect: having curd to his mind, he seasons it to his palate; then with his
hatchet, he cuts a notch round in the bark of a tree, about eighteen inches in
circumference; and a second in the same manner, six inches below that; then
slits the circle, and with his knife gently opens it, parting it from the tree:
thus he makes as many hoops as he judged would contain his paste, which being
girded round with cords to keep them from opening, he fills with the said
paste, and lays them by, till fit to eat.

This being done, which completed his provisions, he returns thanks for those
blessings which had been so liberally bestowed on him: Now, said he, Heaven be
praised! I exceed a prince in happiness: I have a habitation strong and
lasting, a beautiful and convenient freehold, store of comforts, with all
necessaries of life free cost, which I enjoy with peace and pleasure
uncontrouled: yet I think there is still something wanting to complete my
happiness: if a partner in grief lessen sorrow, certainly it must in delight,
augment pleasure. What objects of admiration are here concealed, and like a
miser's treasure, hid from the world! If man, who was created for bliss, could
have been completely happy alone, he would not have had a companion given him:
thus he walks about thoughtful till bedtime.

In that disposition he goes to bed, and soon fell asleep: the night also,
being windy, added to his disposition; but his mind finds no repose: it still
run heavy upon the subject that took it up the day before, and forms ideas
suitable to his inclination; and as solitude was the motive of its being
disturbed, he indulges it with the thoughts of company, dreaming that the same
of his station, and happy state of life, was spread about the world; that it
prompted a vast number of people, from all parts, to come to it, which at last
induced several princes to claim a right to it; which being decided by a bloody
war, a governor was sent, who laid taxes, demanded duties, raised rents, and
warns him to be gone, having fixed upon his habitation for himself to dwell in.
Being sadly disturbed, he cries out in his sleep, This is a great punishment
for my uneasiness: could I not be contented with being lord of this island,
without provoking Heaven to bring me under the power of extorting governors?

There happening a great noise, he starts out of his sleep, with the thoughts
of hearing a proclamation; and cries out, Alas! it is too late to proclaim an
evil which is already come: but being thoroughly awake, and the noise still
continuing, he found he had been dreaming, which very much rejoiced him, he
therefore put on his clothes, and hastens to the place he heard the noise come
from.

Being within forty or fifty yards thereof, he saw a number of monkeys of two
different kinds; one sort squealing and fighting against the other without
intermixing. At his approach the battle ceased; and the combatants, retiring at
some distance, left the spot of ground, on which they fought clear; whereon lay
a considerable quantity of wild pomegranates, which the wind had shook off the
trees the night before, and which were the occasion of their strife.



His coming having caused a truce, every one of those creatures keeping still
and quiet during his stay, he resolves to use his endeavors to make a solid
peace; and as that difference had arisen from the fruit there present, to which
he could see no reason but that each kind had an equal right, he divides it
into two equal parcels, which he lays opposite to each other toward both the
parties, retiring a little way, to see whether this expedient would decide the
quarrel: which answered his intent; those animals quietly coming to that share
next to them and peaceably carrying it away, each to their quarters. This
occasioned several reflections on the frivolous, and often unjust quarrels that
arise among princes, which create such bloody wars, as prove the destruction of
vast numbers of their subjects. If monarchs said he, always acted with as much
reason as these creatures, how much blood and money would they save! Thus he
goes on to his usual place of worship, in order to return thanks, that he was
free of that evil, the dream whereof had so tortured his mind; though he
confessed he justly deserved the reality, for his uneasiness in the happiest of
circumstances.

Having paid his devotion, he takes a walk to see how his peace and beans came
on, which he found in a very improving disposition, each stem bearing a vast
number of well filled pods. Heaven be praised! said he, I shall eat of this
year's crop, and have sufficient to stock my ground the ensuing one.

Thus being plentifully supplied with necessaries, and in a pleasant island,
every thing about him being come to perfection; his dwelling, which seems
intended by nature for some immortal guest, being, by time, yearly repaired and
improved, leaving no room for care; yet the unwise man, as if an enemy to his
ease, cannot be contented with the enjoyment of more than he could reasonably
crave, but must disturb his mind with what concerns him not: What pity, said
he, so delightful a habitation, attended with such conveniences, and situated
in so wholesome an air, and fruitful a land, should at my death lose all those
wonderful properties, being become useless for want of somebody to enjoy them!
What admiration will here be lost for want of beholders? But what kind man
could I settle it upon, worthy of so fine an inheritance? Were it my pleasure
to choose myself an heir, such only appear virtuous, whose weak nature confides
to chastity: every constitution cannot bear excess: want of courage occasions
mildness, and lack of strength good temper: thus virtue is made a cloak to
infirmity. But why do I thus willingly hamper myself with those cares
Providence has been pleased to free me of?

Thus he holds the island from Providence: freely he bequeaths it to whom
Providence shall think fit to bestow it upon: and that his heir may the better
know the worth of the gift, he draws a map of the whole estate; and made an
inventory of every individual tenement, appurtenances, messuages, goods, and
chattels, and also a draft of the terms and conditions he is to hold the
here-mentioned possession upon; viz.

Imprimis, A fair and most pleasant island, richly stocked with fine trees, and
adorned with several delightful groves, planted and improved by nature, stored
with choice and delicious roots and plants for food, bearing peace and beans;
likewise a noble fish pond, well stocked with diverse sorts of curious fish; and
a spacious wood, harboring several sorts of wild fowl, and beasts, sit for a
nabob's table.

Item, A dwelling commenced by art, improved by nature, and completed by time,
which yearly keeps it in repair; and also its furniture.

Item, The officer and appurtenances thereof, with the utensils thereunto
belonging; which said island, dwelling, etc. are freehold, and clear from
taxes; in no temporal dominion, therefore screened from any impositions,
duties, and exactions; defended by nature from invasions or assaults; guarded
and supported by Providence: all which incomparable possessions are to be held
upon the following terms, viz.

That whosoever shall be by Providence settled in this blessed abode, shall,
morning and evening, constantly (unless prevented by ill weather or accident)
attend at the east side of this island, and within the alcove nature prepared
for the lodgment of several harmonious echoes, and there pay his devotion;
singing thanksgiving psalms to the great Origin and Director of all things,
whose praises he will have the comfort to hear repeated by melodious voices.

Next, he shall religiously observe and keep a seventh day for worship only,
from the rising of the sun until the going down thereof: therefore he shall,
the day before, make all necessary provision for that day.

That he shall, after any tempestuous wind or storm, visit the sea at the
outside of the rock, at the east, south, west, and north ends, in order to
assist any one in distress.

He shall not be wasteful of any thing whatsoever, especially of any creature's
life; killing no more than what is necessary for his health: but shall every
day examine his nets, setting at liberty the overplus of his necessity, lest
they should perish in their confinement.

He must also keep every thing in the same order and cleanness he shall find
them in; till and manure the ground yearly; set and sow plants and seeds, fit
for food, in their proper seasons.

Having written this at the bottom of the map he had drawn, being supper time,
he takes his meal; then goes to his usual evening devotion; and, after an
hour's walk, to his bed, sleeping quietly all night, as being easy in his mind.

The next morning he takes his usual walks, and visits his nets. In that he had
set for eagles, he found a fowl as big as a turkey, but the color of a
pheasant, only a tail like a partridge; this having no sign of being a bird of
prey, he was loath to kill it; but having had no fresh meat for above a week, he
yields to his appetite, and dresses it, eating part thereof for his dinner: it
was very fat and plump, and eat much like a pheasant, but rather tenderer, and
fuller of gravy.

Though he was very well pleased with the bird he had taken, yet he had rather
it had been one of the eagles which kept his young antelopes in jeopardy: but
as he could not destroy them with his net, which he had hung a considerable
time without the intended success, he projects the prevention of their
increase, by destroying their eggs, leaving his nets wholly for the use they
had been successful in; and searches the clifts of the rock next the sea, where
those birds commonly build; where having found several nests, he takes away the
eggs that were in them, being then their breeding time, and carries them home,
in order to empty the shells, and hang them up and down in his habitation,
amongst the green leaves which covered the cieling thereof; but having
accidentally broke one, and the yolk and white thereof being like that of a
turkey, he had the curiosity to boil one and taste it, which eat much after the
manner of a swan's. The rest he saved to eat now and then for a change, reaping
a double advantage by robbing those birds; lessening thereby the damage they
might do him in time, and adding a dish to his present fare.

In this prosperous way he lived fifteen years, finding no alteration in the
weather or seasons, nor meeting in all the time with any transactions worthy of
record: still performing his usual exercises, and taking his walks with all the
content and satisfaction his happy condition could procure; entirely forsaking
all thoughts and desires of ever quitting the blessed station he then had in
his possession.

Thus having walked the island over and over (which though delightful, yet the
frequent repetition of the wonders it produces, renders them, as it were,
common, and less admirable), he proceeds to view the sea, whose fluid element
being ever in motion, daily affords new objects of admiration.

The day being fair, and the weather as calm, he sat down upon the rock, taking
pleasure in seeing the waves roll, and, as it were, chase one another; the next
pursuing the first, on which it rides, when come at; and being itself overtaken
by a succeeding, is also mounted on thus, wave upon wave, till a bulky body is
composed, too heavy for the undermost to bear, and then sinks all together:
this, said he, is a true emblem of ambition; men striving to outdo one another
are often undone.

As he was making reflections on the emptiness of vanity and pride, returning
Heaven thanks, that he was separated from the world, which abounds in nothing
else; a ship appears at a great distance, a sight he had not seen since his
shipwreck: Unlucky invention; said he, that thou should ever come into men's
thoughts! the ark, which gave the first notion of a floating habitation, was
ordered for the preservation of man; but its fatal copies daily expose him to
destruction. Having therefore returned Heaven thanks for his being out of those
dangers, he makes a solemn vow, never to return into them again, though it were
to gain the world: but his resolution proved as brittle as his nature was
frail. The men on board had spied him out with their perspective glasses; and
supposing him to be shipwrecked, and to want relief, sent their longboat with
two men to fetch him away.

At their approach his heart alters its motion; his blood stops from its common
course; his sinews are all relaxed, which entirely unframes his reason, and
makes him a stranger to his own inclination; which struggling with his wavering
resolution, occasions a debate between hope and fear; but the boat being come
pretty nigh, gave hope the advantage, and his late resolution yields to his
revived inclination, which being now encouraged by a probable opportunity of
being answered, rushes on to execution. He now, quitting all his former
reliance on Providence, depends altogether upon his getting away, blessing the
lucky opportunity of seeing his blessed country again, for which pleasure he
freely quits and forsakes all the happiness he enjoyed; gladly abandoning his
delightful habitation, and plentiful island. He thinks no more of Providence;
his mind is entirely taken up with his voyage; but disappointment, which often
attends the greatest probabilities, snatches success out of his hand before he
could grasp it, and intercepts his supposed infallible retreat; the boat could
not approach him, by reason of the rocks running a great way into the sea under
water; nor could he come at the boat for sharp points, and deep holes, which
made it unfordable, as well as unnavigable; so that after several hours
striving in vain on both sides to come at one another; the men, after they had
striven all they could but to no purpose, said something to him in a rage,
which he understood not, and went without him, more wretched now, than when he
was first cast away. His full dependence on a retreat made him abandon all
further reliance on Providence, whom then he could implore; but now, having
ungratefully despised Heaven's bounties, which had been so largely bestowed on
him, he has forfeited all hopes of assistance from thence, and expects none
from the world. Thus destitute, and in the greatest perplexity, he cries out,
whither shall I now fly for help? The world can give me none, and I dare not
crave any more from Heaven. O cursed delusion! but rather cursed weakness! why
did I give way to it? had I not enough of the world, or was I grown weary of
being happy? So, saying, he falls a weeping: Could I shed a flood of tears,
sufficient to wash away my fault or ease me of the remorse it does create!

The pains and labor he had been at in the day, climbing up and down the rock,
dragging himself to and fro, to come at the boat, having very much bruised his
limbs; and the disappointment of his full dependence on the late promising
success, as also the tormenting remorse, and heavy grief, for his sinful
reliance thereon, much fatiguing his mind, rendered sleep, which is ordained
for the refreshment of nature, of small relief to him; his thoughts are
continually disturbed with frightful visions; all his past dangers glare at
him, as if threatening their return.

Being now awaked from his disagreeable sleep, he makes a firm resolution never
to endeavor to go from hence, whatever opportunity offers, though attended
with ever so great a probability of success, and prospect of gain; fully
settling his whole mind and affection on the state and condition Heaven has
been pleased to place him in; resolving to let nothing enter into his thoughts,
but his most grateful duty to so great a benefactor, who has so often and
miraculously rescued him from death.

Thus having entirely banished the world out of his mind, which before often
disturbed it, he limits his thoughts within the bounds of his blessed
possession, which affords him more than is sufficient to make his life happy;
where plenty flows on him, and pleasure attends his desires; abounding in all
things that can gratify his appetite, or delight his fancy: a herd of
delightful antelopes, bounding and playing about his habitation, divert him at
home; and in his walks he is entertained with the harmony of diverse kinds of
singing-birds; every place he comes at offers him new objects for pleasure:
thus all seems to concur in completeing his happiness.

In this most blessed state he thinks himself as Adam before his fall, having
no room for wishes, only that every thing may continue in its present
condition; but it cannot be expected, that fair weather, which smiles on the
earth's beauty, will not change. The sun must go its course, and the seasons
take their turn; which considerations must, for the present, admit some small
care: he is naked, and his tender constitution susceptible of the cold;
therefore the clothes he was cast away in being worn out, he is obliged to
think of providing something to defend his limbs from the hardness of the
approaching winter, whilst it was yet warm. Having considered what to make a
wrapper of, he concludes upon using of the grass he made mats of, on which he
lay, being soft and warm, very fit for that purpose: of this he cuts down a
sufficient quantity, which, when ready to work, he makes small twine with, and
plaits it in narrow braids, which he sews together with some of the same, and
shapes a long loose gown, that covered him to his heels, with a cap of the same.

By that time he had finished his winter-garb, the weather was grown cold
enough for him to put it on. The frosty season came on apace, in which there
fell such a quantity of snow, that he was forced to make a broom, and sweep it
away from about his habitation twice a day; as also the path he made to the
places he had occasion to go to, tossing the snow on each side, which before
the winter was over, met at top, and covered it all the way; which obliged him
to keep within doors for a considerable time, and melt snow instead of water;
lest, when going for some, he might chance to be buried amongst the snow.

The winter being over, and the snow dissolved, the gay spring advances apace,
offering nature its usual assistance, repairing the damages the last frost had
done; which joyful tidings made every thing smile. Quarll, also, finding
himself revived, took his former walks, which the preceding bad weather had
kept him from, though there had been no considerable storm the winter before.

He having a mind to view the sea, and being come to the outside of the
north-west end of the rock, sees, at the foot thereof, something like part of
the body of a large hollow tree, the ends whereof were stopped with its own
pitch; and the middle, which was slit open from end to end, gaping by a stick
laid across.

This put him in mind of canoes, with which Indians paddle up and down their
lakes and rivers; and being on that side the rock next to the island of
California, he fancied some of them were come to visit this island, though not
many in number; their canoes holding at most but two men; for the generality,
one only: yet, as some of these people are accounted great thieves, daily
robbing one another, he hastens home to secure what he had; but it was too
late; they had been there already, and had taken away the clothes he found in
the chest; which being by far too little for him, hung carelessly on a pin
behind his door. Had they been contented with that, he would not have regarded
it; but they carried away some of his curious shells, and, what grieved him
most, the fine bird he had taken such pains to dress and stuff, and care to
preserve; as also his bow and arrows.

Having missed these things, which he much valued, he hastens to the outside of
the rock, with his long staff in his hand, in hopes to overtake them before
they could get into their canoe; but happened to go too late, they being
already got half a league from the rock. Yet they did not carry away their
theft: for there arising some wind, it made the sea somewhat rough, and overset
their canoe; so that what was in it was all lost, but the two Indians, who most
dexterously turned it on its bottom again, and with surprising activity leaped
in it, one at the one side, and the other at the opposite; so that the canoe
being trimmed at once, they paddled out of sight.

Having seen as much of them as he could, he walks to the north-east side, in
order to discover the effect of the high wind, which happened the night before.

Being come to the outside of the rock, he perceives something at a distance
like a large chest, but having no lid on it; taking that to be the product of
some late shipwreck, he grieved at the fatal accident; How long, reflected he,
will covetousness decoy men to pursue wealth, at the cost of their precious
lives? Has not nature provided every nation and country a sufficiency for its
inhabitants? that they will rove on this most dangerous and boisterous sea,
which may be titled Death's dominions, many perishing therein, and not one on
it being safe.

As he was bewailing their fate who he imagined had been cast away, he sees two
men come down the rock, with each a bundle in his arm, who went to that which
he had taken to be a chest; and, having put their load in it, pushed it away
till come to deep water; then, having got in it, with a long staff, shoved it
off, till they could row to a long boat that lay at some distance behind a
jetting part of the rock, which screened it from his sight, as also the ship it
belonged to.

The sight of this much amazed him, and made him cease condoling others'
supposed loss, to run home and examine his own; well knowing those bundles, he
saw carried away, must needs belong to him, there being no other movables in
the island but what were in his lodge.

Being come home, he finds indeed what he suspected; those villains had most
sacrilegiously rifled and ransacked his habitation, not leaving him so much as
one of the mats to keep his poor body from the ground; his winter garb also is
gone, and what else they could find for their use.

The loss of those things, which he could not do without, filled him with
sorrow. Now, said he, I am in my first state of being; naked I came into the
world, and naked I shall go out of it; at which he fell a weeping.

Having grieved a while, Why, said he, should I thus cast myself down! Is not
Providence, who gave me them, able to give me more? Thus, having resolved
before winter to replenish his loss, he rests himself contented, and gives the
ruffians' evil action the best construction he could. Now I think on it, said
he, these surely are the men, who, about twelve months since, would charitably
have carried me hence, but could not for want of necessary implements; and now
being better provided, came to accomplish their hospitable design; but not
finding me, supposing I was either dead or gone, took away what was here of no
use; much good may what they have got do them, and may it be of as much use to
them as it was to me. Thus he walks out, in order to cut grass to dry, and make
himself new bedding, and a winter garb.

Having walked about half a mile, he perceives the same men coming toward the
pond. Heaven be praised! said he, here they be still. Now when they see I am
not gone, nor willing to go, they will return my things, which they are
sensible I cannot do without, with which words he goes up to them.

By this time they had caught the two old ducks, which, being pinioned, could
not fly away as the rest did. He was much vexed to see the best of his stock
thus taken away, yet, as he thought they were come to do him service, he could
grudge them nothing, that would any wise gratify them for so good an intent.
But having returned them thanks for their good will, he told them he was very
happy in the island, and had made a vow never to go out of it.

These being Frenchmen, and of an employment where politeness is of little use,
being fishermen, and not understanding what he said, only laughed in his face,
and went on to the purpose they came about: then having as many of the ducks as
they could get, they proceeded toward the house where they had seen the
antelopes, some of which not running away at their approach, they proposed to
catch hold of them.

Being come to the place where they used to feed, which was near the dwelling,
the young ones, not being used to see any men in clothes, nor any body but
their master, presently sled; but the two old ones, which he had bred up, were
so tame, that they stood still, only when the men came to them, they kept close
to him, which gave the men opportunity to lay hold of them; when,
notwithstanding Quarll's repeated entreaties, they tied a halter about their
horns, and barbarously led them away.

Quarll was grieved to the heart to see his darlings, which he had taken such
care to breed up, and which were become the principal part of his delight,
following him up and down, and which, by their jumping and playing before him
often dispersed melancholy thoughts; notwithstanding all these endearing
qualifications, thus hauled away: he weeps, and on his knees begs they may be
left; and though they understood not his words, his actions were so expressive
and moving, that had they had the humanity of canibals, who eat one another,
they would have yielded to so melting an object as the poor broken hearted
Quarll was; but the inflexible boors went on, cruelly hauling and dragging the
poor creatures, which, as if sensible of the barbarity of the act, looked back
to their afflicted master, as craving his assistance; which, at last, so
exasperated him, that he was several times tempted to lay on the ravishers with
his long staff; as often was stopped by the following consideration: Shall I,
said he, be the destruction of my fellow creatures, to rescue out of their
hands, animals of which I have an improving store left, and deprive them of
their healths, and perhaps of their lives, to recover what cost me naught? Let
them go with what they have, and the merit of their deed be their reward. Thus
he walks about melancholy, bemoaning his poor antelopes' fate, and his own
misfortune: They were used to liberty, said he, which they now are deprived of,
and for which they will pine and die, which, for their sake, I cannot but wish;
for life without liberty is a continual death.

As he was walking, thinking (as it is usual after the loss of anything one
loves) of the pleasure he had during the enjoyment, the ruffians having secured
the poor animals, came back with ropes in their hands. What do they want next?
said he, have they not all they desire; would they carry away my habitation
also? Sure they have no design on my person; if so, they will not take it so
easily as they did my dear antelopes. Thus he resolved to exercise his quarter
staff, if they offered to lay hands on him. The villains, whose design was to
bind him, and so carry him away, seeing him armed and resolute, did not judge
it safe for them to advance within the reach of his weapon, but keep at some
distance, divining how to seize him.

Quarll, who, by their consulting, guessed at their design, not thinking proper
to let them come to a resolution, makes at the nearest, who immediately takes
to his heels, and then to the next, who immediately does the same. Thus he
follows them about for a considerable time; but they divided, in order to the
him with running, till the night approaching, and the wind rising, made them
fear their retreat might be dangerous, if they deferred it; so that they went
clear away: which being all he desired, he returned as soon as he saw them in
the longboat, which they rowed to their ship, that lay at anchor some distance
from the rocks.

These wretches being gone, he returns Heaven thanks for his deliverance; and
as his bridge had favored their coming, he pulls it off, and only laid it over
when he had a mind to view the sea, and goes home to eat a bit, having not as
yet broken his fast. Having, therefore, eaten some of his roots and cheese, and
being wearied with hunting these boors, he consults how to lie, his bed and
bedding being gone, as also his winter gown, and the nights being as yet cold:
however, after a small consideration, he concludes to lie in the lodge, which
was left vacant by the stolen antelopes absence; whose litter being made of the
same grass as his mats were, he lay both soft and warm.

Next morning having paid his usual devotion, he goes into the kitchen, in
order to breakfast, and afterward to take his customary walk. Whilst he was
eating, there arose a noise in the air, as proceeding from a quantity of rooks,
jackdaws, crows, and such like birds, whose common notes he was acquainted
with; and as the noise approached, he had the curiosity to go and see what was
the matter, but was prevented by the coming of a large fowl, which flew over
his head, as he was going out; he turned back to gaze at the bird, whose beauty
seized him with admiration; the pleasure of seeing so charming a creature quite
put out of his mind the curiosity of looking from whence proceeded the
disagreeable noise without; which ceasing as soon as the bird was sheltered,
made him imagine those carrion birds had been chasing that beautiful fowl,
which, seeing itself out of danger, stood still, very calm and composed; which
gave him the opportunity of making a discussion of every individual beauty
which composed; so delightful an object; it was about the bigness and form of a
swan, almost headed like it, only the bill was not so long nor so broad, and
red like coral; his eyes like those of a hawk, his head of a mazarine blue, and
on the top of it a tuft of shining gold colored feathers, which spread over
it, hanging near three inches beyond, all round; its breast, face, and part of
its neck, milk white, curiously speckled with small black spots, a gold
colored circle about it; its back and neck behind of a fine crimson, speckled
with purple; its legs and feet the same color as its bill; its tail long and
round, spreading like that of a peacock, composed of six rows of feathers, all
of different colors, which made a most delightful mixture.

Having spent several minutes in admiring the bird, he lays peace, and crumbled
roots, both roasted and boiled, before it; as also water in a shell,
withdrawing, to give it liberty to eat and drink; and stood peeping to see what
it would do: which, being alone, having looked about, picks a few peace, and
drinks heartily; then walks toward the door in a composed easy manner, much
like that of a cock.

Quarll being at the outside, was dubious whether he should detain him, or let
him go; his affection for that admirable creature equally prompts him to both:
he cannot bear the thoughts of parting with so lovely an object, nor harbor
that of depriving it of liberty, which it so implicitly entrusted him withal.
Thus after a a small pause, generosity prevails over self-pleasure; "Why should
I," said he, "make the place of its refuge its prison?" He therefore makes room
for it to go, which, with a slow pace, walks out; and having looked about a
small time, mounts up a considerable height; and then takes its course
northwest.

There happening nothing the remainder of the year worthy of record, he employs
it in his customary occupations; as pruning and watering his lodge and dairy,
making his mats to lie on, as also his winter garb; every day milking his
antelopes and goats; making now and then butter and cheese, attending his nets,
and such like necessary employments.

The mean time, the French mariners, who, probably, got money by what they had
taken from him the year before, returned, it being much about the same season;
and being resolved to take him away, and all they could make any thing of, out
of the island, were provided with hands and implements to accomplish their
design; as ropes to bind what they could get alive, and guns to shoot what they
could not come at, saws and hatchets to cut down logwood and brazil, pick-axes
and shovels to dig up orris roots, and others of worth, which they imagined the
island produced; likewise flat bottomed boats to tow in shallow water, where
others could not come; and thus by degrees to load their ship with booty: but
ever watchful Providence blasted their evil projects, and confounded their
devices, at the very instant they thought themselves sure of success;
implements in a flat-bottomed boat were towed to the very foot of the rock, by
a young fellow, who being lighter than a man, was thought fittest to go with
the tools, which pretty well loaded the boat.

Their materials being landed, to their great satisfaction, the men on board
embarked in two more of the same sort of boats; but were no sooner in them, but
a storm arose, which dashed their slender bottoms to pieces, and washed them
into the sea, in which they perished, oversetting also the flat bottomed boat
on shore, with the load, and the lad underneath it.

The storm being over, which lasted from about eight in the morning till almost
twelve at noon, Quarll, according to his custom, went to see if he could
perceive any damage done by the late tempest, and if any, distressed by it,
stood in want of help.

Being at that side of the rock he used to visit, he could see nothing but a
few fishes and shells the sea had left in the clifts: If this, said he, be all
the damage that has been done, make me thankful; it will recruit me with fresh
fish and utensils. Going to the N. W. part, where he sees a battered boat,
floating with the keel upwards, "This," said he, "bodes some mischief;" but
thought it not to be of any consequence. Having gone about fifty yards further,
he espies a small barrel at the foot of the rock, with several planks and
fragments of a ship, floating with the tide: Alas! said he, these are too
evident proofs of a shipwreck, to hope otherwise. As he was looking about, he
hears a voice cry out, much like that of a man, at some distance, behind a part
of the rock: being advanced a small matter beyond where he was, Heaven be
praised! said he, there is somebody, whom I am luckily come to save, and he is
most fortunately come to be my companion: I cannot but rejoice at the event,
though I heartily grieve for the accident. Hastening to the place where he
thought the cries came from, which, as he advanced, he could discern to be too
shrill for a man's voice, Certainly, said he, this must be some woman by the
noise.

He then, with his staff, endeavored to break that which he took to be the lid
of the chest, but proved the bottom; and, as he was striking, the boy
underneath, calling to him to turn it up, thrust his hand under the side, which
he perceiving, though he understood him not, stood still. Finding his mistake,
This, said he, is a flat bottomed boat, such as the Frenchmen used the year
before, when they came and plundered me. Now, am I safe if I turn it up?
doubtless they are come in great numbers. Pausing awhile, and the lad (whom he
took to be a woman) still continuing his moan, he was moved to compassion; and,
having considered the boat could not hold any great number, he ventures. Let
what will come on it, or who will be under, for the poor woman's sake I will
relieve them; there cannot be many men. However I will let but one out at a
time; if he be mischievous, I am able to deal with him. At this, he puts the
end of his staff where he had seen the hand, and lifts it up about a foot from
the ground. Out of the opening immediately creeps the boy, who, on his knees,
falls a begging and weeping, expecting death every moment, as being the merited
punishment for the evil purpose he came about.

Being affected with his supplications, though the sight of the preparations
made for his intended ruin had moved him to anger against his mercenary
companions, he helps the young fellow up by the hand; and the night coming on
apace, he takes one of the hatchets that lay by, and gave another to the boy,
then falls a knocking the boat to pieces, and directed him to do the same,
which he accordingly did.

The boat being demolished, they carried the boards up higher on the rock, as
also the rest of the things; lest, in the night, some storm should rise, which
might wash them back into the sea; it being then too late to bring them away.
Having done, they each of them took up what they could carry, and so went home.
The young Frenchman, finding a kinder treatment than either he deserved or
expected, was extraordinary submissive and tractable; which made Quarll the
more kind and mild; and instead of condemning his evil attempt, he commiserated
his misfortune, and in room of resentment showed him kindness. Thus having
given him of what he had to eat, he puts him to bed in his lodge, wherein he
lay, till he had got his mats made up; then went to bed himself.

The next morning he rose and walked about till he thought it time for the boy
to rise; he then calls him up, and takes him to the place that he usually went
to every morning and evening to sing psalms; where the youth being come, and
hearing so many different voices, and seeing nobody, was scared out of his
wits, and took to his heels, making toward the rock as fast as he could; but
as he was not acquainted with the easiest and most practicable parts thereof,
Quarll had made an end of his psalm, and overtook him before he could get to
the seaside, into which he certainly would have cast himself at the fright;
but Quarll, who, by the boy's staring, guessed his disorder, not having the
benefit of the language, endeavored to calm him by his pleasing countenance,
and prevented his drowning himself; but could not keep off a violent fit the
fright had occasioned, which held him several minutes.

The fit being over, he and the boy took away at diverse times the remains of
the boat, and what was in it, which they could not carry home the day before:
then taking up two guns, Now, said he, these unlucky instruments, which were
intended for destruction, shall be employed for the preservation of that they
were to destroy; and taking them to his lodge, sets them at each side of the
door; then being dinner time, he strikes a light and sets the boy to make a
fire, whilst he made some of the fish fit to fry, which he picked up upon the
rock the evening before; then takes the dripping he saved, when he roasted any
flesh, to fry them with. The boy, who had lived some time in Holland, where
they used much butter, seeing dripping employed in room thereof, thought to
please his master in making some; and as he had seen milk and cream in the
dairy arbor, wanting a churn only, there being a small rundlet lying empty, he
takes out one of the ends of it, in which, the next day, he beat butter.

Quarll, seeing this youth industrious, begins to fancy him, notwithstanding
the aversion he had conceived for his nation, ever since the ill treatment he
had received from his countrymen; and, as speech is one of the most necessary
faculties to breed and maintain fellowship, he took pains to teach him English.

The lad being acute and ingenious was soon made to understand it, and in six
months capable to speak it sufficiently, so as to give his master a relation of
his late coming, and to what intent. The men, said he, who about one year since
carried away from hence some antelopes, with extraordinaty ducks, and several
rarities, which they said belonged to a monstrous English Hermit, whose hair
and beard covered his whole body, having got a great deal of money by showing
them, encouraged others to come; whereupon several joining together, hired a
ship to fetch away the Hermit, and what else they could find; therefore brought
with them tools, and guns to shoot what they could not take alive. Barbarous
wretches! replied he, to kill my dear antelopes and ducks! pray, what did they
intend to do with me? Why, said the boy, to make a show of you. To make a show
of me! Sordid wretches! is a Christian then such a rarity amongst them? well,
and what were the saws and hatchets for? To cut down your house, which they
intended to make a drinking booth of. Oh monstrous! what time and nature has
been fifteen years a completing, they would have ruined in a moment: well,
thanks to Providence, their evil design is averted. Pray, what is become of
those sacrilegious persons? They are all drowned, said the boy. Then, replies
he, the heavens are satisfied, and I avenged: but how came thou to escape?
for thou wast with them. No, replied the youth, I was upon the rock when their
boat was dashed against it, and was overset with the same sea, under the
flat-bottomed boat, where you found me. That was a happy overset for thee.
Well, is there no gratitude due to Providence for thy escape? Due to
Providence? said he, why, I thought you had saved me: I am sure you let me out.
Yes, replied Quarll; but I was sent by Providence for that pupose. That was
kindly done too, said the boy; Well, when I see him, I will thank him: Does he
live hereabout? Poor ignorant creature! replied Quarll; why Providence is every
where. What! did thou never hear of Providence? What religion art thou of?
Religion! answered the youth: I don't know what you mean: I am a fisherman by
trade, which my father lived by. Well, said Quarll, did he teach thee nothing
else? no prayers? Prayers! replied the lad; why fishermen have no time to pray;
that is for them who have nothing else to do: poor folks must work and get
money; that is the way of our town. Covetous wretches! Well, said he, I grudge
them not what they possess, since it is all the happiness they aspire at; but
thou shall learn to pray, which will be of far more advantage to thee than
work, both here and hereafter: from which time he begins to teach him the
Lord's Prayer, and the Ten Commandments; as also the principles of the
Christian religion; all which instructions the youth taking readily, won his
affection the more: he likewise taught him to sing psalms, which farther
qualified him to be his companion in spiritual exercises, as well as in
temporal occupations.

Now, having company, he is obliged to enlarge his bed, the lodge being wanted
for his antelope against breeding time: he adds, therefore, to his mats. His
other provisions also wanting to be augmented, and he having both tools and
boards, out of the flat boat which he had taken to pieces, he and the lad went
about making large boxes to salt flesh and fish in; then, with the boards that
were left, they made a table for his dwelling that he had before, and one for
his kitchen; as also shelves in the room of those that were made of wicker:
then having recruited his shell utensils that were stolen the year before, he
was completely furnished with all manner of conveniences; and Providence
supplying him daily with other necessaries, there was no room left him for
wishes, but for thanksgiving, which they daily most religiously paid.

In this most happy state they lived in peace and concord the space of ten
years, unanimously doing what was to be done, as it lay in each of their ways,
without relying on one another.

Quarll, who before, though alone and deprived of society (the principal
comfort of life), thought himself blessed, now cannot express his happiness,
there being none in the world to be compared to it, heartily praying he might
find no alteration until death: but the young man, not having met with so many
disappointments in the world as he, had not quite withdrawn his affections from
it; his mind sometimes will run upon his native country, where he has left his
relations, and where he cannot help wishing to be himself: thus, an opportunity
offering itself one day, as he went to get oysters, to make some sauce for some
fresh cod-fish which Quarll was dressing, he saw, at a distance, a ship; at
which his heart fell a panting; his pulses double their motion; his blood grows
warmer and warmer, till at last, inflamed with desire of getting at it, he lays
down the bag he brought to put the oysters in, as also the instrument to dredge
them up with, and takes to swimming. The men on board, having espied him out,
sent their boat to take him up; so he went away without taking leave of him he
had received so much good from; who, having waited a considerable time, fearing
some accident would befall him, leaves his cooking, and goes to see for him;
and, being come at the place where he was to get the oysters, he sees the bag
and instruments lie, and nobody with them. Having called several times without
being answered, various racking fears tortured his mind: sometimes he doubts he
is fallen in some hole of the rock, there being many near that place where the
oysters were: he therefore with his staff, which he always carried with him
when he went abroad, at the other side of the rock grabbled in every one round
the place; and, feeling nothing, he concludes some sea monster had stolen him
away, and, weeping, condemns himself as the cause of this fatal accident;
resolving for the future, to punish himself by denying his appetite; and only
eat to support nature, and not to please his palate.

Having given over hopes of getting him again, he returns home in the greatest
affliction, resolving to fast till that time the next day; but, happening to
look westward, in which point the wind stood, he perceives something like a
boat at a great distance: wiping the tears off his eyes, and looking
steadfastly, he discovers a sail beyond it, which quite altered the motive of
his former fear: No monster, said he, has devoured him: it is too plain a
case, that he has villainously left me: but what could I expect of one who had
projected such evil against me? So saying he went home, and made an end of
dressing his dinner; resting himself contented, being but as he was before, and
rather better, since he had more conveniences, and tools to till his ground,
and dig up his roots with. Having recommended himself to Providence, he resumes
his usual works and recreations, resolving that no cares shall mar his
happiness for the future, being out of the way of all those irresistible
temptations with which the world abounds, to lay the best men's hopes in the
dust.

Being again alone, the whole business of the house lies upon his hands; he
must now prune and trim the habitation that daily harbors him, being made of
fine growing plants, which yearly shoot out young branches: this makes them
grow out of shape. He must also till the ground; set and gather his peace and
beans in their season; milk and feed his antelopes daily; make butter and
cheese at proper times; dig up his roots; fetch in fuel and water when wanted;
attend his nets; go to destroy eagles nests; and every day dress his own
victuals: all which necessary occupations, besides the time dedicated for his
usual devotions, kept him wholly employed; which made his renewed solitude less
irksome. And, having walked all that afternoon to divert his thoughts, admiring
all the way the wonderful works of nature, both in the surprising rocks which
surrounded the island, and in the delightful creatures, and admirable plants,
that are in it; being weary with walking, he returns home, thanking kind
Providence for settling him in so blessed a place, and in his way calls at his
invisible choir; where, having sung a thanksgiving psalm, and his usual evening
hymn, he goes to supper, and then to bed, with a thoroughly contented mind;
which occasions pleasant dreams, to entertain his thoughts.

There happening a great noise of squealing, it waked him out of his dream; and
his mind being impressed with notions of war, it at first seized him with
terror: but being somewhat settled, and the noise still continuing, he
perceived it proceeded from the two different kinds of monkeys in the island,
which were fighting for the wild pomegranates that the high wind had shaken off
the trees the preceding night which was very boisterous.

Having guessed the occasion of their debate, he rises, in order to go and
quell their difference, by dividing amongst them the cause thereof. Getting up,
he opens the door, at the outside of which, an old monkey of each sort were
quietly waiting his levee, to entice him to come, as he once before did, and
put an end to their bloody war.

He was not a little surprised to see two such inveterate enemies, who at other
times never meet without fighting, at that juncture agree so well.

That most surprising sign of reason in those brutes, which, knowing his
decision would compose their comrades difference, came to implore it, put him
upon these reflections: Would princes, said he, be but reasonable, as those
which by nature are irrational, how much blood and money would be saved; having
admired the uneasiness of those poor creatures, who still went a few steps
forward, and then backward to him; he was in hopes to decoy one or both into
his lodge, by throwing meat to them: but those exemplary animals, hearing their
fellows in trouble, had no regard to their separate interest, taking no notice
of what he gave them; but kept walking to and again with all the tokens of
uneasiness they could express; which so moved him, that he hastened to the
place; where his presence caused immediately a cessation of arms, and both
parties retired a considerable distance from each other, waiting his sharing
the windfalls; which being done, they quietly took that heap which lay next
each kind, and went to their different quarters.

Fourteen years more being passed, every thing keeping its natural course,
there happened nothing extraordinary, each succeeding year renewing the
pleasures the preceding had produced. Thunders and high winds being frequent,
though not equally violent, he thought it not material to record them, or their
effects; as blowing and throwing fishes, shells, empty vessels, battered
chests, etc. upon the rock; only transactions and events wonderful and
uncommon: and there happened a most surprising one a few days after, which
though of no great moment, is as worthy of record as any of far greater
concern; being a wonderful effect of Providence, manifested in a miraculous
manner, though not to be said supernatural.

One morning, when he had roasted a parcel of those roots which he used to eat
instead of bread, and this he commonly did once a week, they eating best when
stale; having spread them on his table and chest to cool, he went out to walk,
leaving his door open to let the air in.

His walk, though graced with all the agreeables nature could adorn it with to
make it delightful; a grass carpet, embroidered with beautiful flowers, of many
different colors and smells, under his feet, to tread on; before, and on each
side of him, fine lofty trees, of various forms and heights, clothed with
pleasant green leaves, trimmed with rich blossoms of many colors, to divert
his eye; a number of various sorts of melodious singing birds perching in their
most lovely shades, as though nature had studied to excel man's brightest
imagination, and exquisiteness of art: yet all these profusenesses of nature's
wonders are not sufficient to keep away or expel anxious thoughts from his
mind. It runs upon his two dear antelopes, the darling heads of his present
stock, which he took such care to bring up, and were so engaging, always
attending him in those fine walks; adding, by their swift races, active
leapings, and other uncommon diversions, to the natural pleasantness of the
place; which now, by their most lamented absence, is become a dull memorandum
of the barbarous manner in which they were ravished away from him.

In these melancholy thoughts, which his lonesomeness every now and then
created, he returns home, where Providence had left a remedy for his grievance:
a companion, far exceeding any he ever had, waits his return; which was a
beautiful monkey of the finest kind, and the most complete of the sort, as
though made to manifest the unparalleled skill of nature, and sent him by
Providence to dissipate his melancholy.



Being come to his lodge, and beholding that wonderful creature, and in his own
possession, at the farthest end of it, and him at the entrance thereof to
oppose its flight, if offered, he is at once filled with joy and admiration:
Long, said he, I endeavored in vain to get one, and would have been glad of
any, though of the worst kind, and even of the meanest of the sort; and here
kind Providence has sent me one of an unparalleled beauty.

Having a considerable time admired the beast, which all the while stood
unconcerned, now and then eating of the roots that lay before him, he shuts the
door, and goes in, with a resolution of staying within all day in order to tame
him, which he hoped would be no difficult matter, his disposition being already
pretty familiar, little thinking that Providence, who sent him thither, had
already qualified him for the commission he bore; which having found out by the
creature's surprising docility, he returns his Benefactor his most hearty
thanks for that miraculous gift.

This most wonderful animal, having by its surprising tractability and good
nature, joined to its matchless handsomeness, gained its master's love, beyond
what is usual to place on any sort of beasts; he thought himself doubly
recompensed for all his former losses, especially for that of his late
ungrateful companion, who, notwithstanding all the obligations he held from
him, basely left him, at a time he might be most helpful; and as he fancied his
dear Beausiddle (for so he called that admirable creature) had some sort of
resemblance to the picture he framed of him, he takes it down, thinking it
unjust to bear in his sight that vile object, which could not in any wise claim
a likeness to so worthy a creature as his beloved monkey.

One day that Quarll had occasion to go out, he happened to leave his pen and
ink upon the table and some parchment he had been writing on close by it;
Beausiddle perceiving his master from home, immediately falls to work,
scribbling over every word Quarll had been writing; and when done, he laid it
by in the chest, as he saw his master do with what he had written; he then
takes out another, which he does the same to, and so to half a dozen more,
until his master's return prevented his doing any more mischief; however, in a
quarter of an hour that he was absent, he blotted out as much as had taken full
six months in writing.



Another day, as this lovely animal was officiating the charge it had of its
own accord taken, being gone for wood, as wont to do when wanted, he finds in
his way a wild pomegranate, whose extraordinary size and weight had caused it
to fall off the tree: he takes it home, and then returns for his faggot; in
which time Quarll, wishing the goodness of the inside might answer its outward
beauty, cuts it open; and, finding it of a dull lusciousness, too flat for
eating, imagined it might be used with things of an acid and sharp taste;
having therefore boiled some water, he puts it into a vessel, with a sort of an
herb which is of taste and nature of cresses, and some of the pomegranate,
letting them infuse some time, now and then stirring it; which the monkey
having taken notice of, did the same: but one very hot day, happening to lay
the vessel in the sun, made it turn sour.

Quarll, who very much wanted vinegar in his sauces, was well pleased with the
accident, and so continued the souring of the liquor, which proving excellent,
he made a five gallon vessel of it, having several which at times he found upon
the rock.

Having now store of vinegar, and being a great lover of pickles, which he had
learnt to make by seeing his wife, who was an extraordinary cook, and made of
all sorts every year; calling to mind he had often in his walks seen something
like mushrooms, he makes it his business to look for some: thus he picked up a
few, of which Beausidelle (who followed him up and down) having taken notice,
immediately ranges about, and being nimbler footed than his master, and not
obliged to stoop so low, picked double the quantity in the same space of time;
so that he soon had enough to serve him till the next season.

His good success in making that sort of pickle encourages him to try another;
and, having taken notice of a plant in the wood that bears a small green
flower, which, before it is blown, looks like a caper, he gathers a few: and,
their taste and flavor being no way disagreeable, judging that, when pickled,
they would be pleasant, he tries them, which, according to his mind, were full
as good as the real ones; and gathers a sufficient quantity, with the help of
his attendant, stocking himself with two as pleasant pickles as different
sorts. But there is another which he admires above all: none, to his mind like
the cucumber; and the island producing none, left him no room to hope for any;
yet (as likeness is a vast help to imagination) if he could but find any thing,
which ever so little resembles them in make, nature, or taste, it will please
his fancy: he therefore examines every kind of buds, blossoms, and seeds;
having at last sound that of a wild parsnip, which being long and narrow,
almost the bigness and make of a pickling cucumber, green and crisp withal,
full of a small flat seed, not unlike that of the thing he would have it to be,
he pickles some of them; which being of a color, and near upon the make, he
fancies them quite of the taste.

His beans being at that time large enough for the first crop, he gathers some
for his dinner: the shells being tender and of a delicate green, it came into
his mind, they might be made to imitate French beans: they are, said he, near
the nature, I can make them quite of the shape, so be they have the same
savor. Accordingly he cuts them in long narrow slips, and pickles some; the
other part he boils; and there being none to contradict their taste, they
passed current for as good French beans as any that ever grew.

The disappointment of having something more comfortable than water to drink
being retrieved by producing, in the room thereof, wherewithal to make his
eatables more delicious, he proceeds in his first project; and, taking
necessary care to prevent that accident which intercepted success in his first
undertaking, he accomplishes his design, and makes a liquor no wise inferior to
the best cider; so that now he has both to revive and keep up his spirits, as
well as to please his palate, and suit his appetite.

Having now nothing to crave or wish for, but rather all motives for content;
he lies down with a peaceable mind, no care or fear disturbing his thoughts:
his sleep is not interrupted with frightful fancies, but rather diverted with
pleasant and diverting dreams; he is not startled at thunder or storms, though
ever so terrible, his trust being on Providence, who at sundry times, and in
various manners, has rescued him from death, though apparently unavoidable;
being for above thirty years miraculously protected and maintained in a place
so remote from all human help and assistance.

A SKETCH OF UNIVERSAL HISTORY.
INTRODUCTION.
THE following Sketch of Universal History was written by a gentleman for the
use of two young ladies, and not intended for publication; but as it was
designed to supply what he thought was wanting to give the minds of children
some idea of general history, and as it perfectly answered the purpose for
which he composed it, he has been induced to publish it, that others might reap
the same advantage which those have for whose use it was particularly composed.

There are, it is true, many abridgments of Sacred, Greek, Roman, and English
Histories; but some short sketch of General History seems wanting; that the
learner may be enabled to see how the separate parts are connected with each
other. This deficiency is here attempted to be supplied; and as young minds are
too volatile to be long fixed, it is drawn on as small a scale as possible: on
the same account it was thought proper not to load it with chronological dates,
but to throw it into a concise and simple narrative, that the connection of the
successive events with each other might be readily acquired, and easily
retained when acquired.

The author has carefully avoided the giving a greater space to those
circumstances which are nearest the present time: for though in larger
histories this must necessarily happen from the increasing quantity of
materials, yet it is a fault in a work of this sort, since it tends to impress
on the ductile imagination of youth wrong ideas of chronology which are not
easily eradicated, as the mind will be apt to connect the length of the era
with the number of the pages it occupies.

The author of these pages is free to confess that his own imagination, even in
riper years, was so much biassed by this early prejudice, that it cost him some
pains to correct it; and he will venture to say, that many persons of no
inconsiderable historical knowledge will find the time bestowed on a careful
perusal of this Sketch, accompanied with an inspection of Doctor Priestley's
Historical and Biographical Charts, by no means thrown away.

THE earliest information we have of the actions of mankind is from the Holy
Scriptures. We have there an account of the creation of the world, the
destruction of it by the Flood, the the renewal of mankind by the family of
Noah, who were preserved in the Ark, and their increase and dispersion over the
whole face of the earth. The Scriptures then proceed principally with the
history of the descendants of Abraham, whose great grandson Joseph settling in
Egypt with his eleven brothers, they became, with their progeny, slaves to that
powerful people. But increasing in process of time, they migrated from thence
and settled in Palestine, after many wars, expelling the old inhabitants, who
are called in our translation of the Bible, Philistines. The descendants of
Abraham styled themselves Israelites, or children of Israel, from Jacob, the
father of Joseph, who was also named Israel. They divided the country among
their twelve tribes, distinguished by the names of the twelve sons of Jacob,
from whom they were severally descended. At first they were governed by
magistrates called Judges; and afterward by Kings. In the reign of Rehoboam,
their fourth King, son to Solomon, and grandson to David, ten of the tribes
revolted, under a leader named Jeroboam, leaving two tribes only, viz. Juda and
Benjamin, under Rehoboam, whose descendants were called Kings of Juda, from
whence the name of Jews was derived; and the successors of Jeroboam were called
Kings of Israel.

Several powerful nations arose in their neighborhood, which all became in
time subject to the empire of Assyria. To such a formidable enemy the offspring
of Abraham were an easy conquest: the ten tribes of Israel were carried into
captivity, and their name no more heard of among the nations: the chief person
among the Jews were also carried to Babylon, the capital of Assyria; but the
people were permitted to remain at home under the dominion of their conquerors.

Soon after this a new power arose. The King of Assyria turned his arms against
the Medes and Persians. Cambyses, King of Persia, had married Mandane, daughter
of Astyages, King of Media. The first attack of the Assyrians was against
Media. The Persians sent Cyrus, son of Cambyses and Mandane, at the head of an
army, to the assistance of his uncle Cyaxares, who was then King. The invader
was repelled, invaded in his turn, the King of Assyria killed at the taking of
Babylon, and the whole empire reduced under the dominion of the Medes and
Persians; over both of whom Cyrus reigned, by marrying the only daughter of his
uncle Cyaxares. Thus was the Persian empire founded.

The Persian empire extended over all the known parts of Asia: and the ambition
of Darius, a successor though not a descendant of Cyrus, induced him to attempt
the conquest of part of Europe; but here he met with a severe repulse from the
Grecian republics.

This small people, who inhabited a country of narrow extent, were not only
able by their courage and military skill to check this powerful invader, but
they had made such a proficiency in wisdom and arts, that we may now say, every
attainment modern Europe has made in both is principally, if not solely,
derived from them. The origin of this singular people is very uncertain. The
first time they made any conspicuous figure in the annals of mankind, was in
the Trojan war, which has been rendered immortal by the poems of Homer. At that
time they were divided into small kingdoms, under limited monarchs; all of
which, before the Persian invasion, were formed into republics.

The Persian King Darius despised such feeble antagonists; but both he and his
son Xerxes soon learned, by fatal experience, the advantage of valor and
discipline over timid multitudes. After the loss of immense armies, the Kings
of Persia contented themselves with fomenting the differences which began to
arise among the Grecian republics, in which Athens and Sparta took the lead;
and remaining anxious spectators of the bloody wars which they made with each
other, when freed from the apprehensions of a foreign enemy.

While Greece was thus wasting her strength in wars at home, great jealousy was
still entertained lest the common enemy (for so the King of Persia was
esteemed) should take advantage of her weakness to accomplish his ambitious
designs, when a storm unexpectedly burst on them from another quarter.

There was a country to the north of Greece, called Macedonia, which, though in
many respects congenial with it, was looked on as barbarous (for the Greeks
called all nations but themselves barbarians). Macedonia was governed by an
absolute King. Philip, Prince of Macedonia, happening, on some occasion, to be
an hostage among the Greeks, had the advantage, at the same time, of learning
their art of war and seeing their internal dissentions. Profiting by this
knowledge, when he succeeded to the throne of Macedonia, he so contrived to
embroil the affairs of Greece by corruption and intrigue, and by taking part,
sometimes with one party, and sometimes with another, so to weaken the whole,
that, having bribed the chiefs of some of the republics to his interest, and
totally defeated the Athenians and their allies at the battle of Chaeronea, he
rendered Greece entirely dependent on himself.

Knowing, however, the difficulty of keeping such a people in peaceable
subjection, he planned the popular scheme of an invasion of Persia; assembling
for this purpose the whole force of Greece, and causing himself to be
acknowledged chief of the confederacy. In the midst of this undertaking he was
assassinated, and was succeeded in his power by his son, distinguished by the
appellation of Alexander the Great.

Alexander, immediately putting himself at the head of this formidable army,
conquered the Persian empire with all its depedencies, and, penetrating to the
banks of the Ganges, subdued even part of that country so well known to us by
the name of the East Indies. But this immense empire was of short duration;
for, on his return, he died at Babylon, as some say, by poison, as others by
excessive drinking, leaving his vast dominions to be divided among his
generals. Asia, Egypt, and Greece, exhibited a continual scene of war and
desolation; especially Greece, where there were perpetual struggles between the
successors of Alexander for dominion, and the republics for liberty, till the
whole was reduced to subjection by the power of Rome.

Rome, which makes so conspicuous a figure in the history of mankind, arose
from being a small state to the utmost extent of territory and power. At first
it was governed by Kings, who were expelled for their tyranny, and two annual
magistrates chosen in their place; these, with the senate and assemblies of the
people, formed the government, not unlike our President, Senate, and House of
Representatives. The Romans soon engaged in wars with the other states of
Italy, all of which they finally conquered; increasing by those means not only
their strength but their military knowledge; and as many of the Italian states
were Greek colonies, they had all the advantage of the Grecian art of war
improved by their own experience. Being masters of Italy, they turned their
arms against Sicily, which engaged them in a war with Carthage, a powerful
state on the north of Africa, who had colonies in that island. This war was
prosecuted with various success, till the perseverance and courage of the
Romans prevailed, and Carthage was totally subdued.

To return to the affairs of Greece: Rome made the assisting the Greek
republics a pretense for interfering in their disputes, and finally reduced
both the oppressors and the oppressed to an entire dependence on herself.

The armies of Rome now became invincible. Not only Asia, Egypt, Greece, and
the northern parts of Africa, were subdued, but she extended her conquests to
Spain, Gaul, and Britain.

Yet, amid these splendid scenes of victory abroad, Rome was torn to pieces by
factions at home. At first the struggles were between the senate and the
people, till particular persons obtaining power by holding long commands
abroad, the names of the popular, or noble party were only used as skreens to
the ambition of individuals. The last great contest was between Julius Caesar
and Pompey; the first of whom had commanded in the northern, and the other in
the eastern provinces. The decisive battle of Pharsalia, and the subsequent
death of Pompey, gave the whole Roman empire into the hands of Caesar. The
spirit of liberty, however, made one dying effort. Caesar was stabbed in the
senate house, and an army raised in defense of public freedom. But after a
short war, the veteran troops of Caesar, under command of Octavius, his nephew
and adopted heir, Marcus Antonius, his friend, and Lepidus, one of his
generals, defeated the army of the republic, and the three leaders divided the
empire among them.

Lepidus, being a weak man, was soon deposed; and M. Antonius, devoted to his
pleasures, shut himself up in Egypt with Cleopatra, the queen of that country.
Octavius Caesar, taking advantage of his indolence, encroached on his
provinces, and a war ensuing, Antonius was totally defeated at the naval battle
of Actium, soon after which he killed himself, and Octavius remained sole
master of the Roman empire, with the title of Emperor, and the name of Augustus
Caesar; and Rome, with its vast territories, from this period became subject to
the dominion of an arbitrary monarch.

Our Savior was born during the reign of Augustus, and suffered crucifixion
under Tiberius, his immediate successor.

From this time the whole civilized world being under one master, history for a
long period has little else to record than the characters of the Roman
Emperors; and mankind were happy or miserable as their governors were mild or
cruel. Perhaps the state of the human race was never more enviable than when
such characters as Titus, Trajan, or the Antonines, were masters of the world.
While under the government of such monsters, as Caligula, Nero, and Domitian,
who seemed to delight only in cruelty, mankind were in the most miserable
situation, unable either to resist the power of the tyrant, or escape from his
dominions, as there was no country out of the limits of the Roman empire that
was not inhabited by the most savage barbarians. It may not be amiss here to
mention, that, under the reign of Titus, tenth Emperor from Augustus, the city
of Jerusalem, after repeated rebellions, was finally destroyed by the Romans,
and the Jews dispersed, as they remain at this day: a singular instance of a
people, who, having lost their country, still maintain, though scattered over
the face of the earth, their religion, their language, and their laws, the same
as they were at a period far beyond any antiquity to which the annals of any
the most ancient nation extend.

Though the barbarous tribes that bordered on the Roman empire were continually
infesting the frontiers with hostilities, and gradually encroaching on its
provinces, yet it suffered no great diminution of territory till after the time
of Constantine, who was the forty-first Emperor in succession from Augustus,
and lived upwards of three hundred years after him

During that period Christianity had been gradually, though privately,
extending itself. The professors of it had been cruelly persecuted by some of
the Emperors, and tolerated by others; but Constantine was the first Emperor
who openly professed to be a Christian, and from his time Christianity became
the established religion of the empire.

Constantine, from an absurd vanity, removed the imperial seat from Rome to a
city of his own building, between the Mediterranean and Euxine Seas, which he
called Constantinopolis, or the city of Constantine; and on his death he
divided the empire between his sons. From this time the Roman empire consisted
of two parts; the one, whose seat continued at Rome, was called the Western
Empire; the other, whose capital was Constantinople, was called the Eastern,
and sometimes the Grecian Empire

The empire, being thus divided, grew consequently weaker, and the inroads of
the barbarous nations more formidable. The Goths and Vandals attacked the
Western empire. The Franks, a brave, though uncivilized people, possessed
themselves of Gaul, from whom it received the name of France. The Britons, on
being abandoned by Rome to the inroads of the savage tribes in the north of the
island, called in the Saxons to their assistance, who soon made themselves
masters of the whole, except the mountains of Wales and Scotland, which
afforded an asylum to the ancient inhabitants. And Rome itself, under
Augustulus, the last of its Emperors, was taken by Odoacer, King of the Heruli.

The Eastern empire was attacked by the Saracens, a fierce people, who had
embraced the religion of Mahomet, an impostor and founder of a new sect, whose
doctrine soon spread, and still retains its influence in the East. This warlike
race conquered Arabia, Syria, Egypt, and the northern coasts of Africa; but
they were, in their turn, expelled by the Turks, a nation of Scythian origin,
who adopted the religion and manners of the vanquished. The provinces of the
Eastern empire gradually mouldered away, till it was at last confined to the
walls of Constantinople. A final period was put to the Roman empire so late as
the year of our lord 1453, when Constantinople was taken by Mahomet, Sultan of
the Turks, of whose dominion it has ever since remained the capital. This
happened under Constantine X. (the hundred and fourteenth Emperor in succession
from Augustus), who was killed in the assault, 2200 years from the foundation
of Rome, and during the reign of Henry VI. of England.

This was the real end of the Roman empire; but previous to this, so early as
the year of our Lord 800, there was a pretended revival of it in the person of
Charlemagne, or Charles the Great.

The barbarous tribes who overturned the Roman empire, having very obscure
notions of any religion, easily adopted that of the people they conquered; and
as the Saracens, and after them the Turks, who ravaged the East, embraced the
errors of Mahomet, which they found established in Arabia, so the northern
barbarians who conquered Gaul, Germany, and Italy, were easily converted to the
faith of Christ: and the Bishop of Rome, who assumed the title of Pope, and
Patriarch of the Roman church, soon obtained the same influence over the
Heruli, and the Lombards, who succeeded them, as he had over the Romans under
their Christian Emperors. But Desiderius, the Lombard King of Italy, opposing
the ambition of Pope Stephen III. the Pope called Charlemagne, King of France,
to his aid, who dethroned Desiderius and conquered Italy: as a reward for
which, the Pope crowned him Emperor at Rome; and Charlemagne becoming
afterward master of Germany, and dividing his dominions between his sons, that
to whom Germany fell retained the title of Roman Emperor, which his successors
still continue to assume: and the head of a limited elective monarchy, who
resides at Vienna, now calls himself Emperor of the Romans, and takes the names
of Caesar and Augustus.

About the same time that Charlemagne made these conquests on the continent of
Europe, Egbert united the seven provinces into which the Saxons had divided all
the southern part of Britain (except Wales) into one kingdom by the name of
England.

These barbarians were no sooner settled in their conquests, and in some degree
civilized, than a fresh inundation poured in from the north, under the name of
Danes and Normans, and, committing the same ravages on the new possessors which
they had committed on the old inhabitants, at last fixed themselves, part in
Germany, part in England, and part in that province of France which yet retains
the name of Normandy; and, as their predecessors had done, soon assumed the
religion and manners of the vanquished.

As these northern nations settled over all the western parts of Europe, which
were divided by them into many states, so the same form of government, derived
from the same origin, was established in them all. The leader of each army of
invaders was considered as King, and in some measure as proprietor of the
conquered territory. But as it was necessary to have an army ready at all times
to repel new invaders, and guard against the encroachment of neighbors, the
King, or General, parceled out his land among the superior officers, who, by
way of acknowledgment, were bound to furnish him with a proportionable
assistance of men and arms in time of war, and to attend his councils in time
of peace. And these leaders, to enable themselves to command the requisite
number of troops which they were to furnish, allotted part of their lands again
to the inferior officers and soldiers, on condition that they should attend
them to the wars when summoned by the King or the Lord Paramount. And this,
which is called the feudal system, is the origin of that limited monarchy,
which, till within these two centuries, was established throughout the greatest
part of Europe, and which Great Britain has preserved to this time.

Civilization had as yet made but a small progress: the writings of the ancient
Greeks and Romans, which are now the models of every thing great and elegant,
were confined to the hands of a bigoted clergy; and war was the sole delight of
princes and nobles too ignorant even to write their names.

This warlike spirit, however, was attended by some good consequences: for the
Saracens, who had overrun the eastern parts of Europe, began to turn their
arms against the southern parts of western Europe: they threatened Italy,
invaded the south part of France, their African colonies had made themselves
masters of the best part of Spain, and nothing less than the warlike turn of
its inhabitants could have prevented all Europe from becoming a prey to these
fierce barbarians, and the consequent rudeness and despotism which ever have
attended the religion of Mahomet wherever it prevails.

The Christian Doctrine, corrupted as it was by the Church of Rome, had yet a
tendency to polish and soften the manners of its professors; and even the power
of the Pope, whose supremacy was acknowledged by so many independent and
turbulent princes, though often used for the purposes of superstition, was
sometimes also instrumental in stopping the progress, or mitigating the horrors
of war.

A new spirit of enterprise now took place in Europe. As the zeal for
Christianity increased, the warlike princes and nobles who professed it beheld
with indignation the scene of all the miracles, recorded both in the Old and
New Testament, in the hands of infidels. The Pope encouraged this religious
fervor; and vast armies were poured forth to rescue these consecrated seats
from the Mahometans. But, after deluging the plains of Palestine with Christian
blood, and making a conquest of Jerusalem, which could not be retained, the
votaries of Mahomet remained, and still remain, possessors of that country
which is commonly called the Holy Land.

Some advantage, however, was derived from these enterprises. Part of the
immense armies that passed from Europe to Asia, took their rout by
Constantinople; and though, to their shame it must be owned, that while their
end was to rescue part of Asia from the power of infidels, they themselves
committed devastation in the dominions of the only Christian Prince in the east
of Europe, yet they were struck with the magnificence of the court of
Constantinople, where some relics of the splendor of the Roman empire were
still preserved. This introduced a taste for the arts among the Princes of
western Europe; and on the Turks putting an end to the Eastern empire by the
capture of Constantinople, the learned men of that city migrated into France,
Italy, Germany, and Britain, and introduced there a knowledge of Grecian
literature.

Happily for the revival of learning, Leo X. who was then Pope, was as desirous
of extending literature as some of his predecessors had been of spreading
ignorance; he therefore entertained the Grecian exiles, and encouraged letters
among the clergy. At this time Europe was in a more pacific state: England
breathed after the long wars between York and Lancaster: France, from being
divided among a number of independent nobles, each able to awe the titular
King, became one powerful monarchy: the Moors were driven out of Spain, and
that whole country, which had formed many separate kingdoms, was united by the
marriage of Ferdinand of Castile and Isabella of Arragon: Germany was one large
republic of Princes, of whom the Emperor was the head; and Italy was divided
into many small states, the chief of which were the kingdom of Naples, and the
commonwealth of Venice.

The Pope now found his authority shaken. As literature advanced, a spirit of
inquiry took place, and the monstrous errors grafted by the church of Rome on
the pure religion of Christ began to be perceived. Luther and Calvin published
their opinions on this subject, and had many followers, who, from protesting
against the errors of the church of Rome, obtained the name of Protestants;
and their opinions prevailed in England, the northern countries, and part of
Germany and Switzerland.

About this time the art of navigation being greatly improved, a large
continent was discovered in the west, called America. Many colonies were soon
formed there by the English, French, and Spaniards, which have occasioned
frequent wars among those nations. From this period, as commerce has increased,
mankind have become more civilized. Religion and politics for a time filled
both England and France with intestine commotions. Charles I. of England was
brought to the scaffold by his subjects, and Henry IV. of France was stabed by
an enthusiast. By the arts of Lewis XIV. France was brought to be an absolute
monarchy, without any legal restraint, indeed, on the power of the crown.

The last king of this potent empire was Lewis XVI. who was born August 23,
1754, married to Maria Antoniette of Austria, May 16, 1770; ascended to the
throne upon the death of his grandfather Lewis XV. May 10, 1774; and was
crowned at Rheims, June 12, 1775.

About this period Great Britain, through a mistaken policy, differed with her
colonies in North America, now the UNITED STATES; and after a fruitless and
bloody contest for some years, was compelled to acknowledge them free and
independent.

A revolution commences in France July 14th, 1789 -- Royalty abolished 10th.
August 1792 -- Lewis XVI. ordered for trial to the bar of the convention 11th.
December -- Sentence of death decreed him, 19th. January 1793, and guillotined
21st. January. His Queen, Maria Antoniette tried and executed 16th. October
1793.

The history of France and Great Britain, eternal rivals in glory and interest,
for the two last centuries, is in fact the history of the world. During that
period, there has been no war of any consequence between European powers in any
part of the world in which they have not acted a principal part; and a war
between them extends its influence from the shores of America to the banks of
the Ganges. They have been constantly ready to attack each other on the most
trivial occasions, and even their treaties of peace have seemed rather
cessations of hostilities for the purpose of renewing them with greater vigor,
than any permanent reconciliation. When and how the present fruitless and
wanton quarrel (on the part of Great Britain) may terminate, time must
develope; for the sake of humanity we wish it at an end, and that the future
contests of all-mankind may be, who shall excel most in arts of peace and the
pursuits of literature!

ON THOMAS DAY, ESQUIRE.
IF pensive genius ever poured the tear
Of votive anguish over the poet's bier;
If drooping Britain ever knew to mourn
In silent sorrow over the patriot's urn,
Here let them weep their Day's untimely doom,
And hang their fairest garlands over his tomb;
For never poet's hand did yet consign
So pure a wreath to virtue's holy shrine;
For never patriot tried before to raise
His country's welfare on so firm a base;
Glory's bright form he taught her youth to see,
And bade them merit freedom to be free.
No sculptured marble need his worth proclaim,
No herald's sounding style record his name,
For long as sense and virtue fame can give,
In his own works his deathless name shall live.
GRAY'S ELEGY. WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.
THE curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd winds slowly over the lea,
The ploughman homeward plods his wearied way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight,
And all the air a solemn stillness holds;
Save where the beetle wheels his drony flight,
Or drowsy tinkling lulls the distant folds:
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
The moping owl does to the moon complain
Of such, as wandering near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath these rugged elms, that yew-tree's shade,
Where heaves the turf in a many a mouldering heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid,
The rude forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing morn,
The swallow twitt'ring from her straw-built shed,
The cock's shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed.
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn,
Or busy housewife ply her evening care,
No children run to lisp their fire's return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Often did the harvest to the sickle yield,
Their harrow often the stubborn glebe had broke,
How jocund did they drive their team afield!
How bowed the woods beneath their sturdy stroke!
Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys and destiny obscure,
Nor grandeur hear, with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power
And all that beauty, all that wealth ever gave
Await alike the inevitable hour;
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you, ye proud, impute to these the fault,
If memory over their tomb no trophies raise,
Where through the long-drawn aisle and fretted vault,
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise.
Can story'd urn or animated bust,
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath?
Can honor's voice provoke the silent dust,
Or flattery sooth the dull cold ear of death?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire;
Hands, that the reins of empire might have swayed,
Or waked to ecstacy the living lyre.
But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,
Rich with the spoils of time did never unroll;
Chill penury repressed their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
Full many a gem of purest ray serene
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village Hampden, that with dauntless breast,
The little tyrant of his fields withstood;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest;
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country's blood.
The applause of listening senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty over a smiling land,
And read their history in a nation's eyes,
Their lot forbade; nor circumscribed alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confined:
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of mercy on mankind;
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame,
Or heap the shrine of luxury and pride
With incense kindled at the Muse's flame.
Far from the madding crowd's ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learned to stray;
Along the cool sequestered vale of life,
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet even these bones from insult to protect
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncouth rhymes and shapeless sculpture decked,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh.
Their name, their years, spelt by the unlettered Muse;
The place of fame and elegy supply,
And many a holy text around she strews,
To teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who to dumb forgetfulness a prey,
This pleasing anxious being ever resigned,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing lingering look behind!
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drop the closing eye requires;
Even from the tomb the voice of nature cries,
Even in our ashes live their wonted fires.
For thee, who mindful of the unhonour'd dead,
Do in these lines their artless tale relate,
If chance, by lonely contemplation led,
Some kindred spirit shall inquire thy fate:
Happily some hoary-headed swain may say,
" Often have we seen him at the peep of dawn
" Brushing with hasty steps the dews away,
" To meet the sun upon the upland lawn.
" There at the foot of yonder nodding beach,
" That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
" His listless length at noon tide would he stretch,
" And pore upon the brook that bubbles by.
" Hard by yon wood, now smiling as in scorn,
" Mutt'ring his wayward fancies he would rove;
" Now drooping, woeful, wan, like one forlorn,
" Or crazed with care, or crossed in hopless love.
" One morn I missed him on the accustomed hill,
" Along the heath, and near his favorite tree;
" Another came, nor yet beside the rill,
" Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he:
" The next, with dirges due, in sad array,
" Slow through the church way path we saw him borne;
" Approach and read (for thou can read) the lay
" Engraved on the stone beneath yon aged thorn.
" There scattered often, the earliest of the year,
" By hands unseen are showers of violets found;
" The red-breast loves to build and warble there,
" And little footsteps lightly print the ground."
THE EPITAPH.
HERE rests his head upon the lap of earth,
A youth to fortune and to fame unknown;
Fair science frowned not on his humble birth,
And melancholy marked him for her own.
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere;
Heaven did a recompense as largely send;
He gave to misery (all he had) a tear;
He gained from Heaven ('it was all he wished) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose,
Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
(There they alike in trembling hope repose)
The bosom of his Father and his God.
THE ELEPHANT.
NEXT to Man, the Elephant is the most respectable of the Almighty's creatures.
In size he exceeds all other terrestrial animals; and by his understanding he
approaches nearly to the human species. His temper is naturally gentle. Even
while wild in the forests he thirsts not after blood, nor does he use his vast
strength, except in defending himself or protecting his companions. His
favorite food is rice, roots, and herbs; he abhors fish and flesh. When he
finds a plentiful pasture, he makes use of a particular cry, which gives notice
to his comrades to come and partake of the dainties which he has found. An
invitation which they readily obey, to the great loss of the owner of the land.
-- The Elephant is caught and tamed without difficulty. His love of society
renders him easy to be allured into a snare by others of his own species, who
have been educated for that purpose. Two of these, after he is in confinement,
constantly attend all his motions, and, when he is not disposed to submit,
compel him by striking him with their trunks to obedience. Very soon, however,
his own astonishing judgment convinces him that no harm, is meant to him, and
that his efforts toward resistance are all in vain. In consequence of this, he
applies himself to learn his duty, and becomes the mildest and most obedient of
all domestic animals. He soon learns to comprehend signs. He distinguishes the
tone of command, of anger, and of approbation. He never mistakes the voice of
his master, receives his orders with attention, and executes them with prudence
and eagerness, but without precipitation. He seems to take pleasure in being
covered with gilded harness and gay housings. He draws carriages, wagons,
artillery, etc. with evenness and good humor, provided he be not treated ill,
undeservedly, and that the people who are employed with him have the air of
being pleased with his behavior. His conductor (styled his Cornac) generally
rides on the Elephant's neck and carries in his hand a sharp iron, with which,
when necessary, he pricks the creature's head or ears, to make him move faster;
but this is seldom put in practice, since words are always sufficient, provided
that the Cornac has had time to acquire the Elephant's confidence; after which
the beast's attachment and affection become so strong, that one is actually
recorded to have died of grief, because in a fit of passion he had killed his
keeper.

Before the invention of gunpowder, Elephants were used in war, and have often
by their efforts decided the fate of battles. On their backs they carried small
towers which held five or six armed men; and from their trunks hung heavy
chains, which they were taught to swing around them in order to break the ranks
of the enemy's army. But now that fire is the chief instrument of death in
battles, the Elephant, as he is subject to dread both the noise and the flame
of firearms, would be dangerous to his own party. He is still employed by
Europeans in the East for the purpose of transporting the baggage of their
troops, and by the Indian princes, for carrying their women in large cages
covered with green branches of trees.

Elephants are more numerous in Africa than in Asia, the only two parts of the
world where they are, naturally, found. In Africa they live uncontrouled, for
they despise the negroes as a set of unskilful, weak beings, who have neither
strength nor art enough to reduce them to slavery. Those of the Asiatic island,
Ceylon, are looked upon as the largest, boldest, and most intelligent of the
whole species.

The Elephant is strong in proportion to his vast bulk. He can with ease carry
from three to four thousand weight; and on his tusks alone he can support
upwards of one thousand pounds. The quickness of his paces, when the immense
weight of his body is considered, is a proof of his amazing strength. His usual
walk equals the common trot of a horse; and he can run as fast as a horse can
gallop. He is generally permitted to walk when loaded, and can with ease
perform fifty miles in a day, but, when pushed, can go almost twice as far. He
will do as much work as six strong horses, but his price is immense, and the
charge of maintaining him very great indeed. An Elephant who has been properly
disciplined is worth from four to five hundred guineas; and he will eat in a
day above a hundred pounds of rice, besides vegetables. In India all barrels,
sacks, and bales of goods are carried from place to place by Elephants, and if
their necks and trunks have no more room for burdens, they will carry an
additional weight in their mouth. The Elephant unites sagacity with strength,
and never injures any thing committed to his charge, be it ever so delicate. He
will carry each particular parcel to a boat in his trunk without wetting it; he
will range each in order, will try whether each lies firm, and will actually
place stones where necessary to prevent casks from rolling from their proper
station.

The trunk (or proboscis) of this wonderful animal ought to be particularly
described. It extends itself considerably beyond his mouth, and is terminated
by a protuberance which performs all the offices of, and is by no means unlike
to, a finger: with this he can lift the smallest piece of money from the
ground; he can untie knots; he can turn keys, push back bolts, or loosen straps
from buckles; and with this he can gratify his sense of smelling (which there
is reason to believe to be very exquisite) by gathering flowers, and conveying
them to his nose, which, as well as his finger, composes a part of his trunk.
The orange tree, in whose flowers he delights, both for their taste and smell,
is an object of his most eager pursuit.

The Elephant, when old, suffers great inconvenience from the increasing size
of his large teeth or tusks; to remedy this evil, his natural sagacity prompts
him to make two holes in a tree, if wild, or if tamed, in a wall, to support
them, and prevent the vast fatigue which his neck endures from their weight. As
great part of his skin is tender and delicate, he suffers much from the bites
and stings of flies. To prevent this inconvenience, he puts in practice all the
means which his peculiar good sense suggests: if he cannot keep the insects
away by brushing them off with branches of trees and whisps of straw, he then
wets all the most exposed parts of his body, and gathering dust with his trunk,
spreads it carefully over each unguarded place.

The height of the creature in his natural state is generally between ten and
fourteen feet; but in captivity his growth is considerably checked.

He is nice in many particulars, abhors bad smells, and, probably on that
account, dreads the sight, or even the cry of a hog. In eating, let him be ever
so hungry, he will fast until he has nicely examined his victuals, and
separated from them every particle of dirt, dust, or other uncleanliness.

Both ancient and modern writers dwell with peculiar pleasure on the
innumerable instances of instinct, or rather somewhat which approaches very
nearly to reason, in this noble animal; but of these we shall select a few of
the best attested.

An Elephant had been provoked by ill usage to kill his conductor. -- The
widow, who had been a witness to the horrid scene, rushed with her two infant
children to the enraged animal. -- Here, said she, since you have slain my
husband, take my life too, and complete your bloody business by destroying
these poor babes! The beast, apparently hurt at his own excess of passion, lost
at once his resentment, and taking the eldest of the children in his trunk,
adopted him, as it were for his governor, and would never suffer any other
person to mount his neck.

If the Elephant is revengeful when ill treated, he is truly grateful to those
who use him kindly. A soldier in the East Indies had been accustomed, when he
received his pay, to treat one of these sensible animals with arrack; one day,
having himself partaken too largely of the (...) liquor, he escaped from a
detachment who had been ordered to convey him to prison, and taking shelter
beneath the creature whom he had obliged, he fell fast asleep. His pursuers
finding that the Elephant had taken him under his protection, left him, and he,
when he awoke, sober, and frightened at his situation, was consoled by the
caresses of the good-natured animal, who seemed sensible of the terrors which
his benefactor felt, and willing to remove them. An Elephant, in a battle
fought not many years ago, having been driven to distraction by the pain of his
wounds, ran about the field making the most hideous cries. A wounded soldier of
his own party lay just in his way and naturally expected instant destruction.
But the poor tortured animal, conscious that he owed none of his pain to the
soldier, took him tenderly up with his trunk, and, having placed him out of the
common path, continued his route. This anecdote points out the species of
excellent reasoning in the Elephant, which prevents him from being provoked,
even by the most accute pain, to hurt such as have not injured him: but he must
not be wantonly insulted; and even the most trifling affront may expose the
giver to a fatal recompense. An Elephant which was kept at Versailles A palace
about ten miles from Paris, where the Kings of France used to have a collection
of curious beasts, birds, etc. etc.
not many years past, appeared to know when he was mocked by any person, and
seldom failed to revenge the insult. A man deceived him, by pretending to throw
eatables into his mouth. The animal took his opportunity to knock him down with
his trunk, and treated him so severely that he scarcely escaped with life.
Another time a painter, in order to draw him with his trunk elevated, employed
his servant to throw, or pretend to throw, fruit into the Elephant's mouth; the
deceitful part of this order was resented by the creature with such excellent
sagacity, that instead of revenging himself on the servant, (who appears to
have been within his reach,) he squirted such a quantity of water from his
trunk at the master, (whom he judiciously discerned to be the contriver of his
mortification,) that it utterly ruined the paper on which his work was going
forward.

It is recorded, and universally credited, of an Elephant, that as he was
passing along a street in the city of Delhi, he thrust his trunk in at the
window of a room where a tailor sat employed on a rich habit. -- This man,
displeased at being interrupted in his work, caused the animal to withdraw in
great haste, by pricking him with a needle; provoked at this treatment, the
Elephant, who knew that he should pass by the same street again the next day,
it being the usual road to his watering place, took care to be prepared for his
enemy, by laying in a store of dirty water; this he emptied from his trunk at
the same window, and completed his revenge, by thoroughly spoiling the silk on
which the tailor was at work.

Accounts hardly credible, although perfectly well attested, are told of the
Elephant's sensibility to reproach. One in particular, having been upbraided by
his keeper, as a poor indolent creature, for having failed in an effort to set
afloat a vessel which lay ashore, an attempt which was really beyond his
strength, was so much hurt by the charge, that he made a new trial, succeeded
in it, but fell instantly dead, from the damage which he had received in
consequence of the exertion.

It has been said before, that mild as the Elephant naturally is, he is not to
be trifled with. One of these animals having, with great sagacity, carried the
iron vessel in which he usually drank, to the smith's shop where it used to be
repaired; the workman mended it but by halves; the Elephant carried it back,
and was severely reproached by his master; who made him comprehend, by showing
him how the water ran out of the vessel, that it needed a farther repair. The
animal, as much hurt as if he had been accountable for the workman's neglect,
snatching the vessel out of the owner's hand, half full of water as it was,
carried it in haste to the shop; and as soon as the person who had done his
work so ill appeared, the Elephant discharged the water in his face, as a
punishment for his misbehaviour.

Hitherto, Mr. Buffon has supplied what has been said of the Elephant; what
follows, is chiefly taken from Sparman's account of the Cape of Good Hope.

A female Elephant lost her young one. It seems, that it had fallen into the
hands of a party of the native Hottentots, who had killed and devoured it. The
mother, the next night, having some how (probably by the scent) discovered the
place of its death, attacked the kraal or village in the dark, and utterly
destroyed it, by beating down all the huts, and trampling all the plantations
to pieces. And here it may be properly remarked, that the Hottentots eagerly
seek the flesh of the Elephant to eat it; which is not the case with any other
African or Asiatic people, that we read of.

In the country round the Cape, the Elephant is pursued, not to be tamed, but
to be slain for the sake of the ivory which his teeth afford. In this chase,
the danger to the hunter is great; but the hopes of a large profit (sometimes
as much as 300 gilders, or about twenty-six pounds, by a single Elephant) make
him close his eyes to all perils. He must be very attentive to approach the
animal on the side whence the wind blows; for should he be discerned by his
piercing scent, the Elephant rushes on him; nor can any thing save him, except
a steep hill or wood, either of which circumstances incumber the beast, and
save the sportsman. The bullet which is destined to destroy this immense
creature, must be made of a proportionable mixture of tin and lead; the piece
from whence it is discharged, is generally one of those muskets which were in
use about one hundred and eighty years ago, so strong and heavy, as to require
a rest to support it when levelled. And yet, when these enormous pieces are
deeply loaded, and supplied with proper balls, an Elephant has been known to
receive eight wounds in his body, before he was deprived of life.

THE LION.
THE Lion, though inferior in size to several other animals which inhabit the
same countries with himself, is so superior in the united qualities of
strength, address, and courage, as to have obtained the highest rank amongst
the brute creation. Even the cumbrous Elephant, and the robust Buffalo, are
conquered by this lordly beast, who proudly subdues and preys upon all, but is
himself the prey of none. Nor is his courage less remarkable than his strength.
The fierce Lion, who has been used to conquer, and is ignorant of the superior
power of man, will sometimes rush upon a caravan which is traveling through
the deserts; and such is his contempt of danger, that when he is repulsed, he
does not turn his back and endeavor to escape, but retreats sighting, and
defending himself against the attacks of his enemies. The largest Lions are
about eight or nine feet in length, and three or four feet in height: their
color is yellow on the back, and a dusky white on the sides and belly. The
male Lion is adorned with a large flowing mane, which grows larger as he
advances in years; but the female is without this ornament, and is about
one-fourth less in size. In general the Lioness is much more docile and gentle
than the Lion; but when she has young, she becomes still fiercer than he, and
will attack a number of armed men in defense of her whelps. Her care to secure
them from discovery is shown before their birth; she retires to the least
frequented places, and when they are brought forth, she is so careful to
preserve them, that when she leaves them to procure food, she carefully brushes
away the marks of her feet with her tail, that her young may not be discovered
by the prints of her steps. The Lion is an inhabitant of warm climates, and is
never found in the frozen regions of the North. Indeed the strength and
fierceness of this terrible animal appear to be greatly increased by the heat
of the climate he inhabits; and there is a remarkable difference between the
ferocity of those Lions which breathe the temperate air of lofty mountains and
of those which dwell in the sandy and scorching plains. The American Lions,
which are natives of a milder climate, have neither the fierceness, the
strength, nor the courage of those born under the fervid rays of an Indian or
African sun; nor are they adorned with a mane. Indeed, their differing in so
many respects has made several Naturalists very doubtful whether or not they
were of the true Lion species.

Though the Lion is naturally an inhabitant of hot countries, he can subsist a
long time in more temperate climates. Several have lived during many years in
Europe, and some have brought forth young, and attained to a considerable age,
in Britain. The time which has been supposed the usual term of their lives is
between twenty and twenty-five years. Their numbers have been greatly lessened
by the increase of the human species, and the invention of firearms; and
though many still inhabit the southern parts of Africa and Asia, and are very
fierce and dreadful, yet they are no longer found in very large numbers. Those
Lions which dwell near the villages of India or Barbary, have so often
experienced the superior powers of man, that they have lost much of their
native fierceness, and, if forced by hunger or provoked by the attacks of men,
they attempt to assault them, they approach with great caution and signs of
fear. It is however asserted, that if this fierce beast has conquered, and has
once tasted human flesh, he will never afterward prey with equal pleasure upon
any other animal.

When the Lion prepares to attack his prey, he generally makes use of stratagem
to ensure his success He lies in wait near the springs where the animals go to
drink, couched upon his belly, darts upon them as they pass, and seldom misses
his aim, though he frequently makes a leap twelve or fifteen feet in length. As
he neither hears nor sees very well, though he has the faculty of seeing in the
night, he is known to employ great watchfulness to procure his prey; and is
obliged to keep at a considerable distance from the animal he means to attack,
who would, if he came nearer, soon discover him by his strong scent. Springs
and fountains are very agreeable to him, not only on account of their being
frequented by other animals, but also from the great thirstiness of the Lion;
for though he is able to support great hunger, he suffers much from thirst.
When he attacks the Buffalo, he rushes upon him unseen, fastens his two fore
paws upon his mouth and nostrils, and does not resign his hold till the animal
is quite strangled; he then sometimes tears out the entrails that he may remove
the body with more ease, and drags it to a retreat, where he may enjoy his
feast in security.

All animals appear to have a natural dread of the Lion, and travelers have
frequently been acquainted with their approach by the uneasiness of their
cattle. The oxen and horses sigh deeply, and show every appearance of terror,
and the dogs creep close to the feet of their masters, and are afraid even to
bark. At the sound of his terrible voice the affrighted animals run wildly
about to avoid him; but as he lays his mouth to the ground when he utters his
deep continued roars, the sound is so diffused, that they know not whence it
proceeds, and they frequently advance to the very spot where he stands ready to
devour them. But terrible as the Lion is to every other animal, he is so
inferior to man, that he is not only frequently taken in toils which are formed
to destroy him, but is even hunted for amusement. The inhabitants of the
southern parts of Africa, mounted on horseback, frequently pursue and kill him,
and they esteem his flesh both pleasant and nourishing. His skin, which in some
countries has been used as a royal mantle, is however regarded as very inferior
in real usefulness to the hide of an Ox.

The inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope, who are much infested by Lions,
which devour their flocks, make use of many artifices to destroy them. In
traveling in the night, they are obliged to be pretty constantly upon their
guard against this fierce animal, though he seldom attacks them in the day,
except he is very hungry, or greatly provoked. A Hottentot, who was traveling
to a considerable distance, observed that he was followed by one of these
formidable animals, which kept several yards behind him, but advanced with
exactly the same speed. Sensible of the cunning of the Lion, who seldom attacks
his prey openly, the traveller concluded that he only waited for the approach
of darkness to rush upon him; and as he was without weapons, and at a great
distance from any habitation, he was in the utmost danger of being torn in
pieces by his pursuer. His knowledge of the manners of the animal, and his own
ingenuity, furnished him, however, with the means to escape. He carefully
sought for some rocky place, which was level at the top, and had a deep
precipice on one side; and seating himself on the brink, he prepared for the
part he was to act to save himself from destruction, while his enemy lay
couched upon the ground, and steadily observing him. As soon as it became dusk,
the Hottentot, gently sliding forwards, let himself down upon a small part of
the rock which projected just below him, and which was just large enough to
support him; but in order to deceive the Lion, he raised his stick, upon which
he had placed his hat and cloak, and made a gentle motion with it just above
his head, at a small distance from the edge of the mountain. This stratagem had
the desired success. The Lion crept gently toward the stick, which he mistook
for the man, and then bounded upon it, with so exact an aim as to fall down the
precipice close to the spot where the Hottentot had placed the snare.

There are few dispositions so savage that they may not be tamed by kindness,
and even the ferocious Lion has afforded the strongest proofs of attachment and
gratitude for the benefits he has received. The celebrated Earl of
Peterborough, when a boy, was presented with a young Lion, which he greatly
delighted to caress and to feed; and the animal became so tame as to suffer his
lordship to play with him, with the familiarity of a brother. They grew up
together, and their intimacy had continued several years, when the Earl was
appointed by Queen Ann to the command of her army in Spain. His promotion did
not, however, make him forgetful of his old friend the Lion; he gave strict
orders to his housekeeper to take care of his playfellow. The animal showed
great concern at the absence of his lordship, sensibly pined for his loss, and
refused his food; and the Earl, in order to preserve his life, ordered him to
be presented to her Majesty, in hopes that the society of the other animals in
the Tower would make him forget his old friend. A long time passed before the
return of the Earl from Spain, who brought over with him a Spanish officer whom
he had taken prisoner. His humanity made him desirous of making the captivity
of the Spaniard as easy as possible; and in hopes of amusing him, he took him
to view whatever was curious, in or near London, and amongst other places they
visited the Tower. Here the Earl was received by a roar of joy from his old
companion, who immediately knew him, and showed the greatest transports at the
return of his benefactor; nor did he suffer him to depart, till, in the excess
of his rapture, he had deprived his lordship of nearly the whole of his coat,
though he very carefully avoided injuring his person.

OF THE TWO-HORNED RHINOCEROS.
THIS animal is sound in Africa, chiefly about the Cape of Good Hope, and is
distinguished from the common or one-horned Rhinoceros, as well as from all
other beasts, by having two horns upon its nose, the larger of which stands
foremost toward the muzzle or snout of the animal, the shorter behind it, and
higher up toward the forehead. The foremost horn grows almost to the length of
two feet, and seven or eight inches thick at the bottom; the hindmost sometimes
measures so long as sixteen inches, and proportionably thick. They are of a
conical shape, with the tips inclined somewhat backwards, but their size does
not always appear to be in proportion to the body. This species of Rhinoceros
is endued with prodigious strength, and, though little inferior in size to the
Elephant, and somewhat resembling it in its enormous unwieldy make, runs with
astonishing swiftness. It harbors amongst close thickets and bushy copses,
from whence it comes forth in the cool of the evening, to graze for the night.
Its food consists of plants and roots, with the tops of shrubs, and small
branches of trees. The roots it is supposed to dig up with the smallest of its
horns, as this, especially in the older animals, is most commonly observed to
be worn away in different parts, which is never the case in the foremost and
larger one. It is natural to suppose that this latter is the offensive weapon
of the animal, and is therefore never used in the servile employment of digging
for its food, at which time it is turned on one side, out of the way; for these
horns are said to be so loose and moveable, that when the Rhinoceros walks
carelessly along, one may see its horns dangle about, and hear them clash and
clatter against each other. The shrubs and plants, which also compose part of
its food, it clips off with its lips, not having any fore teeth for that
purpose, Indeed it has little room for them, as the mouth goes off so sharp at
the fore part (something like that of a Tortoise) that it is only an inch and a
half broad. Besides, it has no occasion for any teeth there, the skin which
forms the lips being of the extreme hardness, that it can perform the (...) of
teeth very well, and that with so much the greater ease, as the under jaw goes
within the upper.

The tongue is perfectly soft, which directly contradicts the common notion
that the Rhinoceros kills by licking with his tongue.

Notwithstanding the formidable bulk and amazing strength of this animal, which
has been known to run up to a wagon and carry it to a considerable distance on
its snout and horns, the Hottentots and the Dutch farmers (...) live in the
inland parts round the Cape of Good Hope, frequently attack and overpower it.
For the purpose of shooting it they use balls made of lead and tin mixed, and
having found out its retirement, they approach it on the side opposite to that
from which the wind blows. This precaution is absolutely necessary on account
of the very acute smell and hearing with which the animal is endued. At the
least noise more than usual, it takes the alarm, and erecting its ears, stands
clapping with them and listening; and if the hunter be so imprudent as to get
to the windward of it, even at a great distance, it seldom fails directly to
follow him by the scent and attack him with the greatest fury. Being therefore
pretty secure on the side of the wind, the Rhinoceros has the sagacity in
general to choose, by way of entrenchment, a bush very thick, and high on that
side from whence it has no scent. If wounded it rushes out from the thickets
into the plain, when the boldest sportsmen prudently consult their safety by
flight. It soon, however, turns aside, and if there be no copse convenient for
its escape, (...) off straight forward over the plain; if they happen to have
hounds out with them, these pursue it, and form a strong contrast to the
colossal size of the animal, which, however, seems not to take the least notice
of them. With a gentle rise and fall of the neck it keeps on an even steady
course, a kind of pacing, which nevertheless gets over a great deal of ground:
but this pace, on hearing a few shots fired after it, (...) to a very fast
gallop, so as in an instant (...) ^^ave the hounds at a great distance behind;
and, in all probability, (...) sportsman would inevitably be lost, who should
happen to become the object of its pursuit, if he had not art enough to get out
of the sight and scent of it by shifting and dodging occasionally. In this
particular the Rhinoceros is said to resemble the Elephant, that without
delaying or stopping in the least, it will run to the distance of many leagues
from the place where it has been closely hunted, or in any other way molested.

The two-horned Rhinoceros sleeps in a different posture from the Elephant; it
lies down on the ground on one side, and withal is said to sleep so sound, that
the Hottentots and Dutch colonists frequently steal upon it while in that
situation, and shoot it; it differs very much in this respect from the common
or one-horned Rhinoceros, which is described as by no means a sleepy animal. If
it happens not to die immediately of its wounds, the Hottentot hunters will
nevertheless follow the traces of it for one or more days, till it drops down
with weakness and fatigue. In general, however, they poison one or two of their
darts (...) they attack it, in which case they have no occasion to wait so many
days as they otherwise would before their prey falls into their hands.

Fortunately for those who attack the Rhinoceros, with all its keenness of
smell and hearing, it labors under the disadvantage of being extremely
near-sighted. In effect, its eyes are very small and sunk into its head, which
is perhaps the reason (...) it sees but indistinctly, and that only straight
forward, so as (...) to perceive a horseman at the distance of fifty or sixty
yards upon the open plain, unless directed by its scent or hearing to fix upon
the object. Whenever therefore it happens to receive a wound without being able
to discover from what hand it proceeds, this circumstance seems to provoke it
to a greater degree of fury. Not knowing where to wreak its vengeance, it
swings the fore part of its body violently from one side to the other, and
snuffs up with its nostrils as if endeavoring to discover the enemy by its
smell. The noise which it makes with its nose upon such occasions is
particularly terrible to the horses of those who are in chase of it: for when
wounded, it will snuff and blow so hard and so loud as to startle them, and
make them uneasy, at the distance of some hundreds of yards. Indeed, instinct
sufficiently informs the horse of its danger, when the Rhinoceros is nigh, not
only by the hearing but by the smell also; for whenever the sportsmen approach
its retreat, which is always done against the wind, the horses having the
advantage of the breeze, are enabled to discover their tremendous enemy so far
off as forty or fifty yards by the smell: upon this they immediately stop, and
give evident proofs of terror by their unwilliness to proceed any farther.

This animal is of a greyish or ash color, but, which is very remarkable,
seems to change its hue, and become almost black upon being hard hunted. This
is owing probably to the dust and dried mud that sticks to its skin (as it is
very fond (...)rolling and wallowing in the mire), and when moistened by sweat,
becomes much darker in color. About the (...) however, where the skin is not
so thick as on the rest of the body, and almost quite smooth, it is nearly the
color of a man's flesh. On all other parts the surface of the skin is rough
and knotty, and not much differing from that of an Elephant, but of a closer
texture, and when it is dry, extremely hard. It has not, however, any of those
plaits and folds which are to be observed in the common descriptions and
figures published of it, and which give it the appearance of being covered with
a harness. The hide is an inch and a half thick on the back, and somewhat
thicker on the sides, though less compact there. It is, however, by no means
impenetrable, as has been commonly supposed. Leaden balls indeed will sooner be
flattened against the skin than pierce it; but when they are hardened by a
proper mixture of tin, the Rhinoceros may be killed by a single shot. Nay, its
hide, as well as that of the Elephant, is capable of being penetrated by
javelins and darts. A Hottentot, at the distance of five or six paces, has been
known to pierce through the hide of a Rhinoceros half a foot deep into its
body. Some have also imagined it to possess no feeling in its skin; but,
besides what is mentioned of the common Rhinoceros, that it is capable of being
tickled under the belly with a whisp of straw, the Two-horned Rhinoceros is
fond (as was mentioned before) of wallowing in the mire like a hog, which would
hardly be the case were its hide absolutely insensible; and indeed, when the
thick hide of an Elephant is affected by the stinging of flies, we cannot
suppose that of the Rhinoceros to be totally destitute of feeling. Its skin,
though tough and close in its texture, has, particularly about the groin,
vessels, blood, and juices, adapted for the nourishment of insects; and in
effect this animal is found to be infested in that part with a particular
species of insect; neither does the thickness of its hide hinder it from
perspiring. Lastly, the Rhinoceros here described may be said to be totally
destitute of hair, though there are a few scattered dark bristly hairs, about
an inch long, on the edges of the ears, with a very few between and round about
the horns, and at the tip of the tail. This part of the animal is about an inch
thick, diminishing by degrees from the root to the tip, where it is flattened
at the sides; and on the edges, produced by this flatness, are to be seen some
strong stiff hairs, an inch or an inch and a half in length. Such of them as
stand toward the creature's hard and rough body are visibly worn down and
stunted.

Of the inward parts of this animal, it is sufficient to observe, that its
flesh, when dressed, taste a good deal like pork, but much coarser. Its brain are
less than those of a middle-sized man; like the horse, it has no gall; its
entrails also most resemble those of a horse: so that this beast,
notwithstanding its being furnished with horns, does by no means belong to the
class of those which chew the cud, but rather of those whose fat is of a soft
nature like lard, and not hard like tallow. The stomach, however, does not bear
the least resemblance to that of a horse, but rather to that of a man or hog;
and the contents of it, when opened, after the animal has been lately killed,
are usually without smell, and perfectly fresh and sweet, consisting of roots
and small branches of trees chewed, some of them as big as the end of a man's
finger; and of succulent plants, the whole diffusing around a very strong and
not disagreeable aromatic odor.

OF THE HUMMING-BIRD.
OF this charming little animal, there are six or seven varieties, from the
size of a small wren, down to that of an humble be. An European could never
have supposed a bird existing so very small, and yet completely furnished out
with a bill, feathers, wings, and intestines, exactly resembling those of the
largest kind. A bird not so big as the end of one's little finger, would
probably be supposed but a creature of imagination, were it not seen in
infinite numbers, and as frequent as butterflies in a summer's day, sporting in
the fields of America, from flower to flower, and extracting their sweets with
its little bill.

The smallest humming-bird is about the size of an hazel-nut. The feathers on
its wings and tail are black; but those on its body and under its wings, are of
a greenish brown, with a (...) red cast or gloss, which no silk or velvet can
imitate. It has a small crest on its head, green at the bottom, and as it were
gilded at the top; and which sparkles in the sun like a little star in the
middle of its forehead. The bill is black, straight, slender, and of the length
of a small pin. The largest humming-bird is near half as big as the common
wren, and without a crest on its head; but to make amends, it is covered, from
the throat half way down the belly, with changeable crimson-coloured feathers,
which, in different lights, change to a variety of beautiful colors, much like
an opal. The heads of both are small, with very little round eyes as black as
jet.

It is inconceivable how much these add to the high finishing and beauty of a
rich luxurious western landscape. As soon as, the sun is risen, the
humming-birds, of different kinds, are seen fluttering about the flowers,
without ever lighting upon them Their wings are in such rapid motion, that it
is impossible to discern their colors, except by their glittering. They are
never still, but continually in motion, visiting flower after flower, and
extracting its honey. For this purpose they are furnished with a forked tongue,
that enters the cup of the flower, and extracts its nectared tribute. Upon this
alone they subsist. The rapid motion of their wings brings out a humming sound,
whence they have their name.

The nests of these birds are not less curious than the rest: they are
suspended in the air, at the point of the twigs of an orange, a pomegranate, or
a citron tree; sometimes even in houses, if they find a small and convenient
twig for the purpose. The female is the architect, while the male goes in quest
of materials; such as cotton, file moss, and the fibers of vegetables. The nest
is about the size of an men's egg cut in two. They lay two eggs at a time, and
never more, about the size of small peace, and as white as snow, with here and
there a yellow speck. The time of incubation continues twelves days; at the end
of which the young ones appear, and are much about the size of a
blue-bottle-fly.

It is a doubt whether or not these birds have a continued note in singing. All
travelers agree that, beside the humming noise produced by their wings they
have a little interrupted chirrup; but Labat asserts, that they have a most
pleasing melancholy melody in their voices, though small and proportioned to
the organs which produce it. It is very probable that, in different places,
their notes are also different; and as there are some that continue torpid all
the winter, there may likewise be some with agreeable voices, though the rest
may in general be silent.

THE NIGHTINGALE.
THE NIGHTINGALE is the most famous of the feathered tribe. It visits England
in the beginning of April, and leaves it in August. It is found but in some of
the southern parts of that country, being totally unknown in Scotland, Ireland,
or North Wales. They frequent thick hedges and low coppices, and generally keep
in the middle of the bush, so that they are rarely seen. They begin their song
in the evening, and generally continue it for the whole night. For weeks
together, if undisturbed, they sit upon the same tree; and Shakespeare rightly
describes the nightingale sitting nightly in the same place.

In the beginning of May, the nightingale prepares to make its nest, which is
formed of the leaves of trees, straw, and moss. The nest being very eagerly
sought after, is as cunningly secreted; so that but very few of them are found
by the boys when they go upon these pursuits. It is built at the bottom of
hedges, where the bushes are thickest and best covered. While the female
continues sitting, the male at a good distance, but always within hearing,
cheers the patient hen with his voice, and, by the short interruption of his
song, often gives her warning of approaching danger. She lays four or five
eggs; of which but a part, in that cold climate, come to maturity.

The delicacy, or rather the fame, of this bird's music, has induced many to
abridge its liberty to secure its harmony. Its song, however, in captivity is
not so very alluring; and the tyranny of taking it from those hedges where only
it is most pleasing, still more depreciates its imprisoned efforts. Gesner
assures us, that it is not only the most agreeable songster in a cage, but that
it is possessed of a most admirable faculty of talking. He tells the following
story in proof of his assertion, which he says was communicated to him by a
friend. Whilst I was at Ratisbone, says his correspondent, I put up at an inn,
the sign of the Golden Crown, where my host had three nightingales. It happened
at that time, being the spring of the year, when those birds are accustomed to
sing, that I was so afflicted with the stone, that I could sleep but very
little all night. It was usual then about midnight to hear the two nightingales
jangling. and talking with each other, and plainly imitating men's discourses.
Besides repeating the daily discourse of the guests, they chanted out two
stories. One of their stories was concerning the tapster and his wise, who
refused to follow him to the wars as he desired her; for the husband
endeavored to persuade his wife, as far as I understood by the buds, that he
would leave his service in that inn, and go to the wars in hopes of plunder.
But she refused to follow him, resolving to stay either at Ratisbone, or go to
Nuremberg. There was a long and earnest contention between them; and all this
dialogue the birds repeated. The other story was concerning the war which the
emperor was then threatening against the protestants; which the birds probably
heard from some of the generals that had conferences in the house. These things
did they repeat in the night after twelve o'clock, when there was a deep
silence. But in the day time, for the most part, they were silent, and seemed
to do nothing but meditate and revolve with themselves upon what the guests
conferred together as they sat at table, or in their walks.

Such is the sagacity ascribed to the nightingale. But there is a little bird,
rather celebrated for its affection to mankind than its singing, which however,
in a British climate, has the sweetest note of all others. The reader already
perceives that I mean the RED-BREAST, the wellknown friend of man, that is
found in every hedge, and makes it vocal. The note of other birds is louder,
and their inflections more capricious; but this bird's voice is soft, tender,
and well supported; and the more to be valued as it is enjoyed the greatest
part of the winter. If the nightingale's song has been compared to the fiddle,
the red-breast's voice has all the delicacy of the flute.

THE THREE BROTHERS.
EUGENE, RICHARD, and CASSANDER, were the sons of Mr. Smithson, a reputable
merchant in the North of Old England, who having no other children besides
them, and being in pretty affluent circumstances, resolved to have them
educated immediately under his own eye. For this purpose he invited into his
house a Mr. Markham, a gentleman of learning and approved morals, to be their
tutor, whose care and attention to their improvement afterward fully answered
all his expectations.

These Three Brothers, from their earliest infancy, were play-mates and
companions. They had never been sent out of their father's house, either to
nurse or even to a school: as Mrs. Smithson, their mother, whose education
rendered her perfectly equal to the task, undertook to put them through the
first rudiments of learning, and to prepare them for whatever studies a tutor
might afterward direct them to. Whether it was their constant society from
their earliest childhood; in the course of which, notwithstanding the
difference of two years, between the age of Cassander and that of Eugene, each
shared invariably in the studies as well as the amusements of the other two; or
whether it was the natural bent of their dispositions, I know not, but they
were remarkable for bearing toward each other a degree of affection that is
rarely to be found amongst brothers in general. In their sports they were
inseparable; the inequality of their number was never an obstacle to their all
partaking of the same pastime, though it might originally have been intended
but for two; and notwithstanding there would now and then arise a trifling
dispute amongst them concerning their play, all differences were usually
settled and reconciled before the conclusion of the game, so that they never
parted from each other in a pet; but, on the contrary, after they were tired of
play, it was no uncommon thing to see them linked all three arm in arm,
sauntering up and down the garden walks, which were commonly the scene of their
amusements; and in that friendly attitude communicating to each other their
little fancies, discussing the remarkale stories that occurred in the course of
their lessons, or else laying their heads together to plan and strike out some
new mode of diversion.

Thus agreeing, and unanimous in all things, they entered with pleasure upon
the course of study laid down to them by Mr. Markham, their tutor. Mrs.
Smithson had never, while her sons were under her care, made their lessons a
painful or disagreeable task; the novelty therefore of Mr. Markham's first
examination, under whom they found that they were to learn both Latin and
Greek, so charmed and delighted them, that they all three jumped for joy when
their Papa showed them three Latin Grammars, which they were to begin the next
day.



Besides, their satisfaction at not being obliged to leave their dear parents,
nor to be separated from each other, might not a little contribute to the
alacrity they showed on this occasion. In effect the quickness of their
progress surprised and delighted Mr. Markham, their present tutor, as well as
their former one, that is their Mama, to whom they would run every day in
raptures of joy to communicate the contents of their several lessons.

Hitherto we have seen Eugene, Richard and Cassander, perfectly alike and equal
in all things; it is necessary now to show in what respects they were unlike,
and how the particular character and disposition of each, though leading to
actions extremely different from what the others would pursue, yet always
uniformly concurred in the exertion of that amiable principle, brotherly love.

Eugene, therefore, with much generosity and something of fire in his
composition, was at the same time a little arch, or what is called waggish. His
pranks in general were the most innocent in the world, it is true, and he could
say at least, that he never meant to hurt: if, however, it would sometimes
happen, which after all was seldom the case, that any of his little jokes cost
either of his brothers a tear; that tear, it was easy to be seen, gave Eugene
infinitely more pain than any he himself shed: but the open frankness and
ardent goodnature, with which he would console his weeping brother, seldom
failed to dry it up in a moment. He would never justify his own mistakes or his
awkwardness; and thus he seldom felt the reproaches of his companions, because
they always found him ready to submit to them heartily, and, whenever it so
happened, to own himself in the fault.

Richard, on the other hand, was all simplicity: he had not the least shadow of
design in him; and were it not for the extraordinary apprehension that he
showed in his learning, in which he outstripped both his brothers, he might be
said not to have a thought of his own. Thus Richard, though as cheerful as the
day, seldom laughed unless Eugene or Cassander led the joke. He never proposed
a new sort of play, or invented a fresh plaything, but always was ready, with
the greatest good humor, to join in the one and admire the other, if offered
to his attention by either of his brothers. He might even be said to have no
wants or likings of his own, but as they put him in mind of them. If Eugene
said to the maid, "Molly, I want to go to bed;" Richard would add, "so do I
too." If Cassander said, "Mama, pray give me a piece of bread and butter,"
Richard, it present, would commonly join, "Aye, and me too." And this
disposition of Richard was the happiest in the world; for preserving the
friendship of the Three Brothers; since, whatever advantage or superiority he
might have in his learning, all his amusements, all the pleasure that he
enjoyed from society, depended wholly on Eugene and Cassander.

This last was neither so volatile as his elder brother, nor so simple as
Richard: he had something grave even in his countenance, and though youngest of
the three, was allowed to be much the most prudent; by which means he balanced,
as it were, the opposite defects of his brothers, and frequently would act as
their adviser and censor, by reproving Eugene for his too great vivacity, which
led him so often into scrapes, and Richard for his thoughtless absence and
extreme credulity. But though he sometimes took this freedom, it was always
with the greatest tenderness, being accustomed from his infancy to treat his
elders with respect, particularly his brothers. Indeed a respect for their
elders and superiors Mrs. Smithson took early care to inculcate on the minds of
all her children. Richard was commanded, to yield in every thing to Eugene, and
Cassander to Richard; and all three to behave with proper deference to those
who were more advanced in life than themselves. This injunction had a good
effect more ways than one: it prevented any childish contests for the
preference, as each knew and was contented with his own rank, and always waited
his proper turn. Besides, it made them behave with good manners to strangers,
let their condition in life be what it will; nor was any one of them ever known
to speak or act with petulance even to a beggar.

After remaining a competent time under the instruction of Mr. Markham, it was
their father's pleasure that they should all three enter the University
together, and pursue their studies there, in order to qualify themselves for
whatever of the learned professions they might afterward choose. This
circumstance gave them infinite pleasure. The love that they bore to each other
while children, was now ripening into a steady, ardent friendship, which no
time could alter or diminish; and they saw before them a prospect of being
happy in each other's society during the whole course of their lives. But human
events are uncertain, and the shades of misfortune often intervene unexpectedly
to chequer the most equal and placid sunshine of prosperity. Mr. Smithson was
still in trade, and therefore liable to accidents and crosses which merchants
frequently experience. It happened, in the beginning of the war, that two
ships, containing property of his to a very considerable amount, uninsured,
were taken by the enemy. The deficiency produced in his capital by this
misfortune, joined to several other smaller losses, obliged Mr. Smithson to
become a bankrupt; after which, conceiving a distaste to his native place, he
determined to take a voyage to the West Indies, in order to look after an
estate in land which had been bequeathed him as a legacy by some distant
relation since the time of his failure. At his departure, not judging it
expedient to take his wife along with him, he left her a small sum of ready
money, but promised to send over remittances whenever the property, of which he
went to take possession, could be turned to any account.

Our Three Brothers were inconsolable at parting with their father: this was
the first time in their lives that they might be said to feel the grief of
absence from their beloved parents; for while at College they could hardly be
called absent from home, as they conversed weekly, nay almost daily, by
letters, either with Mr. or Mrs. Smithson. But their sorrow was considerably
increased, when, after two years had elapsed without any tidings from their
father, they received a melancholy epistle from Mrs. Smithson, informing them
of her utter inability to maintain them any longer at College, and requesting
their immediate return, in order to consult how they should dispose of
themselves for their future settlement in life.



During the last two years that they had spent at the University, nothing but
the strictest economy, on the part of the Brothers, as well as that of their
indulgent parent, could have enabled them to subsist; yet notwithstanding the
general dissipation of the place, their temperance and frugality did not hinder
them from supporting an amiable character, and being highly esteemed by all who
knew them. They were remarked for an obliging, affable demeanor, an
unexceptionable attention to their College duties, but particularly for the
strict intimacy and happy degree of unanimity which they always appeared to
maintain. They were indeed distinguished by the title of the Three Brothers;
and the wits of the place spoke of them as an exception to that remark of the
poet Friendship, like love, is but a name,
Unless to one you stint the flame,
However, there was a considerable difference in their dispositions, which,
without the least impairing their affection, grew every day more and more
conspicuous. Eugene was now ambitious, enterprising, and changeable: his parts
were rather brilliant than solid. Cassander, on the contrary, was steady in his
opinions and resolutions, which he built on the soundest and most mature
reflection: he appeared more slow in apprehending the difficulties of science
than his elder brother; but, in return, his memory was more faithful and
retentive, and whatever knowledge he once made his own was ever after at his
command; for, as Mr. Pope elegantly observes, Where beams of warm imagination
play,
The memory's soft figures melt away
Richard was a sort of medium between these opposites: with something of
Fugene's vivacity and the steadiness of Cassander, he had an ardent and
insatiable thirst of knowledge; in effect, he had recommended himself so
powerfully to his superiors, by the extent and splendor of his seize,
that he was at this very time of Mrs. Smithson's writing for him and his
brothers, pointed out to a nobleman, equally respectable for his rank and
principles, as a proper person to be private tutor to his Lordship's two sons,
who were lately entered at the University.

At their return, therefore, upon the summons of their mother, when she laid
before them the melancholy state of their affairs, the disappointment of their
expectations, and, to crown all, the dreadful apprehensions that she
entertained of the loss of her husband, either at sea or by the casualties of
war; concluding with the tenderest advice to them, to unite their efforts
toward the re-establishing of their circumstances by a steady course of
industry in whatever professions they might adopt: upon this occasion it was
that the advantages of superior application and a more rapid progress in
learning appeared conspicuous. While Eugene and Cassander endeavor to comfort
Mrs. Smithson by the strongest assurances of their future diligence and the
exertion of their industry in some line or other that might afford themselves
and her a decent maintenance, Richard had the happiness of being able to make
his mother and brothers the immediate tender of a small competency from the
salary which his noble patron was to allow him, who only waited for his answer
to invest him with the care of his children's education. This prospect was a
seasonable relief to Mrs. Smithson from the despondency into which the present
gloom of her affairs had thrown her. It is true, the iron hand of want had not
as yet begun to pinch her and her children, but the near approach of that
unwelcome visitor (without such a resource as Richard now suggested), was
sufficient to fill her mind with the most melancholy ideas and dismal presages
of adversity and distress.

Now therefore at length, by the irresistible decree of necessity, were our
Three Brothers obliged to part, and take different walks on the vast theater of
life. Richard, returning to the University, attached himself with so much
success to the education of his noble pupils, and to his own improvement, that,
besides being able for the present to contribute to the comforts of his mother,
and those whom he held most dear next to her, he had the prospect before him of
obtaining an ample settlement in the church, through the interest of his
munificent patron, whose favor he enjoyed in as full a measure as his numerous
good qualities entitled him to it. Eugene, having procured recommendations to a
merchant in London, repaired thither, and, applying himself steadily to
business, in the course of four years gave such proofs of his integrity and
other good qualifications, that he was taken by the merchant into partnership.
Cassander, in the mean time, fearing to become a burden on the moderate
pension that Richard allowed his mother, embraced the offer of a Newcastle
trader, who, having formerly been an intimate friend of Mr. Smithson's agreed
to take Cassander a voyage to the East country upon trial. Cassander was still
but young, being no more than sixteen at the time of his entering upon a sea
life, and after his voyage of trial he prudently made it his choice, in
preference to waiting for the uncertain chance of some more brilliant
establishment. In effect, what with the advantage of an excellent education, a
patient and humane disposition, and the uncommon character (for a seaman) of
being remarkably sober and frugal, he in a very few years so improved himself
in the knowledge of trade and navigation, that he was appointed mate of a
vessel trading to Russia, the owners of which were so well pleased with his
activity and good conduct, that they were determined, notwithstanding his
youth, to send him out master of one of their ships, the first opportunity that
offered.

Thus, for some years after the separation of the Three Brothers, fortune
seemed to recompense the severe loss that they had felt in the person of their
father, concerning whom, all this time, notwithstanding every possible inquiry,
not the smallest intelligence had been received. But now, alas! once more,
sorrow and adversity came hand in hand to disquiet the feeling hearts of our
three youths, by an hour of trial such as they had never yet experienced. The
news of their mother's death was the severe prelude to their misfortunes.
Richard had scarcely recovered the shock of this, when the death of his patron
totally dissipated all the flattering hopes that he had formed of fortune and
preferment in the church, in which he had already taken orders. Eugene, and his
partner had for some time felt their affairs in a critical condition; but this
did not hinder him from exerting his native generosity in the service of an
ancient friend. Indeed, the voice of friendship and gratitude always met with a
favorable hearing from Eugene, let their summons be ever so pressing and
importunate. His old tutor, Mr. Markham, under whom he and his brothers had
spent some of the happiest years of their life, was at this time in London.
Disabled by sickness and infirmity, advancing fast toward helpless old age,
and sorely galled by poverty and the neglect of the world, he was almost
without a friend. In this crisis, chance threw his generous pupil in his way,
who amply supplied the place of one to him. Besides furnishing him with the
means of supplying his present necessities; Eugene, and by his persuasion his
partner, became security for the payment of a very considerable debt, which was
on the point of consigning Mr. Markham to a gaol, where he might probably have
passed the remainder of his life. But how ill did fortune requite Eugene for
this friendly action! Mr. Markham died in less than three months after, when of
course the debt devolved upon those who had given security for him. Immediately
upon the heels of this misfortune followed another. The affairs of Eugene's
partnership growing desperate, they were obliged to declare themselves
bankrupt, and this very kindness which he showed Mr. Markham, was reckoned
among the misfortunes that contributed to his ruin. The shock that Eugene's
spirits suffered upon this occasion, as he found himself now unable to fulfill
engagements which he looked upon as sacred, drove him from one act of rashness
and despair to another; till in the end, reduced to extremity of want, in an
obscure country place, he madly and precipitately threw himself among a company
of traveling players, and, to crown all, in this unpromising state of life,
being barely able to subsist himself, he had the desperate imprudence to marry.
It seems he had formed a slight acquaintance with a young lady (the daughter of
a clergyman), who was so struck with his figure and accomplishments, that she
yielded to his solicitations to be united with him in the ties of clandestine
wedlock; thereby utterly forfeiting all her expectations of fortune, together
with the friendship of every one of her relations. The consequence of this
unadvised step, which brought poverty and her train into Eugene's habitation in
shapes unknown before, he bore with as much fortitude and philosophy as usually
falls to the share of five and twenty, that is, with very little if any at all.
Some time before this, Cassander who had made two or three voyages for his
north-country owners, was invited to London by his brother and his partner, to
take the command of one of the large ships in which they were principal
proprietors. Overjoyed at this invitation, which would give him an opportunity,
or rather indeed lay him under the necessity, of being frequently with his
brother while on shore, he came to town with all speed, and was just time
enough to be witness to the unfortunate failure of Eugene and his associate in
trade.

Thus were the Three Brothers plunged into circumstances of the most helpless
distress, just at a time when they entertained hopes (apparently well founded)
of fixing themselves to their satisfaction for life in their respective
professions. Had any one of them been exempt from the pressure of misfortune,
the other two would have been sure of partaking with him in the comforts that
depend on a competency of wealth. But all three were equally reduced; and the
only remnant of happiness, that they could call their own, was the sense of
their mutual affection, which still continued unalterable, amidst the most
pinching trials of disappointment and calamity. In this situation were the
Smithsons, when an incident happened which put that affection to the proof, and
brought forth instances of self-denial and generosity that well deserve to be
recorded. In the course of Eugene's wanderings as a country player, fortune
conducted him to Gravesend where, as he was exhibiting before an audience,
chiefly composed of seafaring people, the same fortune unaccountably led his
father to become a spectator of his performance. In order to explain the sudden
appearance of Mr. Smithson, it will be necessary to relate what befell him after
his departure from England. The reader will remember that this gentleman had
set sail for the West Indies, in order to take possession of an estate in one
of the islands there; but, having pretty early intelligence that the enemy were
masters of the island, and therefore apprehending numberless obstacles to his
obtaining clear and quiet possession of the estate; he formed the immediate
resolution of getting out, if possible, to the East Indies, where he trusted
that, by his general knowledge of trade, he should in a short time be able to
retrieve his shattered circumstances, and to return to his native country with
a fortune sufficient to render the remaining years of his life easy and
comfortable. At the same time he took another resolution (the source of
infinite grief and disquiet to his family), which was, never to inform them of
the place of his retirement until he had gained wealth sufficient to release
them from the state of indigence and obscurity into which, he was pursuaded,
his absence must have plunged them. This object he amply accomplished in ten
years, during all which time his family considered him as dead; and at the end
of that period he was now returning to share his riches with those whom he held
most dear; when the first sight that saluted his eyes after he went on shore
was his unfortunate son figuring in the humble profession of a stroller. It is
impossible to express the rage, sorrow, and disappointment, which at once took
possession of Mr. Smithson's breast, when he was at length convinced that his
eyes and ears did not deceive him. He suddenly left the theater, or rather
barn, before the play was half over, and taking no farther notice of his son
than to leave a note directed for him, and filled with the bitterest
reproaches, he hurried on board the ship. Upon his arrival in London, finding
his anxious wishes and all the projects of his affection disconcerted by his
eldest son's imprudence; his next care was to make inquiry about Richard and
Cassander; for his wife's death he had been informed of by mere accident a
short time before he left India. Richard he soon found out, who, upon the first
summons, flew to embrace his long lost parent. Mr. Smithson, after briefly
relating to him the circumstances of his voyage to and success in the East
Indies, began, bitterly to lament his misfortune in having a son so abandoned
to modesty and discretion, as he styled the unfortunate Eugene. He added, that
the bulk of the fortune which he had realized abroad, he intended now to divide
between his two younger sons, the elder having proved himself so unworthy of
his favor: that he did not mean to keep them in expectation until his death,
but would put each of them in immediate possession of an ample fortune;
reserving for himself what he was determined should be sufficient for his
necessities during the remainder of his life. He concluded with insisting, that
whatever he meant thus to dispose in favor of his younger sons, he would take
care to see settled in such a manner, that neither Eugene nor his posterity
should ever inherit a penny of it.

Richard modestly thanked his father for the affectionate care that he
testified for his interest, but tenderly entreated him not to form too
precipitate a resolution to the prejudice of his eldest born. He used many
arguments to excuse, or at least to palliate Eugene's indiscretion; represented
the sorrowful effects that a continuance of his father's resentment might have
upon a mind so exquisitely feeling as his; and ended with these words: "As to
what regards my own personal advantage, I assure you Sir, I feel myself
naturally very indifferent; and were I not so by nature, the profession that I
have embraced, the precepts of which I have with my whole heart consented to
obey, that profession commands me to fix my thoughts and expectations upon
matters of a far different nature. Besides, had I the most worldly regard for
my own interest, the affection that I have ever borne, and still bear to my
brother Eugene, would stand as a bar to my accepting any fortune to which he
had the most distant claim. I am not without hopes, my dear father, that when
your present anger subsides, you will once more look upon him with the
tenderness of a parent, in which case you will, I trust, applaud the principle
that induces me to decline your liberal offer." Mr. Smithson, with astonishment
in his countenance, asked his son if he was serious in refusing so handsome a
fortune; and finding him fixed in the determination that he had before
expressed, he rose up with evident marks of vexation and disappointment; and
casting some uncharitable reflections on the destiny which, he said, pursued him
through life, baffling and frustrating the most favorite and even laudable
wishes of his heart, he added in a tone of voice, somewhat softened, "Little
did I expect, when I sent for you, to find you an abettor of that profligacy
which has alienated my heart from your elder brother. I fondly thought that my
children would pay such deference to my authority as even to adopt my
prejudices; but since you have determined to think for yourself, be your own
master. Thank Heaven, I have yet one son left." Richard endeavored in the most
respectful manner, to represent the motives of his conduct, but perceiving that
whatever he said only tended to irritate his father, and that it was
impossible, for the present, to obtain a calm hearing, he reluctantly withdrew,
leaving his father in a situation not to be envied by a parent.

Nothing could arrive more opportunely to relieve the depression of Mr.
Smithson's spirits, than the news that he heard next morning; which was, that a
ship, in which Cassander had gone out in the capacity of a mate, after the
failure of Eugene, was returned from her voyage in the river. His resentment
was now not only pointed at Eugene for his indiscretion, but at Richard for his
too scrupulous, uncomplying principles. He was therefore determined to bestow
his whole fortune upon Cassander. But what language can express the amazement
of Mr. Smithson, when, upon his proposing to do so, the generous seaman,
without the least hesitation or preamble, flatly refused to accept a penny of
it! He thought, however, that respect to his father required him to give the
reasons on which he grounded his refusal. He did so, and with arguments nearly
the same as those used by his brother Richard, he endeavored to convince his
father that passion had a much greater share than mature deliberation in the
sentence which he was going to pass upon his eldest son: "We are all liable to
go astray," said Cassander: "happy is he who has the fewest faults. If we do
not forgive those of a son, or a brother, Heaven help us when our own come to
be judged! As for me, I have lived contented with a little, and am not
unacquainted with hardship and distress. God forbid, therefore, that I should
grasp at my brother's birthright. -- But I declare, were Eugene no brother of
mine, knowing as I do his generons nature and the warmth of his honest heart, I
would go before the mast all my life long, sooner than accept, to his
prejudice, a property which nature and reason so clearly adjudge to him."

There was something so ingenuous in this address of Cassander's, something
that spoke so feelingly to his father's breast, that, in spite of a short
conflict which resentment endeavored to excite there, he found himself
constrained to yield the point, and while he wiped away a tear, the offspring
of returning tenderness and affection, he took his son by the hand:
"Cassander," said he, smiling, "thou have conquered. Surely there must be
something of extraordinary merit in Eugene, since he has found two so resolute
advocates in his favor as you and your brother Richard. -- Well, I forgive all
the past -- it shall be buried in oblivion. -- Convince me, as I doubt not you
will, that my eldest son possesses qualities worthy to excite such sentimnets
as you have both expressed in his favor, and I shall be happy indeed."

It is needless to add, that the joy produced by this favorable change in Mr.
Smithson's feelings was soon diffused in the breasts of his two disconsolate
sons. Eugene, upon the receipt of his father's note, had hurried up to town
from Gravesend, like one distracted, and was now at Richard's lodgings,
indulging the most passionate effusions of grief and despair, while Richard,
depressed with a load of sorrows, sat moping in silence, without a word of
comfort to offer to his brother. They hardly perceived Cassander enter the
room; but when he met their eyes, they started as at the sight of an angel.
Something prophetic whispered comfort to their minds even before he spoke. But
how full was the measure of their joy when he announced to them his father's
invitation to repair immediately to his presence! The sequel is easy to be
imagined: all was reconciled: the past was forgotten, and the future opened a
prospect of happiness before them more smiling than they had ever enjoyed
before.

Thus the Brothers, by the efforts of their mutual affection, increased the
happiness that prosperity afforded them, sustained each other under the
pressure of misfortune, and, by persevering in unalterable friendship to each
other, at length ensured both their own happiness and that of their dearest and
first friend on earth -- their Father.

THE THREE SISTERS.
NOT many years ago there returned from Bengal a man whom we will call John
Sterling: he had been well educated, was sprung from a decent family, and
brought home the same good heart which he carried out with him from Britain. As
his fortune was now very large, and he had formed no matrimonial connexions,
his first care, on his arriving in his native land, was to discover what
relations he had still remaining, and to inquire into their circumstances, in
order to bestow on the most deserving of them, part of his great acquisitions.
It chanced that the person to whom he applied, was able to assist in his
search. "Some at least," said he, "of your family, I can give you a pretty good
account of: you have two cousins settled in London; they are sisters, and are
by no means in distressed circumstances, but are perfect contrasts to each
other in their manner of living. The eldest of them is avaricious to an
extreme, lives in a paltry lodging, keeps but one maid servant, and in short
seems to have no pleasure on earth, except that of heaping up money. Not so her
younger sister; she takes care to spend to the very extremity of her income.
She takes great delight in dress, equipage, and every species of luxury, but
her expenses of the showy kind never prevent the exertions of her humanity:
there passes no week in which she does not distribute, on an appointed day,
money, clothes, and victuals to a number of beggars, who crowd around her door
to be relieved." "This last cousin of mine," said our Indian, "I like well
enough, by your account; but as to the other, not a penny of mine shall she
have, to add to her heaps, an old avaricious skin-flint!"

With these sentiments, John Sterling set out to visit his youngest relation.
From her he met with a polite and hospitable reception, and departed from her
house in a perfect good humor with her and her manner of living.

It happened that the only maid servant who lived with the eldest sister, was
acquainted in the family of the person from whom Sterling had received his
intelligence concerning the characters of the two sisters. Some of the
domestics had overheard the conversation, and took the first opportunity to
reproach the girl for the parsimony of her mistress, which they told her had
lost her the sharing of a fine sum of money. This soon reached the ears of the
female miser, whose vexation, at hearing what she had missed, was almost
insupportable. The large fortune, which by dint of the most penurious economy
she had scraped together, now appeared to her less than nothing, when she
considered the immense treasures of her cousin, all of which she thought might
have been her own, had she but managed so as to gain the good graces of the
owner. "Perhaps," said she to herself, "it may not, even now, be too late to
retrieve my error. Some of my money I must sacrifice, it is true, but then if I
succeed, I shall be nobly reimbursed. It will go to my heart, indeed, to part
with what has been the whole joy of my life to procure, but I see no other
chance in my favor, and this scheme must be tried." Having taken her
resolution, she determined, as the first step, to contrive to fall into company
with her opulent relation. This she soon brought about, by meeting him at her
sister's, where he was almost always to be found. She now endeavored, by every
wining grace in her power to captivate his attention, and when she thought she
had in some measure succeeded, she took an opportunity to reproach him for
appearing to have forgotten that he had such a relation as herself. "No,
Madam," said the blunt Sterling, "I had by no means forgotten you, but the
plain truth is, that finding on inquiry, that your turn and mine were as widely
different as light and darkness, I thought that no good could arise from any
connection between us." "I comprehend you, Sir," (replied the lady,) you have
heard me represented in the most odious colors, as a pattern of meanness and
avarice. How cruel is the tongue of defamation! I have laid up money, it is
true, but Heaven knows with what intent! The service of my indigent
fellow creatures has been my real motive, and it was only to amass a sum
sufficient to lay the foundation of a new Hospital, that I have deprived myself
of not only the superfluities, but almost of the necessaries of life. At length
I have attained to my wish, and tomorrow I intend to deposit, in the hands of
proper trustees, five hundred guineas, which I mean to be laid out in the
purchase of land for the edifice to stand upon." The honest Indian was
completely taken in by this maneuver. "How unjustly," said he to himself,
"have I thought of this poor woman! Here has she denied herself every
gratification for the sake of the poor, and I have looked on her as a
self-interested miser! Well, well, I must contrive to make her amends." Then
turning to the lady, "Madam," said he, "hitherto I have mistaken your
character, but I now honor you as much as a few hours past I despised you. But
you must not prevent me from sharing with you the merit of the noble work which
you have taken in hand; tomorrow I will attend upon you, and will add my part
to the donation which you are about to make." He kept his word, and accompanied
her the next morning: he then saw her make a deposit of the sum which she had
mentioned, to which he joined a much more considerable present for the same
charitable purpose.

The worthy Sterling was recounting the adventures of the day to his friend,
and was telling him how very unjustly he had thought of the elder of his
cousins, when he was told that an old domestic of the family earnestly
entreated to speak with him. "Perhaps," said the good East Indian, "he may need
my assistance; let him come in." The poor fellow entered. "Can I, my good
friend, be of any service to you?" said Sterling. "I am very unfortunate," said
the suppliant, "and it is only the report which I have heard of your goodness,
which has tempted me to this application. I lived twenty years in the service
of your worthy uncle: I married, and when I lost my good master, I set up a
little shop: when I was going on with tolerable success, I was utterly ruined
by an unfortunate fire, which consumed my whole stock. Since that cruel event I
have been unable to provide for my young and numerous family, and I now presume
to hope that your goodness will enable me to put my poor children into some way
of business."

"But why, in the name of wonder, did you not apply to my two cousins!" "Alas,
good Sir, I addressed myself to them in the beginning of my misfortunes; but
from the eldest I met with a positive refusal; and the other lady, though she
offered me some relief, yet she accompanied that offer with the condition of my
coming publicly along with other poor, to receive charity at her door; and
indeed, Sir, it appeared hard to one who had been a reputable, tradesman, to be
reduced to beg his bread at a door in a public street. No Sir, I rather chose
to get into a service, which I fortunately contrived to do."

"And what my good friend became then of your children?"

"My eldest daughter, Sir, has had the happiness of being protected by your
Honor's cousin, Madam Sophia, who is goodness itself, and who, although in
very narrow circumstances, yet finds opportunities of doing a thousand good
actions."

"How?" said the good Sterling, "and have I another cousin? And is she poor,
and yet is she charitable? And have I, like a blockhead as I am, been ignorant
of her very existence?"

"There is such a one, I assure you, Sir; she is the daughter of your uncle,
and youngest of the three sisters."

"Is this possible?" said the East Indian, "and if so, how comes it about that
neither of her sisters have mentioned her name (...)? Where has she lived? How
came she so poor?"

"The good lady, Sir, trusted her fortune in the hands of a merchant who became
a bankrupt, and lost nearly the whole of it. She then retired, with what little
she had remaining, to a village in the country, where she boarded at the house
of a friend of here is who married a clergyman. There, from her small income, she
found means to be of infinite service to her poor neighbors; she visited the
sick, she instructed the young, and by her example and advice, she reclaimed
the idle, and encouraged the worthy members of society. As to her name not
being mentioned to you by her sisters, I fear their motive for keeping you in
ignorance concerning her, was their consciousness of her superior claim to your
favor and protection."

"This," cried Sterling, "is the exact person that I am looking for. Come, my
lad, get your boots ready, tomorrow you shall be my guide to the village where
this precious cousin of mine resides; trouble yourself no more about your
children; they shall hence forward be my care: and as to yourself, quit your
service as soon as you can with decency; you are too old to wear a livery, I
will provide for you comfortably for the rest of your life."

"Oh, Sir," said the old servant, "be assured that what is left of that life
shall be employed in praying for blessings on you, and on my kind benefactress
Madam Sophia."

Sterling soon reached the village. He alighted at the parsonage, and inquired
of the minister concerning his amiable cousin. "She is an angel," said the
priest; "notwithstanding the loss of her fortune, her countenance expresses the
happy tranquillity of her mind. Nothing, in short, can deprive her of her
benevolence, and that benevolence must always insure her tranquillity." "Tell
her, I entreat you, Sir," said Sterling, "that a relation, whom she has never
seen, begs to be introduced to her." Sophia received her cousin with unaffected
regard and natural politeness. "I am enchanted with you, my sweet cousin!" said
the East Indian. "In your modest, neat, linen gown, you look more like a woman
of fashion than your showy sister in her gayest dresses; and poor as you are,
your features are illuminated by an air of content which never appears on the
visage of that other sister of yours; that rich lady that founds hospitals! But
tell me now, honestly, cousin Sophy, how has it happened that neither of my
cousins ever made mention of your name to me since my arrival? Have you fallen
out with them? Or do they not know where you reside?"

"Believe me, Sir," replied Sophia, "I love them both too well to keep them in
ignorance of my place of abode, and within these last three days I have written
to each of them." "Hard-hearted wretches!" exclaimed the good Sterling; "can I
ever forget their indifference to so amiable a relation?" "Excuse them this one
time," said the gentle Sophia; "I doubt not but that they meant to have made me
amends for this omission, by the future kindness of their behavior." "No, no,"
said her cousin, "I know the vileness of their hearts. They were conscious of
your superior merit, and dreaded, lest I should reward it by bestowing on you
that fortune which each of them already grasped as her own: but their odious
cunning and greediness shall be disappointed. To your ostentatious sister I
will not give one farthing; she does good, indeed, but it is merely for the
sake of being talked of abroad as a woman of unbounded charity. Your penurious
sister I am still less disposed to encourage. The donation which she has made
in favor of the poor, has her own interest so immediately in view, that it
gives me infinitely more disgust than pleasure. You, my worthy cousin, who do
good actions merely because it is right and fitting to do them, you I declare
to be my sole inheritrix; and from this moment I insist on your making use of
my fortune as if it were your own. I know that fortune is by no means necessary
to your happiness; but I know, at the same time, that your being rich will be
the means of communicating happiness to numbers of sufferers, whom, until now,
you could only pity and not relieve."

THE CONTRAST.
FREDERIC was the son of a lady of fortune, who, having retired to her estate
in the country, bestowed most of her time on his education. In return for her
attachment to him, Frederic was modest, studious, and humane; he felt the
obligations which he was under to his parent, and did his best to requite them
by pursuing her instructions with care, and by preferring her company to that
of any other person. Jacob, a lad of the same age with Frederic, and whose
mother's cottage stood near the park-pale of the lady we have just spoken of,
was in every respect of a character directly opposite to that of his amiable
neighbor. He was loved by no one, not even by his poor mother, all whose
endeavors could never prevail on him even to take the pains of learning to
read. The most innocent way in which he spent his time was in loitering from
place to place, and lounging about; at other seasons he was the plague of his
comrades, and, in consequence, the detestation of the village. Frederic was too
well bred up to choose so vile a boy for a play-fellow; Jacob, however, taking
advantage of the opportunities which the situation of his mother's tenement
gave him, stole, one day, into the room where Frederic's playthings were kept,
broke to pieces his violin and his chariot, completely spoilt his bird organ,
and carried off in triumph his hobby horse.

The author of this mischief was soon discovered, and Frederic, in the first
emotions of resentment, was running, by the advice of a servant, to acquaint
the mother of Jacob with the exploits of her son. "But, no," said he checking
his speed, "she is a severe woman, and she will horsewhip him without mercy,
and, may be, shut him up in an out-house for a week together. How should I like
that for myself? No, no, I had better forgive him, for this once."

Not long after this, Frederic was walking out with his beloved mother, when
unluckily they strolled near a place where the thoughtless, wicked Jacob was
amusing himself by throwing stones with all his little force at every object
within his reach, totally regardless of the mischief which he might occasion.
One of these unluckily hit the little Frederic on the head, and fetched the
blood; but Frederic was too much of a man to cry at a little pain. -- "Mama,"
said the spirited lad, "this stone has hurt me a little, but I dare say the
pain will soon be over." As his forehead, however, was all covered with blood,
his mother went directly home with him and had every proper care taken of his
wound. It was an ugly one, and brought on a fever, and it was the end of seven
or eight days before he was permitted to walk out, and his mother being engaged
with company, ordered a servant to accompany him. As they were walking, the
discourse turned on the wickedness of Jacob: and just as the domestic was
hopeing that they might see nothing of him during their walk, they heard a
rustling noise in a tree behind them, and down, at once, came Jacob, screaming
and crying, from the top of an elm, which his usual spirit of mischief had
tempted him to climb in pursuit of a crow's nest. "I fear," said Frederic,
exerting his utmost endeavors to raise the poor wretch, "that you have hurt
yourself sadly." Jacob still continued his groans and cries; and well he might,
for, upon examination, his leg appeared to be, broken in two places, "Poor
fellow," said the benevolent Frederic, "how he must suffer! let us contrive
some how or other, to convey him home to his mother. -- Unhappy woman! what
distress must she not feel when she sees the condition of her unlucky son!" Her
distress was great indeed. "Poor as I am," she exclaimed, "I can just support
myself and this ungracious lad; but how shall I ever be able to pay the long
demand which the surgeon will have upon me, by the time that Jacob recovers."
Little Frederic, who was a witness to her complaints, afforded to them those
tears which his own suffering could never extort from him. -- "Make yourself
easy, my good neighbor," said the amiable boy, "and oblige me so far as to
accept this new crown-piece, which my good Mama has just given me that I might
buy me a fairing, but I can do without it better than you can." The afflicted
mother looked at him with silent admiration. Frederic proceeded to assure her,
that he was conscious of the smallness of the sum, (though it was his all) he
would use his interest with his parent for a larger supply, and did not doubt
to obtain it. The unfortunate woman now found her tongue, and expressed in the
most affecting terms, her astonishment at seeing his earnestness in relieving
that worthless lad, by whose mischievous hand his forehead was still smarting.
"This," said she, "is truly to return good for evil!" Frederic now returned to
his mother, and after giving her the history of the whole occurrence, "How
comes it, Mama," said he, "that although I was truly sorry for poor Jacob's
misfortune, and though I feel both for him and (...) mother, yet, on the whole,
I am more (...) than grieved?" "Child," said the lady, "you have had an
opportunity of doing well, and you have made use of it; and, believe me,
throughout life you will find, that the consciousness of having done a
benevolent action will be the most effectual cordial for every painful
sensation."



THE DIVERTING HISTORY OF JOHN GILPIN; SHOWING How he went Farther than he
intended, and came safe Home again.
JOHN GILPIN was a citizen
Of credit and renown;
A train-band captain eke was he
Of famous London town.
John Gilpin's spouse said to her dear --
"Though wedded we have been
"These twice ten tedious years, yet we
"No holiday have seen.
"Tomorrow is our wedding day,
"And we will then repair,
"Unto the Bell at Edmonton,
"All in a chaise and pair.
"My sister and my sister's child,
"Myself and children three,
"Will fill the chaise; so you must ride
"On horseback after we."
He soon replied -- "I do admire
"Of womankind but one,
"And you are she, my dearest dear,
"Therefore it shall be done.
"I am a linen-draper bold,
"As all the world does know,
"And my good friend the callender
"Will lend his horse to go."
Quoth Mrs. Gilpin -- "That Is well said;
"And, for that wine is dear,
"We will be furnished with our own,
"Which is both bright and clear."
John Gilpin kissed his loving wife;
O'erjoy'd was he to find,
That, though on pleasure she was bent,
She had a frugal mind.
The morning came, the chaise was brought,
But yet was not allowed
To drive up to the door, lest all
Should say that she was proud.
So three doors off the chaise was staid,
Where they did all get in,
Six precious souls, and all agog
To dash through thick and thin.
Smack went the whip, round went the wheels,
Were never folks so glad;
The stones did rattle underneath,
As if Cheapside were mad.
John Gilpin, at his horse's side,
Seized fast the flowing mane,
And up he got, in haste to ride,
But soon came down again.
For saddle-tree scarce reached had he,
His journey to begin,
When, turning round his head, he saw
Three customers come in.
So down he came; for loss of time,
Although it grieved him sore,
Yet loss of pence, full well he knew,
Would trouble him much more.
'Twas long before the customers
Were fated to their mind,
When Betty, sceaming, came down stairs,
"The wine is left behind!"
'Good lack!" quoth he -- "yet bring it me,
"My leathern belt likewise,
In which I dear my trusty sword
'When I do exercise."
Now Mrs. Gilpin -- careful soul --
Had two stone bottles found,
To hold the liquor that she loved,
And keep it safe and sound.
Each bottle had a curling ear,
Through which the belt he drew,
And hung a bottle on each side,
To make his balance true.
Then over all, that he might be
Equipped from top to toe,
His long red cloak, well brushed and neat,
He manfully did throw.
Now see him mounted once again
Upon his nimble steed,
Full slowly pacing over the stones,
With caution and good heed.
But finding soon a smoother road
Beneath his well-shod feet,
The snorting beast began to trot,
Which galled him in his seat.
So, "Fair and softly," John he cried,
But John he cried in vain;
That trot became a gallop soon,
In spite of curb and rein.
So stooping down, as needs he must
Who cannot sit upright,
He grasped the mane with both his hands,
And eke with all his might.
His horse, who never in that sort
Had handled been before,
What thing upon his back had got
Did wonder more and more.
Away went Gilpin, neck or naught,
Away went hat and wig;
He little dreamt when he set out,
Of running such a rig.
The wind did blow, the cloak did fly,
Like streamer long and gay,
Till loop and button failing both,
At last it flew away.
Then might all people well discern
The bottles he had slung;
A bottle swinging at each side,
As has been said or sung.
The dogs did bark, the children scream'd,
Up flew the windows all;
And every soul cried out, "Well done!"
As loud as he could bawl.
Away went Gilpin -- who but he!
His fame soon spread around --
"He carries weight! -- he rides a race! --
"'It Is for a thousand pound!"
And still, as fast as he drew near,
'Twas wonderful to view,
How, in a trice, the turnpike-men
Their gates wide open threw.
And now as he went bowing down
His reeking head full low,
The bottles twain behind his back,
Were shattered at a blow.
Down ran the wine into the road
Most piteous to be seen,
Which made his horse's flanks to smoke
As they had basted been.
But still he seemed to carry weight,
With leather girdle (...),
For all might see the bottle-necks
Still dangling at his waist.
Thus all through merry Islington,
These gambol (...) did play,
And till he came unto the Wash
Of Edmonton so gay
And there he drew the Wash about
On both sides of the way,
Just like unto a trundling-(...),
Or a wild goose at play.
(...) Edmonton his loving wife
From the balcony spied,
Her tender husband, wondering much
To see how he did ride.
"Stop, stop, John Gilpin! here is the house!"
They all at once did cry;
"The dinner waits, and we are tired! -- well
Said Gilpin -- "So am I."
But yet his horse was not a whit
Inclined to tarry there;
For why? -- his owner had a house
Full ten miles off, at Ware.
So like an arrow swift he flew,
Shot by an archer strong;
So did he fly -- which brings me to
The middle of my song.
Away went Gilpin out of breath,
And sore against his will,
Till at his friend the callender's
His horse at last stood still.
The callender, amazed to see
His neighbor in such trim,
Laid down his pipe, flew to the gate
And thus accosted him --
"What news! what news! your tidings tell,
"Tell me you must and shall --
"Say, why bare-headed you are come,
"Or why you come at all?"
Now Gilpin had a pleasant wit,
And loved a timely joke;
And thus unto the callender
In merry guise he spoke --
"I came because your horse would come;
"And, if I well forebode,
"My hat and wig will soon be here;
"They are upon the road."
The callender, right glad to find
His friend in merry pin,
Returned him not a single word,
But to the house went in:
Whence straight he came with hat and wig,
A wig that flowed behind,
A hat not much the worse for wear,
Each comely in its kind.
He held them up, and, in his turn,
Thus showed his ready wit --
"My head is twice as big as yours,
"They, therefore, needs must fit.
"But let me scrape the dirt away
"That hangs upon your face;
"And stop and eat -- for well you may
"Be in a hungry case!"
Said John -- "It is my wedding day,
"And all the world would stare,
"If wife should dine at Edmonton,
"And I should dine at Ware."
So turning to his horse, he said,
"I am in haste to dine;
"'It Was for your pleasure you came here --
"You shall go back for mine."
Ah! luckless speech and bootless boast,
For which he paid full dear;
For, while he spoke, a braying ass
Did sing most loud and clear:
Whereat his horse did snort, as he
Had heard a lion roar,
And gallopp'd off with all his might,
As he had done before.
Away went Gilpin -- and away
Went Gilpin's hat and wig;
He lost them sooner than at first,
For why? -- they were too big.
Now Mistress Gilpin, when she saw
Her husband posting down
Into the country far away,
She pulled out half-a-crown;
And thus unto the youth she said
That drove them to the Bell,
"This shall be yours, when you bring back
"My husband safe and well."
The youth did ride, and soon did meet
John coming back again,
Whom in a trice he tried to stop,
By catching at his rein;
But not performing what he meant,
And gladly would have done,
The frighted steed he frighted more,
And made him faster run.
Away went Gilpin -- and away
Went post-boy at his heels,
The post-boy's horse right glad to miss
The lumb'ring of the wheels.
Six gentlemen upon the road,
Thus seeing Gilpin fly,
With post-boy scamp'ring in the rear,
They raised the hue-and-cry.
"Stop thief! -- stop thief! -- a highwayman!"
Not one of them was mute;
And all and each that passed that way
Did join in the pursuit.
And now the turnpike gates again
Flew open in short space,
The toll-men thinking, as before,
That Gilpin rode a race.
And so he did, and won it too;
For he got first to town,
Nor stopped till where he had got up
He did again get down.
Let Us sing -- "Long live our President;
"And Gilpin, long live he;
"And when he next does ride abroad,
"May I be there to see!"


FATAL EFFECTS OF DELAY.
CHARLES STANLEY was the second son of a gentleman, who possessed a small
estate in Yorkshire, (Old England) which at his death was designed for his
eldest son, and the youngest was to be brought up to some genteel business, by
which he might improve the little fortune which his father intended for him.
Charles gave early marks of a sweet and engaging temper; he was dutiful to his
parents, he tenderly loved his brother, and was so obliging to the servants,
that he became the favorite with them all. Every little boy in the village
talked of the good nature of little Charles, and of his willingness to part
with his sweetmeats and playthings.

When Charles was about four years old, his father sent him to a neighboring
school, where he was very soon as much remarked for the progress he made in
learning as he had been for his sweet temper. He read better than any boy in
the school, and whenever he went before his master to spell, he was certain to
get the first place. This great quickness gave much delight to his fond parents
and his tutor, though they observed that with all his good qualities, Charles
had one capital fault; instead of going directly to school he would often
loiter in the fields till long after the other boys had gone in, and his books
were always to be sought for at the very time when he should have taken them to
his master.

At a proper age, Charles was placed by his father at a great school, where he
no longer found the indulgence to his faults, which he had met with from the
village tutor. He was not allowed to defer the morning's task till the
afternoon, and it was remarked to him that he was inferior in learning to many
who were his juniors in age. Charles was stung with the remark; he knew that he
was able to excel, and he resolved that he would at some time take great pains,
and obtain the same rank he had held in the village school; but he thought he
might defer this till some future time. His work, while he was under the eye of
his master, was performed as well, and in less time than that of most of his
school-fellows; but the tasks which he had to perform out of school hours were
always deferred, and everything furnished Charles with an excuse for delay; not
that he passed his vacant time in play; instead of that he was often employed
in writing exercises for his school-fellows while they were amusing themselves,
and his own task was deferred till the morning, when there was little time to
perform it well, and he was punished for the faults. Thus poor Charles seldom
enjoyed the proper season for play. He was compelled to complete his task, when
his companions were enjoying themselves in innocent sports, and he was seldom
set free from work till they were retiring to rest.

Charles continued in this situation till the age of fourteen, and was every
day remarked for his abilities to excel, and for those habits of delay which
often destroyed all the advantages he naturally possessed. Mr. Stanley then
took him to London, and placed him with a Merchant, a friend of his, in the
city, to whom he hoped Charles would become so agreeable, as in time to be
admitted into partnership with him. In this situation Charles gave the
strongest proofs of integrity, sweet temper, and great abilities, but delay
attended whatever he undertook; he was not dressed till some hours after he
should be at the desk; he did not get to the Custom-House till the books were
shut, nor appear upon Change, till every man of business had deserted it. With
more virtues, and greater ability, than almost any man of his acquaintance, he
became a general object of ridicule and derision, and when the term of his
apprenticeship expired, he found that, with a character which was shaded with
only one foible, all intimate connexions with him were shunned by the sober
part of the trading world.

About this time Charles had the misfortune to lose his father, who bequeathed
him such a fortune as entitled him to expect a partnership in some respectable
house. But his known habit of delay prevented his friends from making the
offer; and though he fully intended to seek such a connection, yet he continued
to defer it till he had greatly lessened his little patrimony. His father had
introduced him to several friends who might have assisted him greatly, but he
had disgusted them by his conduct, by deferring his visits to unseasonable
hours, and by protracting them till the repeated yawns of the family informed
him that it was time to depart. Charles, who saw himself in a situation where
he was very likely to be without either friends or fortune, now resolved to
exert himself, and to follow the plan which his father had traced out for his
conduct in life. He could not, indeed, meet with an agreeable partnership, but
he determined to enter into a mercantile line by himself; and his friends, who
were delighted with his exertions, formed such extensive connexions for him,
that he had the greatest chance of being in a few years one of the richest men
in the city. But alas! his habit of delay had acquired more strength than he
was aware of, and his efforts to conquer it were but transient. Charles soon
relapsed into his former indolence. He deferred business till he had not time
to transact it. He neglected to comply with the orders of his correspondents
till the goods they sent for were no longer wanted; and he omitted insuring his
vessels, not because he intended to risk the loss, but because, as he did not
see them sinking he thought he might defer the business to some future (...).
In a short time his business declined, several of his vessels had either been
taken or lost, his creditors poured in from every quarter, his property could
not answer their demands; and Charles Stanley, whose integrity was respected by
all, was hurried to prison, with the conviction that his misfortunes were the
consequence of his folly.

In this wretched situation Charles was a prey to sorrow. His heart was melted
at the misery which many poor and innocent families must have suffered from his
failure; and he thought of the uneasiness he must have given to his mother with
agony. Firmly did he resolve, that if he could ever again be established, he
would atone by his future diligence for his past misconduct; but where could he
look for assistance? His mother had no more than was sufficient for her
support; and his brother had already given him whatever he could afford.
Charles was sitting alone, reflecting upon the sad situation of his affairs,
when he was informed that a gentleman inquired for him below, and in a few
moments he beheld a brother of his mother's, whom the family had believed to be
dead, but who was just returned from India with a large fortune. Mr. Hilton was
much grieved at the misconduct and misfortunes of his nephew; but was so much
affected by his ingenuous account of his past faults, and his resolutions of
amendment, that he generously discharged all his debts, and enabled him to
appear again amongst his old acquaintance with credit.

Charles, fully sensible of the miseries from which he had been delivered, was
very earnest to settle himself in some business which would afford him support;
and his kind uncle, who hoped that a new scene would be favorable to his
new-formed plans, earnestly advised him to embark for India, promising to
return with him that he might see him well settled. This goodness filled the
heart of Charles with the warmest gratitude; he fell at his feet, and declared
with tears, that he would exert himself to the utmost to fulfill the commands of
his generous benefactor. Every thing was ordered for their departure, and when
the time arrived for the sailing of the ship, Mr. Hilton went on board with
some goods which were in readiness, leaving his nephew to follow him to the
Downs with those which were not quite finished. But delay again appeared in the
conduct of Charles; he omitted inquiring after them till an express arrived
from Mr. Hilton, with the account that the vessel was to sail the next day, and
that he must hasten down immediately. Charles then began to execute the orders
which his uncle had left, but was detained so long before he could get the
goods, that when he reached the Downs he found the ship had sailed some hours.
Almost distracted with this account, and with the thoughts of what his kind
uncle must think of his misconduct, he wandered about for some time in the
greatest distress, and at length having become almost desperate, he hired a
quick-sailing boat, in hopes of being able to overtake the ship. For some time
they advanced rapidly, and gained sight of the India ship, and the heart of
Charles was alternately agitated by hope and fear. But suddenly the sky was
overcast, the sea swelled, the wind roared, and the boatmen declared that there
was every appearance of an approaching storm, which soon raged round them with
the utmost fury. The vessel, which was too light to resist its force, was
tossed about at the mercy of the wind and waves, and the only hope the unhappy
Charles had of saving his own life, and those of his companions, was by
reaching the ship which they saw at a small distance before them. But they
exerted every effort in vain; a great sea broke over the bark, and Mr. Hilton
had the misery of seeing it sink for ever into the bosom of the ocean, and to
lament the loss of the unfortunate Charles, who, though possessed of such
talents as made him loved and admired by all, yet by one unhappy foible was
rendered miserable and ridiculous through life, and subjected to a dreadful and
premature death.

THE NOSEGAY.
CAPTAIN DORMER, and his amiable Lady, had lived during several years at their
seat in Dorsetshire, happy in themselves, and beloved by all around them, when
they received the unwelcome account that the Captain was commanded to join his
regiment, which was ordered to embark for America. The news of this event
filled all the country with sorrow. The rich grieved for the loss of so
excellent a neighbor; the poor mourned for the departure of their kind and
constant benefactor; and the tenants and servants wept aloud at the thoughts of
being separated from a master who had always treated them more like children
than dependants. But in vain were their entreaties that he would remain; honor
called upon him to depart, and Mrs. Dormer saw, with the utmost sorrow, that to
honor he would sacrifice the strongest feelings of his breast. She resolved,
however, not to be left behind, and in a short time they exchanged the tranquil
pleasures of Belmount, for the horrors of carnage and war.

Mrs. Dormer had not been long in America before she lay-in of twins, both
daughters, and very beautiful. In the care of these sweet children she found
some relief during the frequent absences of her husband, and would often
indulge the hope of returning peace, when the Captain, instead of engaging in
the slaughter of his fellow creatures, might enjoy the delight of improving his
little Fanny and Sophia. The children daily became more fond of their parents,
often clinging to their father when they saw him preparing to go out, and
always clapping their little hands with joy when they saw him return. As soon
as they were able to speak, Mrs. Dormer taught them to say Papa, and in a short
time, when they saw him at a distance, they would directly leave their play,
and running up to Mama, would cry out, Papa is come, dear papa is come to see
his little girls.

The improvement of the children became more visible every day, and they were
daily more dear to their parents, when Captain Dormer, returning from a
foraging party, was fiercely and suddenly attacked by the Indians, and a
desperate engagement ensued. The time when Mrs. Dormer had expected his return
had long passed, and she sat in silent agony looking at her dear children, whom
at one moment she feared were deprived of their parent, and the next, stepping
to the room door, she anxiously listened to every noise, and was fearful, lest
even the sound of her own breath should prevent her from hearing the well-known
step of her beloved husband. At length a sound reached her ears -- it came
nearer; it increased, and she flew down stairs in the fond hope of welcoming
the return of what was most dear to her. The door was opened, but it no longer
opened to admit the tender husband and fond father joyfully returning from the
labors of the day; Captain Dormer was brought in a mangled lifeless corpse.

Thus cruelly deprived of her husband, Mrs. Dormer resolved to return to
England, and to employ her time in the education of her little girls. She took
them down into Dorsetshire, and instructed them herself; and little Fanny and
Sophia Dormer were soon remarked as the neatest work-women in the country. But
their good Mama did not direct their attention merely to the little arts of
making trifling ornaments: she taught them that virtue was superior to
accomplishments, and that what was useful was more excellent than what was
merely elegant. Little Fanny soon understood, that though music gave her great
delight, it was still more delightful by her own sweetness to charm all around
her; and Sophia learned that no pleasure was equal to the pleasure of doing
good to her fellow creatures.

In this happy retirement Mrs. Dormer continued for some years improving her
sweet girls in real virtue and useful knowledge. At this time Lady Aubrey, a
relation of Mrs. Dormer's paid her a visit, and upon her return would gladly
have prevailed with the good mother to suffer both her daughters to spend some
time with her in London. This, however, Mrs. Dormer could not agree to; but as
Fanny had shown a strong affection for her Ladyship, and earnestly wished to
see London, she consented to her going; and Sophia, who preferred the company
of her Mama to any other enjoyment, was left at home. At first indeed, she felt
uneasy without her sister; she found a solo on the harpsichord was not half so
agreeable as a duet, and the beautiful alcove in the garden was not near so
pleasant, as when Fanny sat with her there, at her drawing or needle work. By
degrees, however, she became reconciled to her loss, but frequently thought
that Fanny could not enjoy half the pleasure in London that she did at
Belmount, in assisting her Mama to work for the poor people of the village, or
in going with her to visit those who were sick. But her greatest delight was in
the office which Mrs. Dormer had given her of distributing the broken victuals,
which were given away to the poor every day at her gate. This was the highest
pleasure Sophia could receive. She slew with rapture to the house keeper to
obtain her welcome burden, under which she tottered to the door. She exulted in
seeing so many poor creatures made happy by her bounty, and delighted to hear
them say, Here comes the good little girl; she will, one day, be as good a lady
as her Mama; and she often thought with great pleasure of the joy which her
sister Fanny would have, when she returned, in this new employment.

But Fanny's visit to Lady Aubrey unfitted her for the innocent pleasures of
Belmount. She never heard of such a thing as working for the poor from her
Ladyship; and cards, dress, and elegant equipages, engaged the attention of all
the circles to which Fanny was admitted. She almost learned to forget the poor;
and when she returned to Belmount, she spoke haughtily to the servants, and
scarcely noticed her inferiors; and when the poor came to receive their daily
allowance, instead of serving them, she either turned away, or suffered her
little favorite dog, Surly, to bark at them, and shake their tattered clothes.
All the village talked of her pride, and lamented that the good Mrs. Dormer
should have such a naughty little girl; but the good and gentle Sophia was
loved by them all. They presented her with the choicest flowers in their
gardens, and the most beautiful bantams and pea-fowls were sent to the
poultry-yard of the good little girl that behaved so well to every one. When
Mrs. Dormer came from church, all the farmers and their wives made their best
bows and curtsies to the good lady, who spoke kindly to them all. She was
followed by Fanny, who never turned her head aside; but when Sophia came near,
the children plucked one another, and said, Here comes the good young lady, see
how good humoured she looks: she will ask us all how we do.

Fanny could not avoid seeing how disagreeable her pride made her to every
body, and she found herself much less happy than she was before she went to
London; but she had learned there to think that such behavior was right, and,
if it was an error, she foolishly resolved rather to adhere to it than to own
she had been wrong. She was one day invited with her sister to a ball at the
house of a lady in the neighborhood, where she was to meet all the young
people in that country. Her heart exulted in the thoughts of this gay party,
and she resolved to behave in the same manner she had seen some fashionable
ladies do in London. Upon entering the room she advanced to a small knot of
young ladies of her acquaintance; and, without speaking to the rest of the
company, began to make remarks upon their dress and manners in a whispering
voice, but in a tone loud enough to be heard. After some time a young lady,
whom she had never seen before, entered the room, in a dress made up in a
manner very different from any that Fanny had ever observed; she directly began
to sneer at her, and declared, that for her part she was surprised such strange
figures should think of mixing with people of fashion, and wondered where they
came from. The young lady, confounded at so rude a reception, retired to a
corner, where she was joined by the good humoured Sophia, who chatted with her
till the lady of the house returned into the room, and introduced her into the
company as the eldest daughter of the Duke of Dorset, who was just returned
from a tour to France. Nothing could exceed the chagrin of Fanny, when she
found that the young lady whom she had been ridiculing was the principal person
in the company, and that the dress she had despised, was the admiration of all
who saw it. She had not the assurance to endeavor to repair her fault by
apologies, or to press her acquaintance upon the lady whom she had so grossly
affronted. Indeed she saw that neither her excuses nor intimacy would be
accepted, and she had the mortification of hearing her sister Sophia receive a
very pressing invitation to Dorset House, in which she was not included.

Fanny was greatly mortified at this incident, and she resolved never to behave
in such a manner again. She ought, indeed, directly to have endeavored to
conquer every feeling of pride, and to return to that behavior which made her
beloved by every body; but she only resolved that she would not again laugh
aloud at a stranger in a genteel company, and run the risk of offending her
superiors. As to the poor and miserable, she thought them beneath her regard.

Some time after this, Fanny and Sophia were again invited to the house of a
lady, whom, as Fanny regarded her as a person of great taste, she was desirous
to please her by appearance. She put on all her little finery, but found that
one thing was necessary to complete her dress, which was a Nosegay, and this
she was determined to buy when they reached the town. They set off in the
carriage, attended only by servants, and by Fanny's little dog, which ran at
the side of the chariot. Fanny could talk of nothing but of calling at the
florist's, and of the elegant Nosegay with which she should be adorned. At
length they saw a little tattered girl laying asleep upon the side of the road,
whom Surley directly attacked, and began to shake her ragged clothes. Sophia
called him hastily away, and would have succeeded before he had awakened the
poor little girl, but Fanny encouraged him to proceed; upon this the child
starting up, aimed a blow at the dog, which he avoided, and made a snap at her
leg. The poor terrified girl then endeavored to run away, but in running
missed her step, and fell down the bank into the ditch. She had hurt her foot,
and lay crying in the ditch till Sophia ordered the servant to take her up,
and, contrary to the advice of Fanny, desired him to place her in the chariot
that they might convey her home. She then began to comfort the poor child, and
inquired about her hurt; but she continued to cry out, "O my poor mammy, my
poor mammy, what will she do, now I cannot run about and beg for her and my
daddy!" "Who is your mammy," said Sophia, "and what shall we do for your foot?"
"Oh! don't mind my foot," said the child, "give me only some bread for my poor
mammy and daddy, and my little brother, and I don't care what becomes of my
foot."

The child had scarcely finished her speech when the carriage stopped at the
door of a cottage, which the little girl said was her home. When she attempted
to get out, she found herself unable to walk, and was obliged to be carried by
the footman, who, accompanied by Sophia, entered the house, while Fanny
remained in the carriage sullenly pouting at her sister's condescension, and
very angry to be so delayed. She was indeed sorry to see the poor child so
hurt, and when she was taken out of the carriage gave her what money she could
spare; but she took care to keep enough to buy her elegant Nosegay. When Sophia
entered the house, she found a scene of misery which she could not have
conceived. The father of the little girl had long labored under an ague and
fever, her mother was worn down with poverty and fatigue, and her little
brother crying for hunger in a corner of a poor cottage, striped of almost of
all its furniture, which had been sold to buy necessaries. Sophia found that
little Sally had gone out in the morning to beg something for this afflicted
family, and that, quite exhausted with hunger and fatigue, she set down upon
the bank and cried herself to sleep. The tender heart of Sophia was greatly
affected by this distress; she empitied her pocket of every farthing which it
contained, and gave it to the good woman of the house, and would not keep
enough to buy the collar which she had once intended for her little favorite
squirrel. She then prepared to leave the cottage, but before she went, desired
the poor people to get what was necessary, and told them she would soon return
with her good Mama, who would give them clothes and victuals enough.

The sisters then proceeded to their visit. Fanny bought her Nosegay, which was
very beautiful: but the sweetness of Sophia, and the cheerfulness which the
thoughts of the good action she had been performing inspired her with, made her
so agreeable, that all the company were charmed with her, but paid little
attention to Fanny. At night, when they returned, Mrs. Dormer noticed Fanny's
Nosegay, which, though it had begun to fade, was still very beautiful. This
pleased Fanny, and she cried out, "Ah! Mama, I was sure you would like it, it
is so very pretty, and my sister liked it very much indeed." "Then why did she
not buy one?" said Mrs. Dormer; Fanny hung down her head, and in a faultering
tone answered, "Because she had no money." Mrs. Dormer, surprised at this, for
she had given some to each of them that very morning, inquired from Sophia what
was become of it; Sophia then recounted to her mother the condition in which
she had seen the poor people at the cottage, but took care not to mention a
word of Fanny's ill behavior: she then told her the way in which she had
disposed of her money, and the promise she had made of taking her Mama to the
cottage; and ended by begging that she would go with he* in the morning.
Transported with her conduct, Mrs. Dormer pressed her virtuous child to her
bosom, and promised to take care of the wretched family, for whom Sophia was so
much interested. Then looking with anger at Fanny, she said, "Did you then give
nothing to these poor unhappy creatures?" Fanny hung down her head in silence,
for she was ashamed to speak; but Sophia said, "Oh yes, Mama, indeed she gave
them all the money she had; except just enough to buy her Nosegay and a trinket
for her little watch; and I am sure if she had gone into the cottage and seen
their misery, she would have given them that too." "She sat at the door then,"
said Mrs. Dormer, "while you went in." Then turning to Fanny, "Proud and
unfeeling girl," said she, "who could prefer vain and trifling ornaments to the
delight of relieving the sick and miserable! Retire from my presence; take with
you your trinket and Nosegay, and receive from them all the comforts which they
are able to bestow."

Sophia would gladly have retired with her sister; she was grieved at the
displeasure she had incurred from her Mama, and she wished earnestly to sooth
and comfort the dejected Fanny. Mrs. Dormer, however, chose that she should be
left alone, and Fanny was obliged to pass the night by herself. She then began
to reflect upon the happiness which she had known before she went to visit Lady
Aubrey: she was then beloved by every one, every body met her with a smile; all
the servants were ready to oblige her* and all the neighbors loved her: now
all was changed, and no one except Sophia, no, not even her Mama, seemed to
love her. At this thought she wept bitterly. "And why am I not beloved?" said
she. "And why does every one shun me, at the very time that they are so fond of
my sister? Alas! it is because I am not so good as she." Fanny then thought of
the vexatious situations into which she had been brought by her vanity and
pride. They had caused her to be shunned not only by her inferiors, but by
those above her, and had made her generally hated or despised. Heartily ashamed
of her conduct, and grieved at its consequences, she passed the greatest part
of the night in weeping, and resolved that she would again be good, and again
behave in such a manner as should make her beloved by all, and happy in herself.

Toward morning Fanny fell asleep, and, as she was much tired with lying awake
so long, she slept till it was pretty late; the next day when she awoke, she
inquired for her Mama, and was resolved to ask her forgiveness, and to inform
her of her sorrow for her past faults, and her resolutions to amend. She was
informed that Mrs. Dormer and Sophia were gone to the cottage, and had taken
clothes, and other necessaries for the family, and had sent for a physician to
attend the sick man. "Ah!" said she, "Sophia is happy, and she deserves to be
so, for she is good; I was not worthy to have the pleasure of going to the
cottage, but I will begood and happy too." She then rose, and the first thing
she saw was her Nosegay, which the maid had carefully put into a pot of water
the night before. "This Nosegay," said Fanny, "shall be the constant memorial
of my faults, and of my repentance." She then reached her pallet, and making a
beautiful sketch of the almost dying flowers, she wrote under them in a large
hand, Virtue never fades, and placed the drawing in the most conspicuous part
of the room. When Mrs. Dormer returned, she was struck with this elegant
performance, and calling for Fanny, had the delight of hearing from herself
what had passed in her mind during the past night, and her resolutions of
amendment. After some time, during which Fanny had entirely laid aside her
haughty behavior, the indulgent Mrs. Dormer would have removed the drawing
that it might no longer mortify her child; but Fanny begged it might remain,
and whenever she found herself inclined to return to her former folly, she
placed herself before the picture, which soon became, not merely the shameful
memorial of past faults, but the elegant monument of her return to virtue.

COURAGE INSPIRED BY FRIENDSHIP.
Two sailors, a Frenchman named Robert, and a native of Spain, called Antonio,
were slaves to the same master at Algiers. Friendship is the only consolation
of persons in distress. Antonio and Robert happily enjoyed this consolation --
they communicated to each other their mutual griefs; they conversed perpetually
about their families, their countries, and of the exquisite delight which the
recovery of their liberty, should it ever be granted to their wishes, would
afford them. Their conferences always ended in a flood of affectionate tears,
and this expansion of their hearts enabled them both to support the hard
labor, which was their daily lot, with uncommon fortitude.

The task appointed them was the construction of a road on the top of a cliff
which overhung the sea. One morning the Spaniard resting for a moment from his
toil, and casting an anxious look on the sea, "My friend," said he, "all my
vows, all my hopes, are directed toward the opposite bounds of that vast
liquid plain; why can I not, in company with the partner of my woes, attain
those happy shores? My wife, my children, are ever before my eyes, eagerly
longing for my arrival, or bitterly lamenting my supposed death." Antonio
perpetually indulged himself in these gloomy reflections, and every day that he
was summoned to his work on the cliff, he turned his eyes to the ocean, and
regretted the fatal expanse which separated him from his friends and his
country.

It chanced that one day a Christian ship appeared at anchor not very distant
from the shore. "There friend", cried the Spaniard, "do you see that vessel?
She brings us life and liberty. Though she will not touch here, (for every one
avoids these barbarous coasts) yet tomorrow if you choose it, Robert, our woes
shall end, and we will be free! Yes, tomorrow that ship will pass within a
league of the shore, and we will plunge into the sea from this rock, or perish
in the attempt; for even death is preferable to this cruel slavery." "If you
can save yourself," replied Robert, "I shall support my unhappy lot with
greater resignation. You know, Antonio, how dear you are to me; my friendship
for you will only terminate with my life. I have only one favor to ask of you;
endeavor to find out my father -- If grief for my loss, and old age, have not
already destroyed him, tell him" -- "What do you mean?" answered Antonio; "I
seek your father! -- And do you think I could live happily a single moment with
the idea of having left you in chains?" "But I cannot swim," cried Robert; "and
you know" -- "I know that I have the strongest friendship for you," replied the
Spaniard, embracing him, and shedding tears of affection: friendship will give
me redoubled strength: you shall hold upon my belt, and we will both save
ourselves. In vain did Robert represent the danger there would be of his
perishing himself, and dragging his preserver down with him to destruction;
nothing could overcome the resolution of Antonio. We will both escape, or both
perish together, he cried. "But we draw the attention of our savage keepers;
even some of our companions would be base enough to betray us -- Farewell -- I
hear the bell that calls us from our work; we must separate; farewell till
tomorrow!"

They now returned to their dungeon. -- Antonio was wrapped up in the idea of
his project: he fancied he had already passed the Mediterranean, and was in the
arms of his friends, his wife, and his children. But Robert formed to himself a
very different picture: he saw his friend falling a victim to his own
generosity, and dragged by him to the bottom of the sea, and perishing by that
means, when, if he had only consulted his own safety, he might have preserved
himself, and been restored to the bosom of his family, who most probably were
continually lamenting his loss. "No," said the unfortunate Frenchman to
himself, I will not give way to the solicitations of Antonio; I will not repay
so generous a friendship by being the cause of his death. He will be free. My
unhappy father will at least learn that I am alive, and that my affection for
him is unabated. Alas! I could wish to be the support and consolation of his
age. He wanted my assistance -- perhaps he is now perishing in poverty, and
wishing to see and embrace his son. However, if Antonio is happy, I shall die
with less regret.

The slaves were not taken from their prison the next morning at the usual
hour. The Spaniard was all impatience, while Robert was in doubt whether he
should rejoice or grieve at the disappointment. At length they were called to
their labor, but they could not speak to each other, for their master went
with them. Antonio could only look at Robert and sigh. Sometimes he cast his
eyes toward the sea, and could hardly suppress his emotions. At length night
arrives, and they find themselves alone. "Let us seize this opportunity," cries
the Spaniard, "Come!" "No," replies the other: my friend I never will consent
to endanger your life: farewell, Antonio! I embrace you for the last time. Save
yourself, I conjure you; you have no time to lose. Remember our friendship. I
only request you to remember your promise in regard to my father. He must be
very old, and much in distress; go and console him. If he should want
assistance, I am sure my friend" -- At these words the voice of Robert failed
-- he shed a torrent of tears -- his bosom was torn with anguish. "You weep,
Robert," says Antonio; "it is not tears, but courage, that we now want: resist
no longer; a moment's delay may ruin us; we may never have the opportunity
again; either deliver yourself to my direction, or I will dash my head against
those rocks."

The Frenchman threw himself at the feet of the generous Spaniard: he still
represented the hazard of the attempt, and pointed out the inevitable danger
that must attend his resolution of endeavoring to preserve him. Antonio made
no reply, but catching him in his arms, he ran to the edge of the precipice,
and plunged with him into the sea. At first they both sunk; but, rising to the
surface, Antonio exerted all his force, and swimming himself, kept Robert also
above the water, who seemed to refuse his assistance, and to fear lest he
should involve him in his own destruction.

The people in the ship were struck with an object which they could not well
distinguish. They thought it was some sea monster that approached the vessel.
Their curiosity was now called another way; they saw a boat leave the shore and
hastily pursue what seemed to them a monstrous sea-animal. These were the
soldiers who guarded the slaves, and who were anxious to overtake Antonio and
Robert. The last saw them approach, and, casting his eyes on his friend, and
perceiving that he grew weak, he made an effort and got loose from Antonio,
saying to him at the same time. "We are pursued. Save yourself, and let me
perish; I only retard your course." He had hardly finished these words when he
sunk. A new transport of friendship animates the Spaniard; he darts toward the
Frenchman, and seizing him as he is just ready to expire, they both disappeared.

The boat, uncertain which way to pursue, stopped; while another was sent from
the vessel to discover what the object was which they had seen. The waves began
to grow rough; at last they discovered two men, the one supporting the other,
and trying to reach the vessel. They rowed to them as fast as possible, and
came up with them just as Antonio's strength began to fail. They took them both
on board. Antonio cried out feebly, Assist my friend -- I die; -- and his
countenance seemed convulsed with the agonies of death. Robert, who was in a
swoon, recovering at the instant, and seeing Antonio without any sign of life
extended by his side, was almost distracted; he threw himself on the body of
his friend. "Antonio!" he cried, "my dear Antonio, my friend, my deliverer,
have I been your murderer? Alas! you cannot hear me. Is this your recompense
for having saved my life? But what is life? Who can support it after the loss
of such a friend?"

Saying this, he started up in the boat, and, seizing a sword, would have
plunged it into his bosom, if he had not been disarmed; but in the midst of his
lamentations and distraction, Providence, apparently to reward an affection so
sincere, interposed in his favor -- Antonio breathed a sigh. Robert flew to
the assistance of his friend, who, lifting up his languid eyes, tried to find
the Frenchman, and, as soon as he perceived him, cried out with a transport
beyond his strength, "I have saved my friend!"

They were both conveyed on board the vessel. Their exemplary friendship
diffused a respect for them among the whole crew. And, such is the effect of
virtue even on the roughest minds, every one contended with his fellows in
showing them attention. Robert arriving in France flew to his father, who was
ready to die with excess of joy at seeing him, and was appointed to a genteel
office under the Government. But the Spaniard, who was likewise offered a very
advantageous post, for one in his situation of life, chose rather to return to
his wife and family. But absence did not diminish his friendship; he continued
still to correspond with Robert, and their letters, which are masterpieces of
simplicity and affection, do honor to the sentiment which was capable of
producing so heroic an action.

THE DUEL; OR THE MAN OF TRUE COURAGE.
MELCOUR lost his parents at an age when he could not be sensible of the
greatness of his misfortune. One of his uncles took him home, brought him up
with his own son, and paid the utmost attention to his education. Florival and
Melcour, already united by the ties of kindred, were soon more so by those of
friendship, which, from their living constantly together, grew stronger every
day. They were both designed for the army. When they were of a proper age, they
got commissions in the same regiment. Florival always hated application, and
the dissipation that naturally attends a military life still inclined him less
to it. As for Melcour, he had not only a very good natural genius, but a strong
inclination to cultivate it. His studies had been properly directed; and a
generous and humane disposition, joined with a habit of thinking seriously, led
him to condemn the criminal practice of fighting duels on trivial occasions, a
custom too prevalent in the army.

Different pursuits lessened, by degrees, the friendship of the two young men.
Florival was blinded by the love of pleasure, he ran into all sorts of
extravagance, and became involved in debt. Melcour lamented his folly, assisted
him with his purse, and endeavored to save him from the ruin into which he was
going to plunge. He represented to him how much his conduct degraded him in the
eyes of sensible people. "Even those," said he to him, "who now applaud your
extravagance, will be the first to upbraid you when they see you in distress.
They call themselves your best friends, and you believe them; they have
estranged you from me. They have painted me to you in the most unfavourable
colors, and if they have not entirely extinguished the friendship that
subsisted between us, at least they have greatly weakened it. The wretches well
knew my sincere affection for you; they are informed of the pains I have taken
to discover to you their perfidious designs, and they wish to punish me for
them. O, my friend, if they should succeed in robbing me of your esteem, their
triumph will be too complete! But, my dear Florival! I do not speak on my own
account only. I conjure you, by every sentiment of virtue that united our
infancy, not to plunge a dagger in the heart of the best of fathers. If he were
to know the excesses you run into he would die with sorrow."

These remonstrances touched the heart of Florival. He promised to amend; but
his perfidious friends represented vice to him in so amiable a form, that he
was unable to resist. Melcour being informed, that, after having lost a great
sum of money at play, he was gone to dissipate his sorrow by infamous
debauchery, immediately went to him, and urged to him, with some vehemence, the
duties of his situation, and the promises he had made to fulfill them.

Florival was no longer master of himself; he fell into a most violent rage
against his cousin; he even drew his sword on him; and on Melcour's refusing to
sight him, he abused him in the grossest terms, and was almost tempted to
strike him. His cousin still kept his temper: unworthy as Florival appeared of
his affection, he yet only regarded him as a friend and relation.

Overcome by this steadiness, he at length recovered his temper. He was ashamed
of his behavior, and begged pardon of Melcour for his violence, which was
immediately granted by the generous youth, and an immediate and perfect
reconciliation took place.

An officer belonging to another regiment happened to be present during the
affair; he had been witness to the provocation given by Florival, and he
imputed the coolness of his cousin to want of courage. He did not fail to make
many sarcastic remarks on it, and they came at length to the ears of some of
Melcour's friends. The least suspicion is deemed injurious to the honor of a
soldier. After many inquiries, it was discovered whose conduct had given rise
to the scandal. They were told the honor of the corpse was wounded through
them, and it was their duty to vindicate it. The means were evident. If the
report was true, they must fight each other; if false, they must punish the
author of it. Melcour was truly miserable. His principles disapproved of
duelling in any instance; and in this, if he obeyed the injunctions of his
corpse, he was reduced to the terrible necessity of plunging his sword into the
bosom of his relation and friend. But, in vain did he represent his feelings to
his brother officers, they would hear of nothing but the choice of weapons,
time, and place. His sorrow was unutterable: he retired to his apartment.
Florival, who went to look for him, found him leaning on a table, hiding his
face with his hands, his eyes streaming with tears, and his continual sighs
only interrupted by the frequent repetition of the name of Florival. At such a
sight he was not able to contain himself; he threw himself at the feet of his
friend. His appearance recalled to Melcour all the horror of his situation --
"What! in a moment I am called upon to pierce your heart, and do you come to
seek me? -- O Florival!" said he, his voice almost choked with tears, "should
my arm deprive you of life, I would not survive you. What should I say to your
father? did he take so much care of my infancy, to see me stained with the
blood of his son? O, wretched old man, whatever may be the event of this horrid
duel, it will be an eternal source of anguish for you!"

At this instant some of the officers forced open the door; they came to tell
Melcour he could not delay the combat any longer without giving room to call
his courage in question. What a terrible situation! At this instant the two
friends were embracing each other -- they were unable to return any answer.

Florival was the first who broke this mournful silence. In him the mistaken
principles of honor at present prevailed over those of friendship. He got up,
and extended his arm to assist Melcour, without daring to look at him. He arose
and walked about the room in the greatest agitation; he fancied he saw his
relation and friend murdered by his hands, and his distracted uncle demanding
vengeance for the blood of his son. At length, recovering himself, he turned to
the officers, and said to to them in a firm and resolute tone of voice: I will
no longer hesitate to act the part which is pointed out to me by the voice of
religion, of reason, and of humanity, be the consequence what it may. My
determination is fixed. Go, and inform those who sent you, that Melcour prefers
an imaginary dishonor to a real crime, and that no consideration upon earth
shall tempt him to point his sword against the bosom of his friend. This answer
determined his fate. His brother officers informed him with the sincerest
regret, that, as he had refused to fight, it was impossible for them to roll
with him, and that he must quit the regiment. Who can describe the feelings of
Florival, when he heard this sentence? it was be who had brought Melcour into
this terrible situation. The disgrace of his cousin was owing to his follies.
These thoughts almost drove him to distraction. His friends were alarmed for
the consequences, and removed him by force from the mournful scene.

Melcour, left to himself, soon determined what steps to take. He was
determined not to return home, to be there exposed to a disgrace he was
conscious of not deserving. He resolved to endeavor to improve the talents
which Nature had endowed him with by traveling, till time should either
obliterate the memory of this unfortunate adventure, or show it in its true
light. That very evening he made the proper preparations for his journey, and
wrote a letter to his cousin, acquainting him with his intended expedition.
"Inform my uncle," he added, "of all that has happened; let him know that they
wanted to compel me to become your murderer. He will shudder at the thought.
Though these barbarians, guided only by a false sense of honor, think me
unworthy to serve my king and country, he at least will applaud the courageous
efforts I have made to preserve us both from a crime. This lesson, my dear
Florival, will be of advantage to you; your eyes are now opened to the conduct
of your companions. Still continue your regard for me; and never esteem me
unhappy while I preserve a place in your friendship."

He set out at daybreak the next morning, accompanied by a single servant. He
had not gone many miles from the garrison when he saw a large detachment of the
enemy on the point of defeating an inferior number of French troops. He could
not behold his countrymen in danger of being vanquished without burning with
ardour to assist them. Regardless of the danger of the attempt, he only
listened to the call of glory; and this Melcour, whose courage his brother
officers had presumed to question, flew to the field of battle, performed
prodigies of valor, took one of the enemy's colors, and animating his
countrymen by his example, they obtained the victory.

The general officer who commanded the detachment was charmed with the bravery
of the young warrior, and earnestly desired to know his name. "Sir," he
replied, "I will tell you who I am directly; but, will you give me leave first
to ask, what is the immediate destination of your detachment?" "It is going,"
said he, "to reinforce the neighboring garrison," (naming that which Melcour
had left.) "of which I am to take the command," (...), Sir," said Melcour, "if
you will permit me, I will attend you thither, and receive there those marks of
your approbation that you shall be pleased to honor me with."

They arrived. "Sir," said Melcour, "the only favor I ask of you, is to call
together the officers of the regiment of ***" (that which he had quitted); they
assembled, and Melcour appeared. "Behold, gentlemen," said he, "the unfortunate
victim of a false honor, to which you sacrifice every thing, though it often
renders you cruel and unjust. Because I refused to stain my hands with the
blood of a relation younger than myself, and who had expiated a very slight
offense by the most unequivocal marks of sorrow and repentance; because I
listened to the voice of religion and humanity; because I respected the laws,
you have judged me unworthy to carry arms in the service of my country. Blinded
by prejudice, you have dared to accuse me of cowardice. For that accusation I
have taken ample revenge. These colors, taken from the enemy, are a sufficient
testimony of my courage." His brother officers surrounded him, and embracing
him, by the praises they lavished on him, and the excuses they made, they
atoned for the rash suspicions they had entertained of him.

The general, astonished and charmed with the behavior of Melcour, pressed him
to resume his rank for the present, till he could have an opportunity of
reporting so gallant an action to the minister. Melcour yielded to his
solicitations, seconded by those of the officers of the regiment. "Accept,"
said the general, "that commission you was deprived of yesterday, as a tacit
avowal of the injustice of that prejudice which condemned you, and may your
example entirely root it out!" Then turning to the officers who surrounded him,
he added: "Let the behavior of this virtuous young man teach you, for the
future, not to accuse that person of cowardice, who, obedient to the laws of
true honor, and of his country, refuses to become a murderer. Renounce,
gentlemen, that fatal error, which shows you the man of true courage in him who
is not afraid to wash out an injury in the blood of his fellow citizen: behold
him rather in the person who has greatness of soul to be above the desire of
revenge. For the future, defer your quarrels till the day of battle, and let
the contests for superior resolution be decided in the face of the enemies of
your king and country. Or, if the insult offered you is amenable to the laws,
let the laws fix that ignominy on your adversary that his conduct may deserve.
But, let your warmest praises be bestowed on Melcour, and on those who have the
magnanimity to follow the example he has this day given us."

It is impossible to describe the transports of Florival during this affecting
scene. From that moment he renounced his fatal errors, and, strictly keeping
the solemn promises he had made to his friend, and profiting by his example,
they both were raised to the highest stations in the army, which they filled
with the greatest honor to themselves, their family, and their country.

THE Folly of unrestrained Indulgence; OR THE HISTORY OF EMMELINE AND JENNY.
Ye doting parents, of your charge beware,
The richest soil requires the greatest care.
Ah, then destroy each baneful weed betimes!
Remember this -- that faults will grow to crimes,
If no correcting hand, with well-aim'd skill,
Avert their power, and bend the stubborn will.
How often must reason whisper in your ear,
A blighted spring will make a barren year.

EMMELINE was the daughter of a gentleman of large fortune; she was always
dressed in the most elegant manner; her nursery was filled with the most
expensive toys, and she had several servants to wait upon her. If she wished
for any thing, however absurd in itself, or incapable of pleasing her when
obtained, yet Emmeline must be indulged. Not a servant in the house was
suffered to (...) sometimes, if they happened to displease her, she would
scratch and beat them in the most violent manner. Notwithstanding her finery,
and her superfluity of toys, notwithstanding she had every thing at her command
which riches could procure, and every one was striving to make her happy, she
was a most miserable little girl. Her tyrannical temper made her universally
disliked, even by those who were obliged to be subservient to her, and her
fretfulness and ill humor was a constant thorn in her own bosom.

At the entrance of her father's park stood a lodge, which was inhabited by a
poor man who had also one daughter. Little Jenny was one of the best tempered
girls in the world; she was never seen crying and out of humor like Emmeline,
but on the contrary, was civil and obliging to every body. There was not a
servant at the hall but loved her as if she had been their own child; and never
did they go down to the lodge, but they were sure to carry her an apple, or a
piece of plum-cake, or something, nice in their pockets. It frequently happened
that Jenny was sent for to play with Emmeline, which she did not like at all,
for the young lady was so whimsical it was impossible to please her, and
frequently would desire Jenny to do what was very improper. On such occasions
the would never comply; for though she paid the haughty little girl every
respect which was due to her rank, she never forgot what was due to herself:
well knowing that a wrong action is equally culpable, whether he person who
tempts us to commit it, be poor or rich. If in their play they happened to
break any thing, Emmeline would desire Jenny to say it was one of the servants
who did it; and when she refused to be guilty of so wicked an action, Emmeline
would put herself in a violent passion, and frequently beat her. In short it is
not to be conceived how disagreeable she made herself. She was also very
ignorant; she could neither read, nor write; for though she had several
masters, not one of them attended her more than three or four lessons. Mrs.
Gordon would not permit her to be reprimanded, and no one could long endure her
unrestrained insolence. She was therefore unacquainted with the most common
branches of learning, and when Jenny, who was nearly the same age, could read
very well, Emmeline scarcely knew her letters. Jenny was one day as usual sent
for to the hall, and when she arrived she found the young lady in the parlour
with her Papa and Mama, who were endeavoring to divert her by a great variety
of very pretty prints, which they had sent for from London. She looked at them
a little time, and then being tired, tossed them away. Jenny took one to look
at, when Emmeline snatching it from her, asked her how she dared touch it? I
beg your pardon, Miss Emmeline, said she but I was only going to look at it.

Emmeline. And who gave you leave? To be sure you are a mighty fine lady with
your stuff gown to give yourself such airs.


Jenny. I thought, Miss Emmeline, you sent for me to play with you, and not to
laugh at my dress; it is the best my father and mother can afford, and I am
much obliged to them for it; many very good little girls have much worse.


Emmeline. Well to be sure they must be very good, if they have not a gown.


Jenny. Can peoples' dress, Miss, make any difference in their goodness?


Emmeline. Oh I do not know: pray don't ask me such questions. Come let us go
and play.


They went into the garden, accompanied by a servant, for Emmeline was never
suffered to move without one. As they were running about, Emmeline happened to
fall, and scratch her arm against a gooseberry bush. She immediately began to
cry and shriek so loud, that in a few minutes her Papa, Mama, and half the
servants came running to see what was the matter. Mrs. Gordon chided the
servant very much for the accident, though she well knew it was in no servant's
power to prevent her daughter's doing what she liked. Mr. Gordon took her in
his arms, and carried her into the house; but it was some hours before she
could be pacified. Such was the child, whom unbounded indulgence had totally
spoiled, for Emmeline had not naturally bad dispositions. With increasing
years, her faults increased also, and her parents then began to see, and lament
the folly of their conduct. Every pleasure, every comfort of their lives were
totally destroyed. They could not enjoy their own home from the wretched temper
of their daughter, nor were they happier when abroad, as their fears for her
safety were ever awake. They knew no one could control her, and that however
dangerous what she had a fancy for, that, she would do. They were invited to
spend a month at a gentleman's seat at some miles distance. Not without great
reluctance did they accept the invitation; but at length it was determined
Jenny should stay with Emmeline during their absence. Poor Jenny dreaded the
persecution she knew she must endure, and when she put on her bonnet to go to
the hall, she could not help crying. The first day of her visit was spent much
as usual; but the second, Emmeline was if possible, more ill tempered than
ever; and Jenny, tired beyond all endurance, thus addressed her: Miss Emmeline,
I am come here, not because I wish it, but because your Mama, has desired it;
do not therefore think that I will be treated in this manner. I know that I am
poor, and you are rich; but yet, Miss Emmeline I would not change situations
with you. Of what use to you is your rank, but to enable you to torment others,
and to make every one as unhappy as yourself? I do not believe the poorest
beggar suffers more than you do. You have riches, but you do not know how to
enjoy them, and though you call yourself great, nobody loves you.

This was language Emmeline had never before heard; she would have uttered the
effusions of her passion, but shame kept her silent. She felt a sensation she
had never experienced; and inferiority wholly new. How much did this little
peasant appear superior to herself? how was all her boasted consequence
dwindled to nothing?

Such is the power of Virtue, that even the wicked are awed by it. From that
time Emmeline felt a veneration for Jenny she knew not how to account for. She
saw how happy she always appeared, how much she was beloved, and in short, how
different she was in every respect to herself. These reflections first convinced
her of her folly, in imagining she could ever be happy if she was not good. She
resolved to imitate the conduct she could not but admire, and, if possible, to
become amiable. But she found this a very hard task; she had not only virtues
to acquire, but faults to conquer which had grown with her growth, and
strengthened with her strength. But yet, though it was difficult, it was not
impossible; she told her resolution to Jenny, who could scarcely contain the
raptures she felt at hearing this declaration; and she thought Emmeline had
never appeared so lovely as in that moment. Her countenance was no longer
clouded by frowns and tears; she began to feel what happiness virtue can
bestow, and that it is she alone who makes us truly great.

Very often did she relapse into her former habits, but reflection, by pointing
out their folly, and experience, by showing their misery, fortified her mind to
resist their attacks; Jenny too was near, and assisted her to conquer them.
Hitherto the profusion of money, which the too great indulgence of her parents
had allowed her, had been spent in cakes, sugarplums, and toys; but now, a new
source of delight was opened to her; she tasted the charms of benevolence, and
her bosom was warmed by the emanations of charity. The poor of the village saw
in her a rising benefactress, and the widow and the orphan prayed for her
happiness. The servants too, whom she now treated in a very different manner,
respected her as much as they had before despised her; and every one was eager
to wait upon, and oblige her. As for Jenny, by whose example and advice the
little tyrant had been reclaimed (for it was she who had taught her to pray
Heaven to assist her good intentions) it is impossible to say with what warmth
of affection she loved her. Her stay at the hall was no longer disagreeable to
her, no longer occasioned dread and uneasiness.

Mr. and Mrs. Gordon had been persuaded by their friends to extend their visit
a month longer. So uncomfortable was their own home, that they agreed to it
with much less reluctance than they would otherwise have done. Two months,
therefore, they had been absent, when they began to prepare for their return.
The pleasure they would have felt in seeing Emmeline after this long absence,
was much damped by the consciousness how ill she deserved their affection: yet
themselves only had they to blame; for her heart was good, and naturally
inclined to virtue; but (...) destructive are the consequences of unrestrained
indulgence, that human nature is vitiated by it.

The first glance Emmeline caught of the carriage among the trees, her heart
began to beat with unusual sensations. She felt the painful emotions of
conscious shame; she knew how ill she had requited the tenderness of her
parents, and after a struggle with some (...) sparks of pride, she determined
to confess her faults, and entreat her parents' forgiveness. As soon as they
entered the house, she expressed in a manner very different from her former
habits, the joy she felt at seeing them. They clasped her to their bosoms, and
looked at each other in silent astonishment. They now began to display the
profusion of toys, which they had brought her home, and asked her how she liked
them? She made no answer, but bursting into an agony of tears, threw herself on
her knees before them, and declared her conduct had hitherto made her unworthy
their goodness, but she would in future endeavor to deserve it more.

Inexpressible were the raptures of Mr. and Mrs. Gordon, they could not find
words to declare their feelings, but each endeavored to exceed the other in
the most affectionate caresses. She now constituted their happiness as truly as
she had before been the cause of their sorrow. Her bad habits had been too long
indulged to yield to any thing but time and resolution; yet her relapses were
short, and the contrition she felt, was her best security against their return.
When her parents were informed it was to Jenny they were in a great measure
indebted for their daughter's reformation, they determined their gratitude
should equal her virtue.

Emmeline had very soon a worthy woman provided as a governess for her, to whom
she was docile, obedient, and attentive; and made so rapid a progress in her
studies, that she astonished all who had known her former ignorance. Jenny was
kept at the hall, and shared in the pleasure and instructions of her friend, to
whom she every day became dearer.

From this story, my little readers may learn the benign influence of Virtue.
Vain are riches, vain the boast of power without it! They can never raise any
one so high as Virtue.

Let them consider Emmeline and Jenny. How much was the latter, though clothed
in the simplest manner, superior to her haughty friend, even when decked in the
most costly attire! Let none then despise Poverty, it is often found the
residence of Virtue. Let them pay to merit what is always its due, though found
in the humblest walks of life. And let every one remember there is no real
superiority but that of Goodness; and that it is equally the part of Wisdom and
Virtue, to efface the wild inequality, the distinctions paid alone to rank and
riches, which pride and folly have introduced into the world.

THE END.
BOOKS, For Sale by the PUBLISHERS hereof.
1. The surprising Voyages, Travels, and Adventures of a REPROBATE, including a
Sketch of the Manners and Customs of the Algerines. By HENRY BROOK, Esquire.
Author of the Fool of Quality, etc. etc.

2. The BLIND CHILD, or ANECDOTES OF THE WYNDHAM FAMILY. Written for the use of
young persons, and embellished with a handsome engraved Frontispiece.

The above valuable little work has been written with the laudable hope of
repressing that excessive softness of heart, which too frequently involves its
possessor in a train of evils, and which is by no means true sensibility, that
exquisite gift of heaven, which cannot be esteemed too highly; though its abuse
should serve more and more to convince, it can never be sufficiently
discouraged.

3. The SEVEN WISE MASTERS OF ROME, containing many curious and entertaining
Stories.

4. The SEVEN WISE MISTRESSES OF ROME, wherein the Treachery of evil
Counselors is discovered, Innocence cleared, and the Wisdom of the SEVEN WISE
MISTRESSES displayed.

5. The Seven Voyages of SINBAD THE SAILOR; ALADDIN and his WONDERFUL LAMP; the
Story of LITTLE HUNCHBACK; and the BARBER and his SEVEN BROTHERS.

6. HYMNS for the Amusement of Children, by the Rev. Christopher Smart, A. M.
to which are added WATT'S DIVINE SONGS for Children, embellished with a number
of Engravings.

7. An easy Introduction to the Knowledge of Nature, adapted to the capacities
of Children. By Mrs. Trimmer.

8. The Catechism of Nature, by Dr. Martinet.

9. The Catechism of Health, for the use of Families and Schools. By Dr. Faust.

10. PAUL and VIRGINIA, an INDIAN STORY. From the French of H. B. De St.
Pierre, by H. HUNTER, D. D. A new EDITION, embellished with three handsome
Engravings.

The same FRENCH and ENGLISH.

The same in FRENCH.

11. The INDIAN COTTAGE, by De St. Pierre, Author of Paul and Virginia.


