THE POLITICAL CENSOR, OR MONTHLY REVIEW FOR MARCH 1796,

This work will be published on the last day of every month. Six CENSORS will
make a volume, the sixth will therefore contain a general Index and Table of
Contents. The one ending the year will contain a chronological Table of all the
remarkable events in the Political world.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED FOR BENJAMIN DAVIES, NO. 68, HIGH STREET. MDCCXCVI.

COPY RIGHT SECURED ACCORDING TO LAW.

THE POLITICAL CENSOR, OR MONTHLY REVIEW OF THE Most interesting Political
Occurrences, RELATIVE TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR BENJAMIN DAVIES, NO. 68, HIGH STREET. MDCCXCVI.

INTRODUCTION.
SOME of the principal debates of the present session of Congress, with Remarks
thereon, appeared a few weeks ago, under the Title of, "A Prospect from the
Congress-Gallery," published by Mr. Thomas Bradford. The favorable reception
of that work led me to undertake that which I now offer to the public. My plan,
however, being altered, for reasons with which I am going to acquaint the
reader, it became necessary to alter the title also.

No one, who has been an attentive observer of the violent and dangerous
attempts, which have been made, and are still making, against the Federal
Constitution, and consequently against the peace, prosperity and happiness of
our country, can have failed to perceive, that they had their rise in the
deception, which has been so industriously circulated through every part of the
United-Sates. It is not to be presumed, indeed, that the leaders in this
hostile and formidable combination have been deceived: they have long been
marshalled and ready for the attack; but, it is the delusion, which has been
quietly suffered to steal its way among the people, that has called them into
the field and encouraged them to assault, first the outworks, and at last the
very citadel of our liberties and our lives.

The source of this delusion it is not difficult to discover: we have it
continually before our eyes. I mean the public papers, and I speak with a very
few exceptions.

The general government adopted the most effectual measures for facilitating
the conveyance of information to every quarter of the Union, at the least
possible expense. Hence subscribers to papers were found in abundance, and the
editors, striking off numerous impressions, were, of course, enabled to furnish
them at a low price. The intention of the government, as expressed by the
President himself, was certainly the most beneficent, that of spreading true
information and useful knowledge among all classes of the community. But what
has been the consequence? Exactly the contrary. The French Revolution burst
forth like a vulcano, and its devouring lava reached even us. The editors,
perceiving the partiality of the most numerous class of their subscribers for
this revolution, and all the novel and wild principles it has given rise to,
have been seduced, by the love of gain, to flatter that partiality by extolling
those principles, at the expense of every thing, their own private interest
excepted. Their papers, which swarm like summer flies, are become the vehicles
of falsehood in place of truth, of ignorance in place of knowledge. Like the
tenebrificous stars, mentioned by a celebrated author, they shed darkness in
place of light.

A veil has been carefully drawn over the distresses and horrors resulting from
the anarchical system of France; or, when this could not be done, when the
editors have feared to be anticipated by their fellow laborers, they have
endeavored to outvie each other in apologies for what ought to have been held
up to detestation, or, at least, as an awful lesson to ourselves. Every one,
even of the most destructive and impious acts of that pretended republic, has
been trumpeted forth as the effect of a liberal and enlightened policy; while
no insinuation, no subtilty, no audacious falsehood, has been left unessayed to
thwart all the measures of our own mild and wise government, to disfigure its
principles, and sever it from the affections of the people.

To countervail the malignant efforts of these retailers has ever been my wish;
and, I hope, it will not be thought presumption in me, if I believe that the
trifles from my pen, which the public have honored with their perusal, have,
in some slight degree, had the desired effect. But, alas, what can a straggling
pamphlet, necessarily confined to a single subject, do against a hundred
thousand volumes of miscellaneous falsehood in folio! Their sheets, if
extended, would more than cover the surface of our country.

In opposing a literary monster like this, I am aware that a Porcupine, with
all his quills, can never hope for complete success: but, nothing can be
accomplished without being begun: I hope to call up abler hands to my aid: to
me, it will be a sufficient honor to have led the way.

This I shall attempt, in a monthly work, of the same bulk and price as the one
which is here submitted to the public. In this work I shall take a review of
the political transactions of the past month; give an account of every
democratic trick, whether of native growth or imported from abroad; unravel the
windings of the pretended patriots, and more particularly those of the
flour-merchants; and I trust, I shall be enabled to give, monthly, a sketch of
political affairs more satisfactory, because more correct, than has ever yet
appeared in this country. These will be the leading objects; but I shall
exclude nothing, not entirely foreign to the nature of the work, that may
contribute to the use or amusement of my readers.

The newspapers are supported by subscription, and for that very reason the
Censor shall not. As long as people read, so long shall I write; and, when the
Bookseller advertises me that the work lies on his shelf, it will be a very
good hint for me to draw in my quills.

Here, then, begins a bellum eternum between the fabricating Quid-Nuncs and me.
-- There is my glove, gentlemen; take it up as soon as you will. You well know
that your abuse will infinitely redound to my honor; and therefore, to silence
me, by rendering my work sterile and uninteresting, you are reduced to the
cruel necessity of telling the truth.

I should think it necessary to offer an apology for having prefixed the title
of Censor to the present Number; but the reader will at once perceive; that it
is now assumed for the sake of uniformity, as applicable to the future contents
of the work, and not to the remarks on the debates of Congress, a body to which
I should be very sorry to be wanting in respect.

THE POLITICAL CENSOR.
THE Reader will please to recollect, that, in the Prospect from the Congress
Gallery, I brought down the proceedings in the House of Representatives to the
5th of January, the memorable day of the exhibition of the French Flag. I
should not now have thought of returning to the same subject, had I not been
led to it by an attack on the President, in the anarchical Aurora of
Philadelphia.

One would have thought, that giving this flag a place among the Archives of
the United States, would have been conferring honor enough on it; but nothing
would content the French-Americans, who write in the paper I have just
mentioned, short of its being hoisted in the Congress Chamber, as a trophy of
the victory of French influence. They cite us the example of the Convention.
But, let them say under what circumstances, and with what motive our flag was
granted a conspicuous place in their hall. It was dishonored by being swung
up, gibbeted up, by the side of the flag of regenerated Geneva; a state in
which the Convention had established their system of pillage and murder, and
which they treated as a conquered country, rather than as an independent ally.
To add to our humiliation, a duplicate, as I may call it, of our flag was sent
to Geneva, and there exhibited in the Convention of a poor little degraded
nation of thirty thousand bodies, I will not call them souls. This was saying
to the Genevese: See, you are not the only people who have thrown themselves on
our protecting power, and sent us a pledge of their submission to our
principles.

Thus, by the indiscretion (to give it the mildest term) of our Ambassador,
have we been degraded in the eyes of even Italians, and exposed to the gibes of
the little scandalizing circles of the least respectable people in Europe: and,
in return for this cruel insult, we are called upon to distinguish the flag of
the Convention with a place in the public sittings of our legislature, and by
this act acknowledge ourselves the supple tools of our insulters! -- This is
modern patriotism.

DEBATE ON THE APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE MINT. January 19th.
Mr. Williams, agreeably to notice before given, moved to strike out of the
Appropriation Bill all the gross sum, appropriated for the officers of the Mint.

Mr. SEDGWICK (from Massachusetts) thought that the course which the gentleman
is pursuing, has never been adopted before. It is incorrect to discuss the
merits of the mint in passing this bill. We might as well take up the salary of
the chief justice, or any other article in the bill, as the mint. We never
would have done at this rate. We are now only to vote for the bill, as
agreeably to the laws already made. Mr. Sedgwick said that if the gentleman
from New York (Mr. Williams) would bring forward any proposition for the
regulation, or even the abolition of the establishment of the mint, if it could
be proved productive of public benefit, he, with every other gentleman, would
give him their aid to effect the object; but that now, he conceived, it could
not regularly be brought forward. He thought an appropriation bill should be
conformed exactly to the state of the public engagements, and that where
establishments had been formed and salaries provided, the amount of them should
be the principle of calculating the amount of appropriations; and the House
ought not, by witholding appropriations, to break in upon and destroy
establishments formed by the whole legislature. That these observations had
hitherto been sanctioned by the practice on this subject. He observed, that if
the House was to investigate, in the discussion of an appropriation bill, the
amount of salaries and the legal establishments of government, the public
service would be dangerously destroyed. He remarked, that it was to be
observed, that no appropriation was made for any purpose since the commencement
of the year.

Mr. GALLATIN (from Geneva) rose to state a general principle which he thought
it of importance to lay down on this occasion; lest the decision on the present
question grounded on a different principle, should on some future occasion be
brought forward. The principle was, that this House has a right by witholding
appropiations when they see proper, to stop the wheels of Government. This he
said was plainly to be inferred from the practice of the House, in their
passing annually an appropriation law -- He observed, that in one instance the
House had departed from that principle. In respect to the payment of the
interest on the public debt, for the support of the public credit, the House
had thought it necessary to give up that right. If this principle is not just,
it would be best to make a permanent provision at once.

Mr. SEDGWICK said that he had certainly no intention to have given occasion to
the observations which had been made, but as the general principle which he had
laid down, had been denied, and as it had some relation either intimate or
remote to the subject before the committee, he would take the liberty to repeat
the principle, and to say a few words in support of it.

The principle, then, which he had assumed was, that when legal establishments
were made, it was the duty of the legislature to make appropriations
conformably to the public engagements; and that neither branch had a right to
withhold its assent. -- He observed that the whole legislature, and not a part,
were competent to form contracts, and to establish, and alter compensations and
salaries. The legislature, and not either branch of it, had the power of
expressing the public will, and pledging the public faith: that when a salary
is ascertained, the public faith is pledged that it shall be paid, according to
the stipulation; and that therefore the public credit is involved in making the
necessary appropriations, without which it could not be paid. He asked if in
such case it was competent to the House rightfully to withhold the means
necessary for the performance of the public engagements!

He said he had always supposed that the power of the House, in the case of
appropriations, did not give a power to yield or withhold assent on such a
subject. He believed in every such instance the exercise of discretion was
restrained; to illustrate his ideas, he could mention a similar instance. The
constitution had declared, that the President should receive a stated
compensation for his services, to be ascertained by law; which could neither be
diminished nor enlarged during the term for which he should have been elected.
Here was a duty imposed on the legislature, with the performance of which they
could not, they had no power to dispense. Yet after the compensation was
stated, no payment could be made in consequence of appropriating. He asked if
in this case, when the public will was expressed, the engagement and the
national faith pledged, the legislature could of right withhold the necessary
appropriation? The same observations might he said be applied to every instance
where public controuls were formed. The public faith was pledged, the necessary
appropriations must be made to prevent a violation of it, and if withheld such
violation might justly be charged on the legislature.

Here a long conversation took place with respect to the expediency of the
proposed measure, on the advantages and disadvantages of a Mint, etc. After
which Mr. Livingston, whom we shall by-and-by see making a considerable figure
in the field of opposition to the government, made a motion for the striking
out the whole appropriation for the Mint.

Mr. MURRAY, (from Maryland) said that had the gentleman from New York moved
for delay, for the purpose of introducing a motion to repeal the law which
rendered this appropriation necessary, he would not have troubled the House
with a single remark; but his motion to strike out an appropriation for the
purpose of bringing the policy of the law itself into discussion, contained a
principle in his mind so repugnant to the great legislative duties of the House
that he would oppose it. The object of the appropriation is not a temporary
one, but a part of the machinery of our government, under the express authority
of the constitution by law. The doctrine now contended for by the gentlemen
from New York and Pennsylvania (Mr. Livingston and Mr. Gallatin) was that this
House have a discretionary power of appropriating or not -- To this doctrine,
taken in the extent which he conceived they contended for, he could not give
his support. On the contrary, he thought, that in all cases where an
appropriation flowed from a law to make good a contract, or to erect a
permanent organ in the government, and from any law whose object was permanent,
the true doctrine was, that it was the duty of the House to vote an
appropriation. A law is the will of the nation. The same powers only, that
formed it can repeal it. If it be a constitutional act, no power can lawfully
obstruct its operation or its existence. But attending to the doctrine
maintained to day it would follow, that though this House had not the power of
repealing a law made by all the branches of government, it may obstruct its
operations and render it a dead letter; though it cannot repeal, it may do what
shall amount to a repeal, which is the assumption of a power almost equal to
that of exclusive legislation. He thought he saw in this an evil of great
extent, and an anarchy of theoretic principles. It appeared to him that though
we originate money bills, we had no right to refuse an appropriation to
existing laws that either secured a debt or any contract, or that related to
objects permanent by the law that created or acknowleged them, as long as the
law itself remained unrepealed. We had but a share of legislative power. Where
a law relative to such objects as he had alluded to existed, from which an
appropriation followed, till the law ceased by repeal or by other
constitutional means, it was obligatory upon us as well as upon our
constituents, and the only powers we could exercise of a discretionary sort
resolved themselves either into the mode of making good the appropriation, or
of voting for its repeal. The other branches would then judge of the propriety
of our proceeding; but till they who assisted in its enacting, judged with us
the necessity of doing it away, a duty resulted that we should give it the
energy intended by its enaction.

The Appropriation for the mint was finally passed.

REMARKS.
The first three items in the Appropriation Bill were as follows: DOL. For
compensation to the President of the United States 25,000 To the Vice President
5,000 To the Members of the Senate 38,000

Now, would it not have been much the shortest way for Mr. Livingston to move
for striking out these three items! This would have been coming to the mark at
once. By only three strokes of the "Calm Observer's" pen, the free, the
independent, the beneficent government of the United States might have been
changed into a National Convention; and in the same number of days, we might
have seen our streets patrolled by revolutionary ruffians, our property exposed
to requisitions and our heads to the guillotine.

But, it is not my intention to enter into the merits of a motion, at once the
height of malevolence and absurdity; I have introduced this debate merely to
have an opportunity of introducing the principle laid down by Mr. Gallatin, and
Mr. Gallatin along with it.

This gentleman tells us, that the House of Representatives have a right, by
withholding appropriations when they see proper, to stop the wheels of
Government. -- I should be glad to know were he learnt this: whether from his
companions in Braddock's Field, or from their correspondents, the corrupted
flour-merchants in Philadelphia. They, indeed, were well versed in stopping the
wheels of government, by the agency of appropriations.

When Mr. Gallatin rose from his seat to broach this clogging principle, there
was an old farmer sitting beside me, to whom the person of the orator seemed
familiar. "Ah, ah!" says he, what is little Moses in Congress! -- I sharply
reprimanded him for taking one of our Representatives for a Jew; but, to
confess a truth, the gentleman from Geneva has an accent not unlike that of a
wandering Israelite. It is neither Italian German nor French, and, were it not
a sort of leze republicanism, I would say he clipped the king's English most
unmercifully. Such an accent is admirably adapted for extolling the value of
leaden buckles, or for augmenting the discordant howlings of a synagogue; but
it throws a certain air of ridicule over the debates of a legislative assembly,
and forms a sort of burlesque on the harmonious eloquence of the other members.

When I told the good jog-trot to take care what he was saying, for that the
personage then on his legs was no other than the great Gallatin, he opened his
eyes, and with a look and voice expressive of an honest indignation, "what!"
says he, that same Gallatin who was one of the leaders in the Western
Insurrection? -- I could not help smiling at the simplicity of my country
friend, in not perceiving that such a circumstance was the highest proof of Mr.
Gallatin's patriotism, and the only one that recommended him to the suffrages
of his constituents. -- "No wonder," says the farmer, that he wants to stop the
wheels of government. I wish he would attempt to stop the wheels of my wagon, as I
am going down hill. -- God forgive me, but I believe I said amen.

Mr. Gallatin has been accused of inconsistency, but here I cannot join the
enemies of that gentleman. Whatever a man may be, I love to do him ample
justice. This is a principle so strongly imprinted in my breast, that it
induces me to undertake the defense of Mr. Gallatin's consistency, though I
have not the highest respect for his general conduct or for his character.

We might follow this gentleman through his political career from the day of
his disembarkation to the present session of Congress, but it will not, I
imagine, be necessary to go further back than the Western Rebellion.

So early as the 21st of July, 1791, we find him Clerk to a meeting for
opposing the excise law, or, in other words, stopping the wheels of government.
-- On the 21st of April, 1792, we find this adjourned meeting declaring: That
whereas some men may be found among us, so far lost to every sense of virtue,
and feeling for the distresses of our country, as to accept the office for the
collection of the duty.

Resolved, therefore, that in future we will consider such persons as unworthy
of our friendship, have no intercourse or dealings with them, withdraw from
them every assistance, and withhold all the comforts of life, which depend upon
those duties which as men and fellow citizens we owe to each other, and upon
all occasions, treat them with that contempt they deserve; and that it be, and
it is hereby most earnestly recommended to the people at large, to follow the
same line of conduct toward them.

Thus, then, I think here is no inconsistency; no change of principles. The man
that could draw up a resolution like this, cannot be said to have abandoned his
principles, when he declares that the House of Representatives may stop the
wheels of government, when they see proper, by withholding appropriations.

It is said, indeed, that Mr. Gallatin has since repented of his insurrection
conduct, that he called the above quoted resolution his "political sin," and we
all know that he signed a promise of submission to the laws; but, let it be
remembered, that he never talked about this political sin, until he came down
to Philadelphia, and that his promise of submission to the laws was not made,
until he saw that resistance was in vain, and that it was the only way of
availing himself of the amnesty, and saving his carcass from a loathsome
dungeon. And, if he did leave his poor deluded adherents in the lurch, and even
sacrifice them to his own safety, this is (...) more than every rebellious
ringleader is ready to do, when the moment of danger arrive^. It is by no means
a proof of inconsistency in the gentleman from Geneva. It is, to use the words
of a late political writer, varying his means to preserve the unity of his end.
When overturning a government, or stopping its wheels, is the sole object of a
patriot, so long as he keeps steadily toward the point, whether by open
rebellion, confessing his political sin, pretending submission, lurching his
associates, or withholding appropriations, he can never be justly charged with
inconsistency.

DEBATE ON THE APPOINTMENT OF A STENOGRAPHER. January 29th.
On the 28th a report of the Stenographical committee was given in, specifying
that the committee had received proposals from Mr. David Robertson of Virginia,
whose demand for one sessions was 4,000 dollars. The report became the order of
the day for the twenty ninth, when a resolution was proposed in favor of the
appointment.

I shall choose from this debate what fell from Mr. Swanwick and Mr. William
Smith, as appearing to me to comprize nearly all that was urged on both sides.

Mr. SWANWICK (from Pennsylvania) As to the gentleman who is the subject of the
resolution, If I have more strenuously than usual opposed the motion, it is
from a desire to keep him from quitting the lucrative situation he is said to
find himself in, to embark on the stormy sea he is contemplating: to be the
organ of the members of this House to their constituents is indeed a very
delicate task; one for which, considering the danger he might be in of an
Orpheus's fate, that of being torn to pieces, the salary is but a poor
compensation. He is to do justice to the eloquence of some members -- he is to
clothe in an elegant dress the uncouth, yet well meaning expressions of others,
but what will he do with the silent members, who never speak at all? -- What
will their constituents think of them; indeed, Sir, if he had the idea I have
formed of his danger, he will not undertake at all. Faction and party have been
mentioned -- happy Stenographer if he can keep clear of these. If he fall into
their power, insensibly he will represent one side in clouds and darkness, the
other as ornamented with the brightest beams of light. How will he please both?
Misrepresentation is complained of alas, Sir, how quick is error, how flow is
the progress of truth in almost all things: our Stenographer must indeed be a
wonder working man, if he can revert this tide, and make every where light, and
correct reasoning prevail. The best mode of informing our constituents is by
the yeas and nays on our acts; this truly shows, as a gentleman from
New Hampshire has observed, our doings, which are much more interesting to them
than our abstract reasonings; these our constituents will easily form to
themselves ideas of when they know our votes.

Mr. W. LYMAN (Massachusetts) said that, if this resolution did not pass, it
would be advisable to send all the Primers to the gallery.

Mr. W. SMITH (South Carolina) said it was admitted on all sides, that it was
highly important for the people to receive the most accurate information of the
proceedings of the house, and that the debates were in general extremely
misrepresented. Was it not then the duty of the house to remedy this evil and
to adopt such measures as would transmit to the people in every part of the
United States the most accurate information of the conduct of their
representatives? The house had now an opportunity of obtaining the services of
a gentleman peculiarly distinguished for the rare talent of reporting with
accuracy public debates: the compensation which would be adequate to such
useful and laborious service was beyond the ability of any printer, the house
ought therefore to contribute toward it; the sum required was a trifle when
compared with the advantages; it was no object: the only question then was
whether the stenographer ought to be an officer of the House; in that capacity
he certainly would be more easily restrained from the commission of any wilful
misrepresentation. Mr. Smith did not feel the force of the objections against
the report. It had been said that although the members were now misrepresented,
yet they had it in their power to publish corrections; but these corrections
were often overlooked, while the misrepresentation was operating very
injuriously to the character of the member: this was generally the case in
places remote from the seat of government; the mangled account of a debate was
republished in a distant paper, and the correction if it reached the distant
printer, was generally disregarded. Among the opponents to the report, Mr.
Smith said that he was surprised to find the gentleman who represented this
city, (Mr. Swanwick) who more than any other member should have withdrawn his
opposition to the measure proposed; that gentleman's constituents had it in
their power at any time to hear the debates of Congress; they were on the spot;
ought he not then in candor to assist in facilitating to the remote citizens
the means of obtaining the best knowledge of the proceedings, and the most
correct statement of the discussions of the house; ought they, from their
remoteness, to be kept in the dark, or to be furnished with such light as would
only mislead? Had they not a claim on the house to adopt such means as would
enable the citizens in every state to judge of the propriety of public
measures? The member from this city had another exclusive advantage; if
misrepresented he could correct the error, and the correction will be read;
that was not the case with the members of remoter states, whose reputation
might be injured by misrepresentation without a similar advantage: the member
from this city was in the midst of his constituents; he had daily opportunities
of setting right any mistatement by personal explanation.

Mr. SMITH said he did not agree with some Gentlemen that it was sufficient for
the people to know what laws were passed, without knowing the previous
discussions; he thought on the contrary, the favorable or unfavorable
impression of a Law on the public mind would depend in a great degree on the
reasons assigned for and against it in debates, and the people ought to know
those reasons; when a Law passes, imposing a Tax, would not the people be
reconciled, if they saw from the discussions of the house that such Tax was
unavoidable, and that the particular mode of taxation was the best which could
be devised? And ought this information to depend entirely on the caprice or
convenience of the reporters, who attended when it pleased them, and who
published just as much of the debates as they found leisure or patience to
accomplish? Mr. Smith said, he was convinced that the errors which had excited
so much complaint were not the effect of design, but merely of inadequacy to
the task; very few were competent to such a business, which required peculiar
skill in stenography, very laborious application, and a clear comprehension of
the subject matter of debate. It could not be expected that persons thus
qualified would devote their whole time to this business without an ample
reward. The report was objected to because there was novelty in the plan; it
was true the House of Commons of England had no such officer, but their
practice was not a fit precedent for us on this occasion, for they admitted no
person to write down in the house their proceedings; their debates were taken
from memory. This house on the contrary had from its first institution,
facilitated, by every accommodation, the reporting their proceedings. The thing
was not altogether however without precedent; during the existence of the
national assembly of France there were officers of the house who composed a
daily work called the Logography, which was an exact account of the debates of
that body. It had been asked what control the house were to have over this
officer? he answered that the Stenographer would be liable to be censured or
displaced, if he should be guilty of wilful misrepresentation; it would be
always easy to discriminate between a casual inadvertence, and a criminal
mistatement: the officer's character and talents, his responsibility to the
house, and his oath to report with impartiality, would be a sufficient pledge
of his accuracy. Mr. Smith seriously believed, that the character of the house
had suffered from the erroneous statements which had gone abroad; he wished to
guard against this evil in future; he was willing, for himself, that every
syllable he uttered within those walls, should be carried to every part of the
union, but he deprecated misrepresentation. He was anxious that the truth
should be known, in relation to every act of the government, for he was as
satisfied that the affection and confidence of the people in this government
would increase with the promulgation of truth, as that whatever it had lost of
that affection and confidence was owing altogether to the propagation of
detraction and calumny. It was under these impressions that he had originally
brought forward the proposition, and that he now recommended the report, and
having heard no reasons to change his sentiments of the expediency of the
measure, he should persist in supporting it.

The committee of the whole was discharged from any further consideration of
the subject.

REMARKS.
The House had nearly got upon a rock here, which they would have found it
difficult to get off from in safety. Perhaps there was never a resolution
proposed, at once so apparently trifling and so pregnant with mischief. Let any
man reflect for a moment on the state of parties in this country, and he will
look with affright at the appointment of an officer, invested with the power of
disfiguring every argument and even every phrase that a member of the
legislature may let fall. The gentlemen who supported the resolution, talk of
his being sworn; and, did we live in those good old times, when oaths were
superior to the spirit of party, the argument would be unanswerable: but, alas!
those times are no more. Oaths on the Evangelists are, in this enlightened age,
little more than mockery. The members of the present Congress have every man of
them sworn to maintain the Constitution of the United States, and yet, how many
of them do we see at this moment straining every faculty of the mind to render
it null and void? what, then could be hoped from a Stenographer.

Were a perfect stranger to listen to a debate he would contract a partiality
for one side or the other, before it was half over. Every man in a popular
government has his party; and who can suppose that the Stenographer would not
have his? It was said that the House had a check upon him, in their power to
dismiss him from his office. But, this must be done by a vote of the House, and
therefore it could be no defense for a member who had the misfortune to find
himself in a minority.

Indeed, this power of dismission is one of the worst parts of the plan; for,
as the Stenographer would be loath to quit so lucrative an employment, he would
of necessity be led to preserve a majority in his favor; and, what would be so
sure a way of doing this as misrepresenting the speeches of the minority? a
member might complain; but the Stenographer, secure in his majority, would
laugh at him. Thus might a man of talents and integrity be officially
represented as a fool or a knave, without having the possibility of redress. In
vain would he endeavor to justify himself: the sworn Stenographer would be
believed before him, and the House, by a solemn decision, would determine that
he had said what he never dreamt of.

Should an officer like this ever enter the House, it is easy to forsee that he
will not be long wanted. The very sight of such a tremendous umpire would
frighten away all freedom of speech. It is true the members of the majority
might prattle away, but those of the other side would naturally look upon
themselves in the situation of a man who is making a deposition. One party only
would dare to open their mouths. Where there is no opposition there can be no
debate, and, of course no need of a Stenographer.

Mr. Smith's objection to citing the example of the British House of Commons on
this occasion did not appear to me well founded. They permit no one to write
down their words after them; yet I believe it will be allowed that their
debates are very well reported, and this is a pretty good proof that an officer
for that purpose is by no means necessary,

This gentleman mentioned the officers of the Logography employed by the second
National Assembly in France. Unfortunate instance! the French Constitution,
that masterpiece of legislation, which was to last as long as the round world,
lasted only ten months and ten days; and, among the engines by which it was
destroyed, the office of the Logography claims a conspicuous place. There were
ten of these reporters. They wrote in the literal character: one took the first
sentence, another the second, and so on. Ten men were much more difficult to
warp and corrupt than one would be, and yet we ever see them the decided tools
of the strongest party. Members complained of misrepresentations, and had the
satisfaction to see their complaints still more disfigured than their speeches.
The consequence was, the few real friends of the Constitution were obliged to
hold their tongues, and suffer the inflamatory harrangues of their opponents to
go forth among the people uncontradicted.

I never like to hear the examples of foreign governments applied to our own,
particularly the examples of what is called the government of France. I was
astonished that a gentleman of Mr. Smith's good sense and good intentions
should hold up for our imitation, or even mention as an instance, one of the
most insidious measures of an Assembly, who were guilty of every crime under
heaven; who, after having repeatedly sworn to defend with their lives the
inviolability of their sovereign, cooly planned an insurrection to hurl him
from his throne, afterward made this very insurrection the subject of an
article of accusation against him, and decreed that their own perjury was a
virtue!

Mr. Lyman's hint for driving all the printers out of the house, unless the
resolution passed, was a striking instance of the domineering spirit, which
would infallibly have overborn any Stenographer who had been unfortunate enough
to accept of the post.

This hint broke out, some days after, in the form of a resolution, from the
lips of Mr. Heath of Virginia. -- Resolved, that, until a Stenographer be
appointed, or further provision made for taking the debates of this House, no
printer be permitted to publish abstracts of the speeches of members, unless
permitted by members making the same. This was the substance of the resolution,
and a curious one it is.

These gentlemen seem to have been determined to force their harrangues, at
full length, down our throats, or to keep us in a sort of political starvation.
We must either swallow them by dozens of yards, as buffoons do ribbons, or we
must never have a taste.

I wonder where Mr. Lyman learnt a doctrine like this. Such an idea could
certainly never be engendered in the free temperate air of Massachusetts. As to
the gentleman from Virginia I am not surprised; for, we know that, when a sulky
negro will not lick up his mess clean, however insipid, disgusting and nauseous
it may be, he is muzzled till his stomach comes to. But, are we Pennsylvanians
to be treated thus? -- No, no, Mr. Heath; when you get the government on the
other side of the Potomack, you may, and undoubtedly will, do what you please
with it; but we have four years to live, at any rate; be not in such haste to
muzzle us then.

Should this resolution ever reach the other side of the Atlantic, what idea
will it give the English patriots of our liberty of the press? If a member of
the British House of Commons were to propose such a tyrannical resolution, I
should not wonder to hear of his being stoned to death. Not publish abstracts
from speeches without particular permission! The idea was certainly imported
from the borders of the Palus Meotis.

Had these two gentlemen restricted the prohibition to their own speeches, I
believe that neither the House nor the public would have cared much about the
matter; for neither of them is of the Ciceronian stamp. It is observable, that
those who appeared most anxious for the appointment of a Stenographer, if we
except one or two, are amongst the few whose speeches can do them no sort of
credit with any party. This is the way of the world. Animals, whether endued
with the faculty of speech or not, seem to fly in the face of nature. The ugly
woman is everlastingly at her glass: the owl thought her frightful brood the
prettiest little creatures in the world; and the insipid orator, while his
voice is drowned in the hemmings, coughings and snorings of his drowsy
audience, thinks he is uttering sentences that ought to be written in letters
of gold.

It was observed in the course of the debate, that, if the printers committed
errors, gentlemen might write out their speeches and send them to the press. To
this Mr. Nichols replied, that he was above doing any such thing. -- For my
part, I must confess, that, were I capable of making a speech, I should be too
lazy to write it out for the Newspapers; but as to its being beneath a
lawgiver, I shall say nothing; for we have an example before our eyes of a
folio orator in the House of Assembly of Pennsylvania, who is so far from
thinking it beneath him to write out his speeches, that he even reads them from
his seat, like a schoolboy from his bench. I allude here to one Doctor
Morpheus, who, finding his neighbors determined not to die under his hands, is
now endeavoring to assassinate the State. The State, however, seems to partake
of the obstinacy of his neighbors, turning a deaf ear to all his
prescriptions. The bolus of sedition which he had kneaded up for the Assembly,
did, indeed, at first, operate as a provocative on some of the members from
Whiskyland; but, luckily, the soporific qualities of it soon became
predominant, and, at last, absolutely irresistible. At the end of the second
paragraph the Chairman was perceived to yawn, the third rocked him off, and the
fourth laid the whole Assembly fast asleep. The fifth reached the doorkeeper,
at the further end of the passage, and before the sixth was half finished, an
old woman who fells apples at the gate, dropped from her stool. The political
Morpheus continued to spread his poppies, till, perceiving the effects of his
bolus, he slunk off home to his liver nippy and sour cront. -- Should this
quack in politics as well as physic be suffered to continue his lectures, the
Assembly of Pennsylvania may write over their doors, as the French do over
those of their burying grounds: "This is the place of everlasting sleep."

After this little trip to the Land of Nod, let us return to our Stenographer.

I by no means call in question the virtue of Mr. Robertson, the officer
proposed: on the contrary, I should suppose his virtue must be very high; for,
like that of Fielding's post-boy, it is very high priced. If it be equal to his
modesty, it is certainly beyond any thing reasonably to be expected from a
frail mortal. The humble demand of four thousand dollars for the session is not
a great deal more than eight times as much as any member of the House receives.
The very mention of such a sum cannot fail to bring forth swarms of
Stenographers, as a warm night at the playhouse is said to hatch comedians.

I cannot conclude this article without reminding gentlemen of their cruelty to
my poor Caledonian friend, Callender. How was he mauled! how was his Register
torn to pieces! one took him by the (...), another by the ear; he writhed and
winced (...) jumped about, as the French say, like a frog (...) a gridiron. I
much question if he were in (...) torture when the constables of sweet Edin^
were at his heels. -- Oh! gentlemen from Virginia! how could you so belabour
this imported patriot? a man that has not only forsworn his country, but has
written, or rather transcribed, two whole "Political Progresses" purely to
curry favor with you! nay, he has even blasphemed the President, and justified
the non-payment of debts; and yet, Oh, ingratitude! you could smile at his
agonies! if this be the way you treat your friends, I hope I shall never be
numbered amongst them; at least until your manners and principles change.

One gentleman expressed a good deal of anxiety, lest the "Political Register"
should descend to posterity; but, let him quiet his fears on this account; for,
whether the speeches which Callender has collected were written out or not,
they are a more potent opiate than any drug that was ever pounded in the mortar
of Doctor Morpheus, and that is saying a great deal, I am sure.

I now come to a debate, if a debate it can be called, which I would have the
reader pass over without perusal, if he has a heart ready to take fire, when he
sees a wanton indignity offered to the greatest and most estimable characters.

DEBATE ON HALF AN HOUR'S ADJOURNMENT. February 22nd.
This was the Birthday of General Washington. The morning was remarkably fair:
the firmament decked in its brightest robes. May it ever be so! Never, never
may a cloud darken this auspicious day!

The city was all alive: joy seemed to glisten in every face; the workman had
thrown by his hammer and the housewife her needle, to celebrate this festival
of valor, wisdom, and true patriotism. I was going, among hundreds of others,
to see the cannons of the state fired on this joyful occasion, when, passing by
the House where the Representatives meet, I perceived the doors open. I thought
I would just step in, and see what they were about, I entered, found the
gallery quite empty, and was surprised not to find the house empty also. This
surprise soon gave way to indignation, as the reader will readily believe, when
he hears what was passing.

Mr. Smith (from South Carolina) moved, that the House adjourn for half an
hour, in order to give the members an opportunity of congratulating the
President of the United States on the return of his Birthday.

Strange to tell! this motion was opposed. The ground of this opposition was,
that it was the duty of the House first to attend to the discharge of their
legislative functions, before they attended to the paying of compliments. It
was said, on the other hand, that it had been the practice, ever since the
establishment of the general government, for the House to make a short
adjournment, for the purpose mentioned in the motion.

After some conversation in this way, Mr. Gallatin (from Geneva, last from
Whiskyland) moved, that the words, "half an hour," be struck out,

This amendment was rejected. The motion was then put, and lost.

Ayes 38 Noes 50
Thus was it determined, by a majority of twelve, to withhold from the
President a slight compliment, which he had been accustomed to receive from the
House, from the first year of its existence.

I was but too right in saying, that, at the opening of the session, he saw,
even among those to whom he addressed himself, numbers, who, to repay all his
labors, all his anxious cares for their welfare, were ready to present him the
cup of humiliation filled to the brim.

It was Mr. Parker, the blooming and accomplished Mr. Parker, the honest and
virtuous Mr. Parker of the free State of Virginia, who is as punctual in the
discharge of his legislative functions as his constituents are in the discharge
of their debts: it was this celebrated gentleman, who opened the career, by a
motion for not waiting on the President with an answer to his speech to both
Houses. Mr. Parker was, without doubt, persuaded of the truth of Johnson's
maxim: "Fate never wounds more deep the generous heart,
"Than when a blockhead's insult points the dart."


The excuse, that it was the duty of the House first to attend to the discharge
of their legislative functions, was the most miserable subterfuge, that ever
issued from the lips of malevolence. Half an hour only was asked for. Heavens!
How many half hours have been idled away this very session! -- The Speaker
sends word that he is indisposed. -- Adjourn! Adjourn! -- And this is repeated
day after day. What would have been easier than to appoint a Speaker pro ^em,
if members were so ren^ss in the "discharge of their legislative functions?"
Yet, this was not done, nor, I believe, proposed; though some one of these
fifty indefatigable members were certainly present. How differently do men see
the same object, under different circumstances! the Speaker's headache
adjourns the House for whole days. But, half an hour, a poor thirty minutes,
was too precious to be wasted in a respectful compliment to the best man,
perhaps, this day existing in the world!

The gentleman from Whiskyland was, without doubt, afraid, that the motion
would not be rejected altogether. He imagined the House had not so far got the
better of all decency, as to come to an unqualified determination not to wait
on the President, he therefore proposed to leave out the words, "half an hour."
If this amendment had passed, the House would have adjourned, not for half an
hour, but for the whole day; but then it would have seemed that they did it for
their own pleasure and recreation, and not for the purpose of complimenting
General Washington, the only thing that Mr. Gallatin seems to have been afraid
of.

This proposed amendment is an excellent explanation of the ambiguous excuse,
that it was the duty of the House first to attend to the discharge of their
legislative functions. What! would their duty permit them to separate for the
whole day, and not permit them to separate for half an hour? these gentlemen
seem to count time as the French do their assignats; a thirtieth part is more
valuable than the whole. Mr. Gallatin appears to have scorned the subterfuge.
No matter how much time was spent, or in what manner, so that it was not for
the express purpose of waiting on the President; so that the insult was
rendered acute.

What must have been the President's reflections, when he read the sketch of
this debate? an intruding foreigner, a mere adventurer, who never sat his foot
in the United States, until long after the revolution, comes here to arraign
the conduct of General Washington, to alienate the affections of the people
from him, while he basks in the sunshine of his government, and reaps the
fruits of his valor and his wisdom. And, what are the services Mr. Gallatin
ever rendered America? is this question necessary? where is the man who does
not recollect the alarm, the distress, caused by the Western Insurrection? the
million and a half of dollars that it cost the Union, besides immense private
sacrifices? fifteen thousand men forced from their business and their homes, to
undergo one of the most fatiguing marches ever performed, and which many of
them did not survive, cannot already be forgotten. Ask any of these men; ask
the families, the widows and orphans, of those who lost their lives in this
expedition, what are the services Mr. Gallatin has rendered their country. And
yet this man now raises his head among the legislators of the United States,
and refuses thirty minutes of respect to the very man, to whose lenity, to
whose amnesty alone he owes, that he is now in a situation to insult him.

When I compare the determination of the House of Representatives of this day,
with their conduct and that of the people, at the time of the President's
installation, I blush for them. -- His journey from his seat in Virginia to New
York, was almost one continued triumphal entry. As he approached the towns, he
found the road decked with laurel and strewed with flowers. Sometimes he was
hailed with the firing of cannon, at others with the ringing of bells, and
every where with the shouts of the multitude. Processions were formed to
conduct him, the magistrates, the military, men of all trades, companies of
matrons and choirs of white-robed virgins. It were vain to attempt an account
of the festivals, balls, galas, fireworks, illuminations, mottos, sonnets, and
odes, in honor of the "Savior of his Country." -- Merit (said one of his
panegyrists on this occasion) Merit must be great indeed, when it can call
forth such honors from a free and enlightened people. Honors due to a man,
whose life has been one series of labors, which are upon a scale that heaven
never before assigned to mortal. Future generations will say of him with the
poet: "So near perfection, that he stood
"Upon the bound'ry line
"Of finite from infinite good,
"Of human from divine."


Will "future generations" believe, that, in less than seven years after this
unbounded strain of panegyric was in vogue, the Representatives of the people
came to a formal determination, that half an hour was too much to be wasted in
congratulating this same man on the return of his Birthday?

When the President first accepted the honorable post he now fills, what was
the state of this country? Suffice it to say, that it was such as excited shame
at home and contempt from abroad. His acceptance of the Presidency inspired a
kind of national joy; it was the presage of a prosperity that was to heal the
wounds of a long and tiresome state of discredit and confusion. The people
clung to him as the anchor of their hope: and, have they been deceived? Have
not the riches and prosperity of the whole country far outstripped what could
be hoped for by the most sanguine? More has been accomplished in the short
space of seven years, under the Federal government than was accomplished in an
age, under any other government in the world. If, then, the President merited
such high eulogiums, at the time of his taking on him the administration of
this government, what does he merit now? Certainly he does not merit to be
insulted. Certainly thirty minutes of adjournment would not have been too much
for a man, who, a few years ago, stood upon the boundary line between human and
divine goodness.

Do the gentlemen of the House of Representatives recollect, that not only our
eyes but the eyes of the world are on them? What will other nations say to us?
What will Europeans, who look on General Washington as the first of mankind,
and who have heard and admired all our praises bestowed on him, what will they
think of us and our Representatives, when they are told of this thirty minutes
decision. We have often boasted that our President was happier than any monarch
upon earth, as reigning in the hearts of a free people. I hope this tone will
cease, until we take effectual measures to guard him against future
indignities. When a king is insulted, we see all the worthy part of his
subjects press forward to the throne with assurances of their love and esteem,
and pledging their lives and fortunes for his security. Here a certain
torpidity seems to pervade all this class of society: if their wishes are kind
and sincere, they are useless, as long as they do not break out into action.

But, it would be unjust not to say, that this decision of the House of
Representatives, was very far from being sanctioned by the voice of the people.
That voice breathed sentiments very different from those of the opposers of Mr.
Smith's motion for an adjournment; and of this the House had a striking and
humiliating proof. -- For my part, the motion was no sooner lost than I quitted
the Gallery, boiling with indignation, and went to partake in the jollity of
the day; but, the next morning, I had the satisfaction of reading the following
extracts from the debates, that took place in my absence. Mr. Nichols, says the
reporter, offered his observations on the bill; but, from the firing of cannon,
beating of drums, ringing of bells, and huzzas, in honor of the President's
Birthday, it was impossible to hear what he said.

Nothing on earth was ever more apropos than this. How must the opposers of the
motion have felt? something like a king of England, when he heard the shouts of
his soldiers for the acquittal of the bishops, whose disgrace and ruin he had
contemplated. If ever malice met its true reward, it was at this moment. As if
the people had said: you have aimed a blow at the reputation of our friend and
father: you wish to persuade us, that he is no longer worthy of our love and
veneration; but you shall not succeed. He is as dear to us as ever. You may
continue your harrangues; but we will drown your voices with our acclamations
for the return of the happy day, that gave him to the world.

It is with triumphant satisfaction I observe, that the 22nd of February was
never so honored as this year. Every State, every town in the Union, resounded
with festivity and joy. The city of Philadelphia, ever distinguished for its
attachment to the President, seemed truly sensible of the treasure it
possessed. The theater, the circus, the ball-rooms, even those of private
parties, were decorated with emblems of his wise and heroic deeds. Every heart
overflowed with gladness and gratitude. A few solitary breasts in Congress
alone, mourned amidst the joyous scene; as the poisonous plants under the
torrid zone are said to flag and droop, while those of salubrious qualities
raise their heads, flourish and bloom.

Though I am not an admirer of toasts, I shall close this article with one,
drank at Newark, as it seems to express the general sentiment of the people of
the United States, on this occasion. The illustrious Washington, our beloved
President, in whom are united the talents of a consummate General, an honest
Patriot, and an enlightened Statesman. May the day of his nativity be marked in
the calendar of time, and consecrated as a festival worthy of the celebration
of the latest ages; but let blackness of darkness for ever rest upon the
accursed hour, that gave existence to his unprincipled calumniators.

DEBATE ON THE BILL AUTHORIZING A LOAN FOR THE USE OF THE CITY OF WASHINGTON.
February 23rd.
This debate was very long, and rather uninteresting; but, as I mean to speak
on it myself, I cannot with ^dour refuse to give a sketch of what was said by
o^ (...) two of my opponents, to enable the reader to judge between us.

Mr. SWANWICK (who spoke on the same side that I shall do) said, that he
objected to the bill generally upon the same ground as yesterday, with respect
to joining the securities of the lots and the faith of the United States
together. He asked how the passing of this bill could give value to the
buildings of the Federal City? Is it not, said he, already enacted that
Congress shall fit there in the year 1801? The value of the lots, he said, was
to be increased only by the selling them to a number of persons. The city must
owe its prosperity to its peculiar advantages as a commercial spot, and not
from its being the seat of government. It was, therefore, the interest of the
United States to sell the lots and induce the people to settle there. The
higher price the lots bore, the greater would be the obstacles to settlement.
If it was the intention of the United States to grant money for the completion
of the buildings let the House say so. When it was first proposed to remove the
government to the Federal city, it was said that it would be the interest of
persons to give lots to encourage the government to come there. The security
now asked for was never contemplated. He had, however, no objection to the
United States granting money, but he was against the making of two loans, one
on the credit of the United States, and another on that of the United States,
and certain lots.

Mr. BRENT (from Virginia) said, that it had been observed, that if the lots be
a sufficient surety for the loan, why guaranty it? at present, he said, the
lots were not sufficient. Mr. Br^ served, that the bill before (...) considered
as the touchstone to determine whether the seat of government will go to the
banks of the Potomack, or not. Motives of policy and economy, and objections to
increasing the public debt, will not apply in this case; the very act provides
funds to guaranty the loan, for though the property, until the proposed loan be
guarantied, would sell for a mere trifle, when it is guarantied, it will sell
for a great price; so great a difference would it make, that he believed
property which will then sell for two millions of dollars, would not otherwise
be worth 100,000 dollars. If, therefore, gentlemen are against the bill from
economical views, they are mistaken; for, it was his opinion, that the property
would not only pay off the loan, but eventually be a considerable fund toward
the discharge of the public debt. It had been suggested that the United States
were under no obligation to make this guarantee. He thought differently; he
believed the credit of the United States materially concerned. The public have
relied fully upon the countenance of government in the business, many persons,
indeed, have made great sacrifices to procure lots in this new city, and, if
after holding out temptations to people, government should not go there at the
proposed time, all these persons will be ruined, and a stain will be laid on
the national character. He hoped, therefore, no objection would be made to
carrying the bill into effect.

Mr. GILES (from Virginia) wished to remark on what had fallen from a member
from Pennsylvania yesterday, with respect to the law providing for the removal
of the seat of government. That law, he said, differed from all others. The
Constitution itself, he said, prescribes the rule, the act only fixes the spot
where it should be carried into effect. The act is, therefore, not repealable.
The Constitution does not give a power to fix upon two spots, but upon one
spot. He thought it necessary to make this remark, lest he might be supposed to
countenance the opinion he combated. It had been remarked, that it would be in
some degree degrading to the United States, to borrow money on the credit of
lots; he thought differently, and showed that it was a common thing in
governments to borrow money on different funds. It had been wished to
disconnect the government from the business -- whilst government guarantied the
loan, he said, it would make no difference whether the loan was bottomed on the
lots or otherwise. The nature of the engagement was the same. The question was
whether the House would agree to guaranty the loan, or not.

Mr. GILES said, that he had seen and was acquainted with the buildings
carrying on in the Federal city. He thought the house erecting for the
residence of the President was much too magnificent, much more so than was
intended. Every one thought so who saw it; but this was no reason for
obstructing the progress of the business. He hoped the bill would be formed in
a manner so as to meet the general sense of the House. Though he had objected
to the grandeur of the house intended for the President, he would have the
buildings for congress erected on a grand scale, and fitted for the
representatives of a great and free people.

The Bill was finally recommitted.

REMARKS.
The reader has heard what was said on both sides of this question, and I have
now to beg him to attend to what I would have said, had I been a member of
Congress.

Mr. CHAIRMAN,
It is well known, that I am no orator; that I speak right on, making my tongue
the true interpreter of my heart. You will not therefore expect from me the
wily sophistry of a G -- tin, the quibbling of a G -- les, the verbosity of a B
-- win, or the patriotic bombast of a Live -- ton.

It is seldom, Sir, that I trouble the House with my sentiments on any question
whatever. There are so many gentlemen among us, who are speechifiers by
profession, who deck every subject, however sterile and trifling, with all the
flowers of the garden of eloquence, that a plain spokesman like me can have
little chance of being heard with any degree of patience. On the present
occasion, however, these gentlemen do not seem to be come, like the be, loaded
with sweets; the few they have brought with them are already scattered abroad,
and have lost their fragrance: and, as the day is not yet far enough advanced
to countenance an adjournment, permit me to hope for indulgence, while I humbly
endeavor to spin out the time between this and dinner; or, as our ploughmen
have it, while I take a gentle turn to wind down the sun.

Should gentlemen find themselves inclined to repose, as I have often been in
listening to them, I beg them not to stand upon ceremony, but to loll back at
their ease, and leave me to jog quietly on.

We are called upon, Sir, to guaranty a loan, for which the lots of the City of
Washington are to be a security; and the gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Brent,
tells us, that, though the lots are at present worth but a mere trifle, they
will, when guarantied, be of great value. This is rather obscure, I shall
therefore endeavor to explain it by comparison; which, I make no doubt, I
shall do to the satisfaction of the House. Suppose I had a lot, not worth a
brass farthing, and was to draw a note payable out of the produce of this same
lot, such note would be worth but a "mere trifle;" but, when endorsed by a man
of credit, it would be "of great value;" because the holder would always know
where to look for payment.

But the friends of the guarantee do not stop here. They assure us, that it
would render the lots so very valuable as to create a considerable fund toward
the discharge of the public debt! Much as I wish to see that debt discharged, I
by no means approve of its being done by taking advantage of an overstrained
generosity. The Virginians have most generously bestowed part of the land, and,
not content with that, they now offer us an opportunity of paying off the
public debt with speculations in the lots. I am one of those who are willing to
forego any and every offer of this kind. I am willing that the Virginians
themselves should be permitted to guaranty this loan, and receive exclusively
all the immense advantages accruing therefrom. Let them undertake the
negotiation upon their own bottom, which, from the great credit they enjoy in
foreign countries, they cannot fail to effect upon the most reasonable terms.

It is said, that foreigners will not venture their money on the lots, because
they can form no idea of their value; neither can I, and this is another reason
for my wishing to leave the business in the hands of those who are upon the
spot, and who seem to be the only persons interested in the matter.

The gentleman, who made us the bounteous proposal for paying off the public
debt by the means of the guarantee, concluded with an argument, which, I
believe, he conceived to carry more weight with it: that is; unless the
government went to the City of Washington at the time specified by the act, it
would be "a stain on the national character." -- I participate with Mr. Brent
in his anxiety for our national character, and am glad to have it in my power
to convince him, that it could be in no danger from the disappointment he seems
so much afraid of. We see a very considerable State of the Union, Sir,
tenaciously adhering to a law, made expressly to skreen its citizens from the
obligation of discharging their just debts; and we have seen this very House
pass a resolution for the sequestration of all debts, due from Americans to
their creditors in Great Britain. Neither of these has ever been called a stain
on our national character; and, if these are not, if our character is proof
against these, I imagine we have little to fear from the governments' remaining
at Philadelphia. I will mention another instance, Sir, still stronger. If we
look back into the journals of Congress, we shall find the king of France
styled, our great and good ally, our friend and deliverer; and yet we have
applauded his murd................ [there the Chairman would have called me to
order, upon which I should have said] -- Sir, I should be sorry to break
through the rules of this House; and, I must insist that I am perfectly in
order. The gentleman from Virginia had laid great stress on what he presumed
would be a stain on our national character. I looked upon myself as entitled to
prove, that he was mistaken; and I certainly had a right to do this, by
bringing forward what I conceived to be much better calculated to impress a
stain, and which, however, had not produced that effect. If, therefore, there
was any deviation from the question, the gentleman led the way, and I was only
following him. Besides, Sir, look over the debates of this House, and you will
see to what a nut-shell compass they will be reduced, if you exclude all the
extraneous matter. If members are to be bound down to the simple question
before them, if no latitude of digression is allowed of, no little rambles to
France for eulogium and to Great Britain for invective, how do you imagine,
Sir, that patriotic members would be able to give proofs of their diligence, by
eking out the session to six or seven months? -- Your assent, Sir, to the
justness of these observations, encourages me to take up the thread of my
argument.

If, on the day of our pompous reception of the French Flag, poor murdered
Louis had risen up through the floor, and said: Ungrateful Americans! you who
flattered me in the hour of my prosperity and your distress; you who called me
your deliverer; you who made public rejoicings for the day of my nativity, are
now joining hands with the very men who led me to the block; are expressing
"your sincere and lively sensibility, your sympathy and affection" toward
them; are giving a pompous reception to the emblems of their triumph over me,
at the very moment that my portrait, which was to be the memento of my services
and of your gratitude, is hanging up within your walls. -- If the spectre of
this injured prince had thus spoken, what should we have said? I know a member
who would have replied: Avaunt, "ermined monster!" But, for my part, I should
have felt the stain: I should have thought myself spotted as a leopard. And
yet, Sir, this has never been mentioned as a stain on our national character.
To apprehend, therefore, any danger from our not removing to the banks of the
Patomack, is to strain at a gnat, while we swallow a giant.

Much has been said, Sir, on the manner in which the buildings of the City of
Washington have been conducted. This is a branch of the subject that I should
have passed over in silence, had it not been for an expression or two that fell
from another gentleman from Virginia, Mr. Giles. That gentleman observed, that
the house erecting for the residence of the President was much too
magnificent;" but that, though he objected to the grandeur of the house
intended for the President, he would have the buildings for Congress erected
upon a grand scale, and fitted for the Representatives of a great and free
people. -- I do not choose, Sir, to let this sally go abroad unnoticed, lest
the world should imagine us all tainted with that ungovernable vanity, which
seems to have engrossed the soul of our unfortunate colleague.

The gentleman is afraid that the house of the President may be too
magnificent; but that which he expects to occupy himself, he wishes to see upon
a grand scale -- Modest man! The President is to be kept within the walls of a
plain building, to remind him of the lowliness of his estate, of his being the
servant of the public; while Mr. Giles is to strut beneath the roof of
buildings upon a grand scale, fitted for the Representatives of a great people;
or, in other words, for the great Representatives of the people.

I am thinking, Sir, that the public will do well to keep us within a plain
building, or I am afraid our heads will soon be turned. We are in absolute need
of being dieted, for we are grasping not only at all honor but at all power
too. If we once enter the pile proposed by our colleague; if we once get under
tho^: corinthian columns and starry vaults, we shall expect other things on a
"grand scale" also; we must hvae our coaches-and-six, our led horses, our
pages, our grooms, our huntsmen and our buck-hounds; our villas, baths, sofas
and beds of state. We may expect, in due time, to hear the gentleman from
Virginia propose a seraglio as among the conveniences of the Reprepresentatives
of a great and free people.

Much do I fear, Sir, that if we were once got in possession of all these
pretty things, we should be very loath to return to our humble dwellings and
our homely fare. In short, I think we should do like the great Representatives
of the French; that is, declare ourselves permanent, or, at least, order the
people to elect nobody but ourselves, which amounts to exactly the same.

But, we are told, that this building upon a grand scale, is not intended as an
honor to us, but to our constituents. This is the very gull-trap which the
poor silly French have fallen into. Every thing that their grovelling low-bred
tyrants have assumed to themselves, has been done under the specious pretext of
doing honor to a great and free people. They have scized on all the palaces in
the kingdom, on the royal studs, coaches, and every other article of luxury,
for their own exclusive use; they wallow in sumptuousness, while their ragged
slaves have but two or three ounces of dirty-coloured bread a day, and, if they
murmur, they shoot them down by thousands; and, all this is for the "honor of
a great and free people." A great people, a free people, a sovereign people,
and the like, are very pretty phrases: they tickle the ears of the multitude;
but, should they perceive how completely the demagogues transfer this grandeur,
liberty, and sovereignty, to themselves, perhaps they would cease to admire
them; and nothing seems better calculated to open their eyes, than seeing them
in a splendid palace, while they, many of them at least, are obliged to put up
with log-huts.

It is become a prevailing fashion, among the opposers of our government, to
confine the expression, "Representatives of the people," to this House only.
But, Sir, is not this a very false, as well as dangerous notion? Is not the
President the Representative of the people as well as Mr. Giles? Yes, and of
the whole of the people too, while Mr. Giles represents but a very small part
of one State. The epithet immediate is sometimes prefixed; but then, Mr. Giles
can be the immediate representative of no more than an eighteenth part of the
State of Virginia, while the President is the immediate representative of the
whole Union; for the representation must ever be immediate, though the election
may not. If therefore, a preference is due to any branch of the government, the
President seems to have a better title to it than any of us, and seeing the
thing in this light, I cannot help looking upon the observation of the
gentleman from Virginia as extremely improper, if not indecent.

I thought, Sir, I heard the word Capitol mentioned during the debate. For the
love of modesty, I hope the Congress House is not to be called a Capitol! If
this be the case, it will be necessary to go a step further, and assume the
masquerade dress of the French Romans. How pretty we shall look in long white
robes, descending to our toes, a blue girdle about our waists, a scarlet cloak
on our shoulders, and a red liberty cap on our heads! Let them all be well
embroidered with gold, as those of the French legislators are to be; and, if
they are even set with precious stones, it will be an additional proof of our
jealousy for the honor of "a great and free people." We shall, indeed, bring
on us a ridicule equal to that excited by the upstart pettifoggers of the
National Assembly, when they insisted on the Folding-Doors of the Louvre to be
thrown open at their approach; but, let the world be merry while we are
swagg^ring about in our consular robes, we shall care but little whether we are
called ambitious buffoons or not.

This idea of a Capitol seems to be borrowed from the State of Virginia, the
Assembly-House of which has taken that name. For what reason it was there
adopted, I know not, unless it be, that there are such numbers of Caesar's and
Pompeys in the neighborhood, against whose ambitious projects the grave and
virtuous senate are ever vigilant to preserve the liberty of their country. The
Capitol of Virginia resembles that of Rome also, in that it has a slave mart in
its vicinity,

I shall now, Sir, return to the proposed guarantee, and advert to another of
the forcible arguments of Mr. Brent. This gentleman tells us, that the
guarantee is the touchstone to prove whether the seat of government is to be
removed or not. I am willing to take the gentleman at his word. I am willing to
allow, that refusing the guarantee of the loan, will amount to a declaration of
our wish to remain where we are; and, with this view, I shall give the refusal
my hearty support..... [Here a loud cry of, hear him! hear him!] -- I am glad
to find, Mr. Chairman, that gentlemen are so disposed to hear; for, I can
assure them, that, what I have to say, is not only worth hearing, but attending
to also.

I look forward, Sir, to the day of removing the government to the banks of the
Potomack, as the dawn of its destruction. Open the page of history, and you
will see, that the sat of every popular government in a great measure depends
on the disposition of the people immediately in its neighborhood. I could cite
you a thousand examples, from the fall of the Grecian States down to our own
times; but I shall content myself with one of modern date; and, as the
gentlemen on the other side of the House are so fond of flying to France, I
trust I shall be excused for doing the same.

When the Constituent Assembly conceived the destructive project of
annihilating the government, which their constituents had positively ordered
them to aid and strengthen, what did they do? Removed themselves to Paris,
where they knew the greatest number of disaffected persons were assembled. The
consequences are but too well known.

We are not ignorant of the general disposition of the State to which this
government is to be removed. We have seen its legislature, during this very
session, soliciting every State in the Union to join them in reducing this
government to a mere democracy. Nor can any of us have forgotten the public
invitation to the people of other States, to oppose the treaty with His
Britannic Majesty by open force, boasting that there were a hundred thousand
free and independent Virginians, ready to strike the first blow. Can it be
supposed, then, if we were now assembled at the City of Washington, that these
hundred thousand free and independent Virginians, whether black, white or
yellow, would not dictate to us all we should dare to say or do? Do you think,
Sir, that the cutting truths which have this day fallen from my lips, would
ever have been uttered in the City of Washington? No; I should have expected to
have my throat cut, or my eyes gouged out, by some slave or slave-dealer,
before I got home to my dinner. I will never go there, Sir; and, to those
gentlemen who do, I sincerely recommend the precaution of a steel collar, if
not a suit of armor cap-a-pie.

Mr. GILES has told us, Sir, that the law for the removal of the seat of
government differs from all others; that the Constitution itself has marked the
rule, and only left Congress to name the spot; that the law is therefore not
repealable. Curious quibble! -- The Constitution says, that the Congress shall
exercise exclusive legislation over such district as may become the seat of
government of the United States. -- Now, what is there here, that makes the act
unrepealable? What rule is here marked out? Is there a word about the law being
unalterable? Does the Constitution say, that when the district is once fixed
on, it shall never be changed for another? There is something so ridiculous in
the idea, that one would wonder how it ever found its way into words; and, to
hazard those words, the gentleman must have a very high opinion of the
forbearance of this House. Suppose, for instance, the banks of the Potomack
should be visited with the plague or yellow fever; are we to remain there, and
let our carcasses be thrown into the river? Suppose a vulcano or earthquake,
or, in short, suppose what you will; are we yet bound to make the City of
Washington the seat of government? And what, I ask, are plagues, yellow fevers,
vulcanos and earthquakes, compared with the knives of "a hundred thousand free
and independent" slaves? -- In a word, Mr. Chairman, so fully am I convinced,
that the removal of the seat of government to the State of Virginia will prove
the overthrow of our happy Constitution, and eventually plunge our country in
anarchy and blood, that I shall not only oppose every measure that may
accelerate the fatal epoch, but I pledge myself to bring forward a motion for
the repeal of the act altogether. -- And now, Sir, as I see the gentlemen from
Virginia are bursting with reply, I sit down, satisfied of having discharged my
duty, without giving offense to any one, to whose ears truth is not
disagreeable.

DEBATE ON THE MEASURES TO BE TAKEN TO PREVENT THE IMPRESSMENT OF AMERICAN
SEAMEN. February 18th.
Mr. LIVINGSTON (N. York) said he would call the attention of the house to the
situation of a very important and meritorious class of men whose value seemed
to have been over looked and whose dearest rights were either shamefully
neglected or ignominiously surrendered -- He adverted to the seamen of the
United States. This valuable class of men would fall under one of these
descriptions*

1. Native American Citizens. 2. Such as were citizens at the Declaration of
Independence and at the period of the peace with Great Britain. 3. Foreigners
naturalized since the Declaration of independence.
It would be no difficult matter to prove that all the individuals of either of
those descriptions were equally entitled to the protection of government; to
the same or greater exertions in their favor than were made for those citizens
whose situation rendered it easier to apply for relief.

Yet this meritorious body of our constituents, he said, thus entitled to our
protection and favor, sailing under the sanction of our national flag, had been
illegally seized, violently forced into a service they abhorred, cruelly torn
from their relations, their families and their country, and ignominiously
scourged for asserting the privileges of their citizenship. The country to
which they looked for protection and relief had regarded their sufferings with
apathy and indifference! Three years we had beheld their miseries and heard
their cries; yet for three years we had been silent spectators of this
disgraceful scene. We had begun a compact with their oppressors, in which these
unfortunate men looked in vain for one word of comfort in their misery, for one
little article in the voluminous pages of the instrument, that might offer a
hope of recompense for their past sufferings, or security against future
oppressions. I blush (said Mr. Livingston) as an American to think it was an
American Minister who could be guilty of this disgraceful omission. I should be
covered with shame and confusion for my Country if I could suppose it capable
of giving that omission its sanction, and I hold it a sacred duty, in whatever
station I may be placed, to contribute every exertion, and the little influence
I possess, for their relief. -- He concluded with moving the following
resolution:

Resolved, that a committee be appointed to enquire and report whether any and
what legislative provision is necessary for the relief of such American Seamen
as may have been impressed into the service of any foreign power -- and also to
report a mode of furnishing American Seamen with such evidence of their
citizenship as may protect them from foreign impressments in future.

Refered to a select committee.

February 29th.
The committee made their report, the substance of which was; that the
impressment of American Seamen by foreign powers was too notorious to need
proof; and that the President of the United States shall send agents to England
and the West Indies, in order to afford relief to such American citizens, as
have been illegally seized.

Mr. HARPER (S. Carolina) hoped when this resolution was committed to a select
committee, some statements would have been brought forward, some facts
produced, upon which to found the proposed enquiry. The committee have reported
that they do not think it necessary to adduce any particular instances in which
American Seamen have been impressed by foreign nations, the facts, they
alleged, are too notorious to require particularizing. He could not suppose
these gentlemen would believe that the House could proceed to legislate on
uncertain newspaper reports. He trusted they would afford some proof who, what
number, when, and where American seamen have been impressed. Until this was
done, he should doubt the fact. -- He was heard, he believed, by
Representatives from every port in the United States, and if the fact was so
notorious as to need no further evidence, he doubted not some of these
gentlemen would be able to give some account of the business.

If the facts were established, Mr. Harper believed there would be but one
opinion on the propriety of granting relief; but before they proceeded farther,
some information was necessary respecting the existence of this abuse. He had
applied to the office of the Secretary of State, and to other offices likely to
afford information on the subject; but he found no instance of the impressment
complained of, which redress had not been given. But, if any such instances do
exist, in which relief has been applied for, and not obtained, gentlemen from
some of the sea ports will be able to mention them. If not, he hoped the
committee would rise and recommit the report.

Mr. LIVINGSTON said, the present measure was intended to afford relief to such
of their distressed fellow citizens as had been illegally seized on the high
seas. The gentleman, he said, who brings forward objections to the proposed
enquiry, was in his place when the resolution upon which the report of the
committee is founded, passed unanimously. Why did he not then come forward;
[Mr. Harper said he was not in the House at the time.] -- The resolution does
not direct the committee to enquire into facts, they were considered as
notorious, and nothing seemed necessary but to fix upon the best mode of
furnishing relief. The Legislature of the United States have formerly had
evidence, and they have acted upon it. If the gentleman will look into the
proceedings of the last session of Congress, he will find a considerable sum
granted to Mr. Cutting, for relief of this distressed body of men. Some he
relieved, others he did not. When the dignity of the nation, said he, is
insulted, in the persons of our fellow-citizens, it is necessary at least to
make enquiry into their sufferings.

A remark had fallen, Mr. Livingston said, from the member from South Carolina,
which he wished to notice. He said he had applied to the office of the
Secretary of State, and found there no complaint which had not been redressed.
Now, he had waited upon the Secretary of State, as chairman of the committee,
in vain for information on this subject. The Secretary informed him, that he
could not give him the evidence which it appears he has given to the member
from South Carolina. How, he wished to know, happened it that a member who
opposes the business in question, should be furnished with that information
which was denied to a member who supported it?

It is said, added Mr. Livingston, that we are attempting to legislate without
evidence. Though no facts are at present before the House, it is notorious that
numerous instances have been made known to government, and the present measure
is meant to enquire into the cases of sufferers and remedy them as far as
possible. It is admitted by the member from South Carolina that facts have
existed, but that they have been removed. If these grievances, then, said he,
have existed, let us prevent them in future. Let us not wait till it is too
late to grant relief. The men, said he, who suffer by the depradations
complained of, are at a great distance from their homes and friends, in foreign
ports; dragged on board Tenders, and made to experience every hardship which
can be conceived. And now, when a mode is proposed for the relief of these
distressed citizens, evidence is called for! If one of these men is confined in
the East Indies, can evidence of his bondage be expected to be given here? Such
hardships have existed, and it was their business to prevent them from again
occurring. He hoped, therefore, the committee would not rise, as he trusted
there was sufficient evidence on which to ground the enquiry.

Mr. HARPER wished to remark on what had fallen from the member from New York,
on the Secretary of State's refusing information to certain members and giving
it to others. He applied to the office of the Secretary of State, to learn
whether there were any documents there to support the proposed enquiry, and was
informed there were only two cases; in one of which application was made to the
British government; four persons were said to have been impressed; but on
enquiry, it appeared, that two of them were British subjects, and the other two
had enlisted into the service. The other complaint came to the office when the
Secretary of State was much engaged in other concerns, but he believed relief
was granted. This, he said, was verbal information; he had applied for written
documents on the subject, and doubted not he should receive them as soon as
other business would permit.

Mr. SWANWICK (Pennsylvania) said the member from S. Carolina had called for
information; he conceived no particular information necessary. He could mention
an instance in which he had immediate concern. A vessel of his going to the
West Indies had all her hands taken out of her, and obliged to work the guns of
an English frigate; and, on their expostulating that though they were prisoners
they did not wish to work the guns they were threatened with whipping, and the
captain was told if he interfered, he should be whipped and sent home to
England in irons. If he had thought facts were wanting, by a single
advertisement in one of the Philadelphia papers, they would have been
overpowered with facts. But if he had done so, he supposed he should have been
charged with raising dissatisfaction in the minds of the people, or with
encouraging Jacobinical principles. He therefore did not do it. But, without
going out of the walls of the House, he said, he found evidence sufficient. He
read an extract from the communication of the Secretary of State, dated March
2, 1794, in which were mentioned the representations made by sundry merchants
of Philadelphia (of whom he was one) respecting the impressment of American
seamen. This document was thought sufficiently strong to make an article of
instruction to Mr. Jay in his late negotiation; but, owing to certain
difficulties, no specific agreement was entered into by him for their relief.

The plan now before the House, said Mr. Swanwick, is in^ded to remedy the
difficulties which have been urged as o^acles in this business, by opening
registers in which to enter every American seaman, by which may be known at any
time the number of seamen belonging to the United States, and by means of which
every such seaman would be possessed of a certificate of his citizenship.

Every one knows, said he, what has been felt on account of American seamen
carried into Algiers. No evidence was required with respect to their numbers,
or how they were employed. The united exertions of the whole American people
seemed to cry out for their releasement, and the business, at length, has been
effected. And let us not, said he, attend to our distressed citizens, in one
part only, but in all parts of the world. Let us not, said he, be too nice
about evidence. These men are generally ignorant, and cannot give the necessary
information; he thought, however, they had information sufficient for
legislating upon in the present case. He hoped, therefore, the report would not
be recommitted, until the committee had discussed the business.

Mr. TRACY (Connecticut) believed that every member in that House felt the
propriety of extending the benefit of the laws to every class of citizens, and
to none more than to American seamen. Some members seemed to suppose that the
distresses of American seamen have been looked upon with apathy, but if due
attention had been paid to the efforts of government, it would have been seen
that they had always been duly attended to. It is well known that great
difficulties arise when it is attempted to distinguish between English and
American seamen. This has been the reason why ample regulations have not always
taken place. He hoped the government would be popular, and that the new members
in the House would assist the old ones to render it more and more so; but
thought government ought not to be charged with apathy without paying due
attention to what government had done.

Mr. TRACY proceeded to take notice of the resolutions proposed in the report.
He enquired what good the agent to be sent to Great Britain would do. Are there
seamen, said he, employed but at one place? Had not the United States Consuls
at every port, and can they not do the business? He wished for information on
the subject. A great part of the seamen were foreigners, he said, and it would
be very difficult to separate them. If the plan proposed, however, could be
made to appear to be beneficial, he would heartily join in effecting the
desired relief to the class of citizens alluded to.

Mr. GOODHUE (Massachusetts) said the member from New York, on bringing forward
this business, had charged government with looking upon the distresses of
American seamen with apathy, and blushed on account of its conduct toward
them. He represented, he believed, twenty times the number of American seamen
that that gentleman represented; he was himself, indeed, formerly a seaman; yet
he did not believe the evil complained of existed to any alarming degree. Mr.
Cutting, it had been said, had relieved many seamen; that it was in the year
1790. Last summer the British took many vessels bound to France but they did
not take the crews. There were some instances, he said, in which seamen had
been impressed, and he should be in favor of every necessary step to afford
them relief; but no obloquy should be thrown on government. Neither does the
evil exist to the extent it might have been supposed, when the business was
brought forward. A member from Pennsylvania had mentioned a particular
instance: he could mention a particular instance of a French captain who had so
ill-treated some American seamen, as to be cashiered, on a representation being
made to the French government.

Mr. DAYTON (New Jersey) said that he had not expected an opposition to the
resolution under consideration on the ground of fact, that he could not have
supposed any member would have questioned the existence of the evils, which the
propositions were calculated to remedy. He entertained a belief that the
impressment of American seamen, particularly on board of British ships of war,
was a matter of too great notoriety, to need any evidence at this time. But the
member from South Carolina, who manifested the most zealous opposition to these
measures, had admitted that there had existed instances of this sort, and as it
must follow that what had once existed might again exist, it behoved Congress
to make provisions tending to prevent, or at least most speedily and
efficaciously to remedy them.

Mr Dayton declared that he heartily approved the object of the resolution, as
originally proposed by the member from New York, and the general principles of
the report founded thereon, as a question of humanity, and of great national
policy. It was, however, with pain that he heard the worthy mover draw into
unfavourable question, the conduct of the Secretary of State, and indulge
himself in some severe reflections and imputations upon that officer. Mr.
Dayton ascribed it to an irritability, and perhaps an honest irritability, upon
this subject so affecting and interesting to Americans. He ascribed it to a
warmth of temper in which, in this particular case, the cooler judgment of that
gentleman, and the knowledge of the real character and conduct of the Secretary
of State had no agency or influence. The expressions which had been uttered by
some gentlemen in the course of the discussion tending to charge our government
with a criminal apathy and indifference toward this description of citizens,
did by no means, Mr. Dayton said, meet with his approbation. He believed them
to be unfounded, for he was persuaded that whenever it heard, it did whatever
it could to relieve the seamen of the United States, and to obtain for those
who unfortunately needed it, complete redress. Having said thus much in
vindication of the conduct of the government he returned to the resolution
itself, and declared himself its advocate. It contained neither in its words
nor spirit, any imputation upon the Executive, of the sort hinted at.

In the former case, every one must perceive it more than possible, that owing
to distance and the time which must consequently be expended in the
communication to, and remonstrance from our government, an American citizen
might be impressed and compelled to serve months, perhaps years in a service
which he detested, and possibly forced to apply the match to a cannon charged
with balls aimed for the destruction of his friends.

Mr. BOURNE (Rhode Island) proposed to amend the resolution, by striking out
that part of it which appoints an agent for Great Britain and confines the
sending of an agent to that part of the English possessions in the West Indies
to which the greatest number of American vessels sail.

Mr. LIVINGSTON was pleased to see gentlemen concur in endeavoring to form a
plan for the relief of American seamen. It has been asked why the Consuls were
not entrusted with this business; the committee considered that, as the Consuls
of the United States received no other recompense for their services, than the
dignity and consequence which, their office gives them, they would not be
likely to pay sufficient attention to a business of this kind. They considered
the immense labor of Mr. Cutting to deliver the impressed American seamen.
They supposed, therefore, if the duty were laid upon the Consuls, a salary
should be annexed to their office? but, as there is no Consul in the West
Indies, a special agent should be appointed. -- In order to bring a view of the
business before the House, he would ask, how relief is to be afforded to a
seaman who has been impressed? Suppose he is seized in London, he is sent down
to Portsmouth. The agent must attend immediately, get certificates, pay fees of
office, employ council, etc. to release a single seaman; a trouble he believed
no Consul would take. The committee supposed that the solemnity of
commissioning an agent especially on the business, would convince Foreign
powers that they would no longer suffer the British, or others, to exercise
that power over American seamen which they themselves could not exercise. It is
to be hoped, also, that when the government of Great Britain sees a step of
this sort taken, it will give up the practice of seizing American seamen, and
let them pass in quietness. If not, the agents employed could transmit to this
country an account of what seamen were seized by them, and every particularly
respecting the same. This consideration influenced the committee, and he
trusted it would influence the House.

Mr. S. SMITH (Maryland) said that as the member from South Carolina had called
upon gentlemen from sea ports for evidence, if they were silent, it would be
supposed no information could be given on the subject under discussion. He
supposed he should be prevented from giving this information now, because the
amendment of the first resolution was under consideration. [The House called
for information.] He said he represented a port where the fact of American
seamen being impressed by the British was so notorious, that every man knew it.
But how, said he, is this information to be got and transmitted to the
Secretary of State, no complaint is likely to reach his office, except brought
there by merchants. In his own trade, he had frequent instances of this sort,
almost in every voyage. He could not say the men impressed were always
Americans, but they were men sailing under the authority of the United States.
We have a flag, under that flag men are seized, and they have a right to
expect, when seized, redress from government. There is no difference between
British and Algerines, for, by the former, they are compelled to fight against
those whom they wish well, which is equal to any slavery that can be imposed.
He said, that from one of his ships there were two New England men impressed;
one of whom being a stout, courageous man, wished to have defended himself
against his assailants; but the supercargo said, no, this will risk the cargo
of the owner. The advice he gave, supposing government would afford these men
relief.

If the member from South Carolina wished for such information as would be
received before a court of Judicature, it could not be got. Mr. Smith thought
sufficient attention had not been paid by government to merchants and seamen.
Mr Jay, in his communication to Lord Grenville says, an impressment of American
seamen had taken place, who had been forced to fight, etc. If this had not been
so, it had not been written by Mr. Jay, nor would Lord Grenville have promised
relief. He hoped this information would be thought sufficient.

It had been said that there were not many instances of American seamen
impressed; but, suppose there were but one man, and be a negro, suffering under
the galling yoke of impressment, it is the duty of government to provide relief
for that man. The same member has said that the Quiberon vessels did not
impress the crews of the ships; he said it was sufficient to take their flour
and pay them nine dollars for what might have been sold the next day for twenty
or upwards. -- Mr. Smith concluded by observing, that if we were a feeble
nation, we had a right to expect justice; but he hoped we were not to feeble as
some gentlemen imagined.

Mr. GILES (Virginia) was of opinion, with the member from Rhode Island, that
American citizens should be attended to in other countries, as well as in Great
Britain. He had not heard, of any impressments but by the British, but he had
heard of captivities; and that House had heard of a French officer being
cashiered, for ill-treating American citizens; but it had heard no instance of
Great Britain punishing officers for ill-treating American citizens. No, this
marked the different character of the two nations toward the Americans.

Mr. SWANWICK rose to inform the house that since he was in his place
yesterday, he had been called upon with evidence on the subject now before the
committee, in consequence of the call made for it in the course of the debate.
The instances he had given to him were, the case of Robert Norris a native of
Princeton in New Jersey, and five others who sailed on board the American brig
Matilda, captain Burke, from Philadelphia, which sailed from this port in May
last, for Bourdeaux, and were on the 9th of July, brought to by four British
frigates, forcibly taken into the vessel, impressed and compelled to go and
serve on board one of the said frigates called the Stag, where they served four
months, when the said Robert Norris made his escape from the frigate at
Sheerness, at the risk of his life, and returned in January last to the United
States. His companions he believes are yet in bondage. The other instance was
the brig Sally captain Wilkins, which sailed from this port in May last bound
to Madeira, and five days after leaving the Capes was brought to by the Rattle
Snake stoop of war, captain York, and the mate ( a native of Scotland, but who
had sailed for many years out of the United States) and one of the best seamen
(an American) taken out. They were carried to Hallifax, from whence the
foremast man made his escape, and arrived here the beginning of July. Before
they arrived at Hallifax, he informs, that fifteen men were taken out of
American vessels. -- Mr. Swanwick read also an account from an owner of several
other impressments.

Mr. SEDGWICK (Massachusetts) said, he was yesterday prevented from attending
the House by indisposition. The subject struck his mind, he said, in several
points of view which had not been noticed. He was surprised why the business
was undertaken in the way it was. No description of men, he said, were more
entitled to regard than seamen; but this did not reconcile the adoption of the
subject in the manner proposed. The executive, he was of opinion, would
consider itself as charged with this business. An agent who is neither consul
nor minister, is an instrument unknown, an undefined character that would not
be recognized. It was impossible, he said, for any two agents, one in Great
Britain and the other in the West Indies, to gain information of the sufferings
of seamen in different parts of the two countries, particularly in Great
Britain. He called upon gentlemen to say whether they had ever heard of such a
character as they were proposing to create? He said America had consuls in
every part of the world, and if they have not, they ought to have salaries for
the business. Why appoint agents? and what authority will they have?

Mr. SEDGWICK noticed the different kinds of American citizens, and of the
difficulties arising from the doctrine of inalienable right supported by the
English, and observed that when two countries each claim a right to a man no
means but force was left to decide between them.

The resolution was amended, and a select committee ordered to prepare a bill.
The substance of which in the next Censor.

Now, extraordinary as it m^^ (...), and much as the reader may be
disappointed, ^ust absolutely decline making a single remark on this debate. I
would, however, recommend it to him, to give it an attentive perusal; after
which, by way of recreation, he may read the following dialogue.

LEGISLATIVE WRANGLING a la mode de Paris.
Mr. L -- The seamen, sailing under the sanction of our national flag, have
been violently forced into a service they abhor, cruelly torn from their dear
wives and smiling babes, and ignominiously scourged for asserting their
privileges as citizens! The country to which they looked for relief has
regarded their sufferings with apathy and indifference. Three long, long years
we have beheld their whippings and heard their lamentable cries; yet, for three
long, long years we have been silent spectators of the disgraceful scene! We
have begun a compact with their oppressors, in which these poor dear fellows
look with longing eyes in vain for one little tiny article, one ray of hope! I
blush, that an A -- can Minister could be guilty of this disgraceful omission!


Peter Porcupine. -- Mr. Chairman, the gentleman who spoke last, has described
the sufferings of our injured fellow citizens in a manner that does infinite
honor to his feelings. He talks about blushing and guilty disgraceful
omissions with a warmth peculiar to himself, and admirably calculated to
produce what the players call stage effect. Indeed, Sir, I cannot help looking
on ourselves as engaged in the performance of a tragedy here: the gentleman has
gone back 2203 years, even to the days of Euripides, for his model. The piece
will certainly do us honor; but, it seems to be incomplete without a chorus to
throw light on some parts of it, that in particular where he speaks of
blushing; and, as I have a few verses in my hand, which are not quite foreign
to this subject, I beg leave to read them.

See Democratiad.
"In short to run the L.... stonian round,
"Where every trick of knavery is found.
"Close at his heels trots cousin Peter R.
"And M --, a younger, feebler star.
"Two hopeful brothers of a hopeful breed,
"Two thrifty plants of well approved seed,
"Who long have tried, by arts and measures base,
"To lift from filth the remnant of their race;
"A race so sunk, by habit so depraved,
"So long by vice and infamy enslaved;
"So weak, so haughty, pompous, proud and mean,
"Indeed so black, so shameful and obscene,
"That naught but strength omnipotent can save
"Their name deep sinking in oblivion's wave."
Charity begins at home, says the old proverb; and so ought blushing, Mr
Chairman. One would think, that a man to whom lines like these apply, need lend
his cheek to blush for nobody, and particularly for the governor of N -- Y --
k, one of the brightest characters in this, or any country. There is more
wisdom, more honesty, more real patriotism in one curl, nay in one single hair
of Mr. J -- y's wig, than in all the skulls of all the L -- s, from the days of
St. Patrick down to the present hour.


Mr. L -- The gentleman seems to be paying me off in my own way.


Peter Porcupine. No, Sir, by no means, I am paying you at the rate of twenty
shillings in the pound.


Mr. L -- I see the gentleman is a little nettled. The House know too well the
value of what he advances to form a wrong estimate of it. I shall let him fling
his dirt; thank heaven, it cannot soil my character.


Peter Porcupine. True, Sir; nor is it so malicious to fling dirt, as to fling
stones. I defy any one to say, that I, or any of my family or friends, ever
flung stones, in order to knock out the brains of a man, whose arguments I was
afraid to hear, because I knew them to be irresistible. The treatment of Mr. H
-- ton is a stain, an everlasting stain on the city of N -- Y -- k. I do not
scruple to say, without disparagement to a crowd of worthily celebrated men of
whom this country may boast, that, after General Washington, this man has
rendered it the most essential services; this very man whom a gang of foreign
russian were hired to dispatch. Had one of the missiles hurled from their
infamous hands struck him on the temple, you might have had the pleasure of
seeing him expire at your feet, while we should have mourned the irreparable
loss. Were I to draw your character, Sir, and place it by the side of that of
Mr. H -- ton; then you would have reason to blush indeed, a die ten thousand
times deeper than crimson would become your jaundiced cheek.


Mr. S -- The gentleman last up seems to have lost sight of the question
altogether. One would think he was contemplating protection to Mr. H -- ton
instead of A -- can seamen. I shall endeavor to bring him back to the subject
before the committee, reminding him, at the same time, that such personalities
as he deals about him are very derogatory of the dignity of this House.

I am astonished that proofs of impressments are called for. When we heard of A
-- can seamen being prisoners in Algiers, no evidence was required with respect
to numbers. The united exertions of the whole A -- can people seemed to cry out
for their releasement. Let us not be too nice about evidence. These men are
ignorant, and cannot give the necessary information.


Peter Porcupine. Mr. Chairman, I thank the gentleman for his hint about
personalities; but he will allow, that I am as excusable as Mr L --, who talked
about the shameful, guilty, and disgraceful conduct of a most upright public
Minister. I may not have the mellifluent eloquence of the gentleman last up: I
know I am a rough-hewn mortal; but, as I am speaking to men, and not to an
assembly of little misses, the want of that gentleman's silver lisp may not
amount to a total disqualification.

I shall now turn to what the gentleman has advanced on the subject before us.
-- He begs us not to be too nice about evidence. This is going a step beyond
the Revolutionary Tribunal of Paris. There the accuser is heard, and if the
jury are satisfied of the guilt of the prisoner, no evidence is heard in his
defense. This is not being over nice; but we are required to be still less
nice. The merciful French hear the witnesses against the prisoner at any rate;
but we are called upon to give our verdict, without hearing any at all; poor
unfortunate Great Britain is to be condemned upon the bare indictment. One
comes forward and accuses her; she holds up her feeble emaciated hand, and
pleads, NOT GUILTY, my Lords. Some of us wish to hear what can be urged against
her; but the gentlemen tell us not to be too nice about evidence that she is a
notorious offender; that every man knows it, though no one can give regular
information of it, and, in short, that she ought to have been annihilated long
ago. In vain do we, like Pontius Pilate, ask, for what; still they cry with one
voice: Let her be crucified! Let her be crucified! -- And, is it thus we treat
our poor old mother in the hour of her distress?

The gentleman produces, as a sufficient reason for our not being too nice, the
great " ignorance of the citizens impressed." And, do I hear this language from
Mr. S -- k? Is it possible for the people to be ignorant while under the rays
of this focus of science? Do I live, Mr. Chairman, to hear the words ignorance
and citizens articulated in the same breath? How long, Sir, have our ears been
dinned with, an informed people, an enlightened people; with the destruction of
superstition and prejudice, and the luminous close of the eighteenth century?
And, shall we now be told, that our citizens are ignorant? That they are such
stupid brutes as not to be able to give an account of what has befallen them?
not even of their imprisonments and their stripes?

But, Mr. S -- k, after two or three days diligent search, brings us something
like an account of some men impressed from a vessel of his own, and this, he
insists, is evidence enough for any reasonable man. Thus, when a sailor can be
brought to say, that he has been impressed and scourged, he is an enlighted
citizen; but when he cannot, he is a poor ignorant devil, not capable of giving
the necessary information.

The gentleman told us something about Algiers, and, though I cannot for my
soul preceive why Algiers was dragged into the debate, I look upon myself as
entitled to say a word or two in reply. The united exertions, says he, of the
whole A -- can people seemed to cry out for the releasement of the prisoners in
Algiers, I believe, Sir, that the people in general were much affected with the
fate of those unfortunate men, and that, had proper measures been taken to call
their feelings into action, the prisoners would long ago have been restored to
their families and country, without the interposition of government; but, no
one will deny, that these measures should have originated with the merchants;
that the example should have been given, and, indeed, the greatest part of the
money bestowed by themselves. Was this the case; They did, indeed, "cry out;"
they might, for ought I know, make fervent applications to heaven; but the
applications to their purses, which had been filled by the toil and hardships
of these poor fellows, were very faint and ineffectual. A subscription was
opened in this city, Mr. S -- k was himself one of the receivers, and I now
call upon him to say, how much his brethren subscribed, and how much he
subscribed himself. I call upon him to say, whether a company of foreign
players, yea, even English players, did not subscribe more than all the
merchants of this great, rich and flourishing city! -- Here was apathy and
indifference, indeed! Here Mr. L -- might have seen reason to " blush for a
disgraceful omission!"

I am not sorry that the little gentleman bestowed a few of his silver sounds
on the slaves in Algiers, as it furnishes me with an opportunity of comparing
the conduct of the friends of the resolution toward those men, and that which
they now hold toward seamen impressed by the English. The slaves in Algiers
could have been at any time ransomed, and we well know, that they were all real
A -- cans. The seamen impressed are indefinite; we know not who or where they
are; all we know about them, is, that they are all, or nearly so, subjects of
the king of Great Britain. Now, how comes it, that these gentlemen show such
amazing zeal, and are so deeply touched with what they gravely call the
sufferings of these subjects of His Britannic Majesty, while they show such
indifference for our own citizens? This seems totally unaccountable, yet, Mr.
Chairman, I think I can explain it in a few words. The impressment of British
seamen by the British forms a subject of opposition to the treaty; any measures
taken to resist that impressment may lead to a war; the expense attending the
agents sent out will come from the public purse, and not from the purse of
these gentlemen. None of these weighty reasons existed with respect to the
slaves in Algiers, and therefore, they might have remained there, 'till they
had rotted in their chains, had not that government which these sticklers for
humanity now accuse of apathy and indifference, been much more vigilant and
humane than they.

I have much more to say on this subject, Sir; but as the hour of Turkey and
Madeira is at hand, I sit down, in order to give the House an opportunity of
adjourning.


(To be concluded in the Censor for April.)
NARRATIVE Of the Suicide of the Argus of New York.
OF All the acts arising from folly, wickedness, or despair, that of Suicide is
best calculated to awaken curiosity. It is so hard to be accounted for from the
common evils incident to life, and is such a direct violation of the first law
of nature, that a man must possess an extraordinary degree of stoicism, not to
feel some inclination to be informed of the cause. For my part, I felt this
inclination so forcibly, upon hearing of the fate of the renowned Argus, that I
could not rest, 'till I had obtained a circumstantial account of the whole
affair. I trust, it is unnecessary to say how my breast has been wrung by this
melancholy relation; nevertheless, I should not think that I discharged my duty
as Censor, did I neglect to impart it to my readers.

By way of preface to this Narrative, it may not be amiss to give some account
of the wonderful two-legged creature who is the subject of it.

His name indicates that he has a hundred eyes, which is a real fact. These
eyes, like those of the beast in the vision, are divided between his fore and
hinder parts; but, in other respects, they resemble those of the Lamper Eel:
that is, they emit filth and noxious matter in place of admitting light; or, in
other words, they answer none of the useful purposes of this organ in other
animals. He is extremely vindictive and ferocious, and, though his stupid eyes
are too dim to wound in the manner of the bassilisk, yet, when he has no other
means of vengeance left, he drops tears that scald and burn like aqua fortis

These qualities could not fail to recommend him to the great Citizen G -- t,
of seditious and insolent memory. He very soon became the Citizen's chief
favorite, and is supposed to have drank deeply at the fountain of his
largesses. From motives of gratitude, therefore, he was desperately attached to
the cause of the French Republic. He has written, sworn, and lied in that
cause; and, of all the tools of faction, has, perhaps, been the most steady to
his trust. He has chanted the Marfeillois Hymn, and celebrated all the
successful massacres of his benefactors, with that kind of savage joy that
animates the ravages of beasts of prey.

But, alas! how transitory are all sublunary things! The disgraceful defeats,
or to use their own expression, the little success, of his masters, during the
last campaign, plunged him into a state of dejection, from which he was only
raised to be sunk over head and ears in despair. Like many other charitable
patriots, he was buoyed up by the hope of a rebellion, or, to give it the
fashionable term, of a revolution, in Great Britain; and this event was reduced
to a certainty by the account concerning the Sedition Bills, which our
industrious and faithful and impartial news-mongers spread through the country.

This, then, was the rock of our Argus's hope: still, however, he had his
doubts and his fears, and these were left to fluctuate during the wide chasm in
our foreign intelligence. Nothing torments and harrasses the mind like
suspense. The poor Argus became pensive and melancholy, was often seen to stop
in the middle of the street, and heard to mutter incoherent expressions about
rebellion and Sedition Bills and Pit and King George, or Citizen Guelph, as he
called him.

On Wednesday, the fatal 23rd of March, about a quarter after six in the
morning, he was perceived, with a spying-glass in his hand, walking on the
battery opposite the port. He was observed to stop often and olap the glass to
one of his eyes, then scratch his head, clench his fist, and give other evident
tokens of anger or madness. At last, turning himself toward the water, he laid
the telescope to his shoulder, as if it were a gun, and, after making a motion
to fire, uttered a loud cry and ran down to the beach. Two laborers, who had
viewed him all this time, now lost fight of him. One of them hastened to the
spot, where he found the poor distracted wretch belabouring a log which had
been thrown up by the tide. His left hand was all over blood, and the telescope
was reduced to splinters, except about four inches of it, which he still griped
fast in his right. Upon being asked what was the matter: "Look," says he,
holding his bloody hand to the man, Look, my lad, that is the heart's blood of
Pit: no pity! no pity! let us to the palace and cut all their throats!

The other workman now came up, and the two together, with the help of a third
person, made shift to get him home, without further mischief. This was not
effected, however, without some danger; for, as he conceived himself going to
Newgate, as a preparative for a voyage to Botany Bay, there is not a mean of
annoyance that he did not make (...) of, or an execration that he did not vomit
forth.

When he was put to bed, he swore he was on a rack a million times crueler than
that of Damien. Rascals, says he, I have only killed a minister. I have only
done my duty as a citizen and a patriot. These ravings continued for nearly two
hours, after which, having been copiously bled, he dropped off to sleep.

About four in the afternoon he waked, when to the joy of his friends, and the
surprise of every body, he seemed perfectly restored to his senses. He eat a
basin of panada, drank a little wine and water, and appeared quite recovered,
except from the bruises he had received from the ribs of minister Log.

Just as things were taking this happy (...) one of his printers brought word
that a ship was that mo^ ^rived from Liver-pool, bringing news to the end of
February. This imprudent communication was the cause of an immediate relapse.
He jumped up, and, without either (...) coat, ran down to the wharf, from
whence he got o^^ board the vessel. "Well," says he, with a voice and look that
scared the whole crew, Well, rascals, you are come at last. Tell me this
moment; are the Bills passed. -- The Captain answered yes. "What!" says the
raving Argus, "the Bills passed, and no Revolution!" None, say the captain. --
"What! the English are not cutting one anothers' throats yet!" -- No, says the
humane tarpawling, more is the pity; but let us hope, for the love of God that
they will begin soon. -- This charitable informant had hardly done speaking,
when our poor unfortunate friend made an attempt to throw himself over the
quarter deck. Being prevented here, he assumed a placid mein, pretended he was
only in a joke, though it was evident to every one, he was but too much in
earnest. Soon after this he slipped from among the crowd (which was very
considerable on account of the great news that was expected) and got away on
the forecastle, where he was prepaing to hang himself. He had even got the cord
round his neck, when he was perceived by a man upon the yards. His intentions
were now so manifest, that it would have been downright inhumanity to neglect
him any longer. He was conducted home by some of the citizens, and put under
the care of his own people.

Arrived once more at his home, he seems to have been resolved to defer the
execution of his desperate design no longer. He dissembled, however; talked
very connectedly; enquired whether the paper was nearly composed or not, and
even sat down and took his pen under pretense of writing an article of news. By
those means he prevailed on his people to leave him alone; two of them,
however, thought it prudent to remain at the ^d of the stairs, in order to be
at hand, should he make any attempt on his life. Their suspicious were but too
well founded; for, at the end of half an hour's dead silence, they heard him
utter a most dreadful groan, and, presently after, fall on the floor. They
attempted to force the door, but it was too securely fastened. They then
applied to the wainscot, and, at last, made an opening, when, shocking to
relate! they found their dear master weltering in his blood, his throat being
cut nearly across. A surgeon was instantly called, and every assistance given;
but, I am sorry to add, that, when this morning's post came away, there was
little hope of recovery.

The interval between his entering his appartment and the perpretation of the
horrid deed, was, it seems, employed in writing a farewell letter to his Sister
and only relation, the Aurora of Philadelphia. I (...) ^is^ a copy of this
letter, which, if obtained, shall (...) next Censor.

It is said, with (...) I do not pretend to ascertain, that the instrument with
(...) fatal gash was given, was one of the long couteaux, employ (...) ^he
prisons of Paris, and was a keep-sake from a very intimate friend now in France.

Lately Published by BENJAMIN DAVIES No. 68, High Street.
The BLOODY BUOY etc. For the political Pilots of America, (Price one dol.)

AND REVOLUTIONARY JUSTICE DISPLAYED OR An Inside View of the Prisons of Paris
under the government of Robespierre and the Jacobins. ( price 5-8ths of a dol.)

For Sale at the same place An accurate Plan of the City Philadelphia, 26
Inches square. (price one dol.)


