AN ESSAY ON FEVERS; PARTICULARLY ON THE FEVER LATELY SO RIFE IN CHARLESTON,
SOUTH CAROLINA; TOGETHER WITH SOME USEFUL REMARKS ON THE SYMPTOMS ATTENDANT
THEREON, AND A MODE LAID DOWN TOWARD THE CURATIVE PART.

CHARLESTON: PRINTED BY W. P. HARRISON and CO. 1796.

TO THE HONORABLE DAVID RAMSAY, M. D. PRESIDENT OF THE HOUSE OF SENATE, AND
VICE PRESIDENT OF THE MEDICAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH CAROLINA.
SIR,
A SHORT essay on Fevers in general, and on the late Fever which has raged with
such virulence for the most part of the autumn of this present season; and has
been principally confined within the precincts of this city, appearing at this
time peculiarly seasonable, I have conveyed my remarks and observations on the
subject, in the following sheets, which accompany this, for your perusal.

At the same time, permit me to assure you, sir, that I am actuated by no other
incentives than the welfare of the community at large, and the hope to merit
your approbation.

Should I be so much honored as to obtain your patronage and protection, my
desires will be fully gratified; and my endeavors meet with ample compensation.

I have the honor to subscribe myself, and remain, With all due respect and
esteem, Yours truly, THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
MANY have been much divided in their opinions and various their conjectures,
upon the causes from which the late fever took its rise; which raged in
Charleston with such malignancy, during the autumn of the present era of 1796.

Some of the gentlemen of the faculty also seem much divided in their opinions
in regard to its origination, as well as to the curative part, or treatment of
the disease, and particularly so in respect to blood-letting.

Therefore, it may not seem absurd or improper in (...) who has been in the
practice of physic (in this ^^y, for a series of years) to step forward and
offer his sentiments, and make his observations upon so very interesting and
important a subject; which he submits to the public, in the following essay,
without any sinister motive, or any incentive whatever, but that of rendering
good to his fellow-citizens.

And if this essay should prove useful or beneficial every intent of the
publisher will be fully answered, and every desire accomplished.

An ESSAY on FEVERS.
IT will appear necessary in the first place to lay down the symptoms generally
attendant on the fever alluded to, throughout its different stages. -- And this
end may be best accomplished by a detail of its various symptoms, by quoting
the following case The patient alluded to was a man about forty-nine years of
age, and neither of a plethoric nor gross habit of body.
which came under the immediate eye of the publisher, in the line of his
practice; and at the same time, lay down the curative part and the regimen
which he pursued.

On Monday the 23d of August, 1796, the patient complained of non-appetency,
naucea and vomiting, fullness, tension, and pain at the stomach; the viscera
tense and full; the tongue clammy and foul; the state of the pulse irregular
and sluggish; together with lassitude and prostration of spirits. Had recourse
to a gentle emetic of the Vin: Ipecac: and Antim: and in the evening to a
lenient purgative, both of which respectively operated well, and in the course
of the day supplied the diseased plentifully with light attenuating and
diluting drinks.

24th. The symptoms (as above recited) seemed to increase; perspiration became
impeded; chill rigours were succeeded by flushing heats. The pulse at times
high and changeable; pains in the extremities, and between the scapula's, which
extended seemingly under the plate of the sternum to the stomach and belly; the
urine reddish and small in quantity; purged freely, the stools of a darkish
hue; had recourse to antiphlogistics, and supplied plentifully with diluting
and attenuating drinks.

25th. The symptoms nearly the same as yesterday, excepting that the pulse rose
from seventy to ninety-eight; was changeable, and attended at times with a
tremulous motion and great stricture. The tongue scruffed over with a thick
yellow mucus, and li^ed on each margin with lists of a darkish hue; the uvula
and tonsils red and much inflamed; the head much engaged; the urine red and
small in quantity. Had free recourse to purgatives and the antiphlogistic line,
although no visible abatement took place in any of the symptoms.

26th. The pulse this day seemed weak and tremulous; the tongue much as before
described; the heat of the body great; the urine reddish; nau^ea frequent; the
head much engaged; general lassitude; the thirst urgent; and petechiae appeared
over the surface of the skin. This day had recourse to the antimonial wine;
purged freely; gave also the antispasmodic medicines, and drank plentifully of
light diaphoretic and diluting drinks.

27th. The pulse much lower at times, with an obstructed tremulous motion, and
again its vibration quicker, in so much, that little dependence could be placed
on their irregular state. The head, at times, much engaged and distracted; the
tongue dry and scruffed; the urine reddish; the heat of body much increased;
the state of the viscera continued tense and painful to the touch. Had recourse
to free purgings; the antispasmodic line; neutral salts, and gave plentifully
of light attenuating and diaphoretic drinks.

28th. The pulse unequal and changeable, at times quick and weak; again
sluggish and tremulous; the heat of the body great, and the petechiae over the
surface of the skin; the urine turgid and still small in quantity; the stomach
and neighboring viscera tense and sore to the touch. Purged copiously, and
followed the same line as yesterday was adopted.

29th. The state of the pulse very irregular and unequal in measure; the heat
of body great; the lassitude and prostration of spirits infinite; the urine
turgid and small in quantity, and the tongue dry and listed; the head much
engaged with delirium, and no remission or intermission appeared in anywise
indicative of a state at this time; the antispasmodic line pursued until about
twelve o'clock, when the pain in the head increased over the coronal suture^*
down to the sphinoidals, and extended along the os frontis, so as to become
intolerable, which was followed with delirium, etc. At this time the pulse
became tense and tremulous, and at other times, quick hard and irregular; the
viscera continued hard, full and painful to the touch, although perfectly open.
Now had recourse to the cardiac and diaphoretic medicines, castor, camph.
mosch. rad. serpent. virg. etc. with plentiful draughts of light attenuating
and diluting drinks, until about eleven o'clock at night, at which time a
critical and most profuse sweat broke out, which continued for two hours, and
relieved the pains of the head, delirium, etc. The perspiration dried off, and
returned in two hours after, and continued until half past five o'clock on
Monday the 30th, which produced a favorable and perfect state.

It is not unworthy of our attention to remark, that none of the symptoms in
this fever had ever abated, but rather went on uniformly increasing until about
the time of the crisis being had, except a mitigation of the pains in the
extremities, and lucid intervals of those in the head. The state of the pulse
variable and uncertain, and at times very little or no dependence to be relied
on their state. The tongue constantly scruffed over, dry and listed; the heat
of body great; the stomach and viscera tense, and sore to the touch; the urine
turgid, reddish, and small in quantity.

In fine, every expedient was tried, and every mode adopted, which a regular
line of theory might direct, or a judicious course of practice point out.

From the recital of the above case, the symptoms of this fever (as alluded to)
may easily be discovered, and in order still to throw as clear a light as
possible in this point, it may not be improper if we examine into the primary
causes of fevers, and also into the state of the blood, and its circulating
powers; and how it may be actuated upon by blood-letting, and various other
causes.

At the same time lay down a regular line for the curative part and regimen
most expedient to be adopted in this fatal disease.

The causes which principally may give rise to this fever (as a learned author
says) seems to be in some cases owing to a plethora, supposed to owe its origin
to a preternatural fullness and distention of the sanguineous vessels from too
great and increased a quantity of blood and juices in general.

But upon a more minute enquiry it will appear to be owning to a superabundant
quantity of the fibrous crassamentum, or more sizy parts of the blood, in
proportion to the ferous or thinner; which becomes difficult to be circulated
through the smaller and minute capillary vessels; or propelled from the
extremities of the arterial into the venal system, whence distention and
dilitation of the arteries, an impediment to free, easy, and ready circulation
of the blood, and an increased resistance to the force and action of the heart
are the consequences.

The curative part much depends on deplating the vessels and attenuating the
blood. This can best be effected by gentle and moderate bleedings, lenien^
purgatives, the volatile and neutral salts, and plent^ of diluting and
attenuating drinks.

This malady may also originate from obstructed perspiration, or a stoppage of
the cutaneous excretion by cold, which often proves to be the cause.

To obtain that much desired relief resolution bids the fairest, as our first
attempt should be to reduce the febrile impetus to proper and moderate bounds
and to remove or diminish the cause of the disease by judicious blood-letting
in the beginning, which should be repeated as the urgency of the case may
require, and the violence of the symptoms direct.

Many causes may be assigned as the parent of this disorder, and other classes
of fevers.

In every fever the pulse becomes quicker than natural, and the functions of
the body more or less impaired or viciated. The causes of fevers will then be
such as by their irritation can quicken the circulation, and excite spasmodic
constrictions in the several parts of the body; and those may be distinguished
into general and particular. The general or epedemic fevers may effect a whole
family or city, and for the most part depends on putressent miasmata, or
infectious particles lodged in the air, or upon its manifest qualities, such as
heat or cold, moisture or dryness, etc.

The particular causes of fevers, or such as affect individuals only, may be
referred to three classes.

1st. To purulent fomes from confined matter within the body, the consequence
of suppuration.

2d. To a putressent, acrimonious state of the juices, occasioned by putrid
bilious fomes.

3d. To obstructed perspiration.

From fevers of the first class, belong those hectical and and colliquative.
From the second class, those of the putrid malignant kind. From the third class
or obstructed perspiration, acute, inflammatory, (according to the habit of
body of the patient,) low nervous, rheumatic, and intermittent fevers.

The curative indications in fevers in general may be thus reduced. -- The
first to correct and expel the causes which by its irritation it originated.
The second will depend upon proper management and a just regulation of the
powers of nature, keeping the febrile impetus within due bounds for the proper
coction of the febrile matter. The third will consist in providing for the
relief of the most urgent symptoms.

The symptoms in fevers most frequent and troublesome are -- In the beginning
cold shiverings succeeded by flushing heat, nau^ea and vomiting, thirst,
anxiety, a diarrhea, petechiae, profuse sweatings, watchings, delirium,
comatose affections and convulsions. These being the effects, as that is abated
will often cease, but by removing and weakening the cause which produced them,
we arrive at a perfect state.

The symptoms attendant on the present fever depends on an inflammatory or
spasmodic affection of the several organs, a quickened circulation, or too
dense and vissid a state of the fluids.

The cold shiverings strongly indicate a spasmodic stricture of the smaller or
capillary vessels; the heat that succeeds depends on the increased and
quickened circulation, and sometimes upon an intestinal motion, or putressent
fermentation in the blood and juices.

The heat is to be mitigated by abating its cause. If from an increased
circulation, by evacuations and antiphlogistics; if from a putrid cause, by
anticeptics and gentle diaphoretic medicine, such as vegetable acids, neutral
salts, bark, together with a proper cardiac regimen, etc.

A nausea and vomiting will be owing to either an acrimonious, putrid, bilious
matter, collected in the stomach and prima viae villicating their coats and
irritating to excretion, or slight convulsive motions excited in the stomach
and neighboring viscera, by a determination of the febrile cause to these
parts; and is best relieved by emetics, the antimonial and ipecucuanha wines,
etc. and afterward by anodine and cardiac draughts.

Anxiety may be occasioned by any cause that may impede the circulation through
the lungs, and prevent the free egress of the blood from the ventricles to the
heart. This will depend either on inflammatory or spasmodic affections of the
lungs; when owing to the former cause the antiphlogistic regimen should be
adopted; but when owing to the latter, the warm cordial and antispasmodic line
ought then to be pursued.

The petechiae or exanthemata which often breaks out on the skin in febrile
diseases, may be critical or symptomatic; in this fever they seem to be
symptoms only, and neither lessen or increase the disease, for as the fever
abates the petechiae will gradually disappear.

Profuse sweating often proves injurious by weakening the patient and depriving
the blood of its thinner or more aquaous parts; especially in the latter end,
in weak constitutions or habits, which become coliquative and weakening, and
tend greatly to sink the patient, and prevent recovery.

Watchings or want of rest in this fever is to be relieved by abating the cause
of restlesness; the irritation and unusual contraction and tention of the
maninges and nervous ^^ibillae of the brain, or by administering those
medicines which allay irritation; opiates in various forms claim the first
place.

Delirium, if from inflammation, or too increased an impetus of the
circulation, the antiphlogistic regimen bids fairest and most expedient. If
from spasms and too languid a circulation, which in general is the case, it
will be found necessary to keep up the circulation, and resolve the spasms by
cordial, cephalic and antispasmodic remedies, by bark, mosch, castor, camphor,
serpentaria and assafoetida, etc.

Convulsions and twitchings of the tendons, the last stage in fevers, depend on
some irritation or injury done the brain or its coverings, from preceding
inflammation, suppurations, and the like, also on extreme weakness from
innanition.

The causes of delyria and pervigilia may prove the cause of convulsions also.
Warm cordial stimulants, mosch, castor, serpentaria, etc. bid fairest to answer
the desired end.

This fever may be judged of from the constitution of the patient; a quick,
full and tense pulse, inflammation, great heat and thirst, and acute pains in
the head, back and limbs, etc. It naturally seems most expedient to lower the
circulating powers, and to moderate properly the febrile impetus; this is to be
effected by evacuations and antiphlogistics. The antimonial wine proves
serviceable when judiciously administered in the first stage of this fever; the
cooling diaphoretics and neutral salts, with plenty of light diluting and
attenuating drinks, to promote a gentle diaphoresis; and about the seventh or
eighth day a salutary crisis most probably may take place, by sweat, turbid
urine or loose stools.

But if at the latter end of this disease, the pulse should flag, the
antiphlogistic medicines must be discontinued and a cordial regimen
substituted: and if an intermission should happen* or even a remission, with
gentle sweats and a turbid urine, the bark should be thrown in as our sole
dependence.

It may appear worthy of atttention, that this fever was for the most part
confined to Europeans and transient persons* who had arrived here from
different parts, or came from other parts or states in the union. To all such
it proved most mortal; and where bleedings was most copiously had, still lesser
advantages resulted.

It may not be improper in this place if we should make a few remarks on the
state, course, and circulation of the blood, and at the same time endeavor to
prove how far bleeding may prove useful or prejudicial.

First, let us observe, that it is from the blood all the other juices of the
body are secreted, and lest it should coagulate or stagnate, is in perpetual
motion through every part of the body; and that all its offices depend on the
circulation of the blood, which cannot be suppressed for a few minutes, without
being attended with the most direful effects. The blood, in its progressive
motion, is conveyed from the heart to the arteries, to all parts of the body,
and brought back again by the veins, into the sinus venosus; it is then
protruded into the right or superior auricle and ventricle; from the right
ventricle of the heart it is forced into the pulmonary artery, and after
circulating through the lungs, is returned by the pulmonary vein into the left
or inferior auricle and ventricle; from the left ventricle it is expelled into
the aorta, by whose converging branches it is transported from the extremities
of the small arteries* into the nascent or insipient veins, through them passes
into their larger branches until it arrives at their termination, the heart,
from whence it is as before discharged into the arterial system, again in a
perpetual round to traverse the body.

The blood returning into the cavoe and pulmonary veins, and rushing into the
heart by its cavities, will, in such manner, stimulate and affect its sensible
nerves and fibers, as to bring it immediately into contraction; if the blood
should become acrid, as from infectious miamata, an impeded excretion of the
acrimonious perspirable particles, an absorbed purulent matter, etc. by its
increased stimulus, it will excite the heart to quicker motion or vibrations,
febrile symptoms must take place; or by heat or exercise of body, which ratify
the blood and cause it to be more determined to the heart; more copiously the
cavities being distended, its contractions will be more frequently repeated,
and the contained fluids expelled with more force, and circulated with an
increased velocity through the body.

The systole, or contraction of the heart is immediately followed by its
relaxation or diastole, for the ventricles, by their action, having expelled
the blood which they contained into the aorta and pulmonary arteries, their
componant fibers will lose that tension and firmness which the moment before
they were possessed of; at this time the contraction of the arteries begins: --
For the blood being expeled from the heart, with a force considerably exceeds
the resistance they can yield, will dilate them, distract their fibers, and may
slightly stimulate their internal supersicies: This their dilitation and the
change, from a less to that of a greater capacity, thereby occasioned, is
called the pulse, the diasto^e of which is an expansion of the artery beyond
its natural circumference.

The arteries thus distended and irritated by the stimulus of the forcibly
impelled blood, from an inherent contractile power, which is natural and common
to them, as consisting of circular elasti^ fibers, are immediately constringed
and return to their former diameter, by expressing a quantity of blood into the
venous system, proportionable to that with which they had been dilated beyond
their ordinary capacities; and the arteries, by this means, being disengaged
from the wave of blood emitted by the ventricles, the distention and stimulus
thereby occasioned, will cease, till they are again overstretched by the blood
protruded into them at each systole of the heart, in consequence of which they
are again excited to contract themselves.

And this alternate motion and contraction must continue, whilst life and the
circulation of the blood endure.

From what has been already advanced, it will appear, that from the pulse may
be had much certainty to form a judgment as to the circulating powers; a full
strong pulse will denote that the blood abounds in the body, and that it is
expelled in large quantities at each contraction of the heart into the arterial
system; as on the contrary, a weak languid pulse will evince that the blood
does not exceed in quantity, nor is it circulated with too great an impetuosity
through the body. A quick and strong pulse will argue that there is a
disposition to a plethora, at the same time a stimulus to excite to more
repeated contractions the circulating powers, as a quick and weak pulse will
prove that there is rather a deficiency in the quantity and consistence of the
fluids; but at the same time a stimulating acrimony, or a disposition to
irritability in the solids themselves, beyond the necessary bounds.

The actions of the heart and blood vessels will variously affect the
circulating fluids, as they are performed with a greater or a lesser degree of
strength and elasticity.

It is to these that we are indebted for the conversion of chyle into milk, and
at length into blood; and this will vary in its density and principles,
according to the strength or weakness of the system of the solids, and the
circulation is performed with greater or lesser vigor.

The strong elastic vessels act forcibly upon their contained fluids, whence a
greater friction and attrition of the blood and vessels against each other, an
increased heat and dissipation of the more watery particles, the crassamentum
is wrought up to a higher degree of density, and abounds in full proportion to
the serous parts.

The blood and juices in such constitutions become, for this reason, more
dense, compact and viscid, which will be manifested by examining the blood of a
robust man who uses much exercise, which always will appear of this kind.

Even in diseases in which the vital actions are too much increased, as in
ardent fevers and inflammatory diseases the mass of blood is soon rendered
dense and tenaccous, and covered with a phlogistic lentor.

On the contrary, where the vessels are too weak and the circulation lunguid,
the fluids of the body cannot be sufficiently acted upon, or wrought up to a
degree of density and a proper consistence, whence the blood has the appearance
of a dissolved watery fluid, not sufficiently prepared for the strength and
nourishment of the body, or the purposes of the animal economy, nor circulated
with a force sufficient to preserve and maintain the vital heat.

And hence arises a petuitous lentor in the serum, which under these
circumstances is not sufficiently attenuated, or its particles divided; whence
concretions in the vessels, cachecxies and innumerable other complaints
succeed. In diseases likewise in which the vital actions are depressed, the
pulse is small and weak, the heat of body lessened, and the texture of the
blood dissolved with a superabundant quantity of serum.

To the circulation of the blood rightly and agreeably performed, we are
indebted for life, health, and at last a gradual decay or old age. But if by
any means the blood in its rotatory motion should be impeded or disturbed, it
will become certainly the natural parent of diseases and of death. So long as
the blood and humors are circulated through the ducts and canals of the body,
an animal will live, but no sooner does the circulation cease and become
extinguished, than death succeeds life. If the circulation through every part
should be performed freely, aequably moderately and agreeably, so long we
remain sound and healthy; but in every disease we find the circulation too much
increased, decreased, immoderate or unequal; and morbific causes in a great
measure is productive of diseases, by disturbing and impeding the economy of
the vital motions, and perverting the secretions and excretions.

From what has already been advanced on the subject of phlebotomy, when it
becomes useful and necessary, and when it is to be avoided. For as the
circulating powers may be variously affected by an evacuation of blood, as
sometimes in a plethora, where the vessels are too much distended, a moderate
blood-letting will greatly tend to a free and easy motion of the fluids. On the
contrary, we know of no remedy that will so speedily weaken the powers of
nature and impetus of the circulation, and produce so immediate and universal a
weakness. For as the influx of the blood into the cavities of the heart appears
to be the cause which excites it to action (as before observed) it must follow
that when the vital fluids is exhausted, the quantity to be returned to the
heart will be lessened, therefore the strength of its muscular contraction will
be impeded. The reaction of the arteries now not sufficiently distended, will
be abated; the circulating powers will flag, and may be reduced to any degree
at pleasure.

As bleeding weakens and destroys the action of the vessels and organical
parts, upon the same account it lessens the heat of the body and the motion and
impetus of the blood throughout the whole vascular system. For as the friction
and attrition of the fluids against the solids are a chief cause of heat in
living animals, it is evident that by taking away the cause which excites the
heart to action, the force and strength of its muscular contraction may be
diminished to any degree; and further, it may be said with certainty, by
blood-letting alone we may reduce the motion and impetus of the humors and
give so great a check to life and the circulation, when too impetuous or beyond
measure excited in acute diseases, as to induce a general langour, and by
procrastinating the evacuation, can bring on a deliquium animi, of even death
itself, by which both heat and motion will most effectually be stopped, and
cease.

It will therefore appear evident what effects are consequent to blood-letting,
and those can only be from the following:

In a plethora, a moderate bleeding must tend to deplate and free the vessels
and organical parts when over distended, with a thick, dense blood, by which
means it promotes and increases the circulation of the fluids, the easy, free
contractions of the arteries, and the elasticity of the vessels, at the same
time conduces to the attrition, attenuation and motion of the blood; restores
the natural and ready exercise of the body; depraved by a superabundant
quantity of humors, distending the vessels and cloging the circulation, and by
those means relieves in many and various diseases, and produces many and great
changes in the animal economy.

On the other hand, bleeding will prove of all others the most speedy and
efficacious to weaken the action and elasticity of the heart and arteries, and
to lower the impetus of the circulation; for instance, in acute inflammatory
diseases, where the blood is too rapidly and impetuously propelled, will afford
an immediate and speedy relief, but if profusely, injudiciously and
unseasonably used, where there is neither a real plethora or increased impetus
of the circulation, by lowering the vis vitae, will retard the cure of many
diseases, and at the same time relax the solids and lessen the bodily heat;
retards the circulation, diminishes the strength, dissolves and thins the
fluids, and is productive of various evils, by the body becoming weak, infirm
and cachectic. In fine, in all cases from a relaxed state of the solids, a
dissolved state of blood and a weak languid circulation, blood-letting should
be avoided, as increasing all the symptoms and contrary to all the intentions
of cure.

Much has been advanced on this subject, and it now becomes necessary in the
last place to observe that in most seasons, about the autumn of the year,
fevers of the putrid and inflammatory classes, manifest themselves in
South Carolina, which, according to the state of the weather become more or
less violent and prevalent. It would therefore be found most advisable in
persons coming from Europe or elsewhere, not to adventure here during those
months, or any but from the middle of October until the first part of June, as
in a great measure they might become habituated to the climate, and have less
to dread from the sudden and frequent transitions so common here.

Transient persons who come and stay but a short time, have not that danger to
dread, and those who arrive here in future, would find it infinitely
serviceable and beneficial to them, immediately on their arrival, to make the
proper evacuations by emetics, cathartics, and other necessary evacuations or
excretions, according as the habits of body or constitutions respectively,
might seem most expedient.


