EVERY MAN HIS OWN BREWER, A SMALL TREATISE, EXPLAINING THE ART AND MYSTERY OF
BREWING PORTER, ALE, AND TABLE-BEER; RECOMMENDING AND PROVING THE EASE AND
POSSIBILITY OF EVERY MAN'S BREWING HIS OWN PORTER, ALE AND BEER, IN ANY
QUANTITY.

From one Peck to an hundred Bushels of Malt.

CALCULATED To reduce the expense of a Family, and lessen the destructive
practice of Public-house Tippling, by exposing the deception in Brewing.

By SAMUEL CHILD, Porter Brewer, LONDON.

SECOND AMERICAN EDITION IMPROVED AND CALCULATED ACCORDING TO THE MEASURES AND
CURRENT MONEY OF THE UNITED STATES.

Philadelphia. Printed for T. CONDIE, No. 20, Carter's Alley, 1796.

THIS little Treatise was first published in London, where the demand for it
was so great, that in a few weeks it went through several editions; this,
together with the favorable character given it by the London Reviewers, and
the respectability of its publishers, places the practicability of the author's
system in a favorable point of view. It is the avowed intention of the author,
to serve the laboring part of mankind, and to render their situation more
comfortable by a considerable reduction of their domestic expenses.

In preparing this edition for the press, the Editor has endeavored to second
the views of the author, he has made considerable additions, which he has from
the best authorities, and by arranging it under distinct heads, he has rendered
it more simple and perspicuous without injuring the author's style or
sentiment. Those wishing to compare the present edition with the original, may
have an opportunity by applying at the Philadelphia Library, where a copy of
each is deposited.

T. C.
Philadelphia, Sept. 1796.
TREATISE ON BREWING.
IT has always been the fate of Persons, who despising private interest, had no
object in view but the public good, to meet with a host of enemies; Prejudice,
interest, influence, and a thousand other obstacles oppose their endeavors,
and nothing but the conviction of truth could effectually secure their success.
The author of this small tract, cannot therefore expect to escape his share of
obloquy and defamation, for exerting his small abilities to serve the laboring
part of mankind, and to render their situations more comfortable by a
considerable reduction of their domestic expenses.

The natural constitution of man, requires a portion of liquid aliment to
assist digestion and nutrition; and the hard-working class of the Community,
receive from it support, spirits and strength; it is no wonder then, that the
ingenuity of man has been exerted to produce liquors at once pleasant to the
palate, reviving to the spirits, and productive of support. Gin, Brandy, Rum,
Wine, Ale, Cider, Mum, Perry, etc. etc. are proofs of the amazing invention of
man to supply the defects of nature; but, for celebrity, universal use and
estimation Porter has not been equalled by any other liquor. The method of
producing this beverage, and the ingredients of which it is composed, have been
long kept an impenetrable secret; if we consider the immense profits accruing
from this secrecy, which the perusal of this Treatise will prove
incontrovertibly to any one, it will only be matter of wonder that any person
should disclose it to the public; and indeed had the author a private interest
to serve, he could more profitably promote it by allowing the public still to
be blinded, and the veil of mystery to remain unremoved from the art of Porter
Brewing; but regardless of interested censure, or prejudiced dislike, he
determines to exert his small powers, for the general benefit of society, and
particularly for the lower classes. He is neither influenced by envy at those
who have made fortunes by the secrets here exposed, no by any private wish of
particular gain to himself, but by a desire to soften the hardships of the
industrious poor; and in this point of view, he trusts the candid and impartial
will consider his book, as one step attempted to ameliorate the condition of
the laboring part of mankind.

The intention of this treatise, is to induce the Tradesman, the Artizan, and
the Mechanic, to turn their attention to the possibility of supplying
themselves and families, with a beverage much cheaper, and more nutritive than
Porter, and yet retaining all its good qualities, and excluding its noxious
ones. This may be done in the smallest families, in the smallest quantities and
with the fewest conveniences, at little more than one third of the present
expense of Porter.

Estimate of the profits arising to families and others from brewing their own
Porter, Ale, and Beer.
The following calculations are taken from one quarter (eight Bushels) of malt,
but they, together with the following receipts may be reduced in their
proportions to a single peck, or multiplied to a thousand, by considering the
tables of Ale and Beer measure, allowing the Ale 32 Gallons and the Beer 36
Gallons to the barrel.

A quarter of malt with all the ingredients to make good Porter, exclusive of
time and trouble, cost about 14 dollars, which will produce 5 barrels of
Porter, which may be sold to the innkeeper, at 11 dollars per barrel equal to
55 dollars, or to families in wholesale at 1 dollar per dozen of bottles equal
to 90 dollars, which retailed by the publican at 25 cents per bottle, amounts
to 36 dollars per. barrel or 180 dollars for the produce of one quarter of
malt, -- so that the tradesman, mechanic, or artificer, whose family consumes
in progress of time 5 barrels of porter, pays 180 dollars for what with the
economy of his own care and his wife's attention he may be supplied with at
only 14 dollars.

This calculation is deduced from the current prices of London porter.

The author of this Treatise, has brewed Porter for his own consumption several
years; he is therefore intimately acquainted with every article which the
brewing of Porter requires. He pretends not to say that all Porter brewers
follow the same receipt, the principal articles it contains are essential to
Porter, and though in Britain Acts of Parliament have expressly forbid the use
of several of them, yet the author can affirm from experience, that he could
never produce the present flavoured Porter without them.

If any person will make trial of the Receipt, he will then be enabled to judge
whether all Porter brewers do or do not make use of prohibited articles; it is
only sufficient to observe, however much they may surprise, however pernicious
or disagreeable they may appear, the Author has always found them requisites in
the Brewing of Porter, and thinks they must invariably be used by those who
wish to continue the taste, flavor and appearance which they have been
accustomed to.

The following statement of the ingredients, and their average prices are
sufficient to convince the most incredulous of the truth of the foregoing
Calculations.

PORTER RECEIPT. Average Expense.
Dols Cts. One Quarter of Malt (8 bushels) 8 -- 8lb. Hops. 1 -- 9lb. Treacle (9
pints molasses) 75 8lb. Liquorice Root 2 50 8lb. Essentia Bina 1 -- 8lb. Color
1 -- oz. Capsicum (red pepper) 1 2 oz. Spanish Liquorice 9 oz. Cocculus India
Berries 1 2 drachms Salt of Tartar 1 oz. Heading 1 3 oz. Ginger 10 4 oz. Lime 1
oz. Linseed 2 2 drachms Cinnamon Water for 5 barrels of Porter 1 Total D. 14 51

From this candid and open statement of the articles used in Porter, every
person may adopt the plan proposed by this Treatise of brewing for himself. It
will naturally happen, that those who are unacquainted with the mysteries of
Porter brewing will be surprised at some of the articles, but for their
information I will follow the receipts with a particular description of each
article, that every person may choose his own ingredients, and increase or
decrease their proportions, as may best suit his taste, opinion or convenience.
--

For the benefit of those who live in lodgings, I shall add a calculation for 1
peck of Malt. --

PORTER RECEIPT
Dol. Cts. 1 Peck of Malt 25 lb. of Liquorice Root 33 oz. of Spanish Liquorice
1 lb. of Essentia 4 lb. of Color 4 lb. of Treacle 4 lb. of Hops 4 Capsicum,
Heading, Ginger, Linseed etc. etc. Water for 6 Gallons Porter. 5 D. 80 This
will produce 6 Gallons of good Porter, which bought in retail is, 6 Brewed at
home for 80 Leaves clear gain D. 5 20

Surely this is enough to pay for time and trouble, a few hours of a woman's
time is sufficient for the whole operation, when in the same time she may not
be able to earn 25 Cents, but by following this plan she earns D. 5 20. For
money saved is money got.

Having thus clearly pointed out the neat expense, ingredients and composition
of Porter, even in the smallest quantity. I shall proceed to the receipts for
Ale and Beer.

The following proportions will be found exact for 1 Barrel of Ale.

ALE RECEIPT.
Dols. Cts. 2 Bushels Malt 2 50 2 lb. Hops 32 3 lb. Sugar just boiled up, 37
Capsicum 2 cents, Coriander Seeds 2 cents, 8 Cocculus Indicus 2 cents, Salt 2
cents, Water for 1 Barrel (32 Gallons) Ale 8 D. 3 27 A barrel of Ale 128 quarts
bought at the publican's at 20 cents per. quart. D. 25 60 Ditto brewed at home
3 27 Clear gain D. 22 33

Add to this gain of D. 22 33 the value of the small beer, which may be made by
a second mashing from the malt after the Ale is brewed, and the Produce will be
a very good equivalent for trouble.

RECEIPT FOR ONE BARREL OF BEER.
Dols. Cts. 1 Bushels Malt 1 50 1 lb. Hops 12 1 lb. Liquorice root 52 oz.
Capsicum 1 2 oz. Spanish Liquorice 9 5 lb. Treacle (Molasses) Water for 1
barrel of Beer 44 Total Dols. 2 68 One Barrel of Beer (144 Quarts) bought from
the Innkeepers at 10 cents per quart. D. 14 40 Brewed at home 2 68 Clear gain.
Dol. 11 72

Table beer may be serviceable to large families, and therefore the estimate is
given upon a larger proportion.

RECEIPT FOR TEN BARRELS OF. TABLE BEER.
Dols. Cts. 1 Quarter Malt 8 8 lb. Hops 1 8 lb. Color 1 8 oz. Spanish
Liquorice 36 10 lb. Molasses 90 Total Dols. 11 26 Ten Barrels Table Beer bought
at 4 dollars per. barrel Dols. 40 Ditto brewed at home for 11 26 Clear gain.
Dol. 28 74

Liquorice root and other flavours may be added. What are here inserted are
only the most general, and (as some suppose) indispensible requisites.

The Editor, in order to render this little treatise as comprehensive and
generally useful as possible, has added the following receipt to our author's
number. Its very general use in England by families who brew their own ale and
beer, the cheapness, and if rightly managed, its producing superior ale and
beer to what is generally sold at the Brewers, are sufficient recommendations
to enforce its general practice.

Receipt for Brewing forty eight gallons of Ale and fifty-four gallons of Beer
from six bushels of Malt.
Dols. Cts. 6 bushels Malt 6 2 lb. Hops 25 1 quart Yeast 4 Total Dols. 6 29 48
gallons of Ale at 12 cents per quart 23 4 54 gallons of good Beer at 25 cents
per gallon is 13 50 36 54 6 29 Clear gain Dols. 30 25

In the above receipt the Ale is brewed from the first, and the Beer from the
second mash of the malt; 1 lb. of the hops is used to the Ale, to which is
added the other lb. of fresh hops for the Beer. If the operation is rightly
conducted and the water good, there will be a hogshead of as good Ale, and
another of Beer, as any person could desire for family use, perfectly free from
all intoxicative and bad qualities.

Having thus completed the general receipts, before we proceed to describe the
operations of brewing, it may not be amiss to promote general knowledge, to
give a slight sketch of the properties of each article, that every person may
choose his own ingredients, and increase or decrease their various proportions,
as may best suit his taste, opinion or convenience.

A Particular description of the Ingredients necessary in Brewing Porter, Beer,
etc.
MALT is the well known farenacious grain barley, prepared by particular
operations called malting; these preliminary operations accelerate the process
of fermentation, which in a state of barley it would not be susceptible of. It
is a wholesome nutricious grain, containing a soft balsamic, oleaginous
essence, highly agreeable to the palate, and healthful to the constitution, but
by no means intoxicative except when used in large quantities. The intoxicating
qualities of Porter and Beer are to be ascribed to the various drugs intermixed
with them; it is evident that some Porter, Beer, etc. is more heady than
others, and it arises from the greater or less quantity of stupefactive
ingredients. Malt to produce intoxication must be used in such large quantities
as would very much diminish the brewer's profit.

Malt is made of three different kinds, which differ only in a greater or less
degree of firing or dryness; they are known by the names of pale, amber, and
brown malt. The reason for using these three sorts is to attain a peculiar
flavor and color.

Pale malt is most nutritive, being (from the tender method of drying it)
nearest to the original barley-corn; it likewise contains more of the alcalous
and balsamic qualities; it is used to brew Ale and Beer.

Amber malt, is that which is dried in a middle degree between pale and brown,
and is now much in use, being the most pleasant and free of either extreme; it
is the most wholesome, and I would recommend to use nothing else.

Brown malt is sometimes so crusted and burnt by the great degree of heat which
it endures in the kiln, that its mealy part loses a great share of its
essential salts, and vital properties; it is oftenest used to make Porter.

As country brewers, farmers, etc. generally make their own malt, which
augments about one half more in the process of malting, I have therefore in my
calculations rated the malt at the value of barley, allowing the overplus to
pay the trouble of malting.

HOPS are an aromatic grateful bitter, very wholesome, and undoubtedly
efficacious in giving both flavor and strength to the liquor.

They are essentially necessary to check and keep the fermentation regular,
which without the assistance of Hops would proceed so far as to produce Vinegar
instead of Beer. With regard to the quantity of Hops, every person may suit his
palate or convenience; 4 lb. to 8 lb. is the common proportion to a quarter of
malt: But if the Porter, Beer, etc. is brewed in warm weather or intended to be
kept long, the quantity of hops must be increased.

When the hops are dear, numbers for other bitters have been used, as the herb
Horehound, Daucus or wild carrot seed, Wormwood, etc. none of them however,
comes up to the Hop of a good flavor, although an extract of wormwood makes a
tolerable substitute, particularly for Porter.

YEAST is necessary to aid the fermentation, by giving the liquor that portion
of elastic air, of which the boiling deprives it. One quarter of malt made into
strong Beer requires 6 pints of yeast, and the same quantity made into common
Beer requires 8 pints of yeast to ferment it; the hotter the worts are when the
yeast is added, they require the less. Yeast is of a very intoxicating nature
and produces bad consequences to the stomach, if the Beer is not properly
worked, for without fermentation or working, no Must or worts, however rich are
intoxicative. Yeast may be kept for two or three months, if the weather is not
too hot, by covering it with cold water, which should be frequently renewed, or
some of the thickest yeast may be bottled, in which state it will keep longer.
There is another more simple method of preserving yeast, practiced by many
families in Scotland, who brew their own Beer; it is only putting a whisk,
broom, or branch of juniper or furze into the worts during the time they are
working, then hanging it in a dry place, in this manner yeast may be preserved
ten or twelve months.

TREACLE or molasses, partakes of many of the properties of liquorice; is a
laxative, and inclines to gentle perspiration, by thus promoting the natural
secretions, it must be a principal means of rendering Porter and Beer in
general wholesome and healthy. Treacle is also a cheaper article than sugar,
and answers the purposes of color, where the Beer is intended for immediate
consumption; but in summer where a body is required to withstand the
temperature of the air, and the draught is not so quick; sugar alone can give
body to Porter. Treacle may therefore be used or not at discretion.

LIQUORICE ROOT and SPANISH LIQUORICE are of the same quality, they are
pleasant and wholesome, keep the body gently laxative, and oppose the costive
quality of some of the other ingredients; they ought therefore to be used.
Porter is said to feed people; to incline to corpulency nothing is more
necessary than to keep the body regular, and therefore liquorice is doubtless
one of the most salutary ingredients of Porter, carrying off the pernicious
effects of the other compounds, and producing that regular habit which is the
foundation of corpulency. -- Remember to bruise the liquorice root.

SUGAR is a pleasant nutritive extract, and forms the main body of Beer, when
boiled to a proper temper for essentia, and for what is called color, it
answers both for malt and hops, the one being an agreeable sweet, and the other
a pleasant bitter. Sugar is likewise a keeper of Beer, and gives it that
substance which improves with age; it is a cheap substitute for malt, 6 lb. of
sugar being equal to one bushel of malt; the use of sugar in brewing is
expressly prohibited in Britain by act of Parliament, but in the United States
no such arbitrary restriction is in force. The editor would therefore recommend
it to the attention of those concerned in brewing. Some judicious method may be
fallen upon to apply it with propriety to the exhausted malt, so as to make it
again fit for the purpose of brewing; for the quality of the Saccharine part of
malt resembles that of common sugar, to which it is practicable to reduce it;
and its characteristical properties are entirely owing to its intimate
connection with the other parts of the malt, from which such distinguished
flavours of Beers are derived as are not the immediate result of the hop. Were
it not for these properties, sugar, molasses, honey, or the sweet of any
vegitable may be used in place of Malt; but as all those are deficient of the
other properties of the malt, they will not answer this purpose unless an
eligible succedaneum be found to supply this defect. As we are thus
circumstanced, a search on the other side would turn more to the brewers
account; we have in malt a superabundance of the grosser principles, from which
we may infer, that by a judicious addition of sugar etc. to the sacchrine,
which is too deficient, many valuable improvements may result; perhaps a second
and third wort, of quality equal or very little inferior to the first may be
produced to the advantage of the brewer.

ESSENTIA BINA, this is a compound of sugar, made thus: take 8 lb. sugar, and
boil it in an iron vessel, until it comes to a thick syrrupy consistence,
perfectly black and extremely bitter, to do this it will require a very strong
fire, and long boiling, when you have got it sufficiently boiled, pour your
lime water into it, or if you do not choose to use lime water, pour clear water
into it while hot; for if it is suffered to cool before the water is poured
into it, it will become a useless hard burnt substance: But before you add the
water, be sure it is sufficiently burnt. The use of essentia is optional.

COLOR is also a compound of sugar, boiled till it obtains a middle state
between bitter and sweet, it gives to Porter that fine mellow color, usually
so much admired in good porter; lime water or clear water must be poured into
it, in the same way as directed for the essentia; the essentia and color are
added to the first wort and boiled together with it. We would recommend the use
of color to every person; it assists the Porter in refining; upon sugar
variously prepared, Porter may be said to depend for strength, spirit, and
beauty.

LIME, this may be used or not at pleasure; the intention of it is to assist
the liquor to fine, it may also cause it keep better; the method of using it is
thus: Take unslacked lime and mix it well with a quantity of water, then let it
stand some hours, to settle, after which pour off the water which will be clear
a glass, add this water to the essentia or color in the making.

CAPSICUM or Guinea-pepper is more generally known by the name of Cayan pepper,
or red pepper, is boiled along with the wort; it disperses wind and crudities
caused by indigestion; it gives a warm glow to the stomach which is perceptible
on drinking some Beers, if used in small quantities will produce no bad effects.

GINGER has similar effects to capsicum; it cleanses and flavours beer, and is
often used to bring forward the working; but capsicum being cheaper is more
used, and by its tasteless though extremely hot quality cannot be so readily
discerned in Beer as ginger; the ginger is generally added when the yeast is
put in, or after the the Beer is worked; in the first case it aids the working,
and in the last the fining

COCCULUS INDICUS commonly called Cocculus India-berries, is very poisonous and
stupefactive, and by its great strength attacks the head; it is ground into a
fine powder, and too often mixed with malt liquors to make them intoxicating;
but this is expressly forbidden in Britain by act of parliament, and we would
recommend no person to use it. It is the fruit of the Menispermum Cocculus, and
can only be used to the prejudice of the public.

SALT of TARTAR, our author gives us no account of this article, although it is
very serviceable to malt liquors. It is of an opening nature, and extracts the
virtues of the malt very expeditiously and effectually, giving to the liquor a
fine brown color; it also makes the hops emit their virtue to the malt,
softens the water, and throws down the foul particles of the Beer.

HEADING is a mixture of half alum and half copperas, ground to powder; it
gives to Porter that beautiful head or froth which constitutes one of the
peculiar properties of Porter, and which landlords are so anxious to raise to
gratify their customers. Alum is a great drier, and causes that thirst which
some Beers occasion, so that the more you drink, the more you want. Alum gives
likewise a smack of age to Beer, and is penetrating to the palate. The
properties of copperas are well known as dangerous and destructive, and
therefore needs no comment; as heading is not necessary we would not reccomend
its use.

CORIANDER SEED is of a vehemently poisonous and stupifying nature; one pound
of which is equal to one bushel of malt in strength and intoxicating qualities;
it is not therefore to be presumed that those who brew for themselves will use
an ingredient which is only introduced into the composition of ale, to satisfy
an avoricious desire of unjust gain.

SALT is highly useful in all Beers, it fines the liquor and gives it a
pleasing relish, in the same manner as it does to meat.

LINSEED, CINNAMON, ALLSPICE and several other small articles may be added or
witheld according to taste, custom, or practice; as may also essentia,
capsicum, ginger, limewater and salt of tartar; they being merely optional and
used solely to give a flavor to the liquors; hence it is that so many flavours
are distinguishable in Porter, and so very few brewers are found to resemble
each other in their produce. But the cocculus India berries, coriander seed and
heading are pernicious, not to say poisonous in the highest degree; and the use
of them affords one of the many proofs of the little regard paid to the health
of society by interested persons.

WATER is an article of great moment in brewing, although it has escaped the
notice of our author. Upon the various qualities of water much depends, and
many of the good and bad properties of Porter are to be ascribed. Soft water is
universally allowed to be preferable to hard; transparency is however more
easily obtained by the use of the last, but for every other property soft water
is to be prefered, especially for the purpose of brewing Porter and such Beers
as require a fullness of pallet. If the purity of water is determined by its
lightness, distilled water only can claim eminence. Rain water is the purest of
any that is naturally produced, but by the perpetual exhalations of vegetables
and other substances, it is never to be procured free from those qualities
which pond and river waters possess in a greater degree, these being often
highly impregnated with solutions of vegetable and other substances, frequently
produce in the liquor such a tendency to acidity, as is not easily conquered;
this is more to be guarded against toward the latter end of summer. Where
there is liberty of choice we would recommend the use of that water which from
natural purity, equally free from the austerity of imbibed earths, and the
rankness of vegetable saturation, has a soft fullness upon the palate, is
totally flavourless, inodourous and colorless; whence it is the better
prepared for the reception and retention of such qualities as the process of
brewing is to communicate and preserve. For further remarks upon the nature and
effects of water, we refer the reader to Richardson's hints on the brewing of
malt liquors.

Having thus analized the various ingredients of malt liquors, and exposed
their good and bad qualities to public view, I shall leave a choice to every
individual to prepare to his own taste, and proceed to explain the process of
brewing.

A short account of the operations of Brewing.
As it may be objected that many persons are ignorant of the art of brewing, to
remedy this defect, some instructions, few in number, but quite sufficient
shall here have a place; and if they are followed regularly, every person will
by a single trial be convinced of the possibility and propriety of providing
for his family in future, by a cheaper and more pleasing method than by
recurring to a public house for every pint of Beer, which the wants of nature
may demand.

Every person intending to brew for himself, must be careful to see his malt
measured and ground. By no means trusting it to cornchandlers, who frequently
impose both in quantity and quality upon those who are so incautious as not to
see their own malt measured and ground.

The tubs and vessels intended for use must be carefully inspected and
cleansed, perfected free from dirt or taint, as the least defect of that nature
may distaste the whole brewing.

The different utensils necessary in the operations of brewing are, a copper or
boiler the size of which should be proportioned to the quantity brewed. A mash
tub; this vessel is in form of a large tub or hogshead open at one end, and in
the other is bored one or more holes, to draw the liquor off at, these holes
have stoppers adapted to them.

Coolers. In large brewhouses the cooler is a large square vessel about 1 feet
deep, but in small brewings the wort may be easily cooled into a tub, or by
distributing it in small quanties into any clean vessels that can be spared.

A Working Vat. This vessel is in form of a large wide tub, it is so placed
that the yeast runs over the lowest edge; in small brewings common washing tubs
will answer the purpose. These are the principle utensils necessary to brew
with; but in brewing very small quantities our author furnishes us with the
following substitutes: Many persons (he says) have not the convenience of a
copper, though doubtless, were my plan to become general, most landlords would
find it their interest to provide one for the accommodation of their lodgers,
who would be better enabled to pay their rents, and not have recourse to those
evasive tricks which are now so commonly practiced upon small housekeepers by
the lower class of lodgers. Every person must have a kettle or a large vessel
to boil their clothes, which may be supposed to contain two or three gallons;
here then is a sufficient substitute for a copper; every family must have a
pail, which will serve as a mash tub, and a washing tub will prove an excellent
vessel for the liquor to work in; here then are utensils ready prepared in
every family. It is but boring a small hole at the bottom of the pail for the
liquor to run through, and your mash tub is complete; though it would be more
advisable to purchase a small tub on purpose, a pail being rather small.

The first object in the process of brewing is to place the malt in the mash
tub, this is to be particularly attended to, and a small quantity of clean hay
or straw put into the bottom of the tub to prevent the malt from running off
with the liquor.

The water after being brought to boil, is left to coll until the height of the
steam be over; some direct it to be reduced to the proper degree of heat for
mashing, by dashing cold water into it, but we would prefer to have all the
water boiled, as in many instances the water is improved by boiling. The
flavor of the liqour depends greatly upon the degree of heat in the water when
put to the malt; for, from the nature of the constituent principles of malt, it
is easy to concieve, that a low degree of heat acting principally upon the
saccharium, produces a wort replete with the rich, soft, sweat, fully
impregnated with it attendant mucilage; we would therefore recommend a less
degree of heat for those worts that are intended for Ale, than we would for
Porter and strong Beer; but the utmost caution is here requisite, as too low a
heat produces in the liquor an insipidity of flavor, a tendency to immediate
acidity, and a want of early transparency, from the superabundance of
mucilaginous matter, which after the utmost efforts of frmentation will leave
the Beer turbid.

The contrary application of too much heat, is very apt to unite the whole malt
into a pasty mass, which closes instead of opening its pores, this is called
setting of the malt, from which state it is only to be recovered by adding cold
water to it. Too much heat by extracting an over porportion of oleaginous and
earthy particles, renders the business of fermentation difficult and
precarious, and impresses an austerity on the flavor of the liquor, which is
not easily effaced, in general liquors masked, or mashed with too hot water,
falls short in softness, fullness, sweetness and quantity.

Most brewers use Fahrenheit's thermometer, at 212 degrees of which water
boils; with this, the first mash is usually taken at 180 degrees, and the
second at 190 degrees, but as few persons will have an opportunity, or afford
expense to purchase a brewing thermometer, they may in general leave the water
just hot enough to bite smartly upon the finger: A few trials will enable any
person to be exact upon this head, always remembering to draw off the second
mash somewhat hotter than the first. The water being thus brought to a proper
degree of heat, lade is out of your copper over the malt, till it becomes
thoroughly wet, then mash it well with a wooden paddle or oar to prevent it
from clotting, after standing thus a quarter of an hour a second quantity of
water is added, and the whole well stirred as before. Lastly, the full quantity
of water is added; and that in proportion as the liquor is intended to be
strong or weak. -- This part of the operation is called masking. The whole is
now to be covered up, to compress the stream, and prevent the heat from
evaporating; in small quantities this should be carefully regarded, in larger
ones it does not signify so much.

Let your worts stand after mashing about two hours and a half, more or less,
according to the strength of the wort or the difference of weather. -- Then let
the liquor run off into a vessel prepared to receive it; if at first it runs
thick and discolored, draw off one or two pails full, and pour it back into
the mash-tub to refine again till it runs clear. In summer it will be necessary
to put a few hops into the vessel which is to receive the liquor out of the
mash-tub to prevent its turning sour, which the heat of the weather will
endanger. -- Repeat the mashing for a second wort in the the same manner as the
first, never allowing the malt to stand dry, until the quantity of wort you
wish to get it extracted, always allowing for waste in boiling. Although our
author directs the water for the second mash to be hotter than the water of the
first, yet others differ so far as to direct the water to be used cooler, and
not to stand on the malt above half the time of the first mashing; the editor
is of opinion that this last mode is to be prefered to the first in the brewing
of Ale and Beer, but for Porter he would choose to follow our author, as the
quantity of sugar and molasses in the porter receipts will correct the
superabundance of the grosser principle which hot water is calculated to
extract from the malt. -- Where exhausted malt with some sugar mixed with it is
to be used in place of fresh malt, he would also follow his directions.

The next consideration is boiling of the wort. The great use of boiling the
wort is to prevent a rawness in the liquor, extract the essence of the hops.
separate the grosser parts of the malt, and render the liquor transparent; the
weaker the wort is it requires to be boiled the longer. -- Where the worts of
the different mashes are intended to make one kind of liquor, they are to be
mixed together before they are boiled, but where they are intended for
different strenghts, they must be boiled separately, the first to be boiled one
hour, the second one hour and a half, and if a third, it must be boiled two
hours.

The hops and all the other ingredients are now to be added and boiled along
with the wort, except the ginger and cocculus berries; if the copper is not
large, and the wort to be boiled at several times, or where the first wort is
for ale, and the second for Beer, the hops must be carfully strained from the
first boiling in order to be again boiled in the second. In summer the quantity
of hops must be increased, as mentioned in the description of the hop in page
13 -- as the fine essential oil of the hops is most volatile and soonest
extracted: hence we are taught to boil the first wort no longer than is
sufficient to form the extract, for by exposing them too long to the action of
the fire, the finer and most valuable parts are dissipated; but to the second
boiling or wort we can continue the boiling so long as the flavor of the
liquor is not injured by the too grosser parts of the hop, but in this
particular we would not advise to go beyond our author's directions.

Some brewers make use of the first mashing for strong Beer, the second for a
middling Beer, and the third for small Beer; for the double Ale and Beer they
use the liquors resulting from the two first mashings, as a liquor for a third
mashing of fresh malt.

After the liquors are all boiled and the hops strained from them they must be
put to cool to a proper temperature for fermentation. -- In order that the wort
may cool as soon as possible, lay it very thin, that the heat may dissipate
soon, for if the liquor does not cool within twelve hours it receives injury by
beginning to ferment of itself; in winter this is easily attained, but when the
weather is warm, it is more difficult; the cool of night must be taken, and the
process performed in the cellar; In general the liquor should be just luke warm
when put to ferment; to those who use a thermometer our author's rule is to put
Beer together between 60 and 70 degrees in winter, and ale at 50. In summer,
you cannot make it too cold. Those who are not in possession of a thermometer
may discover the proper heat by the use of the finger which is generally about
90 degrees of heat; they must therefore feel the liquor a little cool before
they put the yeast to it.

When you have thus reduced the liquor to a proper degree of coolness, put it
into the working tub and add the yeast (Barm) to it, in quantity as mentioned
in page 13: If you want it to work quick you may add a greater quantity, our
author mentions from one to two gallons of yeast to eight bushels of malt, we
would not however, recommend any person to exceed this quantity. The yeast must
be perfectly sweet and fresh, or it will communicate to the liquor its nauseous
and filthy flavor in such a manner as never to be got off; when the yeast is
hard and dry, take a little of the liquor made rather hotter than the rest, and
put it to the yeast, keeping it in a warm place, till it begins to work, it is
then to be put to the whole.

After the yeast is added, let it work till it come to a good deep head, which
will be of a yellowish color; when it begins to fall a little in the middle,
it must be skimmed off. Our author allows Ale two or three days to work. Porter
to be brought quicker forward, and Beer quickest of all; he directs the Ale to
be beat up well once or twice a day during the operation; but this is a
practice which persons brewing for themselves ought to avoid, as it produces
bad effects upon the stomach.

The yeast being all skimmed of the head, and the ginger and cocculus berries
added, your liquor is fit for barrelling, which must be done carefully,
avoiding the thick sediment at the bottom of the tub; fill your barrels full,
and let the yeast work out, adding fresh liquor to fill them till they are
quite full and have done working; then bung your barrels, but keep a watchful
eye upon them for some time, lest the Beer should suddenly ferment again, and
burst them, which is no uncommon accident where due care is not taken; heat of
summer, or sudden change of weather will occasion the same misfortune, if your
barrels are not watched, and eased when they require it by drawing the peg. The
only part which now remains to complete your brewing is fining your beer. In
consequence of the subtleness of the essentia, which keeps continually swimming
in the Beer; Porter requires a considerable body of findings, but should any of
my readers choose to brew without essentia with amber malt, and with color
only, their Porter will refine of itself very soon. Some however, will perhaps
follow the exact receipt, and therefore I mention that finings are composed of
Isinglass dissolved in stale Beer, till the whole comes to a thin gluey
consistence like size, and which must be used discretionally; one pint is the
usual proportion to a barrel, but sometimes two and even three are found
necessary. Particular care must be taken that the stale Beer in which the
Isinglass is disolved be perfectly clear and thoroughly stale.

By attending to these directions, any person may brew as good, if not better
Porter than can be supplied from the publicans. Many notions have been artfully
raised in the public mind, that Porter requires to be brewed in large
quantities, and to be long stored to render it sound and strong; but let any
impartial person give these receipts and rules a fair trial, and experience the
surest of all guides and the best of all instructions will prove the falsehood
of those prejudiced conceptions, which have had their origin with the ignorant,
and have been cherished by the interested, One brewing prepared the time the
other is using will afford ample time for Porter to refine for use, and every
person can best judge of the extent of his consumption. Porter is not the
better for being brewed in large quantities, except that the same trouble which
brews a peck will brew a bushel, and I know by experience, that a peck of malt
brewed over, a fire, in a kettle or a saucepan, under the guidance of these
rules, will produce Porter as good and as wholesome as that which is usually
paid for at the public-house; and if but one industrious family in ten
throughout this great metropolis, (London) and in the many large town where
Porter is now brewed, is induced to try the experiment, I have no doubt of
their continuing themselves, and recommending to others, a practice which will
be found simple and easy in its operations, essentially useful in point of
health and convenience, and extremely moderate in point of trouble and expense.

Useful Observations.
IN the London edition of this work, our author has thrown together a few
Miscellaneous remarks in the form of an appendix. -- to these remarks the
Editor has made considerable additions, and arranged the whole here under the
title of useful observations.

PORTER is generally brewed from a mixture of pale, amber, and brown malt,
although some make use of the brown malt only, and others, of three fourths
brown and one fourth pale; but our author seems to prefer the amber malt alone.
Porter is generally brought forward more quickly in the working than any other
malt liquor, small Beer alone excepted, and in a week or ten day the liquor
will be drinkable.

ALE is always brewed from pale malt, it differs from Porter and Beer in having
a less quantity of hops, and a greater proportion of malt; the method of
boiling and mashing it is the same as with Beer and Porter, but it should be
allowed to stand to work two or three days; the capsicum and coriander seeds
are boiled in the wort; when it is sufficiently wrought, it is cleansed by
adding a handful of salt, and a little flour mixed up with the cocculus
berries, then it is fit for barrelling. If properly managed, Ale will keep two
or three years, and improve by age.

BEER works remarkably quick, and must be carefully attended to in the barrels.
-- The quantity of capsicum in one barrel of Beer, is as much as is commonly
contained in two barrels of Porter; this accounts for the preference given to
it in cold winter mornings as a warmer to the stomach. Small Beer requires no
storing, being generally brewed one week and consumed the next.

Brewing in summer. In warm climates it has been found impracticable to brew
malt liquors in summer; the great degree of heat carries the process of
fermentation so rapidly on, that the putrefactive fermentation absorbs the
vinus. It is even difficult in warm countries to preserve malt liquors from
souring, and other destructive qualities, as appears from the following remarks
of our author: If they apply to the climate of England, they will produce
greater effects in our climate which is warmer.

Effects of bad Cellaring. If you have but an indifferent cellar, you should
brew only for present use, in which case six weeks will be a very proper space
betwixt brewing and brewing.

For where beer is kept too long in a bad cellar, so as to be affected by the
weather, it will stink though ever so well bunged. For heat opens the pores of
the wood, and allows the spirit to evaporate, and after the evaporation, the
Beer being affected exactly in the same manner as meat is by the sun, will
stink. Hops will not prevent this accident happening to Beer, they only prevent
its turning sour.

A number of persons not possessed of this necessary knowledge, and not
reflecting upon the influence of the air; as soon as summer approaches, begin
to think directly of brewing Ale, which seldom or never is so good as Beer
brewed in a proper season. For instance, the extreme variations of heat in this
country, (England) are from 16 to 88 degrees. Now in a brewing at 16 degrees,
great care must be taken that it does not get too cold; whereas in a brewing at
88, you will hardly be able to get it cold enough, and must take the cool of
the night to reduce it down to the medium heat, which should be about 60. This
observation is too striking, not to enforce upon every one's mind, the
necessity of carefulness and attention in this respect; for as the pressure of
the air confines the mercury down to the 16th degree, so does it also confine
the spirit of the Beer; and Beer standing in an open tub under that temperature
of the air, would keep better than Beer ever so well casked and bunged, when
affected by the extreme heat of summer.

The effect on wort when working, is exactly the same, in cold weather the
spirit of the Beer is confined, and it is thereby rendered more kind and free
to work itself clear. Whereas in hot weather, the spirit quickly evaporates,
thereby leaving the must vapid and flat, unable to work itself clear, but
keeping continually on the fret, till totally spoiled.

This is the obvious reason for the use of sugar prepared for color, because
sugar will bear the heat better than malt, and when thoroughly prepared
possesses such a strong principle of heat in itself, as to bid defiance to the
hottest temperament of air, and to render its turning sour impossible, as an
instance of its quality:

I have known two casks of the same brewing sent in; one prepared with color,
and charged 30s. (6 dol. 67 ct.) the other without, charged 14s. (3 dol. 11
ct.) upon tasting of both, the cask prepared with color was very much
commended, and the other returned as not drinkable.

Clean casks are another essential object in brewing good Beer; to keep your
casks sweet and in order, never allow them to remain open, but whenever you
have drawn of the Beer, bung them up up tight with the lees within them, and in
a good cellar they will never spoil. Should by accident your casks get musty,
or not sweet, the following method will remedy the evil. Soak them well for two
or three days in cold water, then fill them full of boiling hot water, put in a
lump or two of lime, shake it thoroughly, till quite dissolved, let them stand
about half an hour, then wash them out with cold water and they will be clean
and sweet.

Sour Beer may be restored diverse ways, as by three or four handfuls of
beech-ashes thrown into the cask and stirred; or where the liquor is not very
sour, by a little put into a bag without stirring; chalk calcined,
oyster-shells, egg-shells burnt, sea-shells, crab-eyes, etc. do the same, as
they imbibe the acidity, and unite with it into a sweetness.

Beer tasting of the cask may be freed from it by putting a handful of wheat in
a bag and hanging it in the vessel.

New Beer is made to appear older by adding a little oil of vitrol; but it does
not produce any good effects.

To fine Beer quickly, boil some hartshorn shavings in it.

To soften Beer that has grown stale, mix with it after you have drawn it to
drink, a little salt of wormwood, or a little oyster shell powder.

Ale, Beer, etc. may be made that will carry to the West Indies, by mashing it
twice with fresh malt, boiling twice, and when it is to be shipped put into the
barrel two whole new laid eggs to every five gallons of liquor, to remain. It
is said that in ten or fourteen days the shells will be dissolved, and
afterward that the white disappears, but that the yolk remains all the time.

The Method of making Malt.
That nothing may be wanting to render this treatise on brewing complete, the
Editor has added the following account of the process of Malting, which he has
abridged from Sir. Robert Murray's method of malting.

Take good barley newly threshed, etc. put about 40 bushels in a stone cistern
full of water, where let it steep till the water be of a bright reddish color;
which will be in two or three days, more or less, according to the moisture or
dryness, smallness or bigness of the grain, the season of the year, or the
temperature of the weather. -- In summer it is almost impossible to make malt
well: In winter it requires longer steeping than in spring or autumn. -- It may
be known when it is steeped enough by other marks besides the color of the
water; as by the excessive swelling of the grain if over-steeped, and by too
much softness; being, when it is in a right temper, like the barley prepared to
make soup of. When it is sufficiently steeped, take it out of the cistern and
lay in heaps to let the water drain from it; then, after two or three hours
turn it over with a scoop, and lay it in a new heap 20 or 24 inches deep. --
This is called the coming heap, in the right management of which lies the
principle skill. In this heap it may lie forty hours, more or less, according
to the forementioned qualities of the grain, etc. before it come to the right
temper of malt. While it lies in this heap it must be carefully looked to after
the first fifteen or sixteen hours; for about that time the grains begin to put
forth roots; which when they have equally and fully done, the malt must, within
an hour after be turned over with a scoop; otherwise the grains will begin to
put forth the blade and spire also, which must by all means be prevented. If
all the malt do not come equally, but that which lies in the middle, being
warmest, come the soonest, the whole must be turned, so that what was in the
middle may be outmost; and thus it is managed till it be all alike. As soon as
the malt is sufficiently come, turn it over, and spread it to a depth not
exceeding five or six inches; and by the time it is all spread out begin and
turn it over again three or four times. Afterward turn it over in like manner
once in four or five hours, making the heap deeper by degrees, and continue to
do so for the space of forty-eight hours at least. This frequent turning it
over, cools, dries and deadens the grains, whereby it becomes mellow, melts
easily in brewing and separates entirely from the husk. Then throw up the malt
into a heap as high as you can; where let it lie till it grows as hot as your
hand can endure it, which usually happens in about the space of thirty hours.
This perfects the sweetness and mellowness of the malt. After it is
sufficiently heated, throw it abroad to cool, and turn it over again in about
six or eight hours after, then lay it upon the kiln with a hair-cloth or wire
spread under it; where, after one fire which must last twenty-four hours, give
it another more slow, and afterward a third if it should need it, or according
as you want it dried, to pale, amber, or brown malt, it is then ready for the
grinding.

The preceding is a short sketch of every operation in the common method of
malting; but from the complexity of the process, and the great nicety required
in the management of the whole, it is not probable that any private family will
choose to malt for themselves. If however, there may be any inclined to make
his own malt, for further information we refer him to Combrune's essay on
Brewing.

BOOKS for sale by THOMAS CONDIE, No. 20, Carter's Alley, Philadelphia.
Dol. Ct. An account of the State of Tennessee, with a Map 1 -- Constitution of
the State of Tennessee 20 -- of the Prisons of Philadelphia 25 Articles of
Faith of the Universalist Church. 6 Brown's Introduction to the Bible 75 Burton
on Female Education 1 Berquin's Children's Friend 33 Bible abridged for
Children 20 Brissot on the Commerce of the United States 86 Brackenridge's
Modern Chivalry, 3 vols. 1 Brothers' Strange Prophecies with the testimony of
Mr. Halhed, Member of Parliament 50 Concordance to the Holy Bible, folio 5
Calderwood's History of the Church of Scotland, folio 5 Cook's Voyage round the
World, 4 vol. 4 Creeche's Lucretius, from the Greek 75 Centaur, not fabulous,
by Dr. Young 50 Calvery or the Death of Christ 1 Christianity unveiled, by
BOULANGER 75 Columbian Muse, a selection of Poems 75 D'Arcy, a novel* by
Charlotte Smith Devil upon Crutches, 2 vol. 1 De Nons Travels through Sicily
and Malta 1 Distressed Family, a drama 25 Derham's Astra Theology 50 Enfield's
Speaker, best edition 1 25 Every Man his own Physician, by Theobald 40
Franklin's (Benjamin) Works, with his Life 1 Ferguson's Moral Philosophy 1
Finley's History of the Western Insurrection 1 37 Fontenelle's Plurality of
Worlds 33 Fletcher's Postumous Works 1 Female Jocky Club, or a sketch of the
Manners of the Age 75 Frugal Housewife, a Complete system of Cookery 50
Goldsmith's Citizen of the World 1 -- History of Rome abridged 1 Gay's French
Grammar 75 History of the French Revolution 2 -- of the Clergy during the
Revolution in in France -- this is a very interesting work 1 Hardie's American
Tablet of Memory 1 Haunted Priory, a romance 75 Hive, thoughts on Moral and
Religious Subjects ^5 Huygen's on the Inhabitants of the Planets 25 A variety
of small Histories for Children, each 20 Julia, or Adventures of a Curate's
Daughter, etc. 33 Knox's Moral and Literary Essay's, 2 vols. 3 Kemp's Christian
Pattern 1 25 Kirkiad, a poem 12 Lee's Flowers from Sharon, or Divine Poems in
imitation of Dr. Watts 1 -- Songs from the Rock, etc. 50 Life of Baron Trenc^ 1
Louisa, the Lovely Orphan 25 Letters on Theoron and Aspasia 25 Miscellanious
Works of the Col. Humphreys 1 50 Memoirs of Mrs. Coghlan, by herself 50
Montague's Letters 80 -- Poems 80 Man of Feeling, London edition 1 Ditto 50
Mystic Cottager, a novel, gilt 75 Account of Microscopical discoveries 50 Moral
Miscellany 1 Lady Halket's Meditations* etc. 50 Meditations for every day in
the year 50 Moore's Gentlemen and Ladies' Monitor 75 Medley, or New
Philadelphia Songster 50 Maupertius on Comets 25 Mair's Introduction to Latin
Grammar 50 Noveau Reeueil, par Scott 1 25 Nettleton on Virtue and Happiness 50
Nature and Obligation of Morality 50 Owen on Temptation 50 Practice of Piety 1
Preparation for the Lord's Supper 1 Power of Grace Illustrated (Newton's) this
celebrated treatise may be had in a great variety of elegant bindings. 62
Plato's Works a bridged by Dancier, 2 vols. 2 Persian Letters 75 Proceedings of
the Society of United Irishmen 50 Pennsylvania State Trials, 800 pages, octavo,
besides important law points, these pages contain much information in the
speeches of Judge Bradford and other eminent lawyers respecting the certificate
loans and speculation in general 2 Political Truth, an enquiry into the charges
against Mr. Randolph 25 Political Progress of Great Britain 40 Paine's Age of
Reason, part second 32 Plays, (a variety of single) each 12 Pamphlets (a
variety of) Rushworth's Historical Collections, folio 3 Royal Captives 80
Rowe's (Mrs.) Letters 1 Rural Walks, by Charlotte Smith 50 Sheridan's
Dictionary, 2 vol. 8 vo. calf 5 Sherlock on Death 1 Smith on the Prophets 75
Smith's Universal Geography 65 Sterne's Sentimental Journey 1 Shaftsbury's
Characteristics, 3 vol. 2 Sorrows of Wer^er 50 Safe Conduct, etc. 25 Sentiments
upon the Religion of Reason and Nature 37 Short History of Excise Laws 37
Telemaque, French, plates 1 25 The government of the thoughts, by the author of
the Duty of Man 75 Tables for calculating Dollars and Cents 4 Universal
Traveller, a collection of Voyages in Africa, and Asia, 2 vols. 8 vo. plates 3
Valuable secrets (1000) in the arts 1 Vocal Companion, or Choice Songs 25
Voltaire's Charles 12th. 50 Watts's Psalms 50 Young Clerks Magazine 80

