A TRUE AND MINUTE ACCOUNT OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE BASTILLE, WITH CURIOUS AND
ENTERTAINING ANECDOTES OF THAT FORTRESS.

By JEAN JAQUES CALET, A FRENCH PROTESTANT Who had been a Prisoner there
upwards of twenty years, and in what manner he was taken from his house, and
who recovered his Liberty on, and who assisted at the Demolition of that
Infamous Prison.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL; And sold at his Printing-Office, a few rods
west of the Meeting House. M,DCC,XCVI.

AN ACCOUNT OF AN IMPRISONMENT IN THE BASTILLE, FOR UPWARDS OF TWENTY YEARS.
AFTER an imprisonment of more than twenty years, during which time I was
wholly precluded the use of pen, paper, books, and even the possibility of
hearing the articulation of a single human voice, the reader will not, I hope,
expect any very elegant detail of my misfortunes. My object is truth; my
secondary object I mean, for such, in truth, I ought to call it, my first
object being to procure myself a morsel of bread, and which I hope to be able
to procure from the publication of my dreadful and almost unparalleled
misfortunes:

One would indeed imagine, that, during so long a state of total seclusion from
the world, the natural and unavoidable consequence must have been, an entire
loss of the use of language, reading, and writing: neither of these, however,
in any great degree failed me. In the more fortunate, or rather in the more
early part of my life (for I never recollect fortune to have been over and
above kind to me) my education had been good, and my application, by no means,
inconsiderable: And during the whole of my infamous imprisonment, as soon at
least, as I had tolerably well got over the first shock of my unhappy
situation, I continued to converse by myself, and very frequently to practice
writing, or rather the formation of letters, upon the wall of my cell.

Before I proceed to give the melancholy account of my being conducted to
Prison, it will not be improper to inform the reader of the cause of my being
sent there: although, in fact, no cause was assigned -- but I was accused --
and, in France, to be accused is to be guilty.

I was in London when the contest subsisted between Mr. Wilkes, or rather
between the Public, and the then Ministers of State, concerning the abolition
of General Warrants. And as I came over to England wholly for pleasure, and as
London was at that time a scene of riot and confusion, in which my interference
would have beeen useless and impertinent, I returned to France after a few
weeks, with a full resolution to visit that glorious city, when I should be
able to pass my time there more to my satisfaction.

Shortly after my return to France, I went to spend a few days with a friend in
the neighborhood of Paris, who, amongst other servants had an English Groom
who waited upon us at his table. This Groom, having been four years and upwards
in France, was as capable of understanding, and also of speaking the French
language, as a native. Amongst other topics the conversation of course turned
upon my late excursion to England, and the effort the nation was then making to
abolish General Warrants, which I described to the company, as nearly analogous
to Lettres de Cachet.

Being, as I thought, amongst friends, the conversation was free and without
restraint, and I believe some very severe strictures were imprudently made by
me, in particular, on Lettres de Cachet. And here the matter probably would
have ended, had not the English Groom entered upon a fresh discussion of it in
the servants hall. In short, from words they came to blows, and the
interference of the master and his company became necessary: the Valet, who, as
he said, had received a blow from the Groom, had drawn out his knife, and had,
beyond a doubt put an end to his adversary's existence, had I not very
fortunately secured his arm: whereupon turning, in an instant, from extreme
rage, to extreme coolness, he let fall the knife, and muttered to himself with
a very soft and low voice Well, I may perhaps find a better weapon for my
purpose elsewhere. Firing at this, the Groom imprudently uttered much harsh
language and several execrations against the Police: however, by the authority
of my friend, and by the pesuasion of myself and the rest of the company, the
Valet seemed to be tolerably pacified; in consequence of which he was prevailed
upon to shake hands with the Groom. I shall never forget the frankness and
openness with which the Groom shook him by the hand, nor the malicious
significant look of the Valet.

The reconciliation on the part of the Valet was external only; the Groom I
believe generously declared his real sentiments.

The next morning the Valet asked his Master's permission to go to his father
at Paris, who, he said was dying: should he find him better, he would return by
one o'clock, but should he find him worse, or dead, he hoped to be permitted to
make a longer stay. As he was not returned by ten o'clock at night; we were
observing that his father was probably worse or dead. But, alas, no sooner had
the observation been made, than the villain arrived with an officer of the
Police and a large party of soldiers. Not a single word was spoken: I never
remember a more dreadful silence! the Valet put the right hand of the Groom
into the right hand of the Officer of Police: nor even then was a word
exchanged on either side. The party went off with their booty, the execrable
Valet attending them.

The consternation occasioned in my friend's house, by this dreadful
circumstance, may be better conceived than expressed: what had my friend to
expect but to be sacrificed to the fury of an angry and malicious Valet.
However, after the second night, he received a letter from the servant
"desiring his arrear of wages, and assuring him at the same time that himself
and his family were safe." The words being marked, were emphatical, and
manifestly carried with them an implication. As I was the person who had
introduced the conversation, and had also interfered by taking hold on the
Valet's arm, when he was going to stab the Groom; I could not but suppose that
by my friend and his family being safe, that I was the devoted person. However,
as after a recapitulation of the whole conversation, and of what passed during
our interference to part the Groom and Valet, we could not fix upon any thing
whereby I could possibly have given any particular offense to the Valet, I
suffered myself to be tolerably well pacified. I staid with my friend six
nights after the Groom had been arrested, and then returned home, about three
leagues from Paris, where I did not arrive 'till it was dark.

On knocking at my door, it was opened to me as usual by my servant: to whom I
said, "Well Jacques, is all the family well?" the servant gave me no answer: it
is impossible for any one to conceive the horror that came over me: however, I
walked into the room, where I saw the usual preparations made for supper, and
where were sitting my wife and daughter, a girl of nine years of age, bathed in
tears, unable, and afraid to speak a single word. Whilst I was endeavoring to
unravel this mystery, I was saluted by a touch on the shoulder from the Valet
of my friend, and the same officer of Police that had taken up the Groom at my
friend's house, a few nights before; but the guard of soldiers was much
stronger.

Behold reader, a wretched man for no crime whatever reduced from the summit of
happiness, to the depth of misery: his estate confiscated, his family reduced
to beggary, himself shut up for life, and that perhaps unfortunately a long
life, in an unwholesome dungeon.

Cursed be that government, which founded on iniquity, and in consequence
thereof, viewing every thing with a coward and suspicious eye, devotes with
unfeeling indifferance the probable and positive offender. But doubly cursed be
that government, which, not content with pretext of establishing it is security
on the misery of it is subjects, meanly calls in avarice to it is aid, in order
to strip the innocent relations of the accused, of their undoubted right, their
daily bread.

I have just learnt however, that my unfortunate family did not long survive so
hard a fate: my poor wife, (for though she has been dead many years, has to me
been dead scarcely so many days, I having heard of her death but since my
escape from the Bastile) died within ten days after my commitment, raving mad,
and starved to death: for it would have been death, instant death, to any
person whatever to have relieved her. My poor infant daughter was to have been
consigned over to a harder fate, but heaven forbad it: on the representation of
the officer of the Police to the Marquis de --, a notorious and famous catamite
of the court of Lewis the Fifteenth; she was by him sent for, and orders were
given for her being elegantly brought up, 'till she was of proper age to become
subservient to his abominable purposes. But, heaven be praised, she paid the
debt of nature, as I am just informed within six months after she had fallen
into the Marquis de -- 's hands.

Form to yourself, reader, the idea of a government, under which the subject
offers up thanks to Almighty God for depriving him of his dearest connections,
his wife and family, and think himself happy in the loss of them! Such was
France.

More than twenty years ago I was forever parted from my wife and only child,
and conducted, or rather dragged, in a wretched close cart, from my own house
to the Bastile, under a guard of near one hundred soldiers: every room in my
house was filled with armed men, except that in which were sitting my wife and
daughter. The salute given me on the shoulder by the valet and officer of the
Police was the signal for their coming out. The Intendant of the Police had
given strict orders that none of my family should be permitted to speak, or to
leave the house on pain of death, a threat which would undoubtedly have been
instantly put in execution.

My two maid servants, who, on my arrival were ordered into a private room, had
been treated by the soldiers in a manner too shocking, and too indecent to be
committed to paper. These wretched executors of, what they call, justice, had
been waiting two nights in my house expecting my arrival: and the reason why I
was not apprehended at my friend's house, I am told, was, that the valet laid
his information against me on the Intendant of Police giving his word and
honor that I should not be taken during my visit there. One of my maid
servants died in a few days, in consequence of the brutal treatment she had
received from these officers of Justice, of the footman, and other unhappy
female servant, no account, I am told, could ever be given: it would have been
certain death to have asked a single question about them.

As soon as I arrived at the Bastile, at a signal given, which I never could
discover, but which I rather think was made by dropping the Lettre de Cachet
through a niche, I was received by an officer of the Bastile, whose feelings
seemed to be as brutal as the odious Police of which he was an executioner. The
Lettre de Cachet, which, as he had it in his hand, he must, as I said before,
have received through a niche, was, together with me, delivered to the Governor
of the Bastile, as great a brute in disposition, but of more external polish,
than the former. This murderer, for no less can I call him, did not do me the
same honor, which, on peril of his life, he was obliged to do the Lettre de
Cachet; for that he was compelled to receive with his own hands, but me he made
over to the Deputy Governor, by whom I was consigned to the common Turnkey, who
pushed me in the dark into my cell. This Deputy Governor was much such a fellow
as a good painter would have made of the Police of France had he personified
it: that is, the meanness and cruelty of popery triumphing over an innocent and
helpless individual. A religion made up of gloss, hypocrisy, and priestcraft:
pretending to pardon offenses committed against Omnipotence, and actually
torturing for a remark made on the vile prostitute of a profligate monarch:
forgiving, for a pitiful pittance, crimes against nature and against humanity:
debarring the Almighty of the adoration due to him as God Supreme, and
conferring it upon Saints, many of them as profligate and obscure as their
adorers.

About seven o'clock in the morning on the next day, a nasty, squalid,
cadaverous, figure, who, any where, but in France, would have been taken for
the figure of Famine, brought me a blanket, some clean straw, a quart of
stinking water, and about four ounces of most execrable bread. As my appetite
was not very good, the bread, as may be supposed, remained untouched. The water
I seized with the greatest avidity, and filthy as it was, drank it off at one
draught. At two in the afternoon, the same quantity of bread and water was
again brought me by the same meagre figure, who, observing that the bread which
he had brought me in the morning, remained untouched, took back with him what
he then brought me. At eight o'clock in the evening he came again, bringing the
same quantity of bread and water; but observing, as at two o'clock, that the
bread he had brought me remained untouched, he again took, what he brought at
eight o'clock, away with him.

I am sorry to say that I had formed the dreadful resolution of starving myself
to death: a resolution which my generous keepers seemed themselves ready to
meet me at least half way in. This however, even with their powerful
assistance, I was unable to put into execution. Had I been furnished with any
possible means of putting myself to death by an act of sudden violence, I
undoubtedly should have done it. Such means, however, were effectually denied
me. For, previous to my being pushed into this miserable apartment, I was
stripped of my shirt, neck-cloth, garters, stockings, handkerchief, shoe, and
knee buckles: in lieu of which I was presented with a flannel shirt, and a pair
of wretched flannel stockings: such was my dress, and by no means too often
renewed, during my whole imprisonment: such too, as above set forth, was my
food.

The chamber, if it deserves that name, in which I was confined, was up one
pair of stairs. The only furniture of which was an earthen pot, and a stone of
about half a ton weight which served me for a seat; the room was about twelve
feet high, and about a foot from the cieling was a window about fourteen inches
square, but so barricadoed with iron bars, that it would have been utterly
impossible even for a sparrow to have passed between them. In consequence of
the breadth of the room from the wall to the window, which was scarcely five
feet, I had no possible chance of seeing even the sky; more than that I could
not expect to see through the scanty crevises of the iron bars: to have reached
the window would have been utterly impossible, and as it could have answered no
possible end whatever, but to have created a zealousy in my brutal keepers, so
did I never once think of attempting it. The length of the room was about
eighteen feet: the gloominess, and melancholy of it dreadful to a degree:
dreadful from the sad reflection of it having been the tomb of many a living
corpse, devoted like me to the zealousy of a cruel and tyrannical government,
and more dreadful to me as being the then unhappy possessor of it.

The cieling of this accursed appartment consisted of iron bars, nearly as
thick as my wrist, and within a quarter of an inch of each other cross wise.
This, for the two or three first months of my imprisonment, I own appeared
unaccountable to me, as the floor was of deal.

What will not the love of liberty do? and with what improbable and even
impossible hopes will it not furnish us? from this consideration, namely of the
floor being composed of deal, I flattered myself that one day or other I might
be able to effect my escape: and my hope of doing it was the rather flattered,
as I had observed that one of the boards was loose, nearly the whole length of
the cell: and I had taken it up, not from any idea of then putting my project
into execution, but of getting the thing as it were in train: in a moment I
heard the turnkey at the door, and though it took him some time to open it, yet
was I, unable, from surprise, to replace the board, or even to lay it out of my
hands, so great was my consternation.

The turnkey, on seeing my awkward situation, immediately locked the door
again, and in less than five minutes returned with four men whom I had never
before seen, bringing with them a lanthorn. He was locked with me into my cell,
and setting his lanthorn upon the stone, which I before said was in my cell,
very deliberately took up almost every board before my face, and showed me,
what, 'till then, I never could have suspected to have been the case, a floor
consisting of iron plates at least half an inch thick: having replaced the
boards, he gave a rap at the door, in consequence of which it was immediately
opened, and he took his leave of me, with the most contemptuous sneer in his
countenance that insolence could suggest: here ended my hopes of an escape. I
was not however, as I expected, put in irons, but was treated by my keeper with
excessive contempt, and silent allusions to my project of forming an escape.
During the whole of the ceremony of the turnkey removing the boards, not a
syllable passed between us: as he had positive orders no doubt never to utter a
syllable, so I, through fear of ill-treatment, and, at the same time,
considering it as useless, never once opened my lips.

I must confess that on my first commitment to that prison, the disgrace of a
christian country, and the horror of France, I expected every day, or rather
every hour, to be put to the torture: this however was not the case: my body
was no farther put to the rack, than as it partook of the, sufferings of my
mind: let the humane reader form to himself the idea of being, to a certainty,
confined during life, in such a chamber as I have described, debarred of bodily
exercise, of the liberty of breathing a free or wholesome air, of the enjoyment
of such amusements as the mind of a rational being, tired of idleness and
inactivity naturally has recourse to, and from which it as naturally finds
relief, let him form to himself, I say this id^^, and let him refrain, if
possible, from the most sensible emotions, in behalf of the unfortunate
prisoners. A reflection this, that must operate powerfully upon the feelings of
any one but of an intendant of French Police, or of his base and infamous, but
now degraded, employers.

To the horror of the above scene, may be added the terrible apprehension the
prisoner is hourly under, of being put to the torture: of this, no notice
whatever is given him: he literally has no assurance whatever of not being
taken out of his sleep and torn to pieces by the cruelty of the officers of the
prison.

The last human being to whom I spoke for more than twenty years, to the day of
my release (I relate it with pity to myself, and with shame for my country)
were my unfortunate wife and daughter: and from these, the friends of my bosom,
I was not suffered to receive any answer.

I shall endeavor to be as concise as possible, in the account of my
imprisonment, not wishing myself to reflect upon a subject, on which I cannot
reflect, but with the greatest horror and which having no variety in itself,
cannot but be very unentertaining to the reader.

Suffice it therefore to say: that I was kept in the same room continually: and
never once, during so many years imprisonment was suffered to pass o^^^ the
threshold: my whole and only food was bread and water, both bad, and very bad,
in it is kind. I never spoke to, or was ever once spoken to, by any human
creature whatever. The only variety that I ever experienced, was in respect of
heat and cold, and for this I was indebted to the seasons.

During the five or six last winters, the cold was most dreadfully punishing: I
made a sign to the Turnkey to have an additional blanket, and stockings, but of
this he took not the least notice. In summer the air was foetid, and
suffocating, and frequently to such a degree, that the very Turnkey himself who
was a walking dunghill, was utterly unable to face the noisome effluvia on
opening the door of my cell. Such, reader, was the variety I speak of, but I
shall pass on to that glorious day in which I recovered my liberty.

About four o'clock in the morning I heard, what I had never before heard
during my whole infamous imprisonment, a variety of voices under my window, and
presently, the cry of "to arms." As I concluded that it was nothing more than
some poor helpless individual who either had, or who was then attempting to
make his escape, after wishing him every possible success, and having called
down every possible curse on the Police of France, I again fell asleep. The
noise however did not end here: I then concluded that some of the prisoners had
actually risen against their keepers, and on hearing the firing of a musket
was more than ever confirmed in my opinion, that this must have been the case.
But as I well knew that, even had it been the case, the contest must terminate
in favor of the officers of the Bastile, I again laid myself down indifferent
about the consequences.

In less than an hour I heard a much greater uproar, and a shout of "Vive la
liberte," Liberty for ever. This exclamation thought I, can never proceed from
the mouths of the officers of the Bastile. Nor, indeed, did it: but from the
mouths of those forty brave insurgents who were but a small part of the
assertors of the glorious emancipation of France.

These unfortunate persons were admitted within the walls of the Bastile, on
pretext of making terms of surrender between the Governor and the populace.
But, such was the faith of a French government, scarcely were they entered
within the walls of that grave of Liberty, when they were set upon by a well
armed, though not numerous, Military, which is always kept in the Bastile, and
instantly, contrary to the most solemn promise on part of the officers of the
Bastile, put to death by fire and sword. Dreadful Triumph! and succeeded by a
shout very different from that of "Vive la liberte" that of "Vive la Police" or
slavery for ever.

It will not be here improper to observe, that the Military, and every officer
of the Bastile, except the Governor, is, in fact, as much a prisoner, as any
prisoner there, except that he has the whole range of the premises of the
prison to walk in. When he enters upon his office he takes it for life, and he
would instantly be put to the torture, and then to death, were he to be seen,
or even to express a wish to be without the walls of the prison: nor can the
Governor himself be absent more than ten nights together, and that only by
permission of the King, and with his sign manuel. A plain proof this, that the
Police is thoroughly ashamed of the cruelty and injustice which it is
continually guilty of.

But to proceed:

I now heard silence demanded, and proclamation made (by order of the Governor
as I was afterward informed) to quarter the bodies of the unfortunate persons,
who had so nobly on their part, and so disgracefully on the part of the
Governor and officers or the Bastile, lost their lives in defense of liberty;
and to throw their limbs over the battlements to the terror of their
companions, in order to show them what they were to expect, as a chastisement
of their rebellion, if they did not immediately disperse.

This however was not put in execution: the barbarians contented themselves
with hanging the dead bodies on the palisadoes, and exposing them in a manner
the most brutal and ignominious, and in such a manner as would have disgraced
an inquisition, or any thing but a French Police.

By this act of brutality, the number of the insurgents, and their fury, was
increased at least fifty fold. And matters were now come to such a pitch, that
nothing but a surrender could possibly save the lives of the persons in the
Bastile. This being evident to the Governor, he called all the officers of the
prison together, and proposed (for I heard him with my own ears) to put every
prisoner to death, and to bury their bodies, in order that nothing relative to
that place of confinement, might transpire.

Reader, if thou have any feeling for my unhappy situation, exert it for me
here: if thou have one tear, drop it for me here. My very heart bleeds at the
bare recollection of the dreadful proposal.

During this conversation amongst the officers of the Bastile, the Governor was
summoned to the wall to know whether he would surrender. He would surrender, he
said, if they would swear to him to spare his life, This however was even so
far from being promised to him, that he was, in the most positive and solemn
manner assured, that, in consequence of his cruelty and breach of says toward
their companions, he should infallibly be put to death within three hours after
his surrender: that if he deferred his surrender ten minutes, he should be put
to the most exquisite torture. This, however, was so far from prevailing upon
him to set open the gates, that he absolutely refused to give up the prison,
and came down from the battlements.

Upon this, the fellow who had the management of the drawbridge, and who also
had the keys of the gate of the prison, and who (as I afterward learnt) was
more than fifty yards from the Governor, hearing this resolution of the
Governor, let fall as if by accident, the drawbridge, and offered immediately
to open the gate on condition that they would spare his life.

This proposal was made and executed in half a minute, and the insurgents were
put in complete possession of the prison. The military within the Bastile were
summoned to lay down their arms, which demand they immediately complied with.
The greatest silence and order was observed. The Governor was called for, and
ordered to go down upon his knees, and to answer aloud to every question.

Q. Are you the governor of the Bastile?


A. Yes.


Q. Have you any more military force within these walls than these men who have
now laid down their arms?


A. None.


Q. Give me the names of every officer of this prison?


A. Complied with.


Q. Let every civil officer of this prison stand on my right hand.


A. Complied with; and all answered to their names.


Q. How many prisoners have you at present?


A. About three hundred.


Q. Do you ever use the torture?


On the Governor hesitating to give a direct answer, the interrogator said to
one of the insurgents. (...) to his breast, and on my taking off my hat, fire
upon him.

Q. I repeat my question -- Do you ever make use of the torture?


A. But seldom, and always with the greatest reluctance.


Q. Deliver to me the keys of each cell.


A. Sir, there are nearly four hundred keys, which are mostly in the hands of
the different keepers.


Q. Let each turn-key produce his keys.


A. Complied with.


The Governor was then ordered to follow, and to direct his officers to open
every cell. O Heavens! What a scene! Three hundred and seventeen poor wretches,
many of whom had not seen the light for more than two thirds of their lives,
restored in a moment to the common rights of humanity.

Many of these poor wretches were so emaciated as to be unable to stand: some
of them came forth frantic with joy; others, from the sense of their dreadful
sufferings, and of what they had, in all probability, yet to suffer for many a
tedious year, had lapsed into a state of idiotcy; and one poor man, in
particular, was obliged to be lifted out, being unable to stand upon his legs,
in consequence of having had his knees and ancle bones dislocated by the
torture. This unfortunate prisoner had been there upwards of seven years, and
had been tortured once every year.

As many of the prisoners as were capable of bearing arms had the arms and
clothes of such soldiers as were in the Bastile given to them; and, in return,
the soldiers themselves were clothed in the rags of the prisoners, and in that
condition turned out of the prison gates.

Q. Are all the cells set open?


A. Yes, sir.


The person who had managed the whole of this business with the Governor, and
whose name shall never be divulged by me, returned to the place where he had
interrogated the Governor previous to his attending him to the cells; and said,

Where is the man who let down the drawbridge, and opened the gates of the
prison?

After a few minutes, a wretched and miserable figure came forward, and said
that he was the person, but that he had opened the gates on positive promise of
having his life spared, and therefore humbly hoped for mercy. The gentleman who
had, as I said before, examined the Governor, taking him by the hand, said, I
hope, friend you have nothing to fear; My countrymen, this man has, in all
probability, saved the effusion of much blood, by putting us in quiet
possession of this prison; it is to him we owe this safe and easy conquest. I
know not who promised him his life, but I hope we shall one and all ratify the
promise. No man, I trust, will hurt a hair of his head: I recommend him to you
as to men of honor and humanity.

The question was then again put to the Governor.

Q. Do you use the torture at your own discretion, or have you a particular
order for using it, each time it is used?


A. The order is given when the prisoner is committed, that he should be
tortured at certain and fixed periods.


Q. Who attends the torturing a prisoner?


A. A sworn Surgeon of the Police, the Intendant of Police, myself, twelve
soldiers, and nine turn-keys.


Q. Does not the Surgeon of Police live in the Bastile?


A. No, he and the Intendant of Police are the only persons admitted within
these walls.


Q. Does the degree of torture depend upon you?


A. No, upon neither of us.


Q. Why then is the Surgeon and Intendant of Police sent?


A. The Intendant to testify of the prisoner's having had the torture, and the
Surgeon to take care of him afterward.


Q. Where is the torture performed?


A. In a room on purpose.


Q. Attend me to this room.


A. Yes, sir. I hope I shall, at least, not be put to the torture.


Q. I hope not; it shall not be done by my consent.


The gentleman came back in about a quarter of an hour, and said briefly, that
he had been eyewitness to a scene too shocking to be looked upon: he then
ordered the implements of torture to be brought out, and to be destroyed by the
officers of the Bastile themselves. After which the Governor was ordered to
prepare to die within one hour, and was accordingly permitted to be closseted
with the Confessor of the Bastile. At the expiration of the hour he was brought
out, and hanged over the battlements in the sight of, at least, a hundred
thousand populace, of whom the Giant of this Enchanted Castle had long been the
terror and dread.

The shout was universal: it ascended to God's throne an offering of a sweet
smelling savor. A most grateful offering to the Father of Justice and Mercy!

And now (having seen by glorious experiment that the Lord of this castle of
terror was vulnerable) it was determined to try whether the walls of the prison
were not as liable to mortality. In three days the whole prison was razed to
the ground. What became of the other officers of the Bastile it is difficult to
say; some of them, on being turned out of the prison gates, were instantly torn
to pieces by the populace, not, however, before they had been made to take down
the bodies of the men, who had, under truce, entered the prison, and whose
bodies, after they had been most shamefully murdered, had been hung on the
palisadoes, and buried them in the most respectful manner.

Having given a very faithful and accurate account of the taking possession of
this fortress, (if such I may call it) which, 'till this day, was thought
impregnable, I shall proceed to set before the reader, the manner in which the
destruction of it was carried on.

First of all Proclamation was made precisely in the following words.

In the name of Almighty God, the Father of Mercies, in the name of Jesus
Christ his Son, and in the name of the Holy Spirit, be perfect Love and Liberty
to this and every Nation under Heaven for evermore: Amen.

Whereas this odious prison called the Bastile has, in particular, for many
years, existed the terror and disgrace of Religion and Liberty, the disgrace of
former reigns, and of the faithful and good subjects of his present most
Christian Majesty Lewis the Sixteenth, and of his most Christian Queen, whom
God preserve; we, the Nation, do hereby condemn to utter annihilation, and
perdition, the said odious prison, as being highly disgraceful to us as men,
and to our country as christians, and highly reflecting upon our allegiance to
our most Christian King: determining hereby to banish tyranny and oppression,
the influence of wicked Ministers, and the damnable power of the Church of
Rome, Amen.

No sooner was the proclamation made, than the demolition of the building was
begun, and in the most workman-like and methodical manner. The lead of the roof
was first of all stripped off and thrown down upon the ground, and was then, as
were all the other parts of the Bastile, as fast as they were pulled down,
thrown into the ditch which surrounded it.

As soon as the lead was stripped off, there appeared a roof of iron plates
half an inch thick, screwed down to iron bars of four inches diameter. So that
it would have been utterly impossible for any prisoner whatever to have got
through the roof. This, indeed, the screws being put in from without side would
have prevented, as would also the height of the rooms: those of the upper story
being three or four feet higher than those on the lower stories: when these
iron plates, and the bars to which they were screwed, were removed, an arched
roof of stone presented itself, built in the form of an oven: under this arch,
which was much more difficult to be broken through than the iron roof, it was
presumed that the cells would appear; but this was by no means the case; there
was yet another ceiling of large iron bars laid cross-wise, screwed together
very forcibly, and under that a ceiling of boards. In each of the upper cells
was a set of iron rings and chains fastened to the floor, to which a prisoner
was to be chained in case he attempted an escape.

The roof of the prison being completely taken off, the walls were next pulled
down to the bottom of the uppermost set of cells, the floors of these cells had
nothing peculiar in them: their strength consisted in the iron ceiling of the
cells below them: which were of plates of iron riveted, instead of screwed to
very large and close laid iron bars: nor was it possible to have removed them
but by taking the weight of the side walls off the ends of them: by this method
the matter was effected with tolerable case. And now, night coming on, it was
agreed to suspend the work by common consent. And every key belonging to the
Bastile, together with the outer gates of it having been buried in the ditch,
under some thousand loads of rubbish, and the cells being open, as many as
could get lodging in the prison did so; many returned home 'till the morning,
and many thousands remained abroad the whole night: for my own part, I took up
with my old apartment, though with this difference, that instead of solitude I
had company enough, and instead of spending the night as a miserable captive, I
spent it with as much pleasure, or I hope with more, than if I had been
Governor of the Bastile.

The next morning, by break of day, the demolition of the prison proceeded as
regularly and in as spirited a manner as on the day before: and although the
wall was much thicker, the nearer we came to the ground, yet was it lowered
with considerable more ease than nearer the top of the building, on account of
there being less lead and iron work amongst the stones.

Every hour, or less, fresh persons were employed, as well to throw down the
wall, as also to remove the materials into the ditch: and so great was the
number of people, and such their eagerness to supply the places of those who
had been at work, that had the prison been ten times as large, it would have
been taken down in as short a time: during the whole of this, as also on the
preceding day, there was no cessation of labor whatever, and by the time that
it was too dark to carry on the work on the second evening, the prison was
taken down to the surface of the earth. Whilst one part of the populace was at
work on the Bastile and Governor's house another part was at work on the wall
that surrounded the prison, which was thrown into the ditch by the first night.
The drawbridge also was thrown into the ditch and buried under the rubbish.

When it was dark, the people retired as on the former night, and the most
strict order and decorum were observed.

It must doubtless appear surprising that it never once occurred to any person
present to examine the apartments under ground: nor, 'till the prison was
pulled down to the surface, were these subterraneous cells I believe once
thought of:

As the doors of these chambers of death, if I may so call them, had not been
opened, and as the keys of them, as well as every key belonging to the Bastile
had, as has been said, been buried under some thousand loads of rubbish, it was
now impossible to open them. Nothing remained therefore but to come at them by
taking off their ceilings. It was suspected that there might be many
unfortunate prisoners confined in these noisome and dreadful abodes, which, was
it the case they must be at least forty eight hours without victuals or drink
before they could be relieved. In consequence of these reflections, to persons
eagerly wishing to restore their fellow creatures to the joyful face of day,
and to the common rights of humanity, and sensible at the same time what they
must then suffer from hunger and thirst, and still had to suffer before they
could possibly be relieved, the approach of the morning, was expected, not only
with the utmost, but even with the most painful impatience.

By nine o'clock in the morning of the third day, the ceilings over these
subterraneous cells, which were precisely the same with those of the set of
cells above them, were entirely removed: and in these cells, to our infinite
satisfaction, and utter astonishment, not a single prisoner was found.

These cells were in all respects like those above them, except that they had
no window in them: instead of which there was a little wretched light let in
through the doors: and in order to prevent any unhappy person who might be the
tenant of them, from a possibility of seeing any thing, a hole was cut in the
left hand side of the door next the cell, and in the right hand side of the
outermost door.

Having already given a very accurate account of the windows of the cells, I
now proceed to a description of the doors of them. To each cell there were
three doors, all of them of prodigious strength, one of which are opened
outwardly toward the jailer; this door, although of wood, might with much
greater propriety be said to be of iron, being studded with nails with
monstrous heads, so as almost to met each other, and to form, within a very
little, a superficies of iron: they were also covered transversely with iron
bars, screwed on with the heads of the screws alternately placed, one to the
outside of the cell, and one to the inside of it: between every two screws was
a very strong rivet of iron: this door was locked by a prodigious double lock
of peculiar strength and construction, and also with a padlock: this being
done, a grated door wholly of iron was pulled down like a sash, between this
and the outermost door. The iron bars, of which this sash was composed, were
solid, measuring two inches on every side: it is interstices were about four
inches wide. This door locked on the side into the wall in all respects like
another door, and was also locked by a staple, of prodigious strength, to the
ground. This grase or door being made fast, the outermost door was locked
precisely in the same manner as the door next the prisoner: three no bad
securities these against a poor helpless individual: nor indeed against the
good wishes of such of his friends as might have any idea of conferring upon
him his liberty.

A principal reason why the prisoners in France (I mean what are called state
prisoners) are kept with so zealous an eye is, because government having
generally imprisoned them for nothing, and in most cases having used the
torture, it is ashamed and afraid to release them lest they should tell their
history to the disadvantage of the state. So the minister was afraid to release
La Tude, lest he should write his memoirs: La Tude --, did write his memoires:
and they will ever remain a disgrace to the last and present reigns of France.

But to proceed:

As soon as it was perceived that no prisoner whatever was confined in these
subterraneous cells, it was determined to dig at the bottom of each of them, in
order to examine whether there were any rooms under them: to be fully satisfied
of this, four feet depth of earth was taken out of each cell: but no signs of
other rooms appearing, the great stones, which composed the foundation of the
prison, and which made also the side walls of these subterraneous cells, were
thrown down into the holes, from which the four foot of earth had been taken,
and the earth, which had been dug out, served to cover the place where the
infamous Bastile had so long, and so lately stood: a spot now capable of a
better harvest, hitherto fruitful only in cruelty and oppression, in the sighs
and tears of the wretched prisoner and captive.

The reader will please to observe that I am not giving a description of the
Bastile, no one can be more improper to undertake a task of that sort than a
person who was carried in by night, and thrust into a miserable dark cell, in
which he was kept upwards of twenty years a close prisoner. By the time that I
was let out of my cell, the prison was so full of the populace that I could get
no competent view of the premises of it, nor indeed did I ever think of doing
it: whatever the premises or gardens of it were, they were destroyed, together
with the buildings, before I ever thought of examining them. All I shall speak
of therefore will be what came immediately under my eye.

Besides the prison itself, there were two other buildings, both of them
exceedingly low, within the walls of this gloomy mansion: namely the house of
the Governor and deputy Governor, both of them under the same roof; and a house
for the common turnkeys. The former, as having nothing peculiar belonging to
it, need no description. Of the latter I shall say but little. At the door of
this house for the common turnkeys, there used to stand, night and day, a
centinal, into whose box came a bell rope, which, when pulled, rang a bell in
every room of the house at the same time, in which the common goalers lived.
This was regularly rang three times a day when the goalers went to feed the
unhappy prisoners: and in case of any alarm; but never else upon any occasion
whatever.

If the goalers visited the cells, or any particular cell, at any other, than
at the stated hours, it was always done (truly characterestic of a French
Police) without giving this notice. No turn-key dared to visit a cell on any
pretense whatever, at any other than the stated hours on pain of instant death,
without an order from the Governor, or, in his absence, from the Deputy
Governor, which order was always given in person by word of mouth.

The military, I have been informed, never interfered with the prisoners, nor
with the goalers; nor were they allowed to associate with them, or even to
converse with them. They lived in barracks built against the wall of the
Bastile, which surrounded the ditch; they were under the command of the
Governor, though a Sergeant was always their ostensible commander.

The house in which the goalers lived, was circular; in one part of it was a
large room in which they eat, drank, and associated, during the day time: all
around this room were other chambers in which they slept, and in which, as I
before said, a bell was hung, as there was also in the common room. Under this
house was a very spacious vault, which we took for a channel house, but on
opening it, it proved to be nothing more than a place in which they kept
victuals, and it had in it several vessels of weak wine.

This vault received its light and air from half a dozen small windows, which
were secured by a few slight iron bars; but, within it was a door, or rather
three doors, made precisely like the doors of the cells in which the prisoners
were kept. To break these open in any reasonable time was utterly impossible,
it was therefore resolved upon to remove them by taking away the stone work on
the side of the posts; this was, at last, effected with infinite la^^^^ and
difficulty: the staple to which the (...), or sash door was fastened to the
ground, gave us incredible trouble; it was however determined to open it, and
opened it was.

The conjectures of what might be the contents of this strongly fortified
chamber, were numerous, and, as it afterward proved, all of them erroneous.
One conjectured that it must be a room set apart for torture; another, that it
was a vault for burying the dead, or a charnel house; others, a mine, in case
of assault: however, it turned out to be a very large and spacious room full of
arms of different sorts, ancient and modern, and had in it also some gunpowder
and ball. The windows of it, which were four only, were very strongly fortified
and glazed; they looked out through the wall that surrounded the Bastile, into
the great ditch, and were so formed as not to be very visible on the outside.
Such of the arms as were found in this room, and which were of use, were put
into the hands of the insurgents: the old guns which fired with a match, were
left behind, and buried in the ruins, as being wholly useless. The arch which
covered this room, (for it ran from under the house in which the common goalers
lived, to the outside of the wall of the Bastile) was dug through, and the
room, together with the Bastile, its gates, walls, Governor's house, and, in
short, the whole premises belonging to it, were razed, not only to the ground,
but two feet, at least, beneath the ground: and no trace of the spot, on which
it stood, left behind.

This being done, proclamation was made for silence: and the herald was ordered
to return thanks to Almighty God, for this singular national delivery, from a
tyrannical and oppressive government: and a curse was denounced against those
who should rebuild, or attempt, or propose, or wish to rebuild this prison. The
whole was concluded with three acclamations of "Vive le Roi," "Vive la Liberte"
"Vive la Nation."

I cannot myself (I may perhaps be singular in my opinion) forbear thinking but
that the French Court has suffered, in it is turn, for the many acts of cruelty
and perfidy it has been repeatedly guilty of toward a part of it is subjects,
which, on all occasions, has lived in the most orderly manner under that cruel
and oppressive government. I mean the Protestants:

Thus have I done, what I proposed, laid before the public in the best manner I
am able, a full, clear, and accurate account of the destruction of this once
infamous prison, the terror alike of the wicked and good: the Grave of Liberty,
the scandal of France, the disgrace of Europe: It was my most determined
resolution not to quit that odious and detestable spot so long as one stone was
left standing upon another: It was my resolution I say, and I adhered to it
most strenuously.

THE END OF THE ACCOUNT OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE BASTILE. lindx;
CURIOUS AND ENTERTAINING ANECDOTES TOGETHER WITH HISTORICAL REMARKS OF THE
BASTILLE; WROTE AND PUBLISHED IN LONDON, IN 1774. BY A PERSON WHO WAS LONG
CONFINED IN THAT PRISON.

THE FOURTH EDITION.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL. 1796.

HISTORICAL REMARKS TOGETHER WITH CURIOUS AND ENTERTAINING ANECDOTES OF THE
BASTILLE.
THE Bastille, in its original form, stood at the entrance of Paris, on the
side of the Fauxbourg Saint Antoine: -- It then consisted but of two towers.
The design of the Castle was given, and the first stone laid April 23, 1369, by
Hugh Aubriot, Prevost of Paris, who had been charged with the management of the
new enclosure and fortifications of that city under Charles V. The two towers
with which the Castle was first built served as a defense against the attacks
of the English; but there were soon afterward added two, for the purpose of
retreat, fronting to and parrallel with the first. The entrance to Paris was
lengthened by two separate towers and a double bridge. The edifice was not
completed until the reign of Charles VI. about the year 1383. -- That monarch
added four new towers at equal distances. He constructed apartments between the
towers in the solid walls, pulled down the bridges, and surrounded the whole
eight towers by a dry ditch sunk twenty-five feet below the level of the street.

All the towers are secured at the bottom by strong double doors, with enormous
locks and bolts. The filthy dungeons beneath exhale the most offensive stench,
and are the common abodes of lizards, toads, rats, spiders, and almost every
other species of vermin.

It was in these dungeons that the tyrannical Lewis XI. confined those whose
miserable lives he was desirous of prolonging by gradual torture; such was his
treatment of the princes of Armagnac, who were placed in these dungeons, in
holes sunk in the stone-work into the forms of sugar-loaves, terminating in
points, so constructed to deprive their feet of rest, and their wearied and
tortured bodies of all possibility of repose; from this miserable situation
they were taken twice a week -- to receive the scourge, under the inspection of
Philip L'Huillier, then Governor of the Bastille; and at the end of every three
months they had one or two teeth wrenched from their jaws. The elder of these
princes at length went mad; but the youngest was happy enough to be delivered
from this dreadful incarceration, by the death of Lewis XI. and from his (...),
dated 1483, we have obtained these facts, which could never have been credited,
nor even imagined, without so positive an evidence.

In a corner of each dungeon is placed a campbed, formed by planks laid across
iron bars sixed in the wall. It is here they put such prisoners as they wish to
terrify into any measure, and allow them nothing but a little straw for
bed-furniture. Double doors, each seven inches thick, and fastened by monstrous
bolts, are the entrances to these horrid and dark dens.

After the dungeons the most horrible are those containing iron cages, which
are three in number. These cages are formed of beams, cased with strong plates
of iron; and are eight feet high by six feet wide.

[It is not the intention of the Publisher to give a full account of the
castle, towers, etc. of the Bastille, as the limits of this small pamphlet will
not allow of it, but what has been said will undoubtedly give the Reader an
idea of that infamous prison.]

ANECDOTES. I.
CHARLES de Gontault, Duc de Biron, Peer, Admiral, and Marechal of France, and
Governor of the Port of Breast, at a time when he was loaded with favors by
Henry IV. entered into a correspondence with the Spaniards and the Duke of
Savoy, at that time the professed enemies of the nation, who flattered him with
hopes of obtaining at their hands the sovereignty of the Duchy of Burgundy, and
that of Franche Comte, as a portion with a daughter either of the King of Spain
or of the Duke of Savoy, whom they promised to give him in marriage. Henry IV.
having discovered the plot, immediately taxed Biron with it, who denied the
crime with unconquerable audacity. The Parliament of Paris gave orders for his
trial. He was found guilty of the crime of high treason against his King and
Country, and condemned to lose his head, by an Arret of the 29th July 1602;
which sentence was executed on the 31st of the same month, in the interior
court of the Bastille.

II.
In 1674, Louis Chevalier de Rohan, Grand Veneur of France, having lost his
baggage in a skirmish, on its being rifled, certain letters were found which
gave ground of suspicion, that he was engaged in a traitorous design to deliver
Havrede-Grace into the hands of the English. In consequence of this discovery
he was seized and thrown into the Bastille. The Sieur de la Tuanderie, who was
his emissary in the business, hid himself immediately on hearing the news of
his principal's arrest. Sufficient proofs not being brought forward against de
Rohan, a commission was created which assumed to itself the office of drawing
up documents for convicting him of treason. La Tuanderie was discovered at
Rouen, whither proper officers were dispatched to apprehend him; but perceiving
his case to be desperate, he fired on his assailants, and was immediately
killed on the spot. The friends of the Chevalier de Rohan repaired every night
to the Bastille, which they circumambulated, crying incessantly, with the
assistance of a speaking-trumpet, La Tuanderie is dead, and has confessed
nothing; but this was never heard by the Chevalier. The Commissioners finding
that they could draw nothing from him, told him, That the King knew the whole
of the fact, and was possessed of convincing proofs; that they only waited his
confession; and that they had authority to promise him a pardon upon the single
condition, that he should declare the truth of the matter. The too credulous
Chevalier avowed the treason; when, in an instant the perfidious wretches
changed their tone, and told him, that it was true, they could not ensure his
pardon, but that they had great hopes of obtaining it, and would go immediately
to solicit it. Notwithstanding this promise, they felt no compunction in
pronouncing, soon after, the dreadful sentence of his death. The Chevalier was
condemned to lose his head; and on the 27th November 1674, he was conducted on
foot to the scaffold, along a gallery erected on a level with a window of the
Fencing-school belonging to the Arsenal, where he was executed*

III.
The Sieur Vaillant, a worthy ecclesiastic, but who had been unfortunate enough
to have been concerned in the affair of the too-famous Bull, was confined in
the Bastille from 1728 to 1731. He was a second time thrown into that prison in
1734. Some hotheaded fanatics were seduced, either by bribes or other means,
to spread a report, That this priest was the prophet Elias, lately descended
upon the earth; that he was now in the Bastille, but would soon be taken thence
and put to death. The partisans of this ecclesiastic obtained the common
appellation of Vaillantists. In a course of time, the rigor with which he was
treated in the Bastille, together with his own austerities, turned his brain.
He harbored at times the idea that he was indeed the prophet Elias; and firmly
believing that he should one day be caught up in a whirlwind of fire, he made
no scruple of honestly communicating this opinion to the officers of
l'Etat-Major. On the 26th of January 1739 the chimney of his apartment took
fire, and he welcomed the moment, so long expected, of his elevation; but the
fire was soon extinguished, and he remained under lock and key as usual. He now
thought himself bound to make a ferious declaration in writing to the
Lieutenant de Police, That he, Vaillant, was in no sense the Prophet Elias;
that he did not represent him, and that he had no authority for announcing him,
or for acting or speaking in his name. Long solitude impaired his intellects.
Having entered the chapel one Sunday to hear mass, he suddenly seized the
vestments, put on the cope, etc. and began mass. The people called for
assistance, and the Major came, and tried in vain to stop the priest, who,
quite regardless of all about him, continued the service. The Major seized him,
the priest resisted, and the champions at last collared each other. This scene
deprived the prisoner from ever again attending the mass. He was afterward
conveyed to Vincennos, where he died.

IV:
The Comte de Lally was near three years in the Bastille. He was of a violent
disposition, and one of his favorite maxims was, That he knew no pleasure so
sweet as revenge; which was truly the pleasure of the gods! He added. The
Parliament will judge me with all the rigor of the laws; but the King will
favor me and mitigate my sufferings.

He had permission to have his secretary to reside with him; and this man he
wearied out with perpetual vexation. One day the secretary having observed in
the great Court a quantity of coagulated blood, which had been drawn by
phlebotomy from one of the sick prisoners, and which the servant had carelessly
thrown there, he conceived an idea that preparations were making for putting
him to death, and immediately became distracted.

The Major of the Bastille received orders to conduct the Comte Lally to the
palace, to undergo his final examination. M. le President commanded that (...)
to divest him of the ribbon of his Order, and the other insignia of his
dignities, but he refused to perform that office, which was immediately
executed by the Hussars. The Comte was re-conducted to the Bastille, and all
visits in future, and permission to walk out, were prohibited. The officers
kept him company by turns from this time till his execution, which did not take
place till three or four days after his condemnation. In the mean time, his
friends and relations took opportunity of passing in their carriage by the side
of the gate St. Antoine, and before his window, making signs to him to
anticipate his fate by cutting his throat; but all their signals were useless;
the prisoner, absorbed in reflection, never cast his eyes that way, and left to
the executioner, what, had he perceived their instigations, he would certainly
have saved him the trouble of performing. The Major received orders, to remove
Lally into, the Conciergerie, there to pass the night of horror preceding his
execution, and to continue with him the whole time. Here he became reconciled
to that officer whom he had ever before detested. The next morning M. Pasquier,
a Councellor of Parliament, said to him, The King is full of mercy, and will
certainly pardon you if you will declare every thing you know of your two
accomplices, etc. Lally flew into a rage, called M. Pasquier a perfidious man,
abused him in the grossest manner, and poured out on him the most horrid
imprecations and blasphemies. The magistrate gave immediate orders for gagging
him; but soon after, the confessor appearing, the gag was taken out of his
mouth. He then made a feint of removing a little on one side, drew a point of a
compass, which he had ingeniously concealed, and stabbed himself with great
violence, with a full design of preventing the ignominy which was preparing
before his eyes. The attendants however perceived and disarmed him, when he
vehemently exclaimed; "F --, I have missed the blow!" The surgeon found the
wound not mortal; he became gradually more calm, was confessed, and soon after
executed, May 1766.

FINIS.

