1. Is the Head of Ca^ a Member of the Convention. 2. Is the Head of Grand
Maison. 3. Is the Head of Pinard* three Assassins.


THE BLOODY BUOY THROWN OUT AS A warning to the Political Pilots of America: OR
A FAITHFUL RELATION OF A MULTITUDE OF ACTS OF HORRID BARBARITY.

Such as the eye never witnessed, the tongue never Expressed, or the
imagination conceived, Until the commencement of THE FRENCH REVOLUTION.

TO WHICH IS ADDED AN INSTRUCTIVE ESSAY, Tracing these dreadful effects to
their real Causes.

Illustrated with four striking Copper Plates.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

You will plunge your Country into an abyss of eternal detestation and infamy,
and the annals of your boasted revolution will serve as a BLOODY BUOY, warning
the nations of the Earth to keep aloof from the mighty ruin.

Abbe Maury's speech to the National Assembly. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR
BENJAMIN DAVIES NO. 68. HIGH STREET. MDCCXCVI.

DEDICATION.
To all the just and humane people in the United States of America, of whatever
sect or nation, this work is most respectfully dedicated, by their

Obliged and Humble Servant, P. PORCUPINE.

TABLE Of some of the most striking Facts.
INTRODUCTION PAGE. 9 Massacre of six hundred persons in one day at Avignon 17
A child brought by the murderers to see his father put to death 20 A lad cuts a
hole in the cheek of a priest, to hold up his head by, while another cuts it
off 21 Horrid massacre of the priests at Paris 23 A man tears out a woman's
heart reeking, and bites it with his teeth 27 Women roasted alive, and their
flesh cut off and presented to men for food 27 Phillipe cuts off the heads of
his father and mother, and brings them to his club, as a proof of his
patriotism 29 A father leads his son to death 30 Two women tied naked to the
guillotine, while their husbands are executed 37 Execution of Robespierre and
Henriot 40 Women make little guillotines as play-things for their children 41 A
child of ten years old accuses his mother, who is executed 42 Sans-culotte oath
50 Republican Marriages 53 Carrier first satisfies his lust, and then
guillotines the women who were the objects of it 54 Most brutal barbarity of
some Negroes, and still more brutal of some French soldiers 64 An order for
throwing forty women from the top of a rock into the sea, which is executed 66
Dreadful description of a prison, containing women and children 67 Shooting of
women, stripped naked 72 Decree forbidding people to solicit the pardon of
their friends 73 Drowning of priests 75 Particular account of a drowning 77 A
great number of women, many of whom had children at the breast, drowned 82
Sixty persons suffocated under the hatches of a drowning-boat 83 A man shoots
at his father 84 Seven thousand five hundred persons shot 85 Shocking account
of several hundreds of women and little children, perishing in cold and filth
87 Dead bodies on the banks of the river devoured by dogs, etc. 89 Murder of
ninety priests 90 Hands of the prisoners chopped off 93 People bargain with the
executioners for the cloths of the prisoners as they are going to be shot 99
Women, and children of all ages shot 110 A young lad chops off the head of a
woman, while he sings the Carmognole 111 A woman lying dead and a child sucking
at her breast 121 A man shows his sabre and boasts that he had just cut off
sixty heads with it 124 One invites another to taste the brains of an
aristocrat 125 O'Sullivan boasts of his adroitness at sticking people, and
brags of having led his brother to execution 126 Goullin beats his own father
on his deathbed, and says no man ought to be accounted a good revolutionist
who has not the courage to drink a glass of human blood 127 Children tied to
the guillotine while the blood of their parents run on their heads 128 A
cutthroat wears the ears of murdered persons pinned to his national cockade
ib. The same carries about him the private-parts of murdered men, which he
shows to the women 129 The women of Paris cut off the same from the
Swiss-guards ib. A general murders children at the breast, and offers to lie
with their mothers 130 Women delivered in the mud and water at the bottom of
the drowning boats ib. A child torn from a woman's body, and stuck on a
bayonet, and thus carried at the head of a number of persons going to be
drowned ib. Women with child ripped open, and the embryo stuck on pikes 131 The
Convention applaudes the invention of the drowning-boats, as an honor to
France 139 An Instructive Essay 140 A man's heart torn from his body and placed
palpitating on a table before the magistrates. 157 Murder of Mr. Mauduit: his
entrails trailed along the street 158 Most horrible murder of the Mayor of St.
Denis 190 Murder of a Priest at Trois Rivieres, upwards of fourscore years old
218 A woman's breasts torn off, and thrown on the floor 220 Gobet, the
Constitutional Bishop of Paris solemnly abdicates the Christian Religion 223
ERRATA.
Page 49 Instead of Carrier, born at Nantz, read Carrier, born in Gascogny.

INTRODUCTION.
THE object of the following work is, to give the people of this happy land a
striking and experimental proof of the horrible effects of anarchy and
infidelity.

The necessity of such an undertaking, at this time, would have been, in a
great measure, precluded, had our public prints been conducted with that
impartiality and undaunted adherence to truth, which the interests of the
community and of suffering humanity demanded from them. But, so far from this,
the greatest part of those vehicles of information have most industriously
concealed, or glossed over, the actions as well as the motives of the ruling
powers in France; they have extenuated all their unheard of acts of tyranny, on
the false but specious pretense, that they were conducive to the establishment
of a free government; and, one of the editors has not blushed to declare, that
It would be an easy matter to appologize for all the massacres, that have taken
place in that country.

We have seen, indeed, some exceptions; some few prints that have not
dishonored themselves by going this length: but even these have observed a
timid silence, and have avoided speaking of the shocking barbarities of the
French, with as much caution as if we were to partake in the disgrace, and as
if it was in our power to hide them from the world and from posterity. If they
have, now and then given way to a just indignation, this has been done in such
a manner, and has been so timid, as to do them but little honor. They have
acted the part of the tyrannized people of Paris: they have huzza'd every
succeeding tyrant, while on the theater of power, and, the instant he was
transferred to a scaffold, they have covered him with reproach. They have
attributed to factions, to individuals, what was the work of the national
representatives, and of the nation itself. They have, in short, inveighed
against the murderers of the fallen assassins, while they have, in the same
breath, applauded the principles, on which they acted, and on which their
survivers and their partisans do still act.

Thus has the liberty of the press, a liberty of which we so justly boast, been
not only useless to us during this terrible convulsion of the civilized world,
but has been so perverted as to lead us into errors, which had well nigh
plunged us into the situation of our distracted allies. Nor are we yet secure.
Disorganizing and blasphemous principles have been disseminated among us with
but too much success; and, unless we profit from the awful example before us,
we may yet experience all the calamities that heaven and earth now call on us
to deplore.

Fully impressed with this persuasion, the author of these sheets has ventured
to undeceive the misguided; to tear aside the veil, and show to a yet happy
people the dangers they have to fear. With this object in view, he has too much
confidence in the good sense and piety of the major part of his countrymen, not
to be assured, that his efforts will be seconded by their zeal in the cause of
order and religion.

The materials for the work have been collected from different publications,
all written by Frenchmen, and all, except one, from which only a few extracts
were made, printed at Paris.

Even the prints, representing some of the frightful butcheries, perpetrated by
the revolutionists, have been copied from French engravings.

Well aware that persons of a certain description will leave nothing untried to
discredit a performance of this nature, the author has taken particular care to
mention the work, and even the page, from which each fact is extracted.

He foresees that the cant of modern patriotism will be poured forth against
him on this occasion. He knows that he shall be represented as an enemy of the
French nation and of the cause of liberty. To this he will answer beforehand,
with the frankness of a man who thinks no freedom equal to that of speaking the
truth. As to the individuals composing this formerly amiable nation, many of
them, and he hopes very many, are still entitled to his love and esteem. He
has, from his infancy, been an admirer of their sprightly wit; he owes a
thousand obligations to their officious hospitality, and has long boasted of
their friendship. But, with respect to the regenerated French, he would blush
to be thought their friend, after what he has recorded in this volume. -- And,
as to the cause of liberty, if that cause is to be maintained, by falsehood
blasphemy, robbery, violation and murder, he is, and trusts he ever shall be,
its avowed and mortal enemy.

THE BLOODY BUOY, etc.
CHAP. I.
FACTS taken from L'histoire du Clerge Francois, or, The History of the French
Clergy, by the Abbe B^rruci.

IT will be recollected by the greatest part of my readers, that, soon after
the beginning of the French Revolution, the National Assembly conceived the
plan of destroying the religion of their forefathers. In order to effect this
they separated the Gallican church from that of Rome, and imposed an oath on
the clergy, which they could not take, without becoming apostate* in the
fullest sense of the word. All the worthy and conscientious part of that body
refused of course, and this refusal was made a pretext to drive them from their
livings, and fill the vacancies with such as had more pliant consciencies,
principles better adapted to the impious system, which the leaders in the
Assembly had prepared for their too credulous countrymen.

The ejectment of the priesthood was attended with numberless acts of most
attrocious and wanton cruelty: these have been recorded by the Abbe Barruel, in
a work entitled, The History of the French Clergy; and, though what is here to
be found will dwindle into nothing, when compared to what I have extracted from
other works, yet it could not be wholly omitted, without ^howing a degree of
insensibility for the sufferings of these men, that I am persuaded the reader
would not have excused. I shall therefore begin the relation with some extracts
from that work.

It will be observed, that these extracts, as well as all those that compose
this compilation, are an abridged translation from the French; but, as far as
relates to those contained in this chapter, the American reader may easily
verify the translation by examining the English edition of the Abbe Barruel's
work, which is to be found in most parts of the Union.

PAGE 104.
Soon after the first National Assembly had decreed, that the Comtat of Avignon
belonged to the French nation, an army of assassins, of whom one Jourdan,
sur-named the Cutthroat, was the commander, took possession of the unfortunate
city of Avignon. The churches were immediately pillaged, the sacred vases
profaned and carried off, and the altars levelled to the ground. The prisons
were soon filled, and the unhappy victims were released only to suffer death. A
deep pit was dug to receive their dead bodies, six hundred of which were thrown
into it, mangled and distorted, before ten o'clock the next day. Among them was
Mr. Nolhac, a priest, in the eightieth year of his age. He had been thirty
years rector of St. Symphorien, a parish which he prefered to all others, and
which he could not be prevailed on to quit for a more lucrative one, because he
would not desert the poor. During his rectorship he had been the common father
of his parishioners, the refuge of the indigent, the comforter of the
afflicted, and the friend and counselor of every honest man. When the hour of
danger approached, his friends advised him to (...); but no intrea^ could
prevail on him to abandon his flock: "No," said the good old man, I have
watched over them in the halcyon days of peace, and shall I now leave them
midst storms and tempests, without a guide; without any one to comfort them in
their last dreary moments? -- Mr. Nolhac, who, till now, had been respected
even by the Cutthroats, was sent to the prison the evening before the
execution. His appearance and his salutation, were those of a consoling angel:
I come, my children, to die with you: we shall soon appear in the presence of
that God whom we serve, and who will not desert us in the hour of death. He
fortified their drooping courage, administered the last consolatory pledges of
his love, and, the next day embraced and cheered each individual as he was
called forth by the murderers. Two of these stood at the door with a bar of
iron in their hands, and as the prisoners advanced knocked them down* the
bodies where then delivered over to the other ruffians, who hacked and
disfigured them with their sabres, before they threw them into the pit, that
they might not afterward be known by their friends and relations. -- When the
Cutthroats were dispersed, every one was anxious to find the body of Mr.
Nolhac. It was at last discovered by the cassock, and the crucifix which he
wore on his breast. It had been pierced in fifty places, and the skull was
mashed to pieces.

PAGE 210.
Several priests were conducted to L^grave, where they were told that they must
take the oath, This oath amounted to neither more nor less than direct perjury,
since, by taking it, they must break the oath they had made when they entered
the priesthood.
or suffer death. Among them was a Sulpician of 98 years of age, and a young
Abbe of the name of Novi. The whole chose death, the venerable Sulpician
leading the way. The trial of Mr. Novi was particularly severe. The ruffians
brought his father to the spot, and told him, if he could persuade his son to
swear, he should live. The tender old man, wavering, hesitating between the
feelings of nature and the duties of religion, at last yields to parental
fondness, throws his arms round his child's neck, buries his face in his bosom,
and with tears and sobs presses his compliance. Oh! my child, my child, spare
the life of your Father! -- My dearest Father! -- My dearest Father, returned
the Abbe, I will do more. I will do more. I will die worthy of you and my God.
You educated me a catholic: I am a priest, a servant of the Lord. It will be a
greater comfort to you, in your gray hairs, to have your son a martyr than an
apostate. -- The villains tear them assunder, and amidst the cries and
lamentations of the father, extend the son before him a bleeding corpse.

PAGE 211.
In the same town, and on the same day, the ax was suspended over the head of
Mr. Teron, when the revolutionists bethought them that he had a son. This son
was about ten years of age, and, in order to enjoy the fathers torments and the
child's tears both at a time, he was brought to the place of execution. His
tears and cries gave a relish to the ferocious banquet. After tiring themselves
with the spectacle, they put the father to death before the eyes of the child,
whom they besmeared with his blood.

PAGE 217.
After having spoken of the conduct of the magistrates and mob at Bourdeaux,
the historian mentions the death of Mr. Langoiran and the Abbe Dupuis, thus:

At the entrance of the courthouse, the Abbe Dupuis received a first wound;
others soon levelled him to the ground. A young lad, of about fifteen or
sixteen, cut a hole in the cheek with a knife, to hold up the head by, while
others were employed in haggling it from the body, which was still in agonies.
This operation not succeeding in such a crowd, they took hold of the legs, and
dragged the carcass about the streets, and round the ramparts.

Mr. Langoiran had but just set his foot on the first step of the stairs, when
he was knocked down. His head was hacked off in an instant, and a ruffian held
it up, crying aloud: off with your hats! long live the nation The bareheaded
populace answered: "long live the nation" The head was then carried round the
town in signal of a triumph, gained by a tumultuous populace and ten thousand
soldiers under arms, over a poor defenseless priest.

PAGE 218.
The 14th of July, so famous in the annals of the Revolution, was this year
celebrated at Limoges, by the death of Mr. Chabrol. He was a most useful member
of society; distinguished round his neighborhood as a bone-setter; he was at
once the surgeon and the pastor of his parishioners; and among his murderers
were some of those who owed to him the use of their limbs. He was of a quick
and impetuous temper, and endued with uncommon bodily strength. His death
certainly was not that of a christian martyr; but it deserves particular
notice, as a striking proof of the cowardly ferocity of the French populace.

He had taken shelter at a magistrates, and begged leave to elude the mob by
going out of the house the back way; but the magistrate durst not comply. He
was forced to face his blood-thirsty pursuers. The indignant priest met them at
the door; the attack instantly began. Without a single weapon of defense, he
had to encounter hundreds of the mob, armed with clubs, guns, sabres, and
knives; but, notwithstanding the amazing inequality, he held them a long time
at bay. Some he felled to the ground, others ran from him; he tore a bayonet
out of his flesh, and stabbing it into the breast of his adversary, sent him to
die among the crowd. At last, weakened with the loss of blood, he falls, and
the base and merciless scoundrels cry: to the lamp-post. The idea of hanging
reanimates the remaining drops in his veins. He rises upon his legs for the
last time; but numbers prevailed; again he falls, covered with wounds, and
expires. His last groan is followed by the ferocious howl of victory; the
dastardly assassins set no bounds to their insults; they cut and hacked his
body to pieces, and wrangled for the property of his ragged and bloody cassock.

PAGE 268.
As soon as the unfortunate Louis XVI. had been transfered from his throne to a
loathsome prison, the National Assembly formed a plan for the total extirpation
of the priests, and with them the Christian Religion. The ministers of the
altar were seized and thrown into prison, or transported, from every part of
the country. At Paris about three hundred of them were shut up, in order to be
massacred, and were actually put to death during the first and second weeks of
September, 1792.

About one hundred and eighty of these unhappy men were confined in the convent
of the Carmelites. A troop of assassins commenced the massacre in the garden,
where the priests were permitted to take the air; but while they were
proceeding, a commissary arrived, and informed them that the work was not to go
on that way. There were now about a hundred left ^live, who were all ordered
into the sanctuary of the church; but, to get thither, they had to pass through
a crowd of their murderers. One received a ball, another a blow, and another a
stab: so that, when arrived in the sanctuary they presented a scene, the most
heart-piercing that eyes ever beheld. Some were dragged in wounded, others
quite dead. Even here, though surrounded by a detachment of soldiers, the
blood-thirsty mob rushed in upon them, and murdered several at the very altar.
The sanctuary of a christian church was, for the first time since the blessed
Redeemer appeared among men, filled with a promiscuous group of the living, the
dying, and the dead. The marble pavement was covered with dirt and gore and
mangled carcases, and the sides of the altar splashed with blood and brains.

The soldiers had not been brought to save the lives of the priests: the
commissary who headed them was to execute a plan of more deliberate murder. The
surviving priests were called out two at a time, and murdered in the presence
of the commissary, who took there names down in a book, as he was answerable for
their assassination. Of all that were found here, only four or five escaped. --
The like undistinguished carnage was exhibited at the other prisons.

Every one of these men might have saved his life by taking the proffered oath,
yet not one of them condescended to do it. Let the infidel show us, if he can,
any thing like this in the annals of his impious sect.

PAGE 318.
At the gate of the prison of La Force, the assassins were placed in two rows:
the two ruffians, called judges, who gave the signal of death, were placed at
the gate; and as soon as the prisoner passed them, the assassins dispatched him
with their knives or sabres, throwing the bodies in a heap at the end of the
line. At the foot of this trophy of dead bodies, says the historian, we must
now exhibit a scene of a different kind, in the murder of the princess of
Lamballe. She had retired in safety to London; but her attachment to the royal
family would not suffer her to remain in her assylum, while they were exposed.
Her fidelity was a crime that the infidelity of her enemies could never forgive.

When this illustrious victim was brought forth, she was asked to swear an
eternal hatred to the king, the queen, and to royalty. The oath, said she, is
foreign to the sentiments of my heart, and I will never take it. -- She was
instantly delivered over to the ministers of death. These ruffians pretend to
caress her, stroke her cheeks with their hands yet reeking with human blood,
and thus conduct her along the line. Amidst all these insults her courage never
deserted her. When arrived at the heap of dead bodies, she was ordered to
kneel, and ask pardon of the nation: "I have never injured the nation," she
replied, "nor will I ask its pardon." -- "Down," said they, "and ask pardon, if
you wish to live." "No," said she, "I scorn to ask pardon from assassins that
call themselves the nation: I will never bend my knee, or accept of a favor at
such hands."

Her soul was superior to fear. Kneel and ask pardon was heard from a thousand
voices, but in vain. Two of the assassins now seized her arms, and, pulling her
from side to side, nearly dislocated her shoulders. "Go on, scoundrels," said
the heroic princess, "I will ask no pardon." -- In a rage to see themselves
thus overcome by the constancy of a woman, they dashed her down, and rushed in
upon her with their knives and poignards. Her head soon appeared hoisted upon a
liberty pike, and her heart, after being bit by one of the ruffians, was put
into a basin. Both were carried in triumph through the streets of Paris. At
last, after having feasted the eyes of the multitude, the bearers took them to
the Temple, now become a prison, where one of the two commissaries that guarded
the king, called him to the window, that he might see it; but his companion, a
little more humane prevented the unfortunate monarch from approaching. A
fainting fit, from hearing of the event, fortunately saved the queen from the
heart-rending sight.

The body, stripped naked and the bowels hanging out, was exposed to view on
the top of the murdered victim, where it remained till the massacre was over.

PAGE 327.
A great fire was made in the Place-Dauphine, at which many, both men and women
were roasted. The Countess of Perignan, with her three daughters were dragged
thither. They were stripped, rubbed over with oil, and then put to the fire.
The eldest of the daughters, who was fifteen, begged them to put an end to the
torments, and a young fellow shot her through the head. The cannibals, who were
shouting and dancing round the fire, enraged to see themselves thus deprived of
the pleasure of hearing her cries, seized the too merciful murderer, and threw
him into the flames.

When the Countess was dead, they brought six priests, and, cutting off some of
the roasted flesh, presented them each a piece to eat. They shut their eyes,
and made no answer. The oldest of the priests was then stripped, and tied
opposite the fire. The mob told the others, that perhaps they might prefer the
relish of a priests' flesh to that of a Countess; but they suddenly rushed into
the flames. The barbarians tore them out to prolong their torments; not,
however, before they were dead, and beyond the reach even of Parisian cruelty.

PAGE 328.
On Monday, September 3, at ten o'clock in the evening, a man, or rather a
monster, named Philip, living in the street of the Temple, came to the Jacobin
Club, of which he was a member; and, with a box in his hand, mounted the
tribune. Here he made a long speech on patriotism, concluding by a declaration,
that he looked upon every one who preferred the ties of blood and of nature to
that of patriotic duty, as an aristocrat worthy of death; and, to convince them
of the purity and sincerity of his own principles, he opened the box, and held
up, by the gray hair, the bloody and shrivelled heads of his father and mother,
"which I have cut off," said the impious wretch, because they obstinately
persisted in not hearing mass from a constitutional priest That is one of the
apostates.
. The speech of this parricide received the loudest applauses; and the two
heads were ordered to be buried beneath the busts of Ankerstorm and Brutus,
behind the president's chair According to Monsieur Peltier, in his picture of
Paris, the number of persons murdered in the different prisons of that city,
from Sunday the 2d to Friday the 7th of September 1792, amounted to 1,005. To
these, he says, should be added the poor creatures who were put to death in the
hospital of Bicetre, and in the yards of l^ Salpetriere; those who were drowned
at the hospital of la Force; and all those who were dragged out of the dungeons
of the Conciergerie and the Chatelet, to be butchered on the Pont-au-Change,
which may be computed, without exaggeration, at 8,000 individuals.
."

The last fact related is of such a horrid nature that, though so well
authenticated, it would almost stagger our belief, had we not proof of so many
others, which equal, if not surpass it. I shall here extract one from La
Conjuration de Maximillen Robespierre, a work published at Paris in the year
1795.

The author, after speaking of the unnatural ferociousness which the revolution
had produced in the hearts of the people, says (page 162) I will here give a
proof, and a shocking one it is. -- Garnier of Orleans had a son, who had been
intended for the priesthood, and had been initiated in the subdeaconship;
consequently he was attached to the Christian faith. His father one day seized
him by the throat, and led him to the revolutionary tribunal, where he was
instantly condemned; nor would the barbarous father quit his child till he saw
his head severed from his body. After the execution was over, the tribunal,
ever as capricious as bloody, feigned remorse, and were proceeding to condemn
the father; but the National Convention, informed of the affair, annulled the
process, and publicly applauded the conduct of the unnatural ^ther, as an
imitator of the republican Brutus.

In the extracts from the history of the French clergy, the proposed limits of
this work has obliged me to forego the pleasure of mentioning a great number of
facts, which reflect infinite honor on that calumniated and unfortunate body
of men, as well as on the Christian religion. The following trait, however, I
cannot prevail on myself to omit.

PAGE 341.
At Rheims lived a man, who, from the number of his years, might be called the
dean of Christendom; and, from the fame of his virtues, the priest, by
excellence. He had long been known by no other name than that of the holy
priest. This was Mr. Pacquot, rector of St. John's. When the revolutionary
assassins broke into his oratory, they found him on his knees. A true and
faithful disciple of Jesus Christ, he yielded himself into the hands of his
executioners without so much as a murmur, and suffered himself to be led before
the ferocious magistrate, as a lamb to the slaughter. He crossed the street
singing the psalms of David, while the sanguinary ruffians that conducted him,
endeavored to drown his voice by their blasphemies. At the threshold of the
town hall an attempt was made to murder him, but the mayor interfered, saying
to the people, What are you about? This old fellow is beneath notice. He is a
fool: fanaticism has turned his brain. -- These words roused the venerable old
man. No, Sir, says he, I am neither a fool nor a fanatic, nor shall my life
take refuge under such an ignominious shelter. I wish you to know, that I was
never more in my sober senses. These men have rendered me an oath, decreed by
the National Assembly. I am well acquainted with the nature of this oath: I
know that it is impious, and subversive of religion. They leave me the choice
of the oath or death, and I choose the latter. I hope, Sir, I have convinced
you, that I am in my senses, and know perfectly well what I am about. -- The
nettled magistrate immediately abandoned him to the mob. "Which of you," said
the old man, is to have the patriotic honor of being my murderer? -- "I am,"
says a man who moved in a sphere that ought to have distinguished him from a
horde of ruffians. Let me embrace you then, says Mr. Pacquot; which he actually
did, and prayed to God to forgive him. This done, the hard-hearted villain gave
him the first blow, and his companions buried their bayonets in his emaciated
breast.

The reader's heart, I hope, will teach him the love and veneration, that every
christian ought to feel for the memory of this evangelical old man.

If the death of all the murdered priests was not marked with such unequivocal
proofs of constancy and fidelity as that of Mr. Pacquot, it was, perhaps,
because a like opportunity did not always present itself. One thing we know;
that, by taking an oath contrary to their faith, they might not only have
escaped the knives of their assassins, but might have enjoyed an annual income.
Their refusing to do this is an incontrovertible testimony, that they were no
impostors or hypocrites, but sincere believers of the religion they taught, and
that they valued that religion more than life itself; and, this is the best
answer that can possibly be given to all the scandalous and atrocious calumnies
that their enemies and the enemies of Christianity have vomited forth against
them.

CHAP. II.
FACTS taken from La Relation des Cruautes, commises dans Les Lyonnois.

THE next work that presents itself, following the chronological order, is La
Relation des Cruautes, commises dans Les Lyonnois, or, The Relation of the
Cruelties, committed in the Lyonnese.

PAGE 37.
The grand scene of destruction and massacre was opened, in the
once-flourishing and opulent city of Lions, by a public profanation of all
those things, that had been looked upon as sacred. The murderers in chief,
chosen from among the members of the National Convention, were a play-actor and
a man who, under the old government, had been a bum-bailiff. Their first step
was to brutify the minds of the populace; to extinguish the remaining sparks of
humanity and religion, by teaching them to set heaven and an hereafter at
defiance; in order to prepare them for the massacres, which they, were
commissioned to execute.

A mock procession was formed, in imitation of those observed by the catholic
church. It was headed by a troop of men bearing in their hands the chalices and
other vases which had been taken from the plundered churches, At the head of
the procession there was an Ass, dressed in the vestments of the priests that
the revolutionary army had murdered in the neighborhood of the city, with a
mitre on his head. This beast, a beast of the same kind on which our Redeemer
rode, now bore a load of crucifixes, and other symbols of the christian
religion; having the old and new testament tied to his tail. When this
procession came to the spot which had been fixed on for the purpose, the bible
was burnt, and the Ass given to drink out of the sacramental cup, amidsts the
shouts and rejoicing of the blasphemous assistants.

Such a beginning plainly foretold what was to follow. An undistinguished
butchery of all the rich immediately commenced. Hundreds of persons, women as
well as men, were taken out of the city at a time, tied to trees, shot to
death, stabbed, or else knocked on the head. In the city the guillotine never
ceased a moment; it was shifted three times; holes were dug at each place to
receive the blood, and yet it ran in the gutters.

It were impossible to describe this scene of carnage, or to give an account of
each act of the, till now, unheard of barbarity: two or three, however, demand
a particular mention.

PAGE 39.
Madame Lauras, hearing that her husband was condemned, went, accompanied with
her ten children, and threw herself on her knees before the ferocious Collot
D'herbois, one of the members of the Convention; but no mercy could be expected
from a wretch whose business it was to kill. She followed her beloved husband
to the place of execution, surrounded with her weeping offspring. On seeing him
fall, her cries and the wildness of her looks but two plainly foretold her
approaching end. She was seized with the pains of a premature childbirth, and
was carried home to her house, where a commissary soon after arrived, drove her
from her bed and her house, from the door of which she fell dead into the
street.

PAGE 41.
Two women, who had persisted in asking the life of their husbands, were tied,
during six hours, to the posts of the guillotine. Their own husbands were
executed before their eyes, and their blood sprinkled over them.

PAGE. 42.
Miss Servan, a young lady of about eighteen, was put to death because she
would not discover the retreat of her father.

PAGE 47.
Madam Cochet was condemned for having put the match to a cannon during the
siege, and for having assisted in her husband's escape. She was declared by two
surgeons, to be with child; but this was a reason of little weight with men
whom we shall by-and-by see murdering infants, and even ripping them from the
womb. She was instantly executed.

PAGE 101.
To these facts I shall add the death of Maupetit. He was made prisoner during
the siege, buried alive up to his neck, and in this situation had his head
mashed to pieces with small cannon balls, which his enemies tossed at it with
all the insulting grimaces of savages.

PAGE 104.
At Lions the priests met with the same treatment as at other places, and
honored their deaths with the same unshaken fortitude. Twenty seven were
executed at one time, not one of whom had condescended to accept of the
shameful conditions that were offered, nor even to solicit a pardon from the
vile and blasphemous assassins.

During this murderous work the city of Lions was struck with terror. The
members of the convention stuck up a proclamation, declaring all those, who
should express the least symptoms of pity, suspected persons. When the blood
had in some measure, ceased to flow, and the affrighted inhabitants ventured
out of their houses, they were seen walking along the streets with their eyes
fixed on the ground: men no longer stopped, shook hands, and gave each other
good morrow. The fear of death was stamped on every face: children durst not
ask after their parents, nor parents ask after their children.

The villages round about shared in the fate of the city. An apostate priest
conducted a gang of ruffians, who carried fire and death before them among
those good people, whose only crime was giving shelter to persons escaped from
the massacre. The charitable host and his affrighted guest were butchered
together beneath the hospitable roof, while the wives and daughters were
reserved to satisfy the brutal appetites of the murderers.

In vain should I attempt to give the reader an adequate idea of the crimes,
committed, by the order of the Convention, in this part of France. The author
of La Conjuration de Robespierre says (page 159) that in the space of a few
months, the number of persons, who were murdered in the Lyonnese and in the
surrounding forests, amounted to two hundred thousand.

I shall conclude this chapter with a fact or two taken from La Conjuration de
Robespierre.

PAGE 210.
Though no torments could go beyond the merits of Robespierre and his
colleagues, yet, even in the execution of these monsters, the Parisians
discovered such traits of ferociousness as fully proved, that these grovelling
tyrants had done no more than what they themselves would have done, had they
been in their places.

Robespierre had been wounded in his head and face; his jaws were held together
with bandages; and the executioner, before he placed his neck under the
guillotine, suddenly tore off the bandages, letting his under jaw fall, while
the blood streamed down his breast. The poor deserted wretch was kept some time
in this frightful state, while the air resounded with the acclamations of the
barbarous populace.

PAGE 209.
Henriot had no other cloths on but a shirt and a waistcoat, covered with dirt
and blood. His hair was clotted, and his assassinating hands were now stained
with his own gore. He had been wounded all over, one eye he kept shut, while
the other was started from its socket, and held only by the fibers. This horrid
spectacle, from which the imagination turns with disgust and affright, excited
the joy, and even the mirth of the Parisians. Look at the scoundrel, said they,
just as he was when he assisted in murdering the priests. The people called on
the carts to stop, and a group of women performed a dance round that in which
the capital offenders rode. -- When Henriot was stepping from the cart to the
scaffold, one of the underexecutioners, to divert the spectators, tore out the
eye that was already loose. -- What a hard-hearted wretch must he be who could
perform an action like this? and to what a degree of baseness and ferocity must
that people be arrived, who could thus be diverted?

PAGE 163.
We shall not be surprised that this thirst for human blood, and delight ^n
beholding the torments of the dying, were become so prevalent, when we know,
that mock executions was become a sport. The women suspended to the necks of
their sucking infants, corals, made in the shape of the guillotine; which the
child, by the means of a spring, played as perfectly as the bloody executioner
himself.

PAGE 161.
What could be expected from an education like this? What could be expected
from children who were taught to use an instrument of ignominious death as a
plaything; who were taught to laugh at the screams of the dying, and who, in a
manner, sucked in blood with their mothers' milk? When assassinations became
the sports of children, it was no wonder that the sentiments of nature were
extinguished, and that perfidy and inhumanity took place of gratitude, filial
piety, and all the tender affections.

What I am now going to relate, the mothers of future generations will hear
with affright. -- A child of ten years of age had been scolded, perhaps
whipped, by his mother. He ran to the revolutionary tribunal, and accused her
of being still attached to the catholic religion. The accusation was admitted,
the boy recompensed, and the mother executed in a few hours afterward.

Tell us, ye mothers, for you only can know, what this poor creature must feel
at seeing herself betrayed, and ready to be deprived of life, by the child she
had borne in her womb, who but the other day hung at her breast, and for whom
alone, perhaps, she wished to live.

PAGE 162
In short, says the author, men contracted such a taste as excites horror even
to believe it possible. God forbid that I should enter into particulars on this
subject. The bowels of the reader would not permit him to proceed. Suffice it
to say, that we have seen the time, when man was becoming the food of man.
Those who practiced anatomy during the reign of terror, know but too well what
I could say here, if compassion for the feelings of my readers did not prevent
me.

I cannot quit these facts without once more refering the reader to the work,
from which I have selected them. I wish him not to depend on my veracity, for
the truth of what he may find in a book written on the scene. La Conjuration de
Robespierre is to be had almost any where: I have seen above a dozen copies of
it in the hands of different persons. It was, as I have already said, published
at Paris, and, therefore, we may rest assured, that the author has not
exaggerated; but, on the contrary, we see by the last article here quoted, that
he was afraid to say all that truth would have warranted.

CHAP. III.
FACTS selected from the Proces-Criminel des Members du Comite Revolutionnaire
de Nantes, et du ci-devant Representant du peuple Carrier; or, Trial of the
Members of the Revolutionary Committee at Nantz, and of the Representative
Carrier.

THE work which we are now entering on was published at Paris during the last
year; but, as an introduction to the facts extracted from it, it will be
necessary to give the reader a concise sketch of the progress of the Revolution
down to the epoch when the work was published.

The Sates-General, consisting of the three orders, the Nobility, the Clergy,
and the Tiers-Etat, or commonalty, were assembled on the 4th of May, 1789. The
deputies were all furnished with written instructions in which they were
positively enjoined to make no innovations as to the form of government.
Notwithstanding this, it is well known, they framed a constitution by which the
government was totally changed, the nobility abolished, and the church rent
from that of Rome. Their constitution, however, though established at the
expense of thousands of lives, and though one of the most ridiculous systems of
government that ever was invented, did not fail to meet with partisans; and we
have heard it exotolled in this country as the masterpiece of human wisdom.

This first Assembly, which has been commonly called the Constituent Assembly,
ended its benificent labors on the 30th of September, 1791, and was
immediately succeeded by another, which took the name of the Legislative
Assembly. Most men of sense foresaw that the second Assembly would improve upon
the plan of destruction marked out by the first. The Clergy and many men of
family and fortune had been already driven from their homes and possessions, it
remained for the Legislative Assembly to finish the work by seizing on their
property and exposing it to sale: this they failed not to do. Persecution and
massacre increased daily; but as the small remains of power left in the hands
of the king was still an obstacle, or rather as the monarchy itself was an
obstacle, they were determined to get rid of it. On the 10th of August, 1792,
the king was dethroned (his fate is well known) and the daggers of the
assassins were from that moment drawn, never more to be sheathed, but in the
heart of some innocent victim. We have already seen something of the massacres
which followed this event at Paris and other places; but even these are trifles
to what was to follow.

On the 21st of September, 1792, the third Assembly, generally called the
National Convention, opened their sessions, and, though every individual member
had repeatedly taken an oath to maintain the authority of the king, they at
once declared France to be a republic.

After the murder of the king, this Convention declared war against a great
part of the powers of Europe; and, in order to be in a situation to make head
against their enemies, seized on all the precious metals in the country, or
rather they enacted such laws as obliged the poor oppressed people to bring it
to their treasury, and receive in exchange a vile and worthless paper money.
The churches were instantly pillaged, and no person dared appear with a watch,
or any other article in gold or silver.

The violation of property was only a part of their plan. The hearts of the
lower orders of the people were to be hardened; they were to be rendered
brutal; all fear of an hearafter was to be rooted from their souls, before they
could be fit instruments in the hands of this hellish Assembly. With this
object in view, they declared our blessed Lord and redeemer to be an Impostor,
forbade the acknowledgement of him, and the exercise of his worship. The
churches were turned into prisons, stables, etc. and over the gateways of the
burial grounds were written: This is the place of eternal sleep. Never surely
was there a better plan for transforming a civilized people into a hoard of
cutthroats. It succeeded completely. The blood now flowed at Paris in an
unceasing stream. A permanent tribunal was established, whose only business was
to condemn, and certify to the Convention that the executions went on according
to the lists sent from its committees.

Besides legions of executioners there were others of assassins. The command of
these latter was given to those members of the Convention who were sent into
the different parts of the country. Terror preceded these harbingers of death,
and their footsteps were marked with blood. The sword, the fire, and the water,
all became instruments of destruction.

During this murdering time, which has justly assumed the name of the reign of
terror, the leaders of several factions of the revolutionists themselves
received their reward on a scaffold, and, among others, Robespierre and his
accomplices. When these men fell, the Convention, according to its usual
custom, ascribed all the cruelties, committed during sometime before their
death, to them alone, and the people, always eager for blood, now demanded the
heads of those whom they had assisted in the murder of their countrymen. By
sacrificing these its instruments, the Convention saw a fair opportunity of
removing the infamy from itself, and of perpetuating its power. In consequence,
many of them were tried and executed, and among others Carrier (a member of the
Convention) who had been stationed at Nantz, with the members of the
revolutionary committee of that unfortunate town. From the trial of these men
it is that I have selected the facts which are to compose this chapter. The
trial was before the tribunal at Paris, to which place the accused were carried
from Nantz.

It has been repeatedly asserted, by those who seem to have more attachment to
the cause of the French than to that of truth, that the barbarities committed
in that country, have been by the hands of foreigners. Such a story is
impossible, and even ridiculous; but however, it has induced me to insert here
a list of the barbarous wretches who were so long the scourge of the city of
Nants, from which it will appear, that they were all Frenchmen, born and bred.
This is an act of justice due to other nations.

Member of the Convention on mission at Nantz.
Carrier, born at Nantz.
Members of the Revolutionary Committee at Nantz.
Goullin born at Nantz. Chaux born at Nantz. Grand-Maison born at Nantz.
Bachelier born at Nantz. Perrochaux born at Nantz. Mainguet born at Nantz. Naud
born at Nantz. Gallen born at Nantz. Durassier born at Nantz. Leveque, born at
Mayenne. Bolognie, born at Paris. Bataille, born at Charite-sur-Loire. Joly,
born at Angerville-la-Martel. Pinard, born at Christople-Dubois.
Carrier was the great mover, the assassin-general; the committee were his
agents. Some of them were always assembled in their hall, to give directions to
the undermurderers, while the others took repose, or were dispatched on
important expedition, such as the shooting or drowning of hundreds at a time.
They stood in need, however, of subaltern cutthroats, more determined and
bloody than the people in general; and therefore they raised a company, who
took the title of the company of Marat, composed of the vilest wretches that
were to be found. These being assembled together took the following oath before
their employers.

VOL. IV. PAGE 203.
I swear, to pursue unto death, all royalists, fanatics (christians Fanatic is
the name now given to all who remain attached to the Christian Religion.
) gentlemen (the french word is muscadim, which means a gentleman, or
well-dressed man) and moderates (moderate people) under whatever color, mask,
or form, they may appear.

I swear, to spare neither parents nor relations; to sacrifice my personal
interests, and even friendship itself; and to acknowledge for parents, brothers
and friends, nobody but the patriots, the ardent defenders of the republic.

Pity with me, reader, the poor unhappy people that were to become the prey of
a set of bloodhounds like these. Pity the aged parents and the helpless babes,
that were to bleed beneath their merciless sabres. If you are not endowed with
uncommon fortitude, I could almost advise you to advance no further: fifty
times has the pen dropped from my trembling hand: Oh! how I pity the historian
that is to hand these bloody deeds down to our shuddering and indignant
posterity!

VOL. I. PAGE. 66.
Tronjolly, a witness, informs the tribunal, that the Company of Marat was at
first composed of sixty persons; that Goullin openly proposed that none but the
most infamous villains should be admitted into it: and, at each nomination,
cried out, Is there no greater scoundrel to be found?

On the 24th of October, says the witness, I heard Goullin and his colleagues
say, that they were going to give a great example; that the prisoners should be
all shot. I attest that this scene was still more horrible than that of the 22d
and 23d of September. The Company of Marat were carousing round a table, and at
the same time it was deliberated whether the prisoners should not be massacred
by hundreds. In this deliberation, Coullin was for indiscriminate death: and
thus were the prisoners, without ever being interrogated, or heard, condemned
to die. There existed no proofs of guilt against these unfortunate prisoners;
they were what were called suspected persons; the felons, and all real
criminals were set at liberty.

Carrier, in quality of member of the Convention, had placed a vile wretch at
Pain-boeuf, name Foucault, to whom he gave an absolute power of life and death.

^^^^^ing of men, women, and children. (...) men and women (...) together ^
called republican (...).


VOL. I. PAGE 68.
Old men, women with child, and children, were drowned, no distinction. They
were put on board of lighters, which were railed round to keep the prisoners
from jumping overboard if they should happen to disengage themselves. There
were plugs made in the bottom, or sides, which, being pulled out, the lighter
sunk, and all in it were drowned. These expeditions were first carried on by
night, but the sun soon beheld the murderous work. At first the prisoners were
drowned in their cloths; this, however, appeared too merciful* to expose the
two sexes naked before each other was a pleasure that the ruffians could not
forego.

I must now, says the witness, speak of a new sort of cruelty. The young men
and women were picked out from among the mass of sufferers, stripped naked, and
tied together, face to face. After being kept in this situation about an hour,
they were put into an open lighter; and, after receiving several blows on the
skull with the but of a musket, thrown into the water. These were called
republican marriages.

VOL. I. PAGE 72.
On the 26th of October, Carrier, the member of the Convention, ordered me (the
witness was a judge of some sort) to guillotine indiscriminately all the
Vendeans who came to give themselves up. I refused; but the representative of
the people promised that his prey should not escape him thus. In short, on the
29th, he had guillotined twenty seven Vendeans, among whom were children of
thirteen, fourteen and fifteen, years of age, and seven young women, the oldest
of which was not above twenty nine. On the same day twenty other persons were
executed without trial.

VOL. I. PAGE 76.
Carrier, the bloodiest of the bloody, harrangued his agents sword in hand; he
ordered a woman to be shot at her window, merely because she looked at him; he
chose, from among the female prisoners those whom he thought worthy of his foul
embraces; and* after being satiated with their charms, sent them to the
guillotine.

Observe well, reader, that this was a member of the National Convention, a
representative of the people, a lawgiver.

VOL. IV. PAGE 155.
I think it necessary to bring in here a deposition or two from the third and
fourth volumes of the trial, as they will show at once the pretended and real
motives of the member of the Convention and his committee.

Jomard, a witness, declares that, when the general was beat at Nantz, and the
seizure of suspected persons began, nobody believed any thing of a conspiration
against the republic. As a clear proof of this, adds Jomard, Richard, one of
the agents of the revolutionary committee, wrote to his friend Crespin, telling
him that he had left the company of Marat without arms; but that means were
found out to arm the patriots and disarm the suspected. The general, adds
Richard, is now beating; but do not frighten yourself; I will tell you the
reason of this at your return.

VOL. III. PAGE 58.
Latour, a witness, says, I was sick; Dulny, who was my doctor, informed me
that Goudet, public accuser, had let him into an important secret; which was,
that Carrier and the revolutionary committee not knowing how to squeeze the
rich, had fell upon a plan to imprison them, while they seized on their
effects. In order to have a pretext for doing this, said Goudet, we shall give
out, that there exists a conspiration against the republic. I am to make the
general beat early in the morning. The sans-culottes This degrading term, which
is become the glory of modern patriots, literally means, men without breeches;
but it was ever used by the French to designate vile, rascally people, the
dregs of society; and as such we ought now to understand it.
, informed beforehand, are to parade at their different posts; the rich, and
the timid, will, according to custom, remain in their houses; to these houses
the sans-culottes are to repair, pillage all they have, and convey them to
prison.

Notwithstanding my illness, I had no inclination to be found at home; I
therefore begged the doctor to give me notice when the affair was to take
place, which he promised to do. In three days after he informed me that the
general would beat the next morning. In spite of my sickness I went to my post.
We were all the day under arms, and a great number of rich people were pillaged
and imprisoned, some guillotined.

I attest, adds the witness, that there was not the least appearance of any
conspiration. All was a dead calm; terror and consternation alone reigned in
the city. More than three thousand victims to lust and avarice were this day
lodged in loathsome dungeons, from whence they were never to be released but to
be led to slaughter.

I shall now insert an article or two that will give the reader an idea of the
manner of proceeding of these sans-culottes.

VOL. IV. PAGE 157.
One of the members of the revolutionary committee, with a company of armed
ruffians, went to the house of one Careil. They first examined all the papers,
took 5000 livres in paper money, and 12 louis d'ors. They returned again in the
evening, says the witness, who it seems was mistress of the house; we, at first
took them for common thieves, and therefore our alarm was not so great; but, to
our sorrow, we were soon convinced by the voice of Pinard, that they were the
patriots of the revolutionary committee. Our family was composed of women and
one old man. There was myself; four sisters-in-law, formerly nuns; two old
relations above eighty years of age, and my husband. The house and yard were
stripped of every thing, and the ruffians were talking of setting fire to the
buildings. One of my sisters had made shift to preserve 800 livres; she offered
them these to save the house; they accept the conditions, receive the money,
and then burn the house to the ground.

Our persons were now all that remained to be disposed of. There was a
one-horse chair; but which was too good for any of us; it was fastened to the
tail of a cart into which we were put (my husband, an old and infirm man being
obliged to walk in the rear) and thus were dragged, preceded by our plundered
property, to that gang of cutthroats, called the revolutionary committee. Here
our complaints were in a moment stiffled. Pinard said, that his orders were to
burn all, and kill all. The committee were astonished and offended at his
clemency, and reprimanded him severely for not having murdered us according to
his orders.

I, my sisters, and our poor old relations were sent to one prison, and my
husband to another. My husband died, and we are only left alive to weep and
starve.

It is well worth the readers while to hear what this Pinard said in his
defense, on this head.

VOL. IV. PAGE 162.
We acted, says he, by the order of the Representative of the People, Carrier.
When I went, at my return, to carry him the church-plate that I had taken from
the nuns, he would insist upon my drinking out of the chalice (or sacramental
cup) and asked me why I had not killed all the damned bitches.

I shall here observe, once for all, that these volumes contain a series of
robberies of this sort. Sometimes the plunder was divided among the plunderers,
sometimes it was delivered to Carrier, and at others it was deposited with the
revolutionary committee. These latter imposed immense taxes, or rather
contributions, on the people, under pretense of assisting the sans-cullottes,
but which were applied to their own uses. It is just to observe also, that the
tribunal at Paris, before which they were brought to answer for their crimes,
appears to have snown much more anxiety about the gold and silver, than about
the lives of the murdered persons.

VOL. V. PAGE 15.
Mariotte, a witness, informs the tribunal that he was detached on a party to
seven miles distant from Nantz. The party, says the witness, went into the
neighborhood of the forest of Rince, and took up their quarters in a house
occupied by Mrs. Chauvette. Five days after our arrival, came Pinard, about
midnight, and told us that we were in the house of an aristocrat. He bragged of
having that evening killed six women, and said that Chauvette should make the
seventh. He threatened her, and, to add to her torment, told her to comfort
herself, for that her child should die first. It is Pinard, adds he, that now
speaks to you; Pinard, that carries on the war against the female sex. I drew
my sword, continues the witness, and told Pinard that he should pass over my
dead body to come at the woman.

Commerais, who was another of this party, informs the tribunal, that Pinard
being thus stopped, Aubinet one of his companions said, stand aside while I cut
open the guts of that bitch. He did not succeed, however, adds this witness.
Now Marieuil came up, and swore he would have her life; but finding us in his
way, he said, you look like a good b -- ger enough; I have a word to say in
your ear. -- We only want, says he, to know where she has hidden 60,000 livres
belonging to a gentleman in the neighborhood. I answered, give me your word
not to hurt the woman nor her child, and I will bring her forth. He promised,
and I brought them out. The woman, seeing that she was conducted to a sort of
cellar, cried out, I know I am brought here to be murdered, like the women
whose throats were cut in this place yesterday. All the favor I ask, said she,
is that you will kill me before you kill my child. She was now questioned about
the money; but she continued her protestations of knowing nothing of it. Pinard
and Aubinet prepared again to assassinate her; but they did not succeed for
this time.

VOL. V. PAGE 16.
The same witness relates another adventure. When we were going hence, says he,
toward the forest of Rince, we heard a man, in a little wood, crying for help.
We found Pinard, and two other horsemen each having a piece of linen under his
arm. We left them, and soon after saw two poor peasants running away. In going
along among the brushwood, says the witness, I heard something rustle almost
under my feet: I knocked the bushes aside with my musket; what should it be but
two children. I gave one of them, who was seven years old, into the care of
Cedre, and kept the other, of five years old, myself. They both cried bitterly.
Their cries brought to us two women, their mothers, who were also hid among the
bushes; they threw themselves upon their knees, and besought us not to kill
their children. In quitting the wood Pinard came up with us, he had several
women, whom I saw him chop down, and murder with his sabre. What, says he to
me, are you going to do with those two children? stand away, says he, till I
blow out their brains. I opposed him, and while we were in dispute, two
volunteers brought an old man, stone-blind. This we now found was the
grandfather of the children. Pray, said the poor old man, take my life, and
preserve my little darlings. I told him that we would take care of them; he
wept and squeezed my hand. This unfortunate old man, adds the witness, was
murdered as well as the women.

Pinard quitted the high road in returning, for no other purpose but that of
murdering. He and his companions killed all they came at, men women and
children of all ages. To justify his barbarity, he produced the decree that
ordered him to spare neither sex nor age.

My reader will recollect, that the National Convention of France had abolished
negro-slavery; and he will also recollect, that the humanity of this measure
has been much applauded by those who have not penetration enough to see their
motive in so doing.

We shall now see what advantage this liberty proc^d to the unfortunate country
people ro^n^ Nantz. This city, from its commercial relations with the
West India islands, always contained a number of blacks who came to wait on
their masters, etc. As soon as the decree abolishing negro-slavery appeared,
these people claimed their rights as citizens; and, having no employment, they
were taken into the service of the republic, and placed under the orders of the
revolutionary committee. A party of these citizens were sent to assist in the
murders round the city, and we shall see that they were by no means wanting in
obedience to their employers.

VOL. V. PAGE 90.
An officer, named Ormes came, says a witness, to ask our assistance in favor
of five pretty women, whom the company of Americans (this was the word which
had taken place of that of negroes, because the Convention had forbidden any
one to call them negroes) had reserved for a purpose easily to be guessed at. A
party marched off, and soon came to the house where the blacks b^ lodged the
women. The poor creatures were crying and groaning; their sh^ks were to be
heard at half a mile. The party ordered the door to be opened, which was at
last done. They then demanded (...) women, no, replied the blacks, they are now
our slaves; we have earned them dear enough, and you shall tear them away limb
by limb, if you have them. We told these men, that, thanks to the salutary
decrees of the Convention, the French empire contained no slaves. The brutality
of the blacks would not permit them to listen to the voice of reason; they
prepared for the defense of their prey, when the party, always guided by
prudence, preferred retiring, to avoid slaughter.

Two days after, continues the witness, the Americans, satiated with their
captives, left them. One of these women, the handsomest in the eyes of the
blacks, had been obliged to endure the approaches of more than a hundred of
them. She was fallen into a kind of stupor, and was unable to walk or to stand.
The whole five were shot soon after.

I do not know which is most entitled to our detestation here, the brutal
negroes, or the pusillanimous, rascally Frenchmen, who were the witnesses of
their horrid deeds. Prudence taught these poltroons to retire, when they saw
five of their lovely countrywomen exposed to the nauseous embraces of a set of
filthy merciless monsters! They saw them bathed in tears, heard their
supplicating cries, were shocked at a sight the very idea of which rouses all
the feelings of manhood; but prudence taught them to retire! -- Savage
villains! prudence never taught you to retire from the drownings and shootings
of poor defenseless innocent priests, and women and children! It was not till
the blacks prepared to defend their prey, that prudence taught you to retire!

Some of the women, taken in the country, were suffered to die, or rather to be
murdered, in a less shocking way.

VOL. V. PAGE 35.
Nantz, 5 Ventose, second year of the French Republic.
Citizen Male is hereby ordered to conduct the forty women, under his care, to
the top of the cliff Pierre-Moine, and there throw them head foremost into the
sea.

(Signed) FOUCAULT.

We now come to the deposition of Georges Thomas, a health officer, who is one
among the few, even of the witnesses, that appears to have preserved some
remains of humanity. He tells such a tale of woe as I hope, and am persuaded,
the reader's heart will with difficulty support.

VOL. II. PAGE 147.
The revolutionary hospital, says the witness, was totally unprovided with
every necessary. The jail-fever made terrible ravages in all the houses of
detention; seventy five persons, or thereabout, died daily in this hospital.
There were nothing but rotten mattrasses, on each of which more than fifty
prisoners had breathed their last.

I went to Chaux, one of the committee, to ask for relief for the unhappy
wretches that remained here. We cannot do anything, said Chaux; but, if you
will, you may contribute to the cause of humanity by a way that I will point
out to you. That rascal Phillippes has 200,000 livers in his clutches which we
cannot come at. Now, if you will accuse him in form, and support your
accusation by witnesses that I will engage to furnish you with, I will grant
you, out of the sum, all that you want for the revolutionary hospital. At the
very mention of humanity from Chaux I was astounded: the latter part of his
proposal, however, brought me back to my man. I rejected it with the
indignation that it merited.

I attest, that the revolutionary comm^ of Nantz seized and impr^ (...) those
who were esteemed rich, men of talents, virtue and humanity.

I accuse this committee of having ordered, to my knowledge, the shooting or
drowning of between four and five hundred children, the oldest of which were
not more than fourteen years of age.

Minguet, one of the committee, had given me an order to choose two from among
the children, whom I intended to save from death and bring up. I chose one of
eleven years old, and another fourteen. The next day I went to the prison,
called the Entrepot, with several of my friends, whom I had prevailed on to ask
for some of these children. When we came, we found the poor little creatures
stood no longer in need of our interposition. They were all drowned. I attest,
that I saw in this prison, but the evening before, more than four hundred.

Having received an order from the military commissioners to go to the
Entrepot, to certify as to the pregnancy of a great number of women, I found,
in the entering this horrible slaughterhouse, a great quantity of dead bodies,
thrown here and there. I saw several infants, some yet palpitating, and others
drowned in tubs of human excrement. -- I hurried along through this ^e of
horror. My respect frightened the women: they had been accustomed to see none
but their butchers. I encouraged them; spoke to them the language of humanity.
I found that thirty of them were with child; several of them seven or eight
months. Some few days after I went again to see these unhappy creatures, whose
situation rendered them objects of compassion and tenderness; but -- (adds the
witness with a faultering voice) shall I tell you, they had been most inhumanly
murdered.

The further I advanced, continues the witness, the more was my heart appalled.
There were eight hundred women and as many children confined in the Entrepot
and in the Mariliere. There were neither beds, straw, nor necessary vessels.
The prisoners were in want of every thing. Doctor Rollin and myself saw five
children expire in less than four minutes. They received no kind of
nourishment. -- We asked the women in the neighborhood, if they could not lend
them some assistance. What would you have us do? said they, Grand-Maison
arrests every one that attempts to succor them.

VOL. II. PAGE 156.
The same witness says, I accuse the committee in general of the murder of
seven prisoners, whom, for want of time to examine them, they had hewn down
with sabres under the window of their hall.

The witness adds, Carrier and the committee, as well as their under-murderers,
used to turn the drownings into jests: they called them immersions, national
baptisms, vertical transportations, bathings, etc. I entered, says he, one day
a public house opposite the Bouffay, where I saw a waterman, named Perdreau. He
asked me for a pinch of snuff: for, says the ruffian, I have richly earned it;
I have just helped to dispatch seven or eight hundred. How, says I, do you
manage to make away with them so fast. Nothing so easy, replied he; when I have
a bathing match, I strip them naked, two men with their bayonets push them tied
two and two into my boat, whence they go souse into the water, with a broken
skull.

VOL. II. PAGE 151.
Vaujois, a witness, says; I wrote ten times to the administrators of the
district, and went often to the revolutionary committee to request, that
something should be done for the poor children in prison; but could obtain
nothing. At last I ventured to speak to Carrier, who replied, in a passion; You
are a counter-revolutionist: no pity: they are young vipers, that must be
destroyed. -- If I had acted of myself, says the witness, I should have shared
their fate.

One day in entering the Entrepot, a citizen of Nantz saw a great heap of
corpses: they were all of children: many were still palpitating and struggling
with death. The man looked at them for some time, saw a child move its arm, he
seized it, ran home with it, and had the good luck to save it from death and
its more terrible mininisters.

Here Thomas is again questioned, and he attests, that the revolutionary
committee issued an order, commanding all those who had taken children from the
prisons, to carry them back again; and this, adds the witness, for the pure
pleasure of having them murdered.

VOL. IV. PAGE 245.
Cossirant, a witness deposes that it was proposed to shoot some of the
prisoners en mass; The French expression is preserved here. It is to be hoped
that it will never be adopted in the language of any other country. Its meaning
is, in multitudes.
but that the proposal was rejected. However, says he, as I was returning home
one evening, I met Ramor, who told me that the shooting was at that moment
going on. As I heard no noise I could not believe him; but I was not suffered
to remain long in doubt. A fellow came up to me covered with blood: that is the
way we knock them off, my boy, says he. Seven hundred had been shot that
afternoon.

VOL. IV. PAGE 256.
Debourges, a witness, says: I have seen, during six days, nothing but
drownings, guillotinings and shootings. Being once on guard, I commanded a
detachment that conducted the fourth mass of women to be shot at Gigan. When I
arrived, I found the dead bodies of Seventy five women already stretched on the
spot. They were quite naked. I was informed that they were girls from fifteen
to eighteen years of age. When they had the misfortune not to fall dead after
the shot, they were dispatched with sabres.

VOL. II. PAGE 244.
Naud, one of the accused, says: I saw a red-headed general, named Hector, at
the head of a detachment conducting prisoners to the meadow of the Mauves.
Castrie and I followed him. When we came they were preparing to fire; but we
made shift to save a few of the children.

VOL. I. PAGE 27.
Labenette, a witness, informs the tribunal, that the revolutionary committee
ordered to be stuck on all the walls of the city, a decree forbidding all
fathers, mothers, husbands, wives, children, relations, or friends, to solicit
the pardon of any prisoner whatever.

I was also witness of the drowning of ninety priests, two of whom, who were
decrepid old men, by some accident or other escaped; but were retaken and
murdered. Indeed, adds this witness, I have been an eye witness of several
drownings of men, women with child, girls, boys, infants, indiscriminately. I
have also seen of all these descriptions shot in the public square, and at
other places. The national guard of the city was employed during six weeks in
filling up the ditches, into which the massacred persons were thrown. I was
doctor to one of the prisons, and was like to be displaced, because I was too
humane.

VOL. I. PAGE 60.
Carrier sent for the president of the military commission. It is you then,
says he, Mr. son of a bitch, that has dared to give orders contrary to mine.
Mind; if you have not emptied the Entrepot in two hours, I will have your head,
and the heads of all the commission. -- It is not necessary to add, that he was
obeyed.

VOL. I. PAGE 103.
Tronjolly, a witness, says, that Chaux expressed his disapprobation of the law
of the 14th of September. It is a great pity, said he, it ever was made;
without that, we would have reduced the inhabitants of Nantz to a handful. --
Carrier was consulted, adds this witness, with respect to receiving money to
save the lives of the (...); but the merciful Representative of the people
answered. No compositions: the guillotine; the guillotine; and take their money
afterward. -- Three women, too charming certainly, since they attracted the
desires of the ferocious Carrier, had the misfortune to be chosen for the
tigers pleasures. He first sacrificed them to his brutal lust, and then sent
them to augment the mass of a massacre.

VOL. II. PAGE. 175.
The widow Dumey, a witness, says, that she is the widow of the late keeper of
the Entrepot; that she saw fifty priests brought there, and robbed of all their
money and effects; and that they were afterward drowned, with some women and
little children. She adds, twenty-four men and four women were taken out one
day. A child of fourteen years was tied with others to be drowned, his cries
for his papa were enough to pierce the heart of a tiger; Lambertye, tied him,
however, and drowned him with the rest.

Fouquet, the companion of Lambertye, said on this occasion, that he had
already helped to dispatch nine thousand, and that if they would but let him
alone for twenty four hours, he would sweep all the prisons of Nantz.

VOL. II. PAGE 186.
Lacaille, keeper of another prison, called the Bouffay, gives a circumstantial
account of one of the drownings.

The horrid night, says the witness, of the 23d of October, two soldiers of the
Company of Marat came to the Bouffay, each with a bundle of cords. About nine
o'clock they told me there were one hundred and fifty five prisoners, whom they
were to transfer to Belle -- Isle, to work at a fortress. About an hour after
arrived thirty or forty more of these soldiers. An order from the committee was
produced for the delivery of one hundred and fifty five of my prisoners. I
observed to them, that several of the prisoners on the list were now at
liberty, or in the hospitals.

They now set down to table, and after having supped, and drank heartily, they
brought out their cords, and diverted themselves a while in tying each other,
as they intended to tie the prisoners. I then conducted them to the rooms where
the prisoners were lodged. They instantly fall to work tying the poor trembling
wretches two and two.

Grand-Maison now entered the court yard, and hollowed out to them to dispatch.
Goullin came stamping and swearing, because the number on the list could not be
completed. There were so many sick and dead that they could not well be made
up. I sent you fifteen this evening, says Goullin, what have you done with
them? I told him they were up-stairs. Down with them, says he. I obeyed, and
they were tied, like the rest. Instead of one hundred and fifty five, Goullin
at last consented to take one hundred and twenty nine; but this number not
being complete, the equitable and tenderhearted Goullin orders the remainder
to be taken from the prisoners indistinctly; and when this was done he marches
off at the head of the assassins to conduct them to the river, where they were
all drowned.

VOL. II. PAGE 204.
The widow Mallet, who had first been robbed of her property, and then
imprisoned gives an account of the manner in which she and her companions in
captivity were treated.

I complained, says this poor woman, to Perrocheaux of a violent sore throat.
That is good, said he, the guillotine will cure you of that.

One day Jolly asked if I was not the widow Mallet, and giving me a look, that
makes me tremble even now, aye, says he, she shall drink out of the great cup.

In the house where we were confined, there were a great number of beautiful
pictures. Some men were sent one day by the committee to tear them to pieces,
which they did, leaving only one which represented death, and jeering with
savage irony, contemplate that image, said they, to cheer your hearts.

We were in want of every necessary. Seven hundred of us were confined in this
house, which, even as a prison was too small for two hundred. Forty were
crammed into one little chamber. During six or seven months we had no
infirmary, or rather each appartment was one. The sick and dead were often
extended on the floor among the living. How many have I seen struggling in the
pangs of death by my side.

Grand-Maison told me one day of an old quarrel: times are altered, says he,
now, I have you under my clutches.

Durassier came one day drunk, and began to make out a list for excution. His
oaths and imprecations made us tremble; I was on the fatal list, and I know not
how I have escaped.

My old servant went to solicit for my removal, representing me as dangerously
ill. Perrocheaux said to her: let her die, you silly bitch, and then we shall
have her house, and you will fare better with us than with her.

VOL. II. PAGE 215.
Brejot, a witness, says: there were some women going to be shot; one of them
had a child of eleven months old at her breast, which the assassins would have
shot with its mother, had not a soldier snatched it from her arms. The babe was
carried by a woman to Gourlay, a surgeon, who had the compassion to take care
of it.

VOL. II. PAGE 217.
Fournies, a witness, says, that there were at one time, to his knowledge
ninety six priests drowned in the Loire. Adds he, four of them got on board a
Dutch sloop lying in the river; but were retaken and drowned the nex day.
Foucault, in boasting of the second drowning of these priests, showed, in a
company, where I was, a pair of shoes he then wore, which he had taken from the
feet of one of them.

VOL. II. PAGE 220.
Jane Lallies, a young woman, confined on the general accusation of being an
aristocrat, informs the tribunal, that she was made cook in the prison. One
night, says she, a number of the Company of Marat came to the prison. One
Girardeau conducted the troop. Come, my lads, says he, I must go and see my
birds in the cage. Ducon, seeing some of the prisoners weep, what the devil do
you howl for, says he, we want provisions here, and we are going to send you
off to get us some, that is all.

Cr^in, said to me, in giving me several blows with his naked sword: march,
bitch, light us along: we are masters now: your turn will soon come, when there
is no better game.

Come, come, my little singing birds, said Jolly; out of your ne^ts, and make
up your packets, and above all do not forget your pocket-books; that is the
main point; no cheating the nation. Ducon said a side to Durassier; are not
they surely bit? Finding they did not prepare themselves quick enough, he adds;
come, come, time to dress them, time to shoot them, time to knock their brains
out -- I think that is plenty of time for them.

Durassier kept bawling out, quick, b -- gers, march. To a sick man, who walked
with a stick, he said: you want no stick; march like the rest, b -- gers; you
shall soon have a stick, with the devil to you.

Ducon, as he went away, said to the keeper, good-bye for this time; we shall
come again soon to ease you of the rest: I think we have a pretty smart haul
for once. -- These poor souls were all drowned.

VOL. II. PAGE 222.
Mrs. Pichot, living by the water side at Nantz, says, that she saw the
carpenters busy constructing the lighters for drowning the prisoners; and soon
after, says the witness, I saw, brought to be drowned at the Crepuscule, a
great number of women, many of whom had sucking children in their arms. They
screamed and cried most piteously. Oh! said they, must we be put to death
without being heard!

Several poor women of the neighborhood ran and took a child a piece, and some
two, from them. Upon this the poor creatures shrieked and tore their hair worse
than before. -- Oh! my dear, my love, my darling babe! am I never to see your
dear face again! Heavens protect my poor dear little love! -- Such
heart-piercing cries were surely never before heard! yet these could not soften
the hell hounds that conducted them.

Many of these women were far advanced with child. All were taken into the
boats; a part were immediately dispatched, and the rest put on board the Dutch
sloop, till the next day.

When the next day arrived, says the witness, though we were all terror-struck,
many had the courage to ask for a child a piece of those that were left alive;
but the hard hearted villain, Fouquet, refused, pretending his orders were
changed, and all that remained on board the sloop were drowned.

VOL. II. PAGE 223.
The same witness says: One day I saw several prisoners, brought from the
Entrepot, deposited in a lighter with a neck. They were fastened under hatches,
where they were left for forty eight hours. When the hatches were opened, they
were sixty of them stiffled. Other prisoners that were now on board were
obliged to take out the bodies. Robin stood on the deck with his drawn sword in
his hand, and superintended the work. This done, all the prisoners on board
were stripped naked, men, women and children of all ages from fourscore to
five; their hands were tied behind them, and they were thrown into the river.

Here the judge, if we ought to call a sansculotte ruffian a judge, asked the
witness if this drowning was performed by day, or by night. By open day,
answers the witness. She adds, I observed that the drowners became very
familiar with the prettiest of the women; and some few of them were saved, if
it can be called saving, to endure the more than infernal embraces of these
monsters.

VOL. II. PAGE 227.
Delamarre informs the tribunal, that there was a heap formed of the bodies of
the women, who had been shot, and that the soldiers, laughing, called this
horrible spectacle the mountain, alluding to the mountain of the National
Convention.

VOL. II. PAGE 231.
Foucault having said one day to Bachelier, that he had two cargoes to dispatch
that night, Bachelier slings his arms round his neck, saying, you are a brave
fellow, the best revolutionist I know among them all.

This same Foucault fired at his father with a pistol; and was looked upon as
the inventor of the plugged-lighters for drowning the prisoners.

Delassal, who appears to have been an officer of police, tells the tribunal,
that one day, he had taken up a woman of bad fame, who lived with Lambertye,
one of the chief drowners. He came to my house, says the witness, in a rage,
abused my wife, and casting a ferocious look at my childern: poor (...) says
he, I pity you; to morrow you will be fatherless.

VOL. II. PAGE 252.
Coron, one of the company of Marat, informs the tribunal, that he had seven
thousand five hundred persons shot at the Gigan, and four thousand he had
assisted to drown.

VOL. II. PAGE 254.
Sophy Bretonville, a witness, attests, that Perrocheaux came several times to
her fathers, under pretense of speaking to her mother about the release of her
husband; but that his real business was to make indecent offers to herself. In
short, says the witness, he made me an offer to release my father, if I would
satisfy his lustful desires; but, as I refused, very well, said he at last, I
shall go and do his business for him in an instant.

VOL. II. PAGE 258.
A house was wanted for some purpose by the committee. Chaux was told that
there was one in the neighborhood; but that it was occupied by the owner. A
pretty story, says he; in with the b -- ger into prison, and he will be glad to
purchase his life at the expenee of his house.

When the horrible situation of the prisoners was represented to the committee,
Goullin and Chaux replied: so much the better; let them die; it will be so much
clear gains to the nation.

VOL. II. PAGE 284
Jane Lavigne informs the tribunal, that, one night, Carrier came with Philippe
to sup at her house. They were talking, says the witness, of the measures to be
pursued. You are a parcel of whining b -- gers of judges, said Carrier: you
want proofs to guillotine a man; into the river with the b -- gers, says the
Representative of the people, into the river with them; that is the shortest
way.

VOL. III. PAGE 12.
Mary Herau informs the tribunal, that (...) got admittance one day into a
prison where there were a great many women confined, several hundreds. I saw
one amongst them, adds the witness, that was taken in labor; she was, however,
standing up. Such an object I never saw; she was crawling with vermin; her lips
were blue; death had already seized her. -- To bear the smell, in this infected
abode, I was obliged to have the smelling-bottle continually at my nose.

In consequence of the permission granted me to choose a child out of this
prison, I went to a room where there were three hundred, or there abouts, all
of whom appeared dying or dead. I stopped at the door (for the stink was such
that I durst advance no further) and called the children to me. Some of the
little innocents raised their hands, and others their heads; but only six were
able to get to me. I took one of them, and was also allowed to take a poor
woman, whose situation and piteous moans moved me to the soul. I gave them an
asylum at my house, till the issuing of the inhuman decree, which obliged me to
return them into the clutches of the tigers. When this decree came out. I
applied to the wife of Gallon, one of the committee, begging her to intercede
with her husband for the preservation of the woman and child I had taken: I
will do no such thing, said she; and, if you will be advised by a friend, you
will not trouble your head about them. -- They were reimprisoned, and I never
heard of them more.

VOL. III. PAGE. 14.
Mrs. Laillet informs the tribunal, that six young ladies, of the name of
Lame^erye, were sent to the Bouffay. Carrier, says she, sent an order to put
them instantly to death. The keeper of the prison commissioned me to
communicate to them the fatal tidings. I called them into a room apart, and
told them that the Representative of the people had ordered their execution.

The youngest of them gave me this ring (here she showed the ring) they threw
themselves on their knees, and called on the name of Jesus Christ. From this
posture the ruffians roused to conduct them to the place of death. They were
executed, without ever being tried. While they were dispatching, twenty seven
men awaited the fatal stroke at the foot of the Guillotine.

It is said, to the honor of the executioner, that his remorse for having
executed these young ladies was so great, that he died in a few days afterward.

I attest, adds this witness, that I have seen numbers of naked bodies of
women, lying by the side of the Loire, thrown up by the tide. I have seen heaps
of human bodies, gnawed, and partly devoured by the dogs and birds of prey;
which latter were continually hovering over the city, and particulary near the
water side. I have seen numbers of carcasses in the bottoms of the lighters,
partly covered with water.

VOL. III. PAGE 23.
Renaudot informs the tribunal, that he saw a number of men conducted to the
meadow, called the Mauves, and shot. Some of them who were not killed by the
fusils, says the witness, were dispatched with the sabre. A cannoneer, named
Jacob, came up to me, and said that it was he who had finished those who
escaped the balls. Their necks, says this butcher, were just the thing to try
my new sabre.

VOL. III. PAGE 24.
I accuse, says the same witness, the committee of the murder of three nuns,
with my children's maid. They were conducted by Jolly to the committee to take
the oath of apostasy. Shoot no more, drown no more, said the nuns, and we will
even take this horrid oath. This amounted to a refusal, and the consequence is
too well known.

VOL. III. PAGE 25.
Captain Ler^ attests, that the murder of the ninety priests was a most wanton
act of cruelty, contrary to the professions of the committee itself; for that
they were only to be sent, it was said, into perpetual exile. He says he was
ordered before the committee, and threatened with imprisonment for having
permitted two of them to get on board his vessel.

Captain Bouler, one day, in weighing his anchor, saw four or five hundred dead
bodies raised up by the cables; and adds, that there were one hundred and
thirty women confined at Mirabeau, who disappeared all at once.

VOL. III. PAGE 27.
Foucault, one of the accused, being asked by the judge, what was become of the
pillage of the priests (for, as I have already observed, this seemed to be the
chief object of the trial) Foucault replied, that, having consulted Carrier on
the subject, he answered, b -- ger! who should have it but those that did the
work? -- Foucault declares, that the effects of the priests were lodged on
board the covered lighter, whence the priests had been precipitated into the
water; and on board of which Lambertye, the chief in this expedition, gave a
great dinner the next day, costing forty thousand livres. From other witnesses,
it appears that Carrier assisted at this repast, and that he even proposed
dining on the scaffold of the guillotine.

The foll^wing traits are well calculated to show, what sort of treatment a
people must ever expect from the hands of base-born villains, when they are
suffered to seize the reign of power.

VOL. III. PAGE 11.
I had a son and daughter, says a witness, named Pusterle; Goullin had proposed
a marriage between his son, and my daughter, and Goullin another between his
daughter and my son. Neither had my consent; and to avenge themselves, when
they were in the committee, they seized my wife and daughter, and all my most
valuable property. The former were dragged to a loathsome prison; the latter I
have never since seen or heard of.

VOL. III. PAGE 17.
A friend of Goullin had, as he pretended, been brought to punishment by the
family of the two young Toinettes. When they were brought before the committee,
he told them of this. But, said they, it could not be us. Goullin, like the
wolf in the fable, cried out, if it was not you, it was your father. The two
Toinettes were (...).

VOL. III PAGE 33.
My son-in-law, says a witness, named Valle, had been confined for no other
specified crime than that of being a well dressed man (muscadin). I went to
Carrier and to the committee to solicit his release, before the order was
issued forbidding all solicitations. There seemed to be some hopes of
succeeding; but Chaux opposed my request, and he alone. It was he who had
ordered him to be imprisoned, to be revenged on us, because we refused to sell
him a quantity of starch, that he had a mind to.

VOL. III. PAGE 38.
I was at a drowning, says Tabouret, on board a lighter conducted by Affile.
Come on, my lads, said he, to the island of Topsy-turvy. Before we got out to
the sinking place, I heard the prisoners make the most terrible lamentations.
Save us! oh! save us! cried they; there is yet time! oh! pray, pray, save us!
Some of their hands were untied, and they ran them through the railing, crying,
mercy! mercy! It was then that I saw the villain, Grand-Maison, chop off their
hands and arms with his sabre. Ten minutes after, I heard the carpenters,
placed in the little boats, hammering at the sides of the lighter; and,
directly, down it went to the bottom.

VOL. III. PAGE 40.
Trappe. When the fifty-five priests were drowned, I went to Carrier to ask him
what should be done with their money, gold and silver snuff boxes, rings, etc.
Leave them nothing, says he. Embark these b -- gers, and let me hear no more of
them, says the representative of the people.

These priests, says the witness, had a great number of valuable jewels, which
were all delivered to Richard. Carrier, upon hearing that the expedition was
over, seemed angry; blast it, says he, I intended to reserve that job for
Lambertye.

The widow Dumey corroborates the evidence of Trappe, and adds, after the
priests were drowned, Lambertye came to me, and pointing his sabre to my
breast, bitch, says he, you shall give me an account of the spoils of those
priests. -- I attest, says this witness, that Lambertye and Fouquet were the
favorites of the representative of the people.

VOL. III. PAGE 43.
Naudiller. I was, one day, at Carrier's, with Lambertye and several others.
Carrier, in pointing to the river, said, we have already ducked two thousand
eight hundred of them there. One of the strangers asking what he meant. -- Yes,
says Carrier, two thousand eight hundred, in the national bath.

I myself saw, says the witness, while I was at Nantz, which was not long, five
hundred men and two hundred and fifty women, all tied, conducted to the Loire
by Lambertye and Fouquet.

VOL. III. PAGE 50.
One time, says Affile, (he was one of the drowners) Fouquet ordered me to go
to Marie, to bespeak the two lighters that were wanted for the night, and to
engage some carpenters. This done, I went and got the cords, and the staples to
fasten the prisoners at the bottom of the lighter. -- About nine o'clock nearly
five hundred were put on board. -- These were pillaged and stripped in the
lighter, and Fouquet swore, if I did not obey his requisitions (which were
always made in the name of the law) he would drown me with the rest.

Four little boats, continues Affile, attended each lighter. When the plugs
were pulled out the prisoners cried, mercy! -- There were some on the half deck
with their hands tied only, and these, when they saw the lighter sinking,
cried, let us jump into their boats and drown them with ourselves. But all that
attempted it were hacked down with sabres.

When the expedition was completed, we went to Thomas's hotel, were the
effects of the prisoners had been carried; hence we went to Secher's, where we
divided the spoil.

The prisoners on their trial, having denied here, that they had given orders
for the drownings, several of their orders were produced, and read. It may not
be amiss to insert two or three of them. They will give the reader a perfect
idea of the murderer's style.

In the name of the Republic. The revolutionary committee authorize citizen
Affile jun, to require the number of carpenters that he may find necessary for
the execution of the expedition he is charged with. This citizen is required to
use all the dispatch in his power, and to give generous wages to the workmen;
provided they work* with all the zeal and activity that the public service
requires.

(Signed) GOULLIN, BACHELIER, and others.


In the name of the Republic. The revolutionary committee authorize citizen
Colas, to take as many lighters and small boats, as he shall judge necessary,
for the execution of the business that the committee has entrusted to his
zealous care.

(Signed) NAUD, BOLOGNIE, GOULLIN, and others.


In the name of the Republic. Citizen Affile jun. is required to pay attention
to, and see executed, the order given to citizen Colas; and all watermen and
others are required to aid and assist in the public service, and to obey the
requisition of citizen Affile, under pain of being declared bad citizens and
suspected persons.

(Signed) GRAND-MAISON, NAUD, and others.


VOL. III. PAGE 63.
Bourdin, a witness, gives an account of several shootings. The last that I
saw, adds he, was of eighty women. They were first shot, then stripped, and
left exposed on the spot during three days.

I carried a young lad off from the Entrepot. He was thirteen years of age.
When the revolutionary committee ordered all the children, thus preserved to be
given up, Jolly, who said he was the judge of all the prisoners, permitted me
to keep this boy; but my neighbor Aignes, who could not obtain a like favor,
gave up a lad of fourteen years of age, agreeable to the order of the
committee, and the next day we saw him shot.

When the shooting en mass first began the prisoners were suffered to retain
their cloths till they were dead. As they were conducted to the place of
execution, and even after they arrived on the spot, the old-cloths dealers were
seen bargaining with the soldiers for their cloths. The poor unfortunate
creatures had the mortification to see their own townsmen and women buying the
poor remains of their fortunes on their backs; and, the instant they fell, the
monsters rushed in, tearing the new-acquired property from their bodies, yet
struggling in the pangs of death. -- But, the revolutionary butchers found that
this was but an unproductive sale: the cloths being shot through sunk their
value; and this circumstance determined them to strip the prisoners naked
before execution.

VOL. III. PAGE 66.
Lambert, another witness, informs the tribunal, that he has seen the banks of
the Loire covered with dead bodies; among which were several of old men, little
children of both sexes, and an infinite number of women, all naked. One of the
women, that I saw at one time, had an infant locked in her arms. She had been
drowned at the Crepuscule the day before with about two hundred more.

VOL. III. PAGE 96.
A witness deposes that she saw Lebrun, one of the company of Marat, jump and
dance upon the dead body of a child.

VOL. III. PAGE 99.
Lamaric. I was one morning at breakfast with Crucy, Leveque, and Perrocheaux,
when the latter told me, they were just going to take a young girl out of
prison to put her in keeping for their own use.

I was one day, says the witness, at the committee to ask the release of some
children, and I could not help being shocked at the jocular manner in which
they proceeded and talked. Chaux said to me here we are, you see, up to our
eyes among the dead bodies and pretty girls.

The criminals being asked what they had to say concerning their having issued
certain cruel decrees, answered that they were fathers of families, and that if
they had disobeyed Carrier, they feared he might not only destroy them, but
their wives and children also.

Now then, let us see how these affectionate, tenderhearted fathers of
families behaved toward the wives and children of others.

VOL. III. PAGE 67.
As they had denied having issued the cruel orde^^ for imprisoning the
children, the following decrees were produced.

The revolutionary orders the benevolent commissaries of the seventeenth
section, as well as all others who have prisoners in their houses of detention,
to deliver to nobody, any child whatever; except it may be to the officers of
the ships of the Republic, and even they are to take none under seventeen years
af age.

(Signed) GOULLIN, and others.

The citizen keeper of the Entrepot is ordered to give in a list of all those,
who, in obedience to the order of the committee, have delivered up the children
they had taken from the prison.

(Signed) CHAUX, and others.

Citizen Dumey is ordered to give in a list of all the persons, with the
streets and numbers of the houses where they live, who have taken away any of
the prisoners. He will be particular in the dwelling of the woman, who, in
spite of the decrees of the committee, has had the infamy to take away seven
young girls of fifteen or sixteen years of age.

(Signed) GRAND-MAISON, and others.

When the blood-thirsty villains had thus collected all the unhappy prisoners
together, they issued the following order.

In the name of the revolutionary committee of Nantz. The commandant of the
troops is required to furnish three hundred regulars. One half of this
detachment will march to the Bouffay, and, taking the prisoners thence, will
conduct them bound, two and two, to the prison of the Eperonniere. The other
division will go to Saintes-Caires, and conduct the prisoners from thence to
the Eperonniere. Then, all these prisoners, together with those confined in the
prison of the Eperonniere, are to be taken and shot, without distinction of age
or sex, in the manner that the commanding officer of the detachment may judge
most convenient.

(Signed) GRAND-MAISON, GOULLIN, MINGUET, and others.


In this place, it may not be amiss to let the reader hear what these monsters
had to say in their defense.

VOL. III. PAGE 35.
Goullin. They keep telling us of our terrific measures; I maintain that we
made nobody tremble but the misers, the rich, the borders of provisions, the
fanatics, and the aristocrats; but as for the true sans-culottes, they had
nothing to fear.

Bachelier (VOL. III. PAGE 31) All the rich were suspected persons. We were
obliged to strike, not only them who did, but them who could do harm. However,
very few patriots were sacrificed; we aimed principally at the former nobility
and clergy; at those who horded up provisions, and all such as possessed great
riches. The true and real sans-culottes were spared.

VOL. III. PAGE 99.
One day, says a witness, I begged Bachelier to have mercy on the little
children. I pleaded their innocence, and represented their infancy, and the
injustice of punishing them for the faults of their parents. Bachelier answered
coolly, if I did not know you, I should take you for an aristocrat. You do not
perceive then, that these children have sucked aristocratic milk; that the
blood that runs in their veins is impure, and incapable of being changed into
republican blood? I compare them, added he, to an oil-barrel, which, in spite
of all the washing and scrubbing you can give it, will for ever retain its
stink. It is just so with these children. They will always retain an attachment
to the kings and priests of their fathers.

VOL. III. PAGE 104.
Bachelier answers to this. With respect, says he, to the children of the
aristocrats, I own that I said, they were hard to be made good republicans; and
that it was much to be feared, that the children of fanatics would one day
resemble their parents. Renard, mayor of Nantz, who is known for a sound
patriot and a humane man, said on this subject, that the cats eat the young
rats, and that they were in the right of it; for it was the only way of
destroying the breed. I am persuaded, adds Bachelier, that no true republican
will blame me for saying and thinking like Renard, who was a most excellent
patriot.

There was, it seems, another reason for murdering the aristocrats; for when
the proposal was made for killing them en mass, Robin said (VOL. III. PAGE 85)
the patriots are in want of bread; it is just that those scoundrels should
perish, and not eat up our victuals from us. -- Kermen opposed this; but Robin
exclaimed, none of your moderate propositions here. I say, they are a parcel of
aristocrats that wish to overturn the republic, therefore let them die.

VOL. III. PAGE 106.
Crespin, one of the company of Marat, informs the tribunal, that he was at a
drowning on board a lighter, where the prisoners were fastened down under
boards, nailed from side to side. They uttered, says he, the most piteous
cries. Some of them put their hands folded in a supplicating posture, through
the openings between the boards; and I saw the members of the committee chop
off those hands and fingers. One of them plunged his sabre down in amongst the
prisoners, and we heard a man cry out, oh! the rascal! he has stabbed me! --
Our ears, adds the witness, were now stunned with the cry of, oh! you rascally,
brutal savages! this is the mercy, this the humanity of republicans!

One day, continues this witness, we saw Carrier in a coach at the foot of the
guillotine, enjoying the spectacle, while about twenty persons were beheaded.
-- Naud was with me, who went up to Carrier with me, and asked him, if he did
not want a Marat. Yes, b -- ger, says Carrier. I am your man then, said Naud.

The new Marat was dispatched to call the judges to the representative of the
people; and when Philippes ventured to tell him that, among those whom he had
ordered to the guillotine from the Bouffay, there were two children of fourteen
years of age, and two others of thirteen, Carrier fell in a violent passion;
damned b -- gers, says he, in what country am I got? All milk-hearted rascals
alike!

The following traits will prove that a ferocious cruelty had taken possession
of the hearts of the young as well as the old.

VOL. III. PAGE 65.
Lalloue, says Naud, offered himself as an express to fetch back the one
hundred and thirty-two persons that were sent off to Paris. This he said he
would do for the pleasure of seeing them drowned.

This Lalloue, continues the witness, was a judge, and the companion of the
representative of the people, although but nineteen years of age. -- He had
been convicted of theft, and boasted of being one of the murderers of the
prisoners at Paris, in the month of September 1792. -- Ah! says he one day to
one of his companions on the bench, you should have seen us at Paris in the
month of September. There you would have learned how to knock them off.

VOL. III. PAGE 111.
Lecocq. I saw several men and women chopped down, on board a Dutch sloop that
lay in the river. I saw a young lad assisting to drown the prisoners at the
last drowning; particularly one whom he unmercifully seized by the leg, dragged
to the side of the lighter, and kicked overboard.

VOL. III. PAGE 126
Laillet informs the tribunal, that she saw a lad of about seventeen or
eighteen years of age hew down two prisoners, and hack them with his sabre at
the prison of the Bouffay. They were afterward, adds the witness, dragged to
the waterside.

VOL. III. PAGE 111.
Fontbonne informs the tribunal, that, at the request of Delille, he went to
the Entrepot to endeavor to save an innocent and amiable family of females,
the youngest of which was about thirteen years of age. Delille went with me.
When we came to the prison, we were conducted to a horrid stinking hole under a
staircase. We asked for a candle, and, after some time, we got into this sort
of dungeon. Here we found the mother and four daughters lying close to each
other upon some wet and filthy straw; and round about them there were several
dead women. The youngest daughter, whom alone we had obtained permission to
take was covered up in her mothers gown to keep her warm. -- When we told the
poor mother our errand; no, said she, my child shall stay and die with myself;
we have lived, and we will die together. -- We thought ourselves justified,
adds the witness, in using force. When the mother perceived our resolution, she
uttered such dreadful lamentations as are impossible to be described. My child!
oh! my dear, darling child! were the last words her daughter ever heard from
her. The child never recovered the strike; she pined away about eight months,
and then died.

VOL. III. PAGE 113.
The same witness says, I saw a great number of persons conducted from the
place of Equality, to be shot at the Mauves. There were women and children of
all ages amongst them. My heart could not support this spectacle; I ran home,
saddled my horse, and rode to the place of execution. When I arrived the poor
creatures were all on their knees, and the soldiers were preparing to fire. I
rushed through them, and had the good fortune to save eight of the children,
the oldest of which was twelve years of age; the rest were shot with their
fathers and mothers.

VOL. III. PAGE 114.
Laurency informs the tribunal, that he saw, at one time, three hundred men
conducted to the water. They were all naked, and had their hands tied behind
them. I saw too, adds the witness, several women and girls murdered, on board a
barge in the river, two of whom, aged about eighteen years, I saw a young lad
behead with his sabre, while he sung the carmagnole.

VOL. III. PAGE 119.
Saudroc. At a great dinner, to which Lambertye, the chief murderer, invited
Carrier, I was a witness of a most scandalous scene. After the repast was over,
and while the glass went round, Lambertye entertained us with a long and full
account of a drowning he had performed the night before, and boasted of the
manner in which he sabred the poor wretches that attempted to escape. All the
convives, adds the witness, honored his valor with long and repeated bursts
of applause. -- Carrier toasted the national bath. -- This monster talked of
nothing but death and the guillotine.

Another witness says (VOL. III. PAGE 123.) I saw Carrier, with his drawn sword
in his hand, threatening to guillotine the first person, who should dare to
show the least pity for the prisoners that were conducted to execution.

And another (VOL. II.) says: Carrier came one day to look at the lighters that
were constructing for the drownings, and turning to Foucault: charmingly
commodious indeed! says he. Do you hear? added he, pay these lads well for
their labor.

VOL. III. PAGE 126.
An old man appeared at the bar. I attest, says he, that I was ill-treated by
the revolutionary committee, because I requested the release of a young girl
who was entirely innocent. The committee told me that I had no business to
meddle with any such people. My nephew and my son-in-law were shot for no crime
whatever; and, adds the old man, I had the grief to see my own children dragged
from my house to the fatal lighters. One of them made an attempt to escape from
the hands of his barbarous executioners, was caught and shot.

I dare say the reader is ready to weep for this poor distressed father; but
let him reserve his tears for more worthy objects. This old man was a murderer
like the rest, and his own family had fallen into the pit he had dug for
another. Yes, reader this gray headed, ferocious old tiger, who complains of
the cruelties of others, ends his evidence by accusing Carrier, even Carrier of
having shown an act of mercy! -- I accuse him, says the hoary assassin (PAGE
26) of being no patriot, since he did not execute the wife of Templorie, whom I
informed against as an emigrant.

VOL. IV. PAGE 148.
Juget, a judge at Nantz, reads, from the register of his tribunal, an order of
Carrier to send thirty six men, twenty women, and four children, to be shot,
without being heard or tried. This was accordingly done.

VOL. IV. PAGE 148.
Poupon deposes, that he was witness of a drowning, when the Company of Marat
went and dragged sick persons from the hospital in order to make up a lighter
full. -- Some of these persons, adds the witness, could scarcely crawl along,
and I saw these murderers beat them most cruelly with great sticks, crying:
along with you, b -- gers! march! march! we will give you sweet air enough now.
-- Others they dragged along by the hair of the head, till they got them on
board the lighter. -- All this time, says the witness, the conductors of the
expedition kept hollowing out: come, come, my lads, be quick! along with the b
-- gers! the tide falls a pace: there is no time to be lost.

VOL. IV. PAGE 151.
Seguinel, one of the Company of Marat, informs the tribunal, that Goullin and
Chaux conducted some of the company, one day, to the house of Carrier. When we
came, says this under-cut-throat, into the presence of the Representative of
the people, our conductors told him we were good lads, citizens on whom he
might rely. So much the better, says Carrier, adding, depend on it, my boys, if
you do your duty like good b -- gers, the Republic, which is never ungrateful,
will pay you well.

While we were there, says the witness, Lambertye came, and went into another
room with Carrier. Goullin asked Grand-Maison who that man was. He is a second
Marat, replied the latter; and is now, without doubt, receiving orders to
communicate to us.

Marat.
The name of Marat has been so often mentioned, it may not be improper, or out
of place, to give the reader here some account of that famous cutthroat.

Before the Revolution, he was an obscure beggarly fellow, that was daily
liable to be brought before the officer of police to give an account of the
manner in which he got his bread. But, when this grand event took place; when
murderers were wanted in every quarter of the country, he began to cut a figure
on the scene. He published a gazette, in which he inculcated the necessity of
lopping off the heads of thousands at a time, and of watering, as he called it,
the tree of liberty with the blood of the aristocrats, as the only means of
rendering it fruitful.

These, and such like sentiments, recommended him to the notice of his
countrymen; he obtained their confidence, and was one of the organizers (to use
a french term) of the massacres of the 2nd and 3rd of September, 1792, of which
I have spoken in the first chapter of this work. On this occasion he was an
actor also, and is said to have cut above fifty throats with his own hands.

It would have been something unjust if a man like this had been forgotten,
when the Convention was to assemble. He was not. The people of Paris, who had
been eyewitnesses of his merit, chose him for one of their representatives;
and he was faithful in the execution of his trust; for he never talked about
any thing but of throats to cut, stabbing, and guillotining.

His career, however, was but short. His own neck was not made of iron: a
desperate woman, who had adopted his principles, rushed into his apartment, and
delivered the world of one of the greatest monsters that ever dishonored it.

There was something horrible in the look of this villain. He was very short
and thick, had a black beard ascending nearly to the extreme corners of his
eyes. This beard was usually long, and his hair short, sticking up like
bristles. He had ever been dirty, and it may be imagined, that the fashions of
a revolution which has made it a crime to be well-dressed, had not improved his
appearance: in short, he was at the very best, a most disgusting mortal, and,
therefore, when he came out of the prison of La Force, all covered with filth
and gore, wielding a pistol in one hand and a dagger in the other, no wonder
that even the sanguinary mob ran back for fear.

Charlotte Cordee.
As I have entered on a digression, I will continue it a little longer, to give
the reader an account of the execution of Charlotte Cordee, the young woman
that murdered Marat.

She was not what is commonly called an aristocrat; but a patriot of another
faction than Marat. She was, as it is said, employed by the party of Brissot,
who, from the accomplishments of Marat, were afraid that he would totally
engross the favor and affections of the people. Poor Charlotte received her
reward on the scaffold; and a very just reward too; but there is something so
shocking in the behavior of her executioner, that it ought not to be omitted
in a collection of this kind.

She was a beautiful young woman; extremely fair; and, in any other country,
would have brought tears of compassion from the spectators. The executioner,
after having cut off her head, seized it by the fine long hair, and, holding it
up by one hand, the brutal ruffian gave her a slap in the face with the other.
The bitch blushes, cried he, at any rate. This trait of hangman wit, excited
the savage mirth of the populace. It is something very remarkable that her
face, severed from the body, should blush; but it is a real fact, as appears
from an essay lately republished at Philadelphia, in Gatreau's gazette.


We must now return to Nantz, where we shall find the revolutionary committee
employed in writing to their friends at Paris.

Before they began to drown and shoot by hundreds, they had seized on the
persons of one hundred and thirty two of the most oppulent men in the city, and
sent them off to Paris to be tried as suspected persons. It appears, from the
whole course of the evidence on this head, that the detachment of patriots who
conducted them, were, if any pretense could be found, to murder them all by the
way. This, however, did not happen. The prisoners arrived safe at Paris, and
the committee were obliged to have recourse to other means, to prevent their
return. The one that they adopted was to insure their guillotining at Paris;
and, for this purpose, they wrote to the revolutionary committee of the the
section of Lepelletier. -- Their letter is, and I hope it ever will be, a
curiosity in this country. I shall give it a literal translation, that the
reader may be able to do justice to the memory of the writers,

VOL. IV. PAGE 179.
Nantz, this 5th of Pluviose.
Liberty, Equality, or Death.
Citizens,
The people of Nantz, whom we have sent to Paris, are big villains, all marked
with the seal of reprobation, and known for counter-revolutionists. We are
collecting proofs against them, which we shall send, when the bundle is made
up, to the revolutinary judges. In the mean time, we denounce to you, Julienne,
who has officiously taken upon him the defense of these uncivic vermin.

VOL. IV. PAGE 280.
From the moment the revolutionary committee was installed, says Benet, the
imprisonments began; and they augmented daily. They were all dictated by
animosity, hatred, or avarice. To such a degree did terror prevail, that every
man trembled for his life.

For my part, says the witness, my resolution was taken. I always went with two
loaded pistols in my pockets: one for the villain that should offer to seize
me, and the other for myself. Cruel expectation, for ^ man who had a small
helpless family. But, I had seen six hundred men at one time plunged into the
water, and had been a witness of shootings amounting to three thousand six
hundred persons at the Gigan: after this what could any man hope for.

There is reason to believe, that Carrier meant to murder the whole city; for,
before his journey to Paris, he told one of the women whom he kept, and whose
husband he had put to death, that he would make Nantz remember the name of
Carrier: do not fear, my dear, said he, all my friends shall follow me; but as
for the city it shall be destroyed (PAGE 219)

I was, one day, adds the same witness, sent by Bowin to see some bodies
buried, that were left on the public square. There were upwards of thirty women
all naked, and exposed with the most horrible indecency.

VOL. IV. PAGE 206.
Fontaine. I went one day to a prison where a great many women and children
were confined. My business was to deliver provisions to these people; but I
found neither fire, lights, nor any thing else. I called for a candle in order
to enter this abode of horror. The prisoners were lying here and there on the
bare boards, though it was extremely cold.

In a second visit that I made here, I found the poor unhappy creatures in a
worse situation than before. I saw a woman lying dead, and a sucking child, at
a little distance from her, wallowing about in the filth. Its little face was
absolutely covered with ordure. I gave the keeper ten livres to take care of
this helpless infant, till I could find a nurse; but when I came for it, it was
gone; and Dumey told me, that the English prisoners had taken the child, with a
promise to do well by it.

It seems, from the evidence of several witnesses, that, while these villains
were butchering, or stiffling their own countrymen, they took care to treat
foreign prisoners with some sort of humanity. This distinction fully proves,
that they acted by authority of the Convention. But we shall see this so
incontestibly proved by-and-by, that the remark is hardly necessary here.

VOL. IV. PAGE 210.
I saw, says the same witness, a man, named Gorgo, come and ask for a little
boy, that he said he had obtained permission to take. The child was found
behind a bundle of stuff, where he had run to hide upon hearing voices. Gorgo
brought him to the door-way, and made him dance and sing.

I have selected this last fact to show to what a pitch of obduracy, of
unfeeling indifference, these people were arrived. A thousand volumes could not
paint their familiarity with scenes of horror so well as this trifling
circumstance of making a child dance and sing, at the entrance of a cave^^ of
despair, a human slaughter house, where perhaps his own parents were at that
moment groaning their last.

VOL. IV. PAGE 210.
Chaux, one of the criminals, informs the tribunal, that he was dispatched from
Nantz to wait on Carrier, during his stay at Paris. He told me, says Chaux,
that he did not like Philippes, and that we should guillotine him, at my
return. -- I have communicated, says Carrier, all our proceedings to the
National Convention. -- You must not, adds he, try Lambertye: he is too
precious a patriot. I intend to send for him here, and present him to the
committee of public preservation (salut public) who will not leave him
unrecompensed for his services.

Jicquieau says (PAGE 273.) that Lambertye was the chief murderer. -- This it
was that made him a precious patriot, and a man worthy of reward from a
committee of the National Convention.

This witness adds: when the committee of Nantz was first installed, a
deputation was sent to Carrier, to let him know that no proofs could be made
out against Jomard. The representative of the people, seeing the deputation
enter, cried out, what are all these b -- gers come here for? When he heard our
business, to hell with you, says he, you fool. But, seeming to grew a little
calm, he called me back into his room, and threatened to throw me out of the
window. At last, says the witness, he told me there were other means besides
guillotining; you have only, says he, to send Jomard into the country, and have
him dispatched secretly.

Here we behold a member of the National Convention of France; one of those
philosophical legislators, who call themselves the enlighteners of the
universe. This base, this cowardly cutthroat, this assassin-general, is one of
those men, whom we have been told, are to regenerate mankind, and to establish
a system of universal humanity!

The following traits will depict the leaders in the French Revolution.

VOL. IV. PAGE 273.
Robin, says a witness, was one of the accomplices of Carrier. This Robin, one
day, showed his sabre all stained with blood, saying at the same time, with
this I chopped off sixty of the heads of the aristocrats that we drowned last
night.

VOL. IV. PAGE 209.
Fontaine informs the tribunal, that he was one night at the Entrepot. Here,
says the witness I saw a little man (this afterward appears to have been
Fouquet) wearing pantaloons, and a liberty cap. It is I, said the little
monster, who conduct all the drownings; it is I who give the word of command to
pull up the plugs; nothing is done without my orders. If you will come along
with me, continued he, I will show you how to feed upon the flesh of an
aristocrat; I will regale you with the brains of those rascals. -- I trembled,
says the witness, and got away from this cannibal as soon as I could.

VOL. IV. PAGE 276.
Fontbonne informs the tribunal, that he was one day invited to a dinner, in a
pleasure garden belonging to Ducrois. Carrier and O'Sullivan were of the party.
The conversation turned on the bodily strength of certain persons, when
O'Sullivan observed; "yes, there was my brother, who was devilish strong,
particularly in the neck, for the executioner was obliged to give him the
second stroke with the national razor, before he could get his head off."

The witness adds, O'Sullivan told us, that he was going to drown a man much
stronger than himself; that the man resisted, but was knocked down; then, says
O'Sullivon, I took my knife and struck him, as butchers do the sheep.

Guedon informs the tribunal (vol. IV. page 277) that he was at the same
dinner, mentioned by Fontbonne. I was seated, says this witness, by the side of
O'Sullivan; and, during the repast, he held up his knife to me, and said, this
is excellent to cut a man's throat with; adding, that it had already done him
good service in that way. He called on Robin as a witness of his bravery, and
told us the manner in which he proceeded. -- I had remarked, says O'Sullivan,
that the butchers killed the sheep by plunging their knife in underneath the
ear; so, when I had a mind to kill a prisoner, I came up to him, and, clapping
him on the shoulder in a jocular way, pointed to some object that he was
obliged to turn his head to see; the moment he did this, I had my knife through
his neck.

This O'Suilivan, in his defense, says, that, as to his brother, he was an
enemy of the Republic. When he saw, says this human butcher, that there was no
hope for him, he came and threw himself into my arms; but, like a good
republican, I gave him up to the guillotine.

VOL. II. PAGE 281.
A witness says, that Goullin beat his own father with a stick, when the old
man was on his deathbed; and adds, that his father died in two hours after.

This same Goullin (VOL. II. PAGE 253) said in the tribune of his club. take
care not to admit among you moderate men, half patriots. Admit none but real
revolutionists; none but patriots who have the courage to drink a glass of
human blood, warm from the veins.

Goullin, so far from denying this, says before the tribunal (PAGE 254) that he
glories in thinking like Marat, who would willingly have quenched his thirst
with the blood of the aristocrats.

I shall conclude this chapter, this frightful tragedy exhibited at Nantz, with
the relation of a few traits of diabolical cruelty, which not only surpass all
that the imagination has hitherto been able to conceive, but even all that has
been related in this volume. I have cla^^ed these facts together, that the
indignant reader may tear out the leaf, and commit it to the flames.

Yes (says the author of La Conjuration, page 160) yes* we have seen a
representative of the people, a member of the National Convention, tie four
children, the eldest of which was but sixteen years of age, to the four posts
of the guillotine, while the blood of their father and mother streamed on the
scaffold, and even dropped on their heads.

VOL. V. PAGE 36.
Lailet deposes, that Deron came to the popular society with a man's ear,
pinned to the national cockade, which he wore in his cap. He went about, says
the witness, with a pocket full of these ears, which he made the female
prisoners kiss. If I were not afraid, adds the witness, of for ever blackening
the page of our history, I would here relate a fact, that calls down tenfold
vengeance on the head of this monster.

The witness is ordered to proceed.

This same Deron, adds the witness, carried about him a handful of private
parts, which he had cut from the men whom he had murdered; and these he showed
to the women, whenever an occasion offered.

This last trait, abominable as it is, might have been mentioned in a Paris
tribunal, without that ceremony which the witness made use of; for even the
women of Paris had set Deron the example. Their knives had been exercised on
the dead bodies of the Swisses, who were killed at the king's castle on the
10th of August, 1792. On that very 10th of August which has so often been
celebrated on this continent.

VOL. II. PAGE 267.
Many of the generals in La Vendee, says Forget, made it their glory to imitate
the horrid butchers at Nantz. They committed unheard of cruelties and
indecencies. General Duquesnoy murdered several infants at the breast, and
afterward attempted to lie with the mothers; but not being able to succeed, he
had the operation performed another way. This he called electrifying.

This is the infernal monster that styled himself the butcher of the
Convention, and that said, nothing hurt him so much as not being able to serve
them in the capacity of executioner.

VOL. II. PAGE 122.
I saw, ^ays Girault, about three or four hundred persons drowned. There were
women of all ages amongst them; some were big with child, and of these several
were delivered in the very lighters, among water and mud. This most shocking
circumstance, their groans, their heart-piercing shrieks, excited no
compassion. They with the fruit of their conjugal love, went to bottom together.

VOL. II. PAGE 153.
Coron. A woman going to be drowned, was taken in childbirth; she was in the
act of delivery, when the horrid villains tore the child from her body, stuck
it on the point 405 Prisoners, Men, Women, and Children Going to be Drowned; a
Soldier at the head, carrying on his Bayonet a Child torn from its mother's
Womb.
of a bayonet, and thus carried it to the river.

A fourth of these our representatives (says the author of La Conjuration, PAGE
160) a fourth (great God! my heart dies within me) a fourth, ripped open the
wombs of the mothers; tore out the palpitating embryo, to deck the point of a
pike of liberty and equality!

The reader's curiosity may, perhaps, lead him to wish to know the whole number
of persons put to death at Nantz; but, in this, it would be difficult to
gratify him. I have been able to obtain but five volumes of the trial, which
make only a part of that work; probably the last volume may contain an exact
account as to numbers. The deaths must, however, have been immense, since a
witness deposes (VOL. III. PAGE 55) to the drowning of nine thousand persons;
and another witness (VOL. II. PAGE 253) attests, that seven thousand five
hundred were shot en mass.

The number of bodies thrown into the river Loire, which is half the width of
the Delaware at Philadelphia, was so considerable, that the municipal officers
sound it necessary to issue a proclamation (VOL. V. PAGE 70) forbidding the use
of its waters.

It has been generally computed that the number of persons, belonging to this
unfortunate city and its environs, who were drowned, shot en mass,
guillotined, and stifled or starved in prison, amounted to about forty
thousand. And, this computation is corroborated by the author of La
Conjuration, who says (PAGE 159.) The number of persons murdered in the south
of France, during the space of a very few months, is reckoned at a hundred
thousand. The bodies thrown into the Loire are innumerable. Carrier alone put
to death more than forty thousand, including men, women and children.

It appears, then, that these bloody revolutionists, who styled themselves the
friends of freedom and of mankind, destroyed, in one city of France, a
population equal to that of the capital of the United States.

CHAP. IV.
Facts from several works, proving that the cruelties related in the preceding
chapters, were authorized, or approved of by the National Assemblies.

AFTER having led the reader through such rivers of blood, it seems
indispensably necessary to insert a few facts, showing by whose authority that
blood was spilt; for, it could answer no good purpose to excite his
detestation, without directing it toward the proper object.

When the French first began that career of insurrection, robbery and murder,
which assumed the name of a Revolution, the people of this country, or at least
the most numerous part of them, felt uncommon anxiety for its success. The
people were deceived; but the deception was an agreeable one; the word
Revolution had of itself very great charms, but when that of Liberty was added
to it, it could not fail of exciting enthusiasm. This enthusiasm was, indeed,
nearly general; and this alone was a sufficient inducement for the public
prints to become the partisans of Condorcet and Mirabeau. All the avenues to
truth were at once barred up; and, though the revolutionists every day changed
their creed, though one revolving moon saw them make and break their oaths, all
was amply atoned for by their being engaged in a Revolution.

As the Revolution advanced the enthusiasm increased; but from the moment that
the French nation declared itself a Republic, this enthusiasm was changed to
madness. All the means by which this change of government was to be
accomplished were totally overlooked; nothing was talked or dreamed of but the
enfranchisement of the world; the whole universe was to become a republic, or
be annihilated; and happy was he who could bawl loudest about a certain
something, called liberty and equality.

During this political madness, however, now and then a trait of shocking
barbarity, in spite of all the endeavors of the public papers, burst in upon
us, and produced a lucid interval; but these intervals have never yet been of
long duration; because every subterfuge, that interested falsehood can devise,
has been made use of to give our abhorrence a direction contrary to that which
it ought to have taken. We have heard Brissot, Danton, Marat, and Robespierre,
all accused in their turns of shedding innocent blood; but the National
Assembly itself, they tell us has ever remained worthy of our admiration. The
poor unsuccessful agents of this terrible divan have been devoted to
execration, as tyrants, while their employers have been, and are yet held up to
us as the friends of liberty and the lovers of mankind.

Without further remark, I shall add such facts as, I imagine, will enable
every reader to judge for himself.

To begin with the constituent assembly; one proof of their approving of murder
will suffice. They honored with the title of vanquishers, a blood-thirsty mob,
who after having taken two men prisoners, cruelly massacred them, and carried
their heads about the streets of Paris on a pike. See Rabaud's history of the
French Revolution page 106.

The second Assembly, when they received advices of the murders of Jourdan and
his associates at Avignon, as mentioned in the first chapter of this work,
threatened the member who communicated the news, because he had called the
murderers brigands, and not patriots. See La Gazette Universetle for the month
of May 1792. -- And, how did this Assembly behave, when informed of the
massacres in the prisons of Paris, during the first days of September, 1792?
Tallien (of whom we have lately heard so much) came to the National Assembly,
and informed them of the murdering in the following remarkable words: The
commissaries have done all they could to prevent the disorders (the massacreing
the prisoners is what he calls disorders) but they have not been able to stop
the, in some sort, Just vengeance of the people. -- The Assembly heard this
language very quietly, and Doctor Moore, from whose journal (page 178) the fact
is taken, makes an apology for the Assembly, by saying that they were overawed;
but it has since fully appeared, that the leading members were the very persons
who contrived the massacre, with the aid of Petion, Manuel, and Marat. -- It is
a well known fact, recorded by the Abbe Barruel (page 334) that Louvet, one of
the members of the present Assembly, gave, the day after the September
massacre, an order on the public treasury, in the following words: On sight,
pay to the four bearers each twelve livres, for aiding in the dispatching of
the priests at the prison of S^. Firmin. -- Louvet was, at the time of writing
this note on demand for murderer's wages, a legislator; and I cannot help
remarking here, that a printer of a news-paper in the United States, has lately
boasted, that this Louvet, "now president of the first Assembly on earth," says
our printer, was the editor of a gazette! -- People should be cautious how they
boast of relationship with the legislators in that country of equality.

As it will no longer be pretended, I suppose, that this second Assembly
disapproved of the murders that were committed under their reign, I will now
turn to the third Assembly, which we commonly call a Convention. And, not to
tire the reader with proofs of what is self evident, I shall confine myself to
an extract or two from the trial of Carrier and the revolutionary committee of
Nantz.

VOL. V. PAGE 49.
It is time, says Goullin, to tear aside the veil. The representatives
Bourbotte and Bo knew all about the drownings and shootings; and Bo even said
to Huchet, inspeaking of the members of the revolutionary committee, that it
was not for the murders that they were to be tried.

After this the counselor for the committee asks this citizen Bo, what was the
real motive for bringing the committee to trial; and the other confesses, that
it was for their having misapplied the treasures taken from the prisoners. He
pretends (page 60) though he had taken the place of Carrier at Nantz, and
though the water of the river could not be drank, on account of the dead bodies
that were floating on it; though a hundred or two of ditches had been dug to
put the people into that were shot, and though the city was filled with cries
and lamentations; notwithstanding all this, he pretends that he could say
nothing, for certain, about the murders.

This representative Bo (page 83.) is convicted of having himself justified the
conduct of the committee and of Carrier.

Carrier, in his defense, says, that he had done no more than his duty, and
that the Convention had been regularly informed of every thing. They complain
now, says he (page 119 of shootings en mass, as if the same had not been done
at Angers, Saumur, Laval, and every where else.)

A witness (VOL. 5. PAGE 60.) informs the tribunal, that he, who was himself a
member of the Convention, had informed that body of all the horrors that were
committed at Nantz, and particularly of the massacres of women and children.

The author of La Conjuration, so often quoted says (page 162.) When the bloody
Carrier wrote to the Convention that he was dispatching hundreds at a time by
The Guillotine ^n the square of the ^^^lution* where 70 persons (...) day
means of lighters with plugs in the bottom, Carrier was not blamed; on the
contrary, he was repeatedly applauded, as being the author of an invention that
did honor to his country!

But, what need have we of these proofs? What other testimony do we want, than
that contained in their own murderous decrees? Let any one cast his eye on the
opposite page; let him there behold the scene that was daily exhibited before
the windows of their hall, and then let him say whether they delighted in
murder or not. Blood is their element, as water is that of the finny race.

One thing, however, remains to be accounted for; and that is, how so great a
part of the nation were led to butcher each other; how they were brought to
that pitch of brutal sanguinary ferocity, which we have seen so amply displayed
in the preceding Chapters. This is what, with the reader's indulgence, I shall
now agreeable to my promise, endeavor to explain.

AN INSTRUCTIVE ESSAY, Tracing all the horrors of the French Revolution to
their real causes, the licentious Politics and infidel Philosophy of the
present Age.
THAT the French were an amiable people the whole civilized world has given
abundant testimony, by endeavoring to imitate them. There was not a nation in
Europe but had, in some degree, adopted their language and their fashions; and
all those individuals, belonging even to their haughty rival enemy, who
traveled in their country, were led by an involuntary impulse into an
imitation of their manners.

The prominent feature in their national character was, it is true, levity;
but, though levity and ferociousness may, and often do, meet in the same
person, no writer, that I recollect, had ever accused the French of being
cruel. If we are to judge of their disposition by their national sports and
entertainments, we shall find no room to draw a conclusion against their
humanity. These cruel diversions, where men become the bullies of brute
creatures, and laugh at seeing them goad, and bite, and tear each other to
pieces, were never known in France. Even in their theatrical performances a
dead body was never exhibited on the scene: such a spectacle was thought to be
too much for the feelings of the audience. The works of their favorite authors
generally breathe the greatest tenderness and humanity. The nation that could
produce, and admire, a Marmontel and a Racine, could not be naturally
bloody-minded.

"To kinder skies, were gentler manners reign,
"I turn, -- and France displays her bright domain.
"Gay sprightly land of mirth and social ease,
"Pleased with thyself, whom whom all the world can please:
"How often have I led thy sportive choir,
"With tuneless pipe beside the murmuring Loire!
"Where shading elms along the margin grew,
"And, freshen'd from the wave. the zepher flew;
"And happily, though my harsh touch falt'ring still,
"But mocked all tune, and ma^^^d the dancer's skill,
"Yet would the village praise my wondrous power,
"And dance forgetful of the noontide hour!
"Alike all ages. Dames of ancient days
"Have led their child'ren through the mirthful maze,
"And the gay Grand-sire, skilled in gestic lore,
"Has frisked beneath the burden of threescore.
"So blessed a life these thoughtless realms display;
"Thus idly busy rolls their world away:
"Theirs are those arts which mind to mind endear;
"For honor forms the social temper here."
These verses, extracted from the most elegant of poems, dictated by the bests
of hearts, contain the justest character of the French nation, that I have ever
yet seen. To this character I am ready to subscribe: for, I too have been
charmed with their gentle manners and their social ease: I too have felt the
power of those arts which endear mind to mind: I have been a witness of their
urbanity, their respectful deference and attention to the softer sex, their
paternal tenderness, and their veneration for old age.

Whence, then, the mighty, the dreadful change? What is it that has transformed
a great portion of this airy humane people into a horde of sullen assassins?
What is it that has converted these thoughtless realms; this gay sprightly land
of mirth, this bright domain, into a gloomy wilderness watered with rivers of
human blood? This ought to be the great object of our enquiries: this ought to
fix all our attention. Without determining this point, we can draw no profit
from the preceding relation, and, without attempting it, I should have
undertaken the unpleasant task of holding the French people up to reproach and
detestation to no manner of purpose.

It has been asserted, again and again, by the partisans of the French
revolution, that all the crimes which have disgraced it, are to be ascribed to
the hostile operations of their enemies. They have told us, that, had not the
Austrians and Prussians been on their march to Paris, the prisoners would not
have been massacred, on the 2nd and 3rd of September, 1792. But, can we
possibly conceive how the murder of 8,000 poor prisoners, locked up and bound,
could be necessary to the defense of a Capital, containing a million of
inhabitants? Can we believe that the sabres of the assassins would not have
been more effectually employed against the invaders, than against defenseless
priests and women. The deluded populace were told not to leave the wolves in
the fold while they went to attack those that were without. But these wolves,
if they were such, were in prison; were under a guard an hundred thousand times
as strong as themselves, and could have been destroyed at a moment's warning.
There is something so abominably cowardly in this justification, that it is
even more base than the crime. Suppose that a hundred thousand men had marched
from Paris, to make head against the Austrians and Prussians, there were yet
nine hundred thousand left to guard the unhappy wretches that were tied hand
and foot. Where could be the necessity of massacreing them! Where could be the
necessity of hacking them to pieces, tearing out their bowels, and biting their
hearts?

Subsequent events have fully proved, that it was not danger that produced
these bloody measures: for, we have ever seen the revolutionists most cruel in
times of their greatest security. Their butcheries at Lions and in its
neighborhood did not begin, till they were completely triumphant. It was then,
at the moment when they had no retaliation to fear, that they commenced their
bloody work. Carrier, lolling at at his ease, sent the victims to death by
hundreds. The blood never flowed from the guillotine in such torrents, as at
the very time when their armies were driving their enemies before them in every
direction.

Charles Fox (who, by the bye, would not have made a bad cutthroat general)
Charles Fox had the folly and impudence to say, in the British House of
Commons, that the massacres in France ought to be attributed to the Allied
Powers. You hunt them like wild beasts, said this humane and honest swindler,
and then you complain of them for being ferocious. How this hunting, as Fox
calls it, could drive the French to butcher one another, I cannot see; but if
it was a justifiable reason for them, it might certainly be applied with much
more justice to their enemies; for these have been oftener obliged to fly than
the French. The revolutionary armies have overrun an extent of territory equal
to one third of their own country: the Savoyards, the Germans, the Flemings,
the Dutch, the Spaniards, and the English, have been obliged to fly before
them; but we have heard of no massacres among these people. The French most
unmercifully put to death eight thousand of their country people, who were in
the prisons of Paris, and, as an excuse for this, they tell us that the Duke of
Brunswick had invaded the province of Champagne; but they themselves have
overrun all the United Netherlands, and even taken possession of the capital;
and we have not heard, that the Dutch have as yet been guilty of a single
massacre. They have found but one place in all their career, where the people
could be prevailed on to erect a guillotine, and that was at Geneva. Here their
army was more numerous than the whole population of the state, and therefore
their system was fully adopted; yet even here, among this little debased and
tyranized people, there were to be found no villains infamous enough to imitate
their masters in murdering women and children. That was a species of slaughter
reserved for the French nation alone.

The French revolution has been compared to that of America, and I have heard
some men, calling themselves Americans, who have not been ashamed to say, that
as great cruelties were committed in this country as in that. I would now ask
these men, who are so anxious to be thought as bloody as the sans-culotte
French, if they can give me one instance of the Americans murdering their
townsmen at the approach of the enemy? When the British army succeeded that of
the Congress at Philadelphia, did the continental troops murder all the Tories,
before they quitted the city? Can these generous friends of the French
revolution tell us of any massacres that took place in this country? Did they
ever hear of women and children being drowned and shot by hundreds? Seven years
of civil war desolated these states; but the blood of one single woman or child
never stained the earth.

If the doctrine of the prosligate Charles Fox be admitted, if a people be
justifiable in entering on a series of massacres, the instant they are pressed
by an enemy from without, what safety can there be for any of us? If a
declaration of war is to unsheath the daggers of all the assassins in the
community, civil society is the greatest curse that ever fell upon mankind.
Much better and safer were it for us to separate, and prowl about like savages,
nay like beasts, than to live thus, in continual trepidation, in continual fear
for our throats.

There is something so exceedingly cowardly and ridiculous in this
justification, that even the French revolutionists are ashamed of it. They have
recourse to another still more dishonorable, it is true, but less cowardly.
They tell us, that all the assassins in France have been in the pay of Great
Britain; or, to make use of their own expression, have been excited to action
by the "gold of Pit."

As I wish to advance nothing without the best possible authority, I shall here
insert a passage on this subject, taken from a Gazette published at
Philadelphia by one Gatreau, and at the press of Moreau de St. Merry, who was a
member of the constituent assembly of France.

The intention of the piece evidently is to justify the French character, or
rather the character of the French revolutionists, by attributing the horrid
deeds these latter have committed, to some cause other than their own
dispositions and anarchical principles. To avoid all cavil with respect to the
authenticity of the extract, and the correctness of the translation, I will
first give it in French, and then in English, observing, for the further
satisfaction of the reader, that he may find the piece entire in the Gazette
above mentioned, of the fourth of February 1796.

Quel homme eclaire par l'experience, nieroit aujhurd'hui, que, de la tete de
Pit font sortis tous les crimes qui fesoient abhorrer la Revolution par
ceux-la meme qui en adornie^^ les principes; que, c'est au foyer de la jalousie
et de la haine Angloise, que ^'allumerent les torches, que se forgerent les
poignards, qui ont fait un monceau de cendres et de sang des plus belles
possessions du monde? -- Quel genie malfaisant crea les factions* impies,
sanguinaires ou ambitienses, qui devoient aneantir la France, au du moins la
replacer sous le joug, si la providence ne deconcertoit pas toujours les
complots de l'iniquite? -- Le genie infernal du Ministre Anglois. -- C'est avec
l'or de fes victimes de l'Inde qu'il payoit le fang Francois, verse a grands
flots a Paris, dans les departemens, aux frontieres et dans les colonies.

What man, enlightened by experience, will now deny, that, from the head of
Pit have come all the crimes which have rendered the Revolution detestable in
the eyes of even those who adored its principles; that, it was English jealousy
and hatred that lighted the flames, and sharpened the poignards, which have
reduced the finest possessions in the world to a heap of ashes and blood? --
What evil genius created the impious, sanguinary and ambitious factions, that
were to annihilate France; or, at least, bend it again beneath the vol^^^^^
Providence had not disconcerted (...) of iniquiquity? -- The infe^ (...) of the
English minister. (...) with the gold, drawn from his victims in India, that he
paid for the French blood, which has flowed in rivers at Paris, in the
departments, on the frontiers, and in the colonies.

This is an important, and were it not so very hackneyed and threadbare, I
would call it a "precious confession." Here we see a Frenchman, a partizan of,
and perhaps an actor in, the revolution, endeavoring to wipe away the stain on
its principles, by ascribing all the horrors those principles have produced, to
the gold distributed among the revolutionists by the English minister. The
cruelties that have been committed, were not, then, necessary to the
establishment of a free government; they were not the effect of irritation, of
anarchical confusion, of vindictive retaliation; they were not the natural
consequence of a long-oppressed people's breaking their chains and rising on
their tyrants; all these excuses (which I must allow were silly enough) are at
once done away by this new justification; for, we are here told, in so many
words, that the French people have shed rivers of each other's blood, in every
part of their dominions, p^^^ly for the love -- not of liberty, but of the gold
of Pit.

There is such a ^^tural connection between the measures of the several
National Assemblies and the massacres that were the immediate consequence of
them, that it is impossible to effect a separation without the utmost violence
to all manner of reasoning and truth. If it was the gold of Pit that paid for
all the French blood that has been spilled, it must have been that gold that
paid for the inhuman murder of Messrs. Launy and Flessel, and it must have been
that gold which induced the constituent assembly to sanction the murder, by
giving the assassins of these gentlemen the title of heroes and conquerors, and
by instituting a national festival in their honor.

The Revolution was begun, and has hitherto been maintained by the shedding of
innocent blood; therefore, if it was the gold of Pit that paid for that blood,
it is to the gold of Pit that the revolution is to be ascribed, and not to
that patriotic spirit and love of liberty, with which we have been so long
amused. In the fifth chapter of this work, it is incontestibly proved, that the
several National Assemblies authorized, or approved of all the massacres which
have disgraced their country; if, then, these massacres were paid for by Mr.
Pit, must we not inevitably conclude that the National Assemblies were in the
same pay? If Mr. Pit paid for the blood of the family of Bourbon, for that of
the king's guards, of the nobility, the clergy, the bankers, the merchants, in
short, of all the rich or aristocrats, as they are called, it was Mr. Pit who
destroyed the monarchy: it was he who caused France to be called a Republic,
and who gave rise to the doctrine of equality. Those, therefore, who talk of
the gold of Pit, must cease all their fulsome eulogiums on these gallant
republicans; for, if they are to have a republic, it will, according to their
own confessions, be the work of the English minister.

This vindication, throwing the blame on the gold of Pit, amply participates
in the misfortune of all the vindications that have lately appeared amongst us;
that is, it takes up a bad cause, and makes it worse. The reader will certainly
feel, with me, an inexpressible indignation at a people, who, because an
hostile army was on their frontiers, could be prevailed on to butcher thousands
upon thousands of their innocent countrymen; who could cut the throats of their
fathers and mothers, rip up the bowels of women with child, and carry about the
trophies of their base and savage triumph on the points of their pikes and
bayonets; but, what will be his feelings, what will contain his swelling heart,
when he is told, that all this was undertaken and perpetrated for foreign gold?
The revolutionists, by accusing Mr. Pit of being at the bottom of their
massacres, do not perceive, without doubt, that they are heaping ten times
ten-fold infamy on themselves and their nation.

By alleging this influence of British gold, the writer I have above quoted
reduces himself and the partisans of the revolution to a most distressing
dilemma. He owns that rivers of French blood have flowed at Paris, in the
departments, on the frontiers, and in the colonies; and he tells us, that this
blood was paid for with the gold of Pit. Now, admitting this to be true, this
blood has been shed, and this gold received, by Frenchmen. To what, then, will
our author ascribe this sanguinary avarice? He must either ascribe it to the
natural disposition of his countrymen; or, a change in that natural
disposition, produced by the revolution. It is uncertain which of these he may
choose, but it is very certain, choose which he will, that he has held up the
character of his nation, or the principles of the revolution to detestation,
and abhorrence. This is the way he has justified the French in the eyes of the
people of this country. Infinitely better were it for such justifiers to suffer
the press to rest in eternal inaction. All that a good Frenchman can do, is, to
weep over the disgrace of his country; for, so long as murder, horrid,
barbarous, savage murder, shall admit of no excuse, so long shall the actions
of the French revolutionists remain unjustifiable.

It is more than probable, that a writer of this stamp might be willing to
allow, that his countrymen were always naturally ferocious and bloody-minded,
rather than confess that this disposition has been produced by the principles
of the revolution: for, patriots of this kind are ever ready to sacrifice the
honor of their country to the support of their systems. But justice demands
from us to reject with disdain every such conclusion. We have seen the French
people sprightly, beneficent, humane and happy; let us, now, follow them
step-by-step into the awful opposite, and see for ourselves, by what diabolical
means the change has been effected.

The first National Assembly had hardly assumed that title, when they
discovered an intention of overturning the government, which they had been
called together, and which their constituents had enjoined them, to support,
and of levelling all ranks and distinctions among the different orders in the
community. To this they were not led, as it has been so falsely pretended, by
their love of liberty and desire of seeing their country happy; but by envy,
cursed envy, that will never let the fiery demagogue sleep in peace, while he
sees a greater or richer than himself. It has been objected to this, that there
were among the revolutionists men who already enjoyed distinguished honors;
but it is forgotten at the same time, that ambition will be at the top, or no
where; that it will destroy itself with the envied object, rather than act a
subaltern part. The motto of a demagogue is that of Milton's Satan: "rather
reign in hell than serve in heaven."

This task of destruction was, however, an arduous one. To tear the complicated
work of fourteen centuries to pieces at once, to render honors dishonorable,
and turn reverential awe into contempt and mockery, was not to be accomplished
but by extraordinary means. It was evident that property must change hands,
that the best blood of the nation must flow in torrents, or the project must
fail. The Assembly, to arm the multitude on their side, broached the popular
doctrine of equality. It was a necessary part of the plan of these reformers to
seduce the people to their support; and such was the credulity of the
unfortunate French, that they soon began to look on them as the oracles of
virtue and wisdom, and believed themselves raised, by one short sentence issued
by these ambitious impostors, from the state of subjects to that of sovereigns.

I punished (says Solon, the Athenian lawgiver) I punished with death, all
those aspiring disturbers of the commonwealth, who, in order to domineer
themselves, and lead the vulgar in their train, pretended that all men were
equal, and sought to confound the different ranks in society, by preaching up a
chimerical equality, that never did or can exist. How happy would it have been
for France, had there been some Solon, endued with wisdom and power enough to
punish the political mountebanks of the Constituent Assembly! What dreadful
carnage, what indelible disgrace, the nation would have escaped! Hardly had the
word equality been pronounced, when the whole kingdom became a scene of anarchy
and confusion. The name of liberty (I say the name, for the regenerated French
have known nothing of it but the name) The name of liber^^ had already half
turned the heads of the people, and that of equality finished (...) work. From
the moment it sounded in their ears, all that had formerly inspired r^spect,
all that they had reverenced and adored even, began to excite contempt and
fury. Birth, beauty, old age, all became the victims of a destructive equality,
erected into a law by an Assembly of ambitious tyrants, who were ready to
destroy every thing that crossed their way to absolute domination.

One of the immediate effects of the promulgation of this doctrine was the
murder of Monsieur Foulon and his son-in-law Berthier, who, without so much as
being charged with any crime, were taken by the people, conducted to Paris and
cruelly massacreed. I will say nothing (says Du Gour in his eloquent Memoire
page 35) I will say nothing of the savage cruelties committed on Foulon and
Berthier; I will not represent the bloody head of the father-in-law, offered to
the son to kiss, pressed against his lips, and afterward put under his feet; I
will not represent the inhuman assassins rushing on Berthier, tearing out his
heart, and placing it, quivering and still palpitating, on the table of the
town hall, before the magistrates of the commune. -- After this their heads
were stuck on pikes, and the heart of Berthier on the point of a sword. In this
manner they were carried through the streets, followed by the exulting populace
(see Rabaut's Hist. Of the French Revolution, page 117.) Nor let it be
pretended that the Assembly could not prevent this shameful, this bloody deed.
They had the absolute command of Paris at the time, and had two hundred
thousand armed men ready to obey their nod. But the Assembly never opposed the
murder of those whom they looked upon as their enemies; nay, Rabaut, their
partial historian (who was one of their body) even justifies the murder.

When the word equality found its way to the colonies it was only a signal for
assassination. At Port-au-Prince the Chevalier de Mauduit, a brave and generous
officer, who rendered essential services to this country during the last war,
was murdered by his own soldiers. The villains had the insolence to order him
to kneel down before them: "No," said he, like a soldier as he was, it shall
never be said, that Thomas Mauduit bent his knee before a set of scoundrels, --
His head was cut off; he was torn limb from limb; his bowels were trailed along
the street, as butchers do those of beasts in a slaughter house. The next
morning the different members of his body, and morsels of his flesh, were seen
strewed about opposite his house, and his bloody and ghastly head placed on the
step of the door way. -- We know, we have before our eyes the proofs of what
havoc, distress and destruction, this detestable word has since produced in
the unfortunate island of St. Domingo.

It was now that the sovereign people, entering on their reign, first took the
famous plundering motto: "La guerre aux chateaux et la paix aux chaumieres";
that is, War to the gentlemen's houses and peace to the cottage; or, in other
words, war to all those who have any thing to lose. This motto is extremely
comprehensive; it includes the whole doctrine of equality. It was not a vain
declaration in France; but was put in practice with that patriotic zeal which
has marked the whole course of the revolution. To be rich or of a good family
became a crime, which was often expiated by the loss of life. Men took as much
pains to be thought obscure vagabonds, as they had formerly done to be thought
wealthy and of honest descent; and, what distinguishes the French revolution
from all others in the world, to have a ragged pair of breeches, or to be
totally in want of that so necessary article of dress, was esteemed the surest
mark of pure patriotism, and was the greatest recommendation to public favor.

But the National Assembly, though heartily seconded by myriads of ragged
populace, knew, however, that they could not long depend upon such a
promiscuous support. The citizens were, therefore, to be soldiers at the same
time, and placed under the command of the creatures of the Assembly. To this
end the territory of the nation underwent a new division, on the levelling
plan. The provinces of France were melted down into a rude undigested mass of
departments, districts, and municipalities. All the old magistrates were
replaced by the vilest wretches that could be found. There were forty four
thousand municipalities, each of these had several municipal officers, and each
of these latter his troop of revolutionary myrmidons. There could not be less
than three millions of men in arms, ready to burn, cut and slay at a moment's
warning. Nothing was to be seen or heard but the patrolling of these sons of
equality. The Assembly pretended to hold out the olive branch, while they were
forming the nation into a camp. The peaceable man trembled for his life. One
must have been an eye witness of the change produced by these measures, to have
the least idea of it. All was suspicion and dread. The bell that had never rung
but to call the peaceful villagers to the altar, was converted into a signal of
approaching danger, and the tree, beneath which they formerly danced, became an
alarm post. The ragged greasy magistrates, with their municipal troops at their
heels, were for ever prowling about for their prey, the property of others.
These little platoons of cutthroats ranged the country round, crying havoc
burning and laying waste where ever they came. They had not yet begun to murder
frequently, but it was little consequence to a man whether his brains were
blowed out or not, after having seen himself and family reduced, in the space
of a few hours, from affluence to b^ggary. A band of these enlightened (...)
went to the chateau, or country house of a gentleman in Provence, and demanded
that his person should be delivered into their hands. The servants defended the
house for some time, but in vain; they advanced to the front door, when the
lady of the house appeared with a child in her arms, and endeavored to pacify
them, saying that her husband was gone out at the back door. The ruffians
instantly set fire to the house. When the lady perceived this, she confessed
that her husband was hidden in one of the garrets. The house was now on fire;
she left her child and rushed through the flames to call her husband from his
retreat, but she was stifled in the passage, and burnt to death, and her
husband shared in her fate, leaving a helpless infant to the mercy of the
murderers of its father and mother. -- A hundred volumes like this could not
contain the horrors that these revolutionary robbers committed in the name of
liberty and equality.

Let this, Americans, be a lesson to you, throw from you the doctrine of
equality, as you would the poisoned chalice. Wherever this detestable
principle gains ground to any extent, ruin must inevitably ensue. Would you
stifle the noble flame of emulation, and encourage ignorance and idleness?
Would you inculcate defiance of the laws? Would you teach servants to be
disobedient to their masters, and children to their parents? Would you sow the
seeds of envy, hatred, robbery, and murder? Would you break all the bands of
society asunder, and turn a civilized people into a horde of savages? This is
all done by the comprehensive word equality. -- But they tell us, we are not to
take it in the unqualified sense. In what sense are we to take it then? Either
it means something more than liberty, or it means nothing at all. The
misconstruction of the word liberty has done mischief enough in the world; to
add to it a word of a still more dangerous extent, was to kindle a flame that
never can be extinguished but by the total debasement, if not destruction, of
the society, who are silly or wicked enough to adopt its use. We are told, that
every government receives with its existence the latent disease that is one day
to accomplish its death; but the government that is attacked with this
political apoplexy is annihilated in the twinkling of an eye.

The civil disorganization of the state was but the forerunner of those curses
which the Assembly had in store for their devoted country. They plainly
perceived, that they never should be able to brutify the people to their
wishes, without removing the formidable barriers of religion and morality.
Their heads were turned, but it was necessary to corrupt their hearts.

Besides this, the leaders in the Assembly were professed modern philosophers;
that is to say, atheists or deists. Camus and Condorcet openly taught atheism,
and Ceruti said with his last breath, the only regret I have in quitting the
world, is, that I leave a religion on earth. These words, the blasphemy of an
expiring demon, were applauded by the assembled legislators. It was not to be
wondered at, that the vanity of such men should be flattered in the hope of
changing the most christian country into the most infidel upon the face of the
earth; for, there is a sort of fanaticism in irreligion, that leads the
profligate atheist to seek for proselytes with a zeal that would do honor to a
good cause, but which employed in a bad one becomes the scourge of society.

The zeal of these philosophers for extirpating the truth, was as great at
least, as that shown by the primitive christians for its propagation. But they
proceeded in a very different manner. At first some circumspection was
necessary. The more effectually to destroy the christian religion altogether,
they began by sapping the foundations of the catholic faith, the only one that
the people had been taught to revere. They formed a schism with the church of
Rome, well knowing that the opinions of the vulgar, once set afloat, were as
likely to fix on atheism as on any other system; and more so, as being less
opposed to their levelling principles than the rigid though simple morality of
the gospel. A religion that teaches obedience to the higher powers, inculcates
humility and peace, strictly forbids robbery and murder, and, in short, enjoins
on men to do as they would be done unto, could by no means suit the armed
russians, who were to accomplish the views of the French Assembly.

The press, which was made free for the worst of purposes, lent most powerful
aid to these destructive reformers. While the catholic religion was ridiculed
and abused, no other christian system was proposed in its stead; on the
contrary, the profligate wretches who conducted the public prints, among whom
were Mirabeau, Marat, Condorcet and Hebert, filled one half of their impious
sheets with whatever could be thought of to degrade all religion in general.
The ministers of divine worship, of every sect and denomination, were
represented as cheats, and as the avowed enemies of the sublime and sentimental
something, which the Assembly had in store for the regeneration of the world.

Most of my readers must have heard of the magnificent church of St. Genvieve,
at Paris. It was one of the most noble structures that the world had ever seen,
and had besides the honor of being consecrated to the worship of Christ. This
edifice the blasphemers seized on as a receptacle for the remains of their
"great men." From a christian church, they changed it into a pagan temple, and
gave it the name of Pantheon. Condorcet, pre-eminent in infamy, proposed the
decree, by which the name of God and that of St. Genvieve were ordered to be
effaced from the frontispiece.

To this Pantheon the ashes of Voltaire were first transported, and the
Assembly spent no less than three days in determining whether those of Rousseau
should not accompany them. This distinction, paid to two of the most celebrated
deists of the age, was a full declaration of the principles as well as the
intentions of the majority of the Assembly.

Those who have not had the patience to wade through the lies and blasphemies
of Voltaire, know his principles from report. Rousseau is not so well known;
and, as he was, and still continues to be, the great oracle of the
revolutionists, I am persuaded a page or two on his character, and that of his
works, will not be lost here; particularly as I have heard both mentioned with
applause in this country, by persons apparently of the best intentions.

The philosopher Rousseau, the pagod of the regenerated French, was born at
Geneva; and, at a proper age, bound an apprentice to an artist. During his
apprenticeship he frequently robbed his master as well as other persons. Before
his time was expired he decamped, fled into the dominions of the king of
Sardinia, where he changed the presbyterian for the catholic religion. This
beginning seemed to promise fair for what followed. By an unexpected turn of
fortune he became a footman, in which capacity he did not forget his old habit
of stealing. He is detected with the stolen goods; swears they were given him
by a maid servant of the house; the girl is confronted with him, she denies the
fact, and weeping presses him to confess the truth; but the young philosopher
still persists in the lie, and the poor girl is driven from her place in
disgrace. -- Tired of being a serving-man, he went to throw himself on the
protection of a lady, whom he had seen once before, and who he protests was the
most virtuous creature of her sex. This lady had so great a regard for him,
that she called him her little darling, and he called her mama. Mama had a
footman, who served her besides, in another capacity very much resembling that
of a husband; but she had a most tender affection for her adopted son Rousseau,
and, as she feared he was forming connections with a certain lady that might
spoil his morals, she herself, out of pure virtue, took him -- to bed with her!
-- This virtuous effort to preserve the purity of Rousseau's heart, had a
dreadful effect on the head of the poor footman, and so he poisoned himself --
Rosseau fell sick, and mama was obliged to part with little darling, while he
performed a journey to the south of France, for the recovery of his health. On
the road he dines with a gentleman, and lies with his wife. As he was returning
back, he debated with himself whether he should pay this lady a second visit or
not; but, fearing he might be tempted to seduce her daughter also, virtue got
the better, and determined the little darling to fly home into the arms of his
mama; but, alas! those arms were filled with another. Mama's virtue had
prompted her to take a substitute, whom she liked too well to part with, and
our philosopher was obliged to shift for himself. I should have told the
reader, that the little darling, while he resided with his mama, went to make a
tour with a young musician. Their friendship was warm, like that of most young
men, and they were, besides, enjoined to take particular care of each other
during their travels. They traveled on for some time, agreed perfectly well,
and vowed an everlasting friendship for each other. But, the musician, being
one day taken in a fit, fell down in the street, which furnished the faithful
Rousseau with an opportunity of slipping off with some of his things, and
leaving him to the mercy of the people, in a town where he was a total stranger.

We seldom meet with so much villainy in a youth. His manhood was worthy of it.
He turned apostate a second time, was driven from within the walls of his
native city of Geneva, as an incendiary, and an apostle of anarchy and
infidelity; nor did he forget how to thieve. -- At last the philosopher
marries; but like a philosopher; that is, without going to church. He has a
family of children, and, like a kind philosophical father, for fear they should
want after his death, he sends them to the poor-house during his lifetime! --
To conclude, the philosopher dies, and leaves the philosopheress; his wife, to
the protection of a friend; she marries a footman, and gets turned out into the
street.

This is a brief sketch of the life of Jean Jacques Rousseau, the oracle of the
regenerated French, a thief, a whoremaster, an adulterer, a treacherous friend,
an unnatural father, and twice an apostate. -- There wants only about a hundred
murders to make him equal to the immortal Marat, whom we have seen compared to
Jesus Christ. This vile wretch has the impudence to say, in the work that
contains a confession of these his crimes, that no man can come to the throne
of God, and say, I am a better man than Rousseau.

His writings, though they have very great literary merit, contain such
principles as might be expected from such a man. He has exhausted all the
powers of reasoning and all the charms of eloquence in the cause of anarchy and
irreligion. And his writings are so much the more dangerous, as he winds
himself into favor with the unwary, by an eternal cant about virtue and
liberty. He seems to have assumed the mask of virtue for no other purpose than
that of propagating with more certain success the blackest and most
incorrigible vice Two philosophers can seldom agree more than two persons of
any other profession; so it happened with Voltaire and Rousseau. The humurous
prophetic satire of the former, occasioned by the publication of Rousseau's
romance, the New Eloisa, is so well worthy of a place here, that I cannot deny
myself the pleasure of translating an extract or two from it.

"In those days there will appear in France a wonderful man. He will say unto
the people, behold! I am possessed by the demon of enthusiasm; I have received
from heaven the gift of paradoxical inconsistency; and the light-heeled
multitude will dance after him and many will adore him. And he will say, you
are all rascals and prostitutes, and I detest rascals and prostitutes, and I
come to live amongst you. And he will add, the men and women are all virtuous
in the republic of Geneva, where I was born, and I love virtuous men and women,
and I will not live in the country where I was born. -- He will protest that
the playhouse is a school of prostitution and corruption, and he will write
operas and plays. -- He will advise mankind to go stark naked, and he will wear
laced cloth^, when given unto him. -- He will swear that romances corrupt the
morals of all who read them, and he will compose a romance; and in this romance
will be seen vice in deeds and virtue in words, and the lovers will be mad with
love and with philosophy; and this romance will teach how to seduce a young
girl philosophically; and the disciple will lose all shame and modesty: and she
will practice foolishness and raise maxims and paradoxes with her master; and
she will kiss first, and ask him to lie with her, and he will actually lie with
her, and she will become round and pregnant with metaphysics. And this they
will call philosophy and virtue, and they will talk about philosophy and
virtue, till no soul on earth will know what philosophy and virtue is."


.

This was the man and the writer that the constituent Assembly held up to the
imitation and even adoration of the poor deluded French people. The ashes of
this thieving philosopher cost the nation almost two thousand guineas in
debates.

Those who know, what power novelty has on the French; with what enthusiasm, or
rather fury, they adopt whatever is in vogue, may guess at the effect that this
philosophical canonization of Rousseau produced. Every thing was a la Rousseau;
his works were hawked about, mouthed in the National Assembly (often by those
who understood them not) recommended in all the prints, and spouted at the
sans-culotte clubs. His old boorish sayings became the liveliest traits of wit,
all his manners were imitated, to be crusty and ill-bred was like Jean Jacques,
and, what was particularly offensive to every just mind, his loathsome
down-looking portrait, that portrait which seems to be the chosen seat of
guilt, was seen at every corner, and in every hand.

Having thus prepared the public mind, the Assembly made a bold attack on the
church. They discovered, by the light of philosophy, that France contained too
many churches, and, of course, too many pastors. Great part of them were
therefore to be suppressed, and to make the innovation go down with the people,
all tithes were to be abollished. The measure succeeded; but what did the
people gain by the abolition of the tithes? not a farthing; for, a tax of
twenty per cent was immediately laid on the lands in consequence of it. The
cheat was not perceived till it was too late.

But, the abolition of the tithes, the only motive of which was to debase the
clergy in the opinions of the people, was but a trifle to what was to follow.
The religious orders, that is to say, the communities of monks and nuns,
possessed immense landed estates, and these the honest Assembly had marked for
their own. As a pretext for the seizure they first decreed, that the wealth of
the religious orders belonged to the nation, to that indefinite being, that
exists every where and no where, and that has devoured all, without receiving
any thing.

As this act of seizing the estates of the regular clergy, was one of those
that gave a decisive blow to property as well as religion in France, and one
that has received the greatest applauses in this country, I shall enter a
little at length into the flagrant injustice of it. Nor is the subject
inapplicable to ourselves; for, though there are no religious orders in
America, there are many people of property, and it is of a violation of
property that I here charge the Assembly.

How the estates of the religious orders became the property of a certain
somebody called the nation, in 1791, is to me wholly inconceiveable; seeing
that there never was a time, when they belonged to that society of men, now
^alled the French. Great part of the monasteries had been founded five, six,
seven hundred years, and some above a thousand years before the most worthless
of the French took it into their heads to be so many sovereigns. The founders
were men of pious and austere lives, who, wishing to retire from the world,
obtained grants of uncultivated land, generally in some barren and solitary
spot. There they formed little miserable settlements, which, by their frugality
and labor, in time became rich meadows, farms and vineyards. A French
historian, speaking of St. Etienne, says: In 1058, he retired to Citeaux, then
a vast forest, inhabited only by wild beasts. Here, with the help of his
followers, he built a monastery of the wood of the forest; but, at first, it
was no more than a group of shabby huts. Every thing bore the marks of extreme
poverty: the cross was of wood, the censers of copper, and the candle-sticks of
iron. All the ornaments were of coarse woolen or linen. Labor was the only
means of subsistence with the monks of Citeaux. For many years bread was their
only food, and they were often reduced to a scarcity of even that.

In time this forest became a cultivated and flourishing estate, and the
successors of the first proprietors were not only at their ease, but even rich.
The monastery, which was at first but a clump of ill-shaped huts, built with
the limbs of trees, bark and turf, was become a magnificent pile. The church
was beautiful beyond description. Instead of wood and copper and iron, the
symbols of religion and the sacred vases were now of gold, silver and precious
stones. This abbey, at the time of the seizure by the Constituent Assembly, had
an annual revenue of 120,000 French livres, or, about 6,000 pounds sterling.

Now, I ask any honest man; was this the property of the French nation, or not?
By what rule of right, by what principle of law or justice, could this estate
belong to any other than the lawful successors of the first proprietors; that
is to say, the possessors at the epoch of the seizure? No title ever framed by
man could be so good as theirs. The community at Citeaux had never ceased to
exist, nor for a single moment ceased to keep possession of their Abbey and and
its dependencies. They had first obtained a lawful grant of the land, had
cleared, cultivated, and enriched it; and had enjoyed an uninter^^pted
possession during the space of seven hundred and thirty two years? but, at the
end of the enlightened eighteenth century, the Age of Reason, up starts a horde
of lazy worthless ruffians, calling themselves the nation, and lay claim to
their estates!

Bulteau, in speaking of St. Benedict, says: The bodily labor ordered by this
wise founder, was a source of peace and tranquillity to the first monks, and of
opulence to their successors. The monasteries were long an assylum to those
christians, who fled from the oppressions of the Goths and Vandals. The little
learning that remained in the barbarous and dark ages, was preserved in the
cloisters. It is to them we owe all the most precious remains of antiquity, as
well as many modern inventions. -- Indeed, under the great disposer of all
events, it is to them we owe that we are christians; that we possess the word
of God, our guide to eternal life. They not only preserved this inestimable
volume, but spread it in every country in the world. Without their agency, our
ancestors might have continued pagans; nay, we ourselves, perhaps, might now
have been sacrificing our children in the hollow of a Wicker-Idol. -- Every man
of any reading knows, that the monasteries have continued to enrich the world
with learned and useful productions. Some of the writings that do the greatest
honor to the French nation, and to the human mind, have issued from the
cloister. And yet, we have seen these men robbed of their estates, stripped of
even their furniture and their vestments, driven from beneath their roofs,
hunted like wild beasts, and, what I am ashamed to say, many of us have had the
folly, or rather baseness, to applaud their unprincipled and blood-thirsty
pursuers I cannot help observing here, that these unjust and inhuman applauders
have not always been confined to the mob. An Oration on the Progress of Reason.
delivered at a Public Commencement in the University of Cambridge,
Massachusetts, on the 18th of July, 1792, contains a phillipic against the
injured French monarch and Clergy, the most illiberal that ever disgraced the
lips of a petulant self-sufficient pedant. The Orator discovers but little
knowledge of any branch of his subject, and more particularly of the character
of Louis XVI. of that of the French Clergy, and of the nature of the old
government; against all which he runs on in a strain of invective, more
resembling the brutal abusiveness of Calvin, than any thing we ought to expect
to hear from the chair of a seminary, at the close of the " enlightened
eighteenth century". -- Like many others, this Orator looked upon the French
Revolution as happily terminated; as the dawn of universal peace, liberty, and
virtue: he has since had time to see his error, to see the effects of his
"Progress of Reason," some of which I have related in the former part of this
volume; If he be candid, therefore, he will publicly retract this error. If he
should not do this, I shall take the liberty, one of these days, of convincing
him that he has erred.
.

We are told that the monks were become too rich. Indeed this was their great
offense in the eyes of an Assembly, whose motto was: War to the rich and peace
to the cottager. But we have seen that the foundation of these riches was laid
by the labor of their predecessors, and we may observe that they were
augmented, not by oppression, as has been falsely asserted, but by a prudent
management of their estates. Those communities that cultivated their own lands,
were noted for the excellent manner of their cultivation, and for the superior
quality of their produce; and those that rented out their farms, let them at a
low rate, so as to enable the farmer to enrich the land at the same time that
he enriched himself. It was by such means that their estates became the most
valuable in the country, a circumstance that poor shallow-headed Pain has
brought against them as a heinous offense. They were gentle humane masters and
landlords: a man looked upon his fortune as made, when he became the tenant of
a religious order.

And, how were these riches spent? Not in horses and coaches; people shut up in
a cloister had no use for these. Not in balls and plays: for there they could
never appear. Not in rich attire and costly repasts; for the greatest part of
them were clothed worse than common beggars, and were forbidden the use of
meat, and even of wine, the common drink of their country. Their riches did not
go to agrandize their families; because, as no individual could possess any
thing, so he could bequeath or dispose of nothing. Who, then, profited from
these riches? -- Go ask the poor, who were happy in the neighborhood of their
convents. Go ask the aged, the infirm, the widow and the orphan. And, ask them,
too, what aid and consolation they have received from the thieving philosophers
of the Revolution.

This charge of being too rich, is the most absurd as well as the most vile
that could possibly be invented. Do we say to a man, who has acquired an
immense fortune by the labor of his father, or by any other means; you are too
rich, and therefore your property belongs to the nation? -- There is a
community at Bethlehem, very much resembling those we have here been speaking
of. What should we think of a scoundrel legislator, who should propose to strip
these people of their property, and turn them out to beg their bread, merely
because the value of their lands is increased? Such was he who first proposed
the seizure of the church lands in France.

Some of the convents in France had been founded by lay persons, upon such and
such conditions; and, in case of failure on the part of the community, the
property was to revert to the heirs of the donor. Foundations of this kind were
exactly resembling those we frequently see among us, of hospitals, seminaries,
etc. and the deeds were still in existence at the time of the seizure; but an
Assembly that paid no respect to a right of prescription, founded on a thousand
years of uninterrupted possession, could not be expected to pay attention to
the contents of a bit of old parchment.

We ought not to be astonished at hearing the author of The Age of Reason
attempt to justify this act of impudent fraud; but let us see how his doctrine
would suit, if applied to oursleves: for this is the only way to determine on
its merits. Suppose (which God forbid!) the principles of the French Revolution
should be adopted by our Legislature, and they should declare all the meeting
houses, seminaries, hospitals, etc. together with the estates which have been
left for their support, the property of the nation, how should we receive this?
Suppose an army of cutthroats should be sent to the Friends' Meeting House and
thrust them out with the points of their bayonets; suppose another should go to
the episcopal church, drive the congregation from the altar, strip the minister
of his cassock, seize on the sacramental cup, and turn the Church into a
stable; I ask how should we like this? -- But, we are told, there is a vast
difference; that the monks were superstitious drones, useless to society. --
Ah! let us beware. Let us take care not to condemn, because we are protestants,
a religion that differs from our own in form only; a religion that has yet more
votaries than any other christian profession can boast of. And, as to the
religious orders being useless to society, we have no proofs of this, but
strong presumptive ones of the contrary; for, we know, that France was great
and happy, that it had been increasing in extent, wealth and population, since
the existence of these communities, However, I can by no means take upon me to
prove the public utility of the monastic life; nor is it necessary; for, if no
man is to possess property, unless he can prove his utility to society, I am
afraid that few of us would be secure. How many hundreds of proprietors do we
see, who are much worse than useless to society! Surely the public is as much
benefited by a man who spends his life in a convent, as by one who spends it in
a tavern, at a billiard-table, or in a playhouse. Thousands and thousands
there are who never worked a stroke, nor studied a single hour; vegetating
mortals, who seem to live only to eat and drink and be carried about. Yet we
have never thought of seizing their estates. No; utility or inutility has
nothing to do with the matter; the question before us is a simple question of
right. Whether monks were necessary or useful in France, or not, we know there
were such people, and that they possessed property legally acquired; and, every
honest man, capable of distinguishing between right and wrong, will hold in
abhorrence the Assembly that dared to rob them of it.

When we hear of such crying acts of injustice as this, we are naturally led to
enquire who were the first promoters of them. The reader will be astonished to
hear, that the decree for this national robbery was first proposed by a bishop.
Of a hundred and thirty eight French bishops, there were only four to be found,
who would give their approbation to this deed, and one of these four was he who
proposed the decree. The Abbe Barruel speaks of him in the following terms: The
Assembly thought it high time to consumate their designs upon the church, by
seizing what still remained of its possessions, This measure was so evidently
contrary to every principle of justice and common honesty, that it was not easy
to find a man so totally lost to every sentiment of humanity as to bring it
forward. This second Judas was at last found in the college of the apostles.
Th^^ was Taill^rand Perigord, bishop of A^tun. -- This Perigord possessed all
the baseness, all the vices of a Jew. -- See hist. of the French clergy, page
15.

To obtain the sanction of the people to this act, they were told, that the
wealth of the church would not only pay off the national debt, but render taxes
in future unnecessary. No deception was ever so bare faced as this; but even
this was not wanted; for the people themselves had already begun to taste the
sweets of plunder. Avarice tempted the trading part of the nation to approve of
the measure. At the time of passing the decree they were seen among the first
to applaud it. They saw an easy means of obtaining those fine rich estates the
possession of which they had, perhaps long coveted. In vain were they told,
that the purchaser would partake in the infamy of the robbery; that, if the
title of the communities could not render property secure, that same property
could never be secure under any title the plunderers could give. In vain were
they told, that in sanctioning the seizure of the wealth of others, they were
sanctioning the seizure of their own, whenever that all-devouring monster, the
sovereign people, should call on them for it. In vain were they told all this:
they purchased: they saw with pleasure the plundered clergy driven from their
dwellings; but scarcely had they taken possession of their ill-gotten wealth,
when not only that, but the remains of their other property were wrenched from
them. Since that we have seen decree upon decree launched forth against the
rich: their account books have been submitted to public examination; they have
been obliged to give drafts for the funds they possessed even in foreign
countries; all their letters have been intercepted and read. How many hundreds
of them have we seen led to the scaffold, merely because they were proprietors
of what their sovereign stood in need of! these were acts of unexampled
tyranny; but, as they respected the persons who applauded the seizure of the
estates of the church, they were perfectly just. Several of these avaricious
purchasers have been murdered within the walls of those buildings, whence they
had assisted to drive the lawful proprietors: this was just: it was the measure
they had meted to others. They shared the fate of the injured clergy, without
sharing the pity which that fate excited. When dragged forth to slaughter in
their turn, they were left without even the right of complaining: the last stab
of the assassin was accompanied with the cutting reflection, that it was just.

I have dwelt the longer on this subject, as it is, perhaps, the most striking
and most awful example of the consequences of a violation of property, that the
world ever saw. Let it serve to warn all those who wish to raise their fortunes
on the ruin of others, that, sooner or later, their own turn must come. From
this act of the Constituent Assembly we may date the violation, in France, of
every right that men ought to hold dear. Hence the seizure of all gold and
silver as the property of the nation: hence the law preventing the son to claim
the wealth of his father: hence the abominable tyranny of requisitions; and
hence thousands and thousands of the murders, that have disgraced unhappy
France.

Since the seizure of the church-estates, there has not, in fact, been any such
thing as private property in France; for, though the Constituent Assembly did
not pass a decree of this import, they knew perfectly well how to pass decrees
and establish regulations amounting to the same thing. Some of their enormous
contributions on the rich, were called patriotic gifts; but he who refused to
pay the gift inserted in the list, knew he had but a few hours to live. The
money and jewels, deposited at the bar of the Assembly and on the altar of the
country, amounted to immense sums. These were held out as a proof of a general
approbation of their measures; but had the Assembly been candid, they would
have confessed, that these offerings were the pure effect of fear, of a panic
that had seized all the proprietors in the nation, and that each giver's hatred
to their cause might be measured by the sum he deposited. It was not a grateful
free will offering, but a sacrifice, that the trembling wretch came to offer at
the shrine of tyranny, in order to save his house from the flames, or his own
head, or that of some dear relation or parent, from the scaffold. Could a man,
reduced to acts like this, be said to possess any thing?

The successors of the Constituent Assembly laid aside the mask, as no longer
necessary. On the 13th of March, 1794, all the Merchants of Bourdeaux (known
for one of the most infamously patriotic towns in the kingdom) were arrested in
one day, and condemned, in presence of the guillotine, to a fine of one hundred
millions of French livres, upwards of four millions sterling. On the 18th of
April, the rich Banker, La Bord^, after having purchased his life eight times,
was guillotined, and the remainder of his riches confiscated. On the 10th of
May, twenty seven rich Farmers-General were executed, because they had amassed
riches under the monarchy. Finally, on the 27th of June, all property, of
whatever description, was decreed to belong to the nation, and was put in a
state of requisition accordingly, as the persons of the whole of the
inhabitants had been before.

The milk-and-water admirers of the Constituent Assembly pretend to be shocked
at these measures; but, what are these measures more than an improvement on
those of that Assembly? The progress was not only natural, but even necessary
to the support of the revolution. Had there been still church-estates to seize,
und monks to murder, it is probable, that the tyrants, who have succeeded the
Constituent Assembly, would not have surpassed their predecessors; but, that
source being exhausted, they were obliged to find out others, or return to
order and obedience. And, I should be glad to know, if the property of one
individual, or one society, was become the property of the sovereign people by
virtue of a decree of one Assembly, why the (...) claim should not be made to
the property of other individuals, or other societies. Nor can I believe,
whatever Atheists and Deists may say to the contrary, that it was any more
unjust to guillotine Bankers and Merchants, or even members of the Constituent
Assembly, than to guillotine or massacre poor, defenseless, friendless Priests.
There is such an intimate connection between the security of property, and that
of the person to whom that property belongs, that one can never be said to be
safe, while the other is in danger. Tyrant princes, tyrant assemblies, or
tyrant mobs, when once they are suffered to take away with impunity the
property of the innocent man, will feel little scruple at taking away his life
also. Robbery and murder are the natural auxiliaries of each other, and, with a
people rendered ferocious and hardened by an infidel system that removes all
fear of an hereafter, they must for ever be inseparable.

Before the decree was passed for the assumption of the estates of the regular
clergy, every calumny that falsehood could invent, and every vexation that
Tyranny could enforce, were employed to debase the whole body of the clergy and
the religion they taught. Songs and caricatures were sung, or hawked about, by
shameless strumpets in the pay of the Assembly. In these not only the clerical
functions and the lives of the clergy were ridiculed, but even the life of
Jesus Christ and the Virgin Mary. The Incarnation of our Savior became the
subject of a farce, in the smutty language of Parisian fish-women. Who were the
characters in this farce, I leave the shuddering reader to conceive.

A decree, in form of an invitation, "Invitations from superiors," says some
one, "favor strongly of commands." This was so much the case in the present
instance, that the priest who dared to disobey, was sure to expiate his
disobedience with his life. The magistrates often entered the church and seized
the chalices on the altar, during the celebration of the mass. Such are
revolutionary invitations.
was issued, for bringing the gold and silver from the churches to the mint. It
was well known, that there were none of these metals in the churches, except
the vases, the crucifixes, and other symbols, hitherto held sacred. What an
effect the coining up of these must have on the minds of the giddy multitude,
is not difficult to imagine. Many, however, even of the most depraved, felt a
momentary horror; but this horror the Assembly knew how to do away. Hundreds, I
might say thousands, of abandoned scriblers were employed to propagate the new
principles. Their little filthy ditties were spread through all the
departments, at the expense of the nation. Some of these were catechisms in
rhyme, in which the Constitution was substituted for God, the Assembly for the
saints, and both recommended to the adoration of the French patriots. The
journal, or Letter, as it was called, of Pere du Chene, written by one Hebert,
and of which it is said fifty thousand copies were struck off daily, was sent
into the towns and villages by the carriers of the decrees of the Assembly.
This Hebert, whose Strumpet has since been adored at Paris, as the Goddess of
Reason, was a professed atheist. His journal contained the most outrageous
abuse of all that was respectable and sacred, interlarded with oaths and
execrations without number. I have one now before me, which has for title:
Lettre du veritable Pere du Chene, bougrement patriotic. in English: Letter of
the true Father du Chene b -- gerly patriotic; I would here insert an extract
from this letter; but, I trust I shall be believed, when I say, the contents
are fully answerable to the title. Such were the agents of Condorcet and his
colleagues: thus did they corrupt the morals of the people; thus did they lead
them from one degree of vice to another; thus were they hardened up to rob and
to murder; and thus did the boasted Constituent Assembly lay the foundation of
all those horrors we have since heard of.

The magistrates in the different municipalities, chosen from the scum of the
nation, distributed these infernal writings among the people in their
precincts, and particularly among the young people. If, by chance, some
magistrate was found, too scrupulous to execute their will, means were soon
invented to get rid of him. Some pretext or other was never wanting to excite
the mob to put an end to him and his resistance. Chatel, Mayor of St. Denis was
one of this description. The mob were told that this man was the cause of the
dearness of bread. They flew to his house, and obliged him to reduce the price
according to their will; though it was well known, that he had not the power to
reduce it at all unless at his own expense. The rabble were dispersing; but
they had not fulfilled the bloody wishes of the revolutionary agents, who had
nothing less in view than the lowering of the price of bread. They were
instigated to return to the unfortunate magistrates. First, they attempted to
hang him; but, wearied with his resistance, one of them took out his knife, and
cut his head partly off, while several others pricked him with their bayonets.
The unhappy victim was still alive after the back of his neck was cut assunder,
and was heard to groan out: for heaven's sake kill me! kill me! you make me
suffer too long! -- The sanguinary villain, who had begun to cut his head off,
now threw away his knife, and borrowed that of his comrade, with which he
finished the work. When he found that his own knife was not sufficient, he
said, with a cool indifference: lend me your knife, for mine is not worth a
curse. That which was lent him was a little two-penny knife with a wooden
handle. -- During this time, other assassins gave him several stabs, with their
knives, in the belly and stomach; one of them turned his knife slowly in the
flank of the dying man, and said to him, laughing: Does that enter well? Don't
you find the daylight peep into you? -- He at last expired, after the most
inconceivable torments. His body was dragged along the streets of St. Denis
with his head tied to his feet. -- A resolution of the town has since declared
him innocent of any offense whatever: he had given abundant assistance to the
poor the winter before: the diminution he had just made in the price of bread
was at his own expense; and this barbarous punishment was his recompense. His
wife went distracted, and has ever since been in a mad-house. His as^^^sins
obtained pardon from the Assembly, a circumstance much less surprising, than
that they should think it necessary to ask it. See du Gour's Memoire, page 57.

Examples of this kind, and such were wanting in very few parts of the country,
could not fail to insure an implicit obedience on the part of the magistrates.

The debasement of religion was nearly completed by the public sale of the
suppressed churches and monasteries. The grossest indecency presided at all
these demoniac scenes. When the vile agent of the Assembly, hammer in hand, had
exhausted his auctioneer rhetoric, in recommending a church as an excellent
barn, stable, or playhouse, it was knocked down to the base and avaricious
speculator, while the hireling mob shouted applause. The church of St.
Aldegonde at St. Omers (I love to cite instances) the highest in that ancient
town, and for hundreds of years the pride of its inhabitants, was sold to a Jew
of Dunkirk, for the pitiful sum of 20,000 French livres in assignats, not more
than 200 pounds sterling; not half the cost of one of the pillars. This
beautiful edifice by the spire of which the town was known at a great distance,
had been chosen for destruction, that the humiliation of religion might be the
more striking. It met with such treatment as might be expected from the hands
of an infidel. Its lofty spire was tumbled to the earth in less than a month:
the body of the church was turned into a ropewalk, and the Jew proprietor, to
complete the degradation of Christianity, left a representation of the Lord's
Supper uneffaced in the chancel. What must be the grief, what the indignation
of the thinking and pious part of the inhabitants of St. Omers, thus to see
their favorite church, the sanctuary of their God, and the God of their
fathers, delivered, for a bundle of depreciated paper-money, into the hands of
a descendant of the murderers of him, to whose worship it was consecrated!

To give the reader a just idea of the ribaldry of the scenes of brutal
impiety, exhibited at the pillage of the convents, is totally impossible. A
dozen or two of carts rattling along with a commissary at their head ^llowed by
an escort of ragamuffins, decorated with a bit of three colored ribbon, and
armed with hammers, axes, crow-bars and spades, generally formed the corpse for
such an expedition. Hardly were the doors opened when the vaults rang with
their hammering and their oaths. In a few hours the whole was gutted. The
decorations of the altar, the priest's vestments, statues, pictures, books,
manuscripts, the most precious pieces of antiquity, the productions of long and
laborious lives of study, were hauled away as so much rubbish. The paintings on
the doors, walls, ceilings, and other fixtures, were effaced or disfigured; the
fury of the enlightened ruffians descended even to the graves of the deceased
fathers.

At the expulsion of the nuns, the conduct of the revolutionists, was, if
possible, still more swinish and cruel. While the gibing commissary pulled
aside their veils to examine their faces, his blackguard attendants
congratulated them on the pleasures they were going to enjoy in the world, and
this in a language calculated to raise a blush on the cheek of a common
street-walker. They seemed to enjoy their tears, and even to make some
sacrifices to augment them. Had any one a piece of needle work which she wished
to preserve, it was rent to pieces before her face. A singing bird that had the
misfortune to have been the companion of the solitary hours of its mistress,
was sure to be taken from her and killed. To these dejected and defenseless
females, every insult and indignity was offered, not forgetting the last of
which beastly libertines can be guilty.

In a country where the crucifix was sent to the mint, where churches were put
up at auction; where the half-worn cassock, the surplice, and the veil, made
part of the assortment of a dealer in old-cloths, and were exposed to public
sale on the marketplace; where the ministers of the gospel were scoffed at,
reviled, and frequently murdered with as little ceremony as one would kill a
dog; where the most daring blasphemi^s were uttered and published and spread
through the country, not only with the permission of its governors, but by
their direction; in a country where all this was practiced, religion could not
be of long duration. Religion, and even the Catholic religion, did, however,
still subsist in France, at least, in form. The Assembly had as yet passed no
positive decree for its abolition. They had robbed the church, had stripped its
altars, and degraded its ministers; but still the most pious and active of
those ministers were left in the exercise of their functions. The parochial
clergy, though deprived of the tithes, had a stipend allowed them. They yet
remained with their parishioners, many of whom, indeed nearly all the elderly
and sober part of them, continued as firmly attached to their pastors, as at
any former period.

Things were not suffered to remain long in this state. The Constituent
Assembly well knew, that they and religion could never exist for any length of
time in the same country. The parochial clergy were men of talents and
industry. They generally decided all the little disputes between their
parishioners; to which amicable capacity, they often joined that of physician
or surgeon; and these their beneficent services were always rendered without
fee or reward. Even the atheists and deists themselves had repeatedly
acknowledged their virtuous modesty, and the great utility they were of to the
community at large. Such a body of men, immoveably attached to the religion
they taught, was truly formidable to the new tyrants. Religion had received a
severe blow; but, if these men retained their cures, it might recover. Nay,
what was still more dreadful, the monarchy itself might recover along with it;
and it is not difficult to conceive, how an idea like this must haunt the minds
of the pupils of the savage and impious Diderot, who hoped to see the last of
kings strangled with the guts of the last of priests. In short, the parochial
clergy, were the only men on earth they had now to fear, and these they got rid
of by a stratagem worthy of an Assembly, the leaders of which joined to the
most hardened wickedness, the profoundest dissimulation.

They laid aside the Rights of Man, together with the famous constitution, from
which they took the adjunct to their name, and which we have since seen burnt
by the hands of the common hangman (or rather common guillotiner) in that very
city of Paris, where it had been issued amidst the applauses and even
adorations of the populace. They laid aside the discussion of this instrument
of short-lived and ridiculous memory, to draw up another, which they were
pleased to call, "the Civil Constitution of the Clergy." They were constitution
mad, absolutely frantic.

It might be sufficient to say of this latter constitution, that it was just as
subversive of religion as their other constitution was of every principle of
government and sound policy. They knew it to be in direct opposition to the
very nature of the catholic religion: yet they had the assurance to tell the
people, that it was not; they even went so far as to protest, that they would
live and die in the religion of their forefathers, at the very moment when they
were taking the surest measure in the world for destroying it. They were led to
this hypocritical declaration from a fear that the body of the people were not
yet ripe for a total abolition of religion, and, as we shall see in the sequel,
this fear was not entirely unfounded. By persuading the people, that nothing
was intended against their faith, they had an additional handle against the
clergy, by representing them as unfriendly to their "Civil Constitution,"
merely because it was necessary to the support of the Rights of Man.

This instrument did not, however, pass into a law, without considerable
resistance. There were yet some honest and virtuous men even among the members
of the Constituent Assembly. These had remained with them, not to aid in
overturning the government, and effecting the dreadful revolution that has
since rendered the country a slaughterhouse, but to oppose the destructive
measures of the philosophers, and, if possible save the sinking state. At the
head of these was the learned and eloquent Abbe Maury. He opposed this "Civil
Constitution," with all the powers of reasoning and all the charms of
eloquence: but it was casting pearls before swine. When was an atheist open to
conviction. The decree passed, and was soon after followed by another, obliging
the clergy to swear to observe and maintain the "Civil Constitution." This oath
they could not take without breaking that which they had taken at entering into
the priesthood; and that the Assembly had every reason to suppose they would
not do. Whether they did or not, however, the end of their tyrants was
answered: if they refused, they were to be driven from their livings; if they
complied, they must be looked upon as apostates, and be deserted by all those
who were still attached to them. In either case the tottering remains of
religion must come to the ground. The clergy, and indeed the whole nation, and
all Europe, saw the real object of this inhuman and impious decree; but the
Assembly, surrounded with their enlightened myrmidons, the Parisian mob, bid
defiance to earth and heaven.

Generally speaking, the clergy were resolved not to take the oath. Lose no
time, said the Abbe Maury, in the delivery of your challenge. By shedding our
blood you may ingratiate yourselves with your constituents. Lose, then, not a
single moment. Your victims are here; they are ready. To their torments add not
that of suspense. Why not vote at once for our execution, glut your hatred, and
quench for a little your thirst for blood? Hasten, I say, while the power is in
your hands; for remember, I now foretell, your reign will be of short duration.

This prophetic address, which we have seen so fully verified, served only to
inflame. Eight days only were given the clergy to determine on compliance or
refusal, during which no stratagem that base and degenerate tyranny could
devise, was left unessayed to intimidate them. This was ever their practice,
when they had an important blow to strike. Rochefoucauld, formerly a duke,
declared, at the time the decree for the seizure of the monasteries was under
deliberation, that the lives of the bishops and priests, in the Assembly,
depended upon the passing of it; and, in order to silence all those who opposed
it, a list of their names was stuck up on the walls, with a promise of a reward
of twelve hundred livres to any patriot, who would assassinate them. According
to this laudable custom, this instance of French liberty, when the day for
taking the oath, or, as it was well termed, "the for-swearing day" arrived, the
Assembly took care to call in the aid of the fish-women and mob. To the
lamp-post with the non-juring bishops and priests! was echoed from the streets
and the galleries. The ruffians were prepared for murder, and were howling for
their prey, like so many wolves round a sheepfold.

Let the reader imagine himself in the situation of one of these unfortunate
clergymen: an oath of apostasy before him, and a halter behind his back, and
then let him give me his opinion of the rights of man.

This did not intimidate the clergy, only thirty of whom could be prevailed on
to submit, and these were already known to have abandoned their religion. When
the oath was tendered to the bishop of Again: Gentlemen, says he, I lament not
the loss of my fortune; but there is another loss which I should ever lament;
the loss of your esteem and my faith. I could not fail to lose both, if I took
the oath now proposed to me. The old bishop of Poitiers, fearing he might lose
so fair an opportunity of bearing testimony of his sincerity, advanced to the
tribune, and calling on the president to command silence; Gentlemen, said he, I
am seventy years old; I have been thirty years a bishop: I will never disgrace
my gray hairs by an oath of apostasy. Upon this manly declaration of the
reverend old prelate, the clergy rose from their seats, thanked him for his
example, and told the Assembly he had expressed their unanimous sentiments.

Not being a Roman Catholic, I hope I shall be excused, when I freely declare,
that I much question, whether the ministers of any protestant communion, in a
moment so terrible, surrounded with assassins and without a single friend,
would have shown such a noble intrepidity. They have lost their money, said the
profligate Mirabeau on this occasion, but they have saved their honor. Doctor
Priestley (Fast Sermon of 1794, page 46.) says: When I was myself in France in
1774, I saw sufficient reason to believe, that hardly any person of eminence,
in church or state, and especially in the least degree eminent in philosophy,
or literature, was a believer in christianity; and no person will suppose, that
there has been any change in favor of christianity in the last twenty years --
The Doctor will allow, I suppose, that bishops are persons of eminence in the
church; if he does, it will appear that he knew but very little of those of the
French church, and that he formed a very rash opinion (to say the best of it)
concerning their belief in christianity; for, of one hundred and thirty eight
bishops, only four, namely, Taillerand, Brienne, Jarante, and Gobet, took the
oath of apostasy. But, he will say: I meant, those eminent in philosophy and
literature. Ah! eminent in philosophy! here he is right. No, no; not one of the
philosophical divines believed in christianity; they looked upon Christ, as the
Unitarians do; that is, as a sort of "teacher:" but, to the honor of the
French bishops, there were but four of these philosophers amongst them. As to
the other hundred and thirty, if they have not given a proof of their belief, I
should be glad to know from the Doctor, what proof he will please to be
satisfied with. -- Their refusal to take the oath could be dictated by nothing
but their belief in christianity, and their determination not to dishonor it.
Had not this been the case, they would have taken the oath, and preserved their
fortunes. They were in a country were the mob do not, like those of Birmingham,
content themselves with the execution of an effigy; they execute the person.
Yet they remained at their post: they did not decamp in disguise. Even if they
escaped the knives of the cutthroats, they knew that poverty, beggary, a
lingering existence, must be the price of their refusal. They could not bring
an action against the city of Paris: no damages are granted by a jury in that
country. They could not preach and prate against the government with impunity?
they could not transfer their property, and emigrate in open day. There are
such things as national guards, municipalities, passports, halters, daggers,
knives, drowning-boats, and the rights of man, in France. We have since seen
several of these bishops, or men "of eminence in the church," refuse with the
bloody poignard at their breasts, to take this oath. Would they have done this,
had they been what Doctor Priestley has represented them to be? would they have
done this, had they been atheists, or deists? nay, would they have done this,
had they been Unitarians! If we are to judge from the conduct of the Doctor,
they would not. -- I will not take upon me to say, that the philosophical
political divine meant to propagate an attrocious calumny by this sermon of
his: I shall only observe, that the sermon was preached long after the French
bishops had given these undeniable proofs of their faith and sincerity.
And, if this was the case, what had the Assembly done? If, to preserve honor,
it was necessary to refuse an obedience to their decrees, what sort of decrees
must those be?

The Assembly were disconcerted by this firm resistance on the part of the
clergy? they knew the clergy in general would never take the oath, but they did
not imagine that those amongst themselves, would, amidst the vociferations of
their cannibals, have the courage to give such a positive denial. For a moment
they felt abashed; but they were gone too far to think of retreating. The
apostate Abbe Gregoire, whom we have since seen amongst the organizers of a
pagan festival, was, on this occasion chosen to convince the clergy, that the
oath might be taken, without any violation of their faith. After this, in order
to deprive the clergy of an opportunity of defending their opinions in
opposition to the oath, they were ordered to advance and take it at once. This
decree had no effect: not a man advanced. Now the matter was brought to a
point: the decree for enforcing the oath must be repealed, or the clergy must
be driven from their livings, and those in the Assembly from their feats. It is
hardly necessary to say that the latter was adopted: one tyrannical measure is
the natural and inevitable consequence of another.

A decree was now passed for the expulsion of all the non-juring bishops and
priests, and for the choosing of others in their stead. From this day, it may
be said, there was no such thing as an established religion in France. The ax
had long been laid to the root of the tree; it was ready to fall, and this
stroke levelled it with the earth.

Had the dispute been about this or that tenet; had the oath been imposed with
an intention of exchanging one religion for another, the case would have been
different; the expulsion might have taken place without any very considerable
injury to the morals of the people. But, the struggle was that of religion
against irreligion, that of christianity against atheism.

It was (I hope it is so no longer) the opinion of Doctor Priestley, and many
other philosophical divines, that any change whatever was preferable to the
continuation of the catholic religion in France. There is a passage in Moore's
journal, which contains so complete an answer to every thing these gentlemen
have advanced on this subject, that I am surprised, considering the principles
of the journalist and his companion Lauderdale, that it ever found a place in
that volume.

The Doctor, being at Abbeville, met with a protestant clergyman, whom he
congratulated on the deliverance of himself and his brethren, from the vexation
of Romish persecution. The clergyman seemed to lament, that along with the
spirit of persecution, that of religion daily diminished. Upon which, says the
Doctor, I observed that, as nothing could be more opposite to true religion
than a spirit of persecution, the former, it was to be hoped, would return
without the latter; but, in the mean time, the protestants were happy in not
only being tolerated in the exercise of their religion, but also on being
rendered capable of enjoying every privilege and advantage which the catholics
themselves enjoy.

We are not allowed those advantages, resumed the clergyman, from any regard
they bear to our religion, but from a total indifference of their own.

Whatever may be the case, replied I, the effect is the same with regard to
you.

No, said he, the effect might be better, not only with respect to us, but to
all France; for the spirit of persecution might have disappeared, without an
indifference for all religion coming in its place: and in that case there would
have been more probability of the true religion gaining ground; for it is
easier to draw men from an erroneous doctrine to a true one, than to impress
the truths of religion on minds which despise all religion whatever.

But, although you may not be able to make converts of them, I replied, still
you may live happy among them, in the quiet possession of your own religion and
all your other advantages.

I doubt it much, resumed he; being persuaded that, in a country where
religious sentiments are effaced from the minds of the bulk of the people,
crimes of the deepest guilt will prevail in spite of all the restraints of law.

How fully, alas! has the opinion of this good clergyman been confirmed! here
we see a man living upon the spot, a Frenchman and a protestant, lamenting the
decay of the catholic religion, and trembling for the consequences. This man
plainly perceived the drift of the philosophical legislators: he saw that the
destruction of all religion was their object, while they pretended to be
correcting its abuses. Very far was he from saying, with our zealous reformers,
that any change was preferable to the continuation of popery, and yet, I think,
we ought to allow him to be as much interested in a change, and as good a judge
of its conveniences and inconveniences, as persons on this side the sea;
except, indeed, that he might not be enlightened by the rays of modern
philosophy. Some of the French protestants, however, differed widely from this
good man. The Calvinists of Nimes began massacreing the Catholics at an early
period of the revolution, under the pretext that they were aristocrats. About
six hundred persons, of both sexes and of all ages, were butchered in their
houses, in the streets and public squares, before they could even suspect their
danger. These monsters attacked the convent of the Capuchins, forced it open,
and pursued the venerable fathers to their dormitories and ce^^^. Five of them
were left weltering in their blood at the altar's foot. One of these a very old
man, craved five minutes while he committed his soul to God. The cool and
deliberate villains granted his request. The intended butcher held a pistol in
one hand and a watch in the other, and, when the five minutes were expired,
shot him through the head. See Hist. of the French Clergy, page 71. French
edition.

This fact fully proves, that protestants can be as cruel as catholics. Let us
not, then, imagine that we are secure from events of this kind, merely because
the catholic religion is not established here. It was not a zeal for the
Calvinistical religion that led the protestants of Nimes to commit these acts
of barbarity: their knives were pointed, not against catholics, as such, but as
aristocrats.




From this digression we must return to the expulsed clergy. The parish priests
generally followed the example of their bishops in refusing to take the oath.
Others were, of course, appointed to replace them. Taillerand Perigorde, whom
we have seen proposing the assumption of the church-estates, was now become a
sort of Pope to the modern church, and was busily employed, laying unholy hands
on the heads of the new bishops. Gobet, one of the four bishops who had
forsworn themselves, was rewarded for his apostasy by the bishopric of Paris.
Vagabond philosophical abbes, who had never been able to obtain admittance into
the priesthood under the old government, were now not only accepted, but sought
after. To these were added the secular priests and monks who had apostatized.
Even the wretches who had been expulsed from their cures, or orders, for
irregular or criminal conduct, were now called in from Germany and the
low countries. What a fight must it be, to those who yet preserved some respect
for their religion and their country, to see these strollers, with their
strumpets at their heels, returning to take on them the care of the morals and
fouls of a numerous people! after all, the number of apostates was
insufficient: a great many parishes remained without any priest at all.

The installment of the new priests was commonly, not to say always, attended
with tumult and violence. Many of their predecessors were knocked down,
stabbed, or shot, at their church doors, the day, or day after, they had
refused to conform. The priest of the village of Spet-Saux, while he was
explaining to his parishioners his reasons for refusing to take the oath,
received a mu^ket ball in his br^^^^, and tumbled dead from the pulpit into the
(...).

Where there was no resistance but on the part of the priest, an assassination
put an end to the struggle; but, in some places, the resistance was more
general. The parishioners were divided; one part the champions of the apostate,
and the other, those of the old priest. Church time was the moment for deciding
these disputes, and the Churchyard the field of action. These affrays were
often bloody; victory sometimes leaned to the side of justice; but, as the
apostate appeared in person at the head of his troops, as he had the young
people generally on his side, and always the mob and municipal officers, with
their national guards, he seldom failed to keep the field. Some of these
wretches have been seen conducted to the altar to the sound of drums and
trumpets, at the very moment when their partisans were murdering on the outside
of the church.

The expelling of the parochial clergy tried the real sentiments of the body of
the French people more than any one act of their tyrants ever did, before or
since. Generally speaking, the trial was honorable to them; for, if we except
Paris, and some other places immediately under the influence of the
revolutionary clubs, they wished to retain their ancient pastors, and did not
scruple to declare that wish, notwithstanding the vociferations of hundreds of
mob in the pay of the Assembly; notwithstanding all these petty assemblies of
subaltern tyrants, called municipal officers, who came to order them to receive
an apostate, in the name of the law; notwithstanding thousands of spies and
assassins, ever ready to betray and murder them; in spite of all these, whole
parishes flocked round their priests, pressed them to continue, followed them
to the fields, and left the apostates to say mass to the bare walls. Many of
the latter, though they continued to receive the revolutionary salary for
upwards of two years, never could boast of above three or four voluntary
hearers.

Wherever this obstinate attachment to religion appeared, the Assembly knew how
to make the refractory feel their authority. True tyrants, they suffered no one
to thwart their will with impunity. Property, honor, conscience, all must
yield to their sultanic decrees!

Condorcet, the atheist Condorcet, proposed flagellation; and this was pretty
commonly inflicted on the women and children who assisted at the masses of the
non-juring clergy. The Abbe Barruel (page 79 of the French edition) tells us,
that three sisters of one of the Charity-houses at Paris, expired under the
rods of the assassins. Ungrateful monsters! the lives of these women had been
totally devoted to the service of the sick, the lame and the blind. By their
vow they were excluded from the pleasures of the world, without being excluded
from its pains. They had made a voluntary surrender of all they possessed, had
assumed the garb, and submitted to the austerities of the monastic life, in
order to devote themselves to the mournful occupation of attending on the poor
who labored under infirmities. It was said, they did this to secure
themselves, a place in heaven; and most certainly they took the surest way. I
feel a reluctance to call such people superstitious; for, if they were so,
their superstition was of a most amiable kind, and surely nothing short of the
principles of this hellish revolution could have hardened the hearts of men to
scourge them to death, and that merely because they would not disgrace
themselves by receiving the sacrament from the contaminated hands of an
apostate.

It were endless to enumerate all the different sorts of persecution exercised
against those who remained attached to their religion. Little children were
beaten half to death; the hair and ears of women were cut off; they were
mounted on asses, and led about in the most unseemly and shocking guise. The
instance of John Cantabel deserves particular notice. Cantabel was an honest
peasant, sincerely attached to the religion of his fathers. He happened to have
a little catechism which had been published by the non-juring clergy; it was
found in his house; and this was a sufficient crime. A committee of municipal
officers ordered the catechism to be burnt; a great fire was made; Cantabel was
brought forth, and commanded to throw the book into it. "No," says the heroic
peasant, it contains the principles of my religion; it has been my guide and my
comfort, and it now gives me the courage to tell you, that I will never commit
it to the flames. Upon this he was threatened, but still he remained resolute.
One of the ruffians seized a flaming torch, and held it under his hand. "Burn
on," said he, you may burn not only my hand, but my whole body, before I will
do any thing to dishonor my religion. He was afterward mounted on a horse,
his back to the head, and the tail in his hand, and was thus conducted about
amidst the shouts of the rabble. The vile wretches, when tired with their
sport, suffered him to creep home, more dead than alive. -- This is the liberty
of conscience in the "Age of Reason.!" This is the toleration we might expect
from atheists, from these infidel philosophers, who are continually exclaiming
against the prejudices of their forefathers, and against the sad effects of
bigotry and religious zeal. In the cant of these enlightened reformers, this
peasant was a fanatic, an aristocrat, a rebel to the law, and, as such, they
will tell you that he was worthy of death.

Notwithstanding the partial opposition the apostates met with, and the horror
their conduct, as well as their ministry excited in all good minds, they, at
last, found themselves in possession of the churches, to the exclusion of the
ancient priests. Such of these latter as had escaped death, were now bereft of
all means of subsistence; they were therefore obliged to become a charge to
their faithful parishioners. Had there been any such things as toleration and
liberty under the Constituent Assembly, these unfortunate men might still have
found a retreat amongst their wealthy neighbors, that would have left them no
reason to regret the loss of their salaries. But the greatest part of their
wealthy neighbors were already reduced to their own situation, and those who
were not, knew that the reception of a non-juring priest would amount to a
proof of aristocracy, sufficient to lead them to the guillotine. The expulsed
priests were, then, obliged to take shelter in some obscure and miserable
cabin, and often was the terror so great, that, like persons infected with the
plague, no one would admit them beneath his roof.

From such a state of misery and humiliation, some fled in disguise to the
countries surrounding France; some to recesses in the forests, whither the
peasants of the neighborhood brought them the means of existence. Numbers,
however, still remained in their towns and villages. Seeing the whole country
swarming with assassins, they thought, perhaps, they might as well wait the
stab in their own parishes as to seek it at a distance. Many, too, from age and
infirmity, were absolutely incapable of traveling; and, besides the small
remainder of a life so full of bitterness, could not, with such men, be an
object of sufficient importance to induce them to abandon those of their
parishioners, who still sought their advice and consolation. Some were retained
by their affection to their relations, or their parents; it is so hard to break
the bands of nature, to tear oneself from all one holds dear, that the risk of
death in competition with such a separation, loses half its terrors.

The ancient priests who remained in their parishes, or near them, though often
obliged to secret themselves, and though, to appearances, generally shunned,
were resorted to by great numbers, particularly of the elderly people. I have
already observed, that, among the youth, there was a pretty general bias toward
the apostates. Hence ensued such scenes of division and persecution as no
country on earth except France ever witnessed. Friends were divided against
friends; one branch of a family against another. It often happened that the
parents treated their children as apostates, and the children their parents as
aristocrats; quarrels and bloodshed were as often the consequences. We have
seen (page 29 of this volume) a son cut off the heads of his father and mother,
because they refused to attend at the mass of an apostate, carry the heads to
his club, and receive applauses for the deed. Acts like this were not frequent;
but others very near approaching it, were not only frequent but general. Sons,
and even daughters, have been known to beat and lacerate their parents in the
most cruel manner. Hundreds of both sexes have been led to prison and publicly
accused by their children. A man at Faulconberg in Artois, blew his wife's
brains out with his musket, and left her wallowing in her blood on the hearth
with seven small children crying round her!

Can any man, with the common feelings of humanity about his heart, contemplate
such scenes of horror, without execrating the revolution that gave rise to
them? Many writers (and among others Thomas Pain) have remarked, that the
French paid great respect, even a sort of adoration, to old people: if this was
the case, which I am by no means inclined to deny, or doubt, what sort of a
revolution must that be, which has changed this respect and veneration, so
justly due to old age, into scorn and contempt, into a merciless brutality,
nay, into parricide? Solon made no law to punish sacrilege or parricide;
because, he observed, the first was as yet unknown in Athens, and the second
was so directly against all the feelings of nature, that he did not believe it
could ever be committed. -- Poor Solon did not live in the enlightened
eighteenth century, or he would never have talked in this way. If he could but
rise from the grave, and listen to our philosophers, they would not only
convince him that such actions are possible, but they would tell him they were
indispensably necessary to the establishment of a free republican government.
Had Solon been at Paris, since the revolution, he would have been guillotined
for a rank aristocrat.


The apostate priests failed not to fan the flames of discord and division. To
ingratiate themselves with the young and ignorant, they mixed in all their
amusements and debauches, treated them at their own houses, and instituted
civic festivals for the mob, with whom they were continually surrounded. Their
masses were sung midst the shouts of robbers and murderers, and often
interrupted by the arrival of some innocent conscientious person, dragged in to
assist at what he looked upon as a profanation. Their churches resembled
guard-houses, rather than places of divine worship. In proportion as they
perceived themselves neglected and despised, their wrath against their unshaken
predecessors increased. Vexed and humiliated to find, that all the respectable
part of their parishioners took as much pains to avoid them, as to seek a
communication with their old pastors, the whole weight of their vengeance fell
on these latter. In their existence itself they saw a memento of their own
infamy. There is not a species of cruelty, that the most obdurate can devise,
which they left unessayed. They hunted them from their retreats, from the
houses of their friends and relations, from the woods and caverns even, to
expose them to insult and murder. The infirmities of age, the tears of parents,
nothing could soften the hearts of these apostate wretches. We have seen enough
of the sufferings of the old clergy in the first Chapter of this work; but
there is yet one instance which I must quote. I was at Trois Rivieres (says le
voyageur de la Revolution) a little village in Picardy. I saw several women
running by the inn where I had put up; they all seemed much alarmed. I asked
the landlord what was the matter: he told me that the revolutionary priest,
provoked to find that none of the village attended at his mass, had been that
morning to Ville D' Eu for a party of national guards, to aid him in driving
the former priest from a little cottage, where he and his mother had taken
shelter. The man gave me a most affecting account of this good priest, who was
upwards of fourscore years of age, and who had been the rector of that place
for more than fifty years. On the day he was to deliver his cure into the hands
of the apostate, he summoned his little flock to meet him in the church for the
last time. Not a soul was absent: old or young. The women carried their infants
in their arms, and two old people, not able to walk were carried on couches. My
children, says the old man, I have pressed your tender hands on the baptismal
font: I have sung the requiem for the souls of your fathers: I must now bid you
an eternal farewell, deprived of the consolation of leaving my ashes amongst
you. -- Here he ceased; tears stifled his voice: the sobs and cries of his
audience rendered the scene too much for him. -- While the landlord was
speaking, we heard a discharge of muskets, and a loud shriek of woman. We ran
to the spot. The peasants of the village, about forty in number, had assembled
round the cottage with clubs to defend their pastor; but, the enemy having fire
arms, they had been obliged to give way, leaving two of their companions dead
and several wounded. I now beheld a fight sufficient to melt the heart of a
tiger. Two ruffians of the national guard were dragging out this venerable old
man by the hair of his head, by those locks as white as snow. He had received a
wound in his cheek, from which the blood ran down on his garments. In this
situation was he led off, bare headed and bare footed, toward Ville D' Eu,
while his poor old parent, who had been many years blind and dumb, remained on
her bed, happily insensible of the sorrows of her son. As the villains pulled
him along, all the words he was heard to utter, were, My Mother! Oh! My Mother!
-- The women and children of the village followed the escort with cries and
lamentations, till the savages drove them back with the points of their
bayonets.

Nor were those of the laity spared, who resorted to the old clergy for the
exercise of the rites which they looked upon as essential. A new married couple
having refused to have the ceremony performed by one of the apostates, a party
of his myrmidons broke in upon them, the wedding night. The husband made his
escape: the wife, in a swoon, became the prey of the party. They gratified
their brutal passion, without gratifying their ferocity. They tore off her
breasts, as a tiger might have done with his claws, and threw them on the
floor. They then left her to wait till death relieved her from her horrible
situation. See Hist. of the French Clergy, page 138. -- I cannot help remarking
here, that it is something wonderful this History is not more known in America.
-- It is a proof, among hundreds, how locked up we have been to every thing
that might lead us to a just estimation of the French Revolution. -- It is
true, the greatest part of the News-paper have set their face, against truth;
but surely, were the presses free, we ought not to suffer ourselves to be kept
in the dark by people, who are, probably paid for so doing.


I should have scrupled inserting a fact like this, though taken from so
respectable a work, if the former part of this volume did not contain others,
if possible surpassing it: I say if possible; for I declare I know not which is
most shocking, the tearing off a woman's breasts, or the ripping a child from
her womb, and sticking it on the point of a bayonet. Indeed, the greatest part
of the facts related here, are so much more shocking and terrific than any
thing we have ever before had an idea of, that common murders appear as
trifling.

By means like these, the old clergy and their adherents were extirpated, and
religion along with them. The business of the new clergy (if the wretches
deserve the name) was not to establish one church on the ruins of another: it
would be as preposterous to suppose that an Assembly of Atheists and Deists had
any such intention, as to suppose that a horde of apostates were calculated for
the work. These latter were, in fact, so many missionaries of blasphemy and
murder, sent into the provinces purposely to destroy the ancient priesthood.
The assembly foresaw that, when that was done, their new priests would at any
time become the apostles of infidelity.

It must be confessed that these legislators did not want for cunning: an
elegant writer has lately called them "architects of ruin;" and, indeed, they
possessed the art of destroying in its utmost perfection. Their calculations
with respect to their new priests were extremely just; they came out to an
unit. When they had annihilated their predecessors, they were not only ready to
second the decrees for the abolition of christianity altogether; they were not
only instrumental therein, but they had led the way. Several began to teach the
religion of Reason in the Jacobin clubs, of which they were all members, and
even in the pulpit. The garb of a priest itself became a burden to them, and
they humbly asked leave to quit it for the more honorable one of the national
guard. The apostate bishop of Moulin, who had been consecrated by the
unhallowed hands of Tailler^nd, wrote to the Convention that he officiated with
a pike and liberty cap, instead of the croiser^ and the mitre. It was this vile
wretch, who first caused to be written on the gate of the burying ground: "this
is the place of everlasting sleep. --

Three weeks after this communication of the bishop of Moulin, Gobet, the new
bishop of Paris, with his Grand-Vicars and three other revolutionary bishops,
came to the hall of the legislators and there abdicated christianity in form.
They begged pardon of the injured nation for having so long kept them in the
dark, by duping them into a belief of the divinity of an Impostor, whose
religion they now threw off with abhorrence, resolved in future to acknowledge
no other deity than Reason alone!

It was not more than four days after this that a pagan festival was held in
the Cathedral Church of Paris. A woman named Memoro, the wife of another man,
but the strumpet of the vile Hebert, alias Father du Chene, was dressed up as
the goddess of Reason. Her throne was of green turf; an altar was erected at
some distance, on which the priests burnt incense, while the legislators and
the brutified Parisian herd were prostrated before the throne of the goddess
Reason, alias Memoro, alias du Chene.

About this epoch appeared the paganish republican calendar, with a decree
ordering its adoption. This was intended to root from the poor tyranized people
the very memory of religion; to dry up the only source of comfort they had
left. They had been robbed of all they possessed in this world, and their
inexorable tyrants wished to rob them of every hope in the next. Some say that
this calendar itself was composed by an apostate priest, others, that it was
the work of a writer of farces, named Des Moulins. Whoever may be author, we
know who has the honor of re-printing it and retailing it in this country.

It is true the last mentioned acts, the consummation of the most horrid
blasphemy that ever man was witness of, took place under the Convention; but,
what were they more than a necessary consequence of the measures of the
Constituent Assembly? nay; the leaders in that Assembly boasted, when they had
obtained the decree against the non-juring priests, that they had tricked the
people out of their religion, before they perceived it. Nor is there at this
time one of those who voted for that decree, who will not tell you, that
christianity is a farce, fit only for the amusement of old folks, and that he
rejoices in its abolition in France. This is not mere surmise.

Indeed, that their successors have only fulfilled their wishes, in this
respect, there can be no doubt, if any judgment of the wishes of men is to be
formed from their principles, their words and their actions. Who, I ask, that
wished to preserve religion, would have passed a decree for the expulsion of
every priest that refused to forswear himself? who, that did not wish to
destroy religion, would have passed a decree for committing it to the care of
apostates? Was it not clear, that such men would stick at nothing? That, at the
nod of their masters, they would at any time be ready to blaspheme the God they
pretended to adore? On the contrary, the Assembly knew, that there was no hope
of their system taking root, while the ancient clergy remained in their cures.
Among men, who gave up their all, and exposed themselves to almost certain
death, rather than falsify their faith, they could not hope to find a Gobet.
They could not hope to find supple villains that would voluntarily depose the
emblems of their religion on the altar of a strumpet, and confess themselves to
have been the crafty ministers of an arch impostor. --

The oath tendered to the clergy was the touchstone; it was to prove them; to
know whom the Assembly could depend on for the accomplishment of their
projects, and whom they could not depend on. The enforcing of the oath was the
last blow to public religion in France, and therefore the destruction of that
religion, with all its immoral and murderous consequences, is due to the
Constituent Assembly, and to them alone. It is as nonsensical as unjust to
accuse this or that faction, or even the Convention itself, of exchanging
Christianity for a system of paganism; infidels who adore an idol are as good
as infidels who adore none; and where is the difference, whether the adored
idol be Jean Jacques Rousseau or Madame Memoro? An adultress is as good a
goddess as an adulterer is a god at any time.

Let the reader now look back, and he will easily trace all the horrors of the
French Revolution to the decrees of the Constituent Assembly. It was they that
rent the government to pieces; it was they that first broached the destructive
doctrine of equality; it was they that destroyed all ideas of private property;
and finally, it was they that rendered the people hardened, by effacing from
their minds every principle of the only religion capable of keeping mankind
within the bounds of justice and humanity. Look also at their particular
actions, and you will see them breaking their oaths to their constituents and
to their king; you will see their agents driving people from their estates,
beating and killing them; you will see them surrounded with a set of hireling
writers and assassins, employed to degrade and murder peaceable people attached
to the religion of their forefathers; and you will see them not only pardoning
murders, in spite of their poor humiliated monarch, but even receiving the
assassins at their bar, covering them with applauses, and instituting festivals
in their honor. What have the members of the Convention and their agents done
more than this? They have murdered in greater numbers. True; but what have
numbers to do with the matter? The principle on which those murders were
committed was ever the same; it was more or less active as occasion required.
The wants of the Convention were more pressing than those of the Constituent
Assembly. The Assembly were not driven to the expedient of requisitions, nor
was the hour yet arrived for the promulgation of the paganish calendar.
Consequently they met with less opposition, and therefore less murders were
necessary; but, had they continued their fittings to this day the devastation
of every kind would have been the fame that it has been.

The whole history of the revolution presents us with nothing but a regular
progress in robbery and murder. The first Assembly, for instance, begin by
flattering the mob, wheedling their king out of his title and his power; they
then set him at defiance proscribe or put to death his friends; and then shut
him up in his palace, as a wild beast in a cage. The second Assembly send a
gang of ruffians to insult and revile him, and then they hurl him from his
throne. The third Assembly cut his throat. What is there in all this but a
regular and natural progression from bad to worse. And so with the rest of
their abominable actions.

To throw the blame on the successors of the first despotic Assembly is such a
perversion of reason, such an abandonment of truth, that no man, who has a
single grain of sense, can hear of with patience. As well might we ascribe all
the murders committed at Nantz to the under cutthroats, by whom they were
perpetrated, and not to the Convention by whose order, and under whose
protection, these cutthroats acted. The Constituent Assembly knew the
consequences of their decrees, as well as Foucault ( See page 66) knew the
consequence of his order for throwing forty women from the cliff Pierre-moine
into the sea; and it is full as ridiculous to hear them pretend, that they did
not wish those consequences to follow, as it would be to hear Foucault pretend,
that he did not wish the forty women should be drowned. True, the Convention
are guilty of every crime under heaven: assassins and blasphemers must ever
merit detestation and abhorrence, from whatever motive they may act, or by
whomsoever taught and instigated; but still the pre-eminence in infamy is due
to their teachers and instigators: the Convention is, in relation to the
Constituent Assembly, what the ignorant desperate bravo is in relation to his
crafty and sculking employer.

Before I conclude, it may not be improper, as I have hitherto spoken of the
Constituent Assembly in a general way, to make some distinctions with respect
to the persons who composed it. I am very far from holding them all up as
objects of abhorrence, or even of censure. There were many, very many, men of
great wisdom and virtue, who were elected to the Sates-General, and even who
joined the Assembly, after it assumed the epithet National. It would be the
height of injustice to reproach these men with the consequences of measures,
which they opposed with such uncommon eloquence and courage. History will make
honorable mention of their names, when the epitome I have here attempted will
be lost and forgotten. Suffice it then to say, that the weight of our censure,
of the censure of all just and good men, ought to fall on those licentious
politicians and infidel philosophers alone, who sanctioned the decree for the
annihilation of property and religion.

Here, too, we ought to divest ourselves of every thing of a personal or party
nature, and direct our abhorrence to principles alone. As to the actors, they
have, in general, already expiated their wickedness or folly by the loss of
their lives. We have seen the atheist Condorcet obliged to fly in disguise from
the capital, the inhabitants of which he had corrupted, and by whom he had been
adored as the great luminary of the age: we have seen him assume the garb and
the supplicating tone of a common beggar, lurking in the lanes and woods, like
a houseless thief, and, at last, literally dying in a ditch, leaving his
carcass a prey to the fowls of the air, and his memory as a lesson to future
apostles of anarchy and blasphemy. Scores, not to say hundreds, of his
coadjutors have shared a fate little different from his own; and those who have
not, can have little reason to congratulate themselves on their escape. The
tornado they had raised for the destruction of others, has swept them from the
seat of their tyranny, and scattered them over every corner of the earth. Those
haughty usurpers who refused the precedence to the successors of Charlemagne,
are now obliged to yield it to a peasant or a porter. They who decreed, that
the "Folding-Doors of the Louvre should fly open at their approach," are now
glad to lift the latch of a wicket, and bend their heads beneath the thatch of
a cabin. And, what language can express the vexation, the anguish, the cutting
reflections, that must be the companions of their obscurity! When they look
back on their distracted country, when they behold the widows, the orphans, the
thousands and hundreds of thousands of murdered victims, that it presents; when
they behold the frantic people, carrying the dagger to the hearts of their
parents, nay, digging their forefathers from their graves, and throwing their
ashes to the winds; when they behold all this, and reflect that it is the work
of their own hands, well might they call on the hills to hide them. The
torments of such an existence who can bear? Next to the wrath of heaven, the
malediction of one's country is surely the most tremendous and insupportable.

Now, what is the advantage we ought to derive from the awful example before
us? -- It ought to produce in us a watchfulness, and a steady resolution to
oppose the advances of disorganizing and infidel principles. I am aware that it
will be said by some, that all fear of the progress of these principles is
imaginary; but, constant observation assures me, that it is but too well
founded. Let any man examine the change in political and religious opinions
since the establishment of the general government, and particularly the change
crept in along with our silly admiration of the French Revolution, and see if
the result of his inquiries, does not justify a fear of our falling under the
scourge, that has brought a happy and gallant people on their knees, and left
them bleeding at every pore.

Unfortunately for America, Great Britain has thrown from her the principles of
the French revolutionists with indignation and abhorrence. This, which one
would imagine should have had little or no influence on us, has served, in some
measure, as a guide to our opinions, and has been one of the principal motives
for our actions. A combination of circumstances, such as, perhaps, never before
met together, has so soured the minds of the great mass of the people in this
country, has worked up their hatred against Great Britain to such a pitch, that
the instant that nation is named, they lose not only their temper but their
reason also. The dictates of nature and the exercise of judgment are thrown
aside: whatever the British adopt must be rejected, and whatever they reject
must be adopted. Hence it is, that all the execrable acts of the French
legislators, not forgetting their murders and their blasphemy, have met with
the most unqualified applauses, merely because they were execrated in the
island of Britain.

The word Republic has also done a great deal. France is a Republic, and the
decrees of the legislators were necessary to maintain it a Republic. This word
out-weighs, in the estimation of some persons (I wish I could say they are few
in number) all the horrors that have been, and that can be, committed in that
country. One of these modern republicans will tell you that he does not deny,
that hundreds of thousands of innocent persons have been murdered in France;
that the people have neither religion nor morals; that all the ties of nature
are rent asunder; that the rising generation will be a race of cutthroats;
that poverty and famine stalk forth at large; that the nation is half
depopulated; that its riches along with millions of the best of the people are
gone to enrich and aggrandize its enemies; that its commerce, its manufactures,
its sciences, its arts, and its honor, are no more; but at the end of all
this, he will tell you that it must be happy, because it is a Republic. I have
heard more than one of these republican zealots declare, that he would sooner
see the last of the French exterminated, than see them adopt any other form of
government. Such a sentiment is characteristic of a mind locked up in savage
ignorance; and I would no more trust my throat within the reach of such a
republican, than I would within that of a Louvet a Gregoire, or any of their
colleagues.

Our enlightened philosophers run on in a fine canting strain about the bigotry
and ignorance of their ancestors; but, I would ask them, what more stupid
doltish bigotry can there be, than to make the sound of a word the standard of
good or bad government? what is there in the combination of the letters which
make up the word Republic; what is there in the sound they produce, that the
bellowing of it forth should compensate for the want of every virtue, and even
for common sense and common honesty? -- It is synonymous with liberty. -- Fatal
error! In the mouth of a turbulent demagogue it is synonymous with liberty, and
with every thing else, that will please his hearers; but, with the man of
virtue and sense, it has no more than its literal value; that is, it mea^^ of
itself, neither good nor evil. If we (...) our own government that of a (...)
and judge of the meaning of the (...) the effects of that government, (...)
^mit of a most amiable interpret^ (...) if we are to judge of it by wh^ (...)
^^duced in France, it means a^ (...) ^ous, tyrannical, blasphemous^ (...) Last
winter, one of these re^ (...) in Congress, accused a (...) New England of
having (...) ^lican principles, because (...) thing that seemed to (...)
slavery! Thus, then, (...) mean liberty. In (...) thing: it is a watch w^ (...)
ever our happy and (...) Republic should be (...) done under the m^ (...)

Let us, then, (...) look to the ch^ (...) and not to their professions; let us
attach ourselves to things and not to words; to sense and not to sound. Should
the day of requisition and murder arrive, our tyrants calling themselves
republicans will be but a poor consolation to us. The loss of property, the
pressure of want, beggary, will not be less real because flowing from
repub^^^an decrees. Hunger pinches the repub^^^^^ the cold blast cramps his
joints as (...) those of other men. This word (...) soften the pangs of death.
The (...) ^fe will not produce a delectable (...) because drawn across the
throat (...) ^lican; nor will the word repub^ (...) bullet, or render a flaming
(...) down. When Monsieur Ber^ (...) ^ghastly head of his father (...) ^is
lips, when his own heart (...) ^rn from his living body, (...) ^king and
palpitating, on (...) ^^mmittee of magistrates, (...) and and of his mangled
(...) ^uaged by the shouts of (...) ^ers.

(...) ^ese things never can (...) Because we have (...) ^^aracter of a paci^
(...) all we set danger (...) are not Frenchmen, we are men as well as they,
and consequently are liable to be misled, and even to be sunk to the lowest
degree of brutality as they have been. They, too, had an amiable character:
what character have they now? The same principles brought into action among us
would produce the same degradation. I repeat we are not what we were before the
French Revolution. Political projectors from every corner of Europe, troublers
of society of every description, from the whining philosophical hypocrite to
the daring rebel and more daring blasphemer, have taken shelter in these
States. Will it be pretended that the principles and passions of these men have
changed with the change of air? it would be folly to suppose it.

Nor are men of the same stamp wanting among the native Americans. There is not
a single action of the French revolutionists, but has been justified and
applauded in our public papers, and many of them in our public assemblies.
Anarchy has its open advocates. The divine author of our religion has been put
upon a level with the infamous Marat. We have seen a clergyman of the episcopal
church publicly abused, because he had recommended to his congregation to
beware of the atheistical principles of the French. Even their calendar, the
frivolous offspring of infidelity is proposed for our imitation. Where persons,
whose livelihood depends on their daily publications, are to be found who are
ever ready to publish articles of this nature, it were the grossest folly not
to believe, that there are hundreds and thousands to whom they give pleasure.
It is a truth that no one will deny, that the Newspapers of this country are
become its scourge. I speak with a few exceptions. It is said that they
enlighten the people; but their light is like the torch of an incendiary, and
the one has the same destructive effect on mind as the other has on matter. The
whole study of the editors seems to be to deceive and confound. One would
almost think they were hired by some malicious demon, to turn the brains and
corrupt the hearts of their readers.
But, we are not left to mere surmise here. How many numerous companies have
issued, under the form of toasts, sentiments offensive to humanity and
disgraceful to our national character? We have seen the guillotine toasted to
three times three cheers, and even under the discharge of cannon. If drunken
men, as is usually the case, speak from the bottom of their hearts, what
quarter should we have to expect from wretches like these. It must be allowed,
too, that where the cannons were fired to give eclat to such a sentiment, that
the convives were not of the most despicable class. And, what would the reader
say, were I to tell him of a member of Congress, who wished to see one of those
murderous machines, employed for lopping off the heads of the French, permanent
in the State-House yard of the City of Philadelphia?

If these men of blood had succeeded in plunging us into a war; if they had
once got the sword into their hands, they would have mowed us down like
stubble. The word aristocrat would have been employed to as good account here,
as ever it has been in France. We might 'ere this, have seen our places of
worship turned into stables; we might have seen the banks of the Delaware, like
those of the Loire, covered with human carcases, and its waters tinged with
blood: 'ere this we might have seen our parents butchered, and even the head of
our admired and beloved President rolling on a scaffold.

I know the reader will start back with horror. His heart will tell him, that
it is impossible. But, once more, let him look at the example before us. The
man who, in 1788, should have predicted the fate of the last humane and truly
patriotic Louis, would have been treated as a wretch or a madman. The attacks
on the character and conduct of the irreproachable Washington, have been as
bold, if not bolder, than those which led to the downfall of the unfortunate
French Monarch. His impudent and unprincipled enemies have represented him as
cankered with every vice that mark a worthless tyrant; they have called him the
betrayer of the liberties of his country, and have even drawn up and published
articles of accusation against him! Can it, then, be imagined, that, had they
possessed the power, they wanted the will to dip their hands in his blood? I am
fully assured, that these wretches do not make a hundred thousandth part of the
people of the Union: the name of Washington is as dear and dearer, to all good
men, than it ever was. But, of what consequence is their affection to him, of
what avail to themselves, if they suffer him to be thus treated, without making
one single effort to defeat the project of his infamous traducers? It is not
for me to dictate the method of doing this; but sure I am, that had the friends
of virtue and order shown only a hundredth part of the zeal in the cause of
their own country, as the enemies of both have done in the cause of France, we
should not now have to lament the existence of a hardened and impious faction,
whose destructive principles, if not timely and firmly opposed, may one day
render the annals of America as disgraceful as those of the French Revolution.

THE END.
JUST PUBLISHED And to be sold by BENJAMIN DAVIES No. 68, HIGH STREET (price
5-8ths of a dollar) REVOLUTIONARY JUSTICE DISPLAYED, Or an Inside View of the
Prisons of Paris, Under the government of Robespierre And the Jacobins; Taken
from the Journals of the Prisoners themselves.

Translated from the French.

AND A Plan of the City Philadelphia 26 Inches square. Taken from actual survey
and neatly engraved, with a Pamphlet, giving "Some Account of the civil and
religious institutions, population, trade and government" of the Place. --
(price 1 dollar.)


