"Stop the Wheels of Government."


THE POLITICAL CENSOR, OR MONTHLY REVIEW OF THE Most interesting Political
Occurrences, RELATIVE TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY PETER PORCUPINE.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR BENJAMIN DAVIES, NO. 68, HIGH STREET. MDCCXCVI.

THE POLITICAL CENSOR For MAY, 1796.
PROCEEDINGS IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
WHEN the last Censor went to the press, the long contested and important
question on the treaty with Great Britain was still undecided. Go! said I,
gentle Censor, and, in thy mild and conciliating accents, beseech the desperate
demagogues to spare us a little longer.

A sort of cloud had interposed between the people and the sun of prosperity.
Terror had seized on all those who had something to lose; they knew not whether
it was prudent to buy or to sell, whether their ships were safest in the
harbor or out at sea; the sans-culottes began to grind their teeth and whet
their couteaux, while the heads of the aristocrats seemed to totter on their
shoulders, and hang as it were by a bit of skin.

In this situation were we, when, on the 29th of April, the question was taken
in a committee of the whole House. The Ayes were 49 and the No's 49: the
Chairman, Mr. Muhlenberg of Pennsylvania gave the casting vote in the
affirmative.

Thus was the fate of a nation suspended upon the voice of one man, and thus
have we once more narrowly escaped war and anarchy.

Some benignant sylph certainly whispered Mr. Muhlenberg in the ear; for, it is
well known, that he had been a declared enemy to the treaty from the first
moment of its appearance. He was one of the leaders at the town meeting held at
Philadelphia on the 25th of July, 1795. At this meeting "the d -- ned treaty
was kicked to hell," and the assembly adjourned to go and break Mr. Bingham's
windows. This meeting appointed a committee to draw up a memorial, praying the
President not to ratify the Treaty. The memorial after reprobating every
article of the treaty singly, concludes thus: Your committee apprehend that
great evils would result to these States from this treaty, if ratified, they
therefore recommend that an address be prepared, and presented to the President
of the United States, praying that he will not ratify the said treaty. Now, Mr.
Muhlenberg was one of the very committee who drew up this memorial. Nor did his
opposition cease here; for we find him voting for the papers, and for the
protesting resolution of Mr. Blount. Had he not voted for this latter
resolution, I could have admitted, that he gave his casting vote from a
persuasion that the House had no right to set the treaty aside; but, in voting
for the resolution of Mr. Blount, he insists on this right, and therefore the
casting vote remains to be accounted for. Idle stories go about: slander is
ever on the wing: for my part I am not one of those who will give credit to
nothing that he cannot see through: but I leave a mystery as I find it. This
miraculous conversion is certainly to be attributed to the interposition of
some invisible power; to that power let us return our thanks, and not to Mr.
Muhlenberg.

But though the resolution for carrying the treaty into effect had passed in
the committee, it had yet to get through the House, and much apprehension was
entertained for its safety on the passage. The opposition was determined to
dispute the ground to the last inch; accordingly when the resolution was taken
up in the House, on the 30th, Mr. Dearborn moved the following preamble to it:
That although in the opinion of this House the treaty is highly objectionable
and may prove injurious to the United States, yet, considering all the
circumstances relating thereto, particularly that the last 18 articles are to
continue in force only during the present war, and two years thereafter, and
confiding also in the efficacy of measures which may be taken for bringing
about a discontinuance of the violations committed on our neutral rights, in
regard to our vessels and seamen, therefore; etc.

This was the last shift of a baffled saction. If you do carry the treaty, said
they your resolution shall contain the proofs of your own folly and
inconsistency. The plan was well laid: it was expected that some of the
members, who had voted for the resolution the day before, would also vote for
the preamble; nor was this improbable; any in consistency might be expected
from some of them

Mr. Muhlenberg, as if afraid of being outstripped by Mr. Christie and some
others, hastened to give the preamble his entire approbation, and did at last
actually vote for it. Thus, we see this gentleman, first opposing the treaty at
a town meeting, and drawing up a memorial beseeching the President not to
ratify it; then we find him voting for a resolution that declares the House to
have a right to set the treaty aside; but, when called on for his casting
voice, he seems to have forgotten all about the evil tendency of the treaty and
the unmaking power of the House. Sleep, however, seems to have refreshed his
memory, and we find him, next day, voting for a preamble, that declares this
treaty highly objectionable, and that it may prove injurious to the United
States; but, in less than ten minutes afterward he falls back into his old
state of torpidity, and really votes for this very "highly objectionable and
injurious treaty," without any modification or preamble at all. What an
excellent political weathercock! He tacks with ten times the celerity of the
Indian on the top of his Sugar-house.

When the preamble was put, there appeared according to the counting, or rather
miscounting, of the "Calm Observer" Ayes 49 and Noes 49; consequently, the
speaker, Mr. Dayton, was called on for the casting vote, and he gave it in the
negative.

Thus, another casting vote preserved the honor of the House, as a former one
had done that of the nation. But, it must be remarked here, that, when the
names of the members came to be printed, it appeared 50 had voted in the
negative; so that there was a majority against the inconsistent preamble, even
without the casting vote of the Speaker.

Mr. Jekyll, in his account of the Habeas Corpus Act (Woodfall's Reports for
1794; Vol. 4. p. 12) says: this act was first obtained by something like a
miracle. In one stage, it was carried in the upper House by a sort of pious
fraud: one of the tellers seeing a very fat Lord coming in, and knowing him to
be a man of weight, counted him for ten. I should have thought that, for like
reasons, Mr. Muhlenberg had been counted for two, had not the error been by
substraction in place of addition. Whether the fraud would have been quite so
pious on this occasion, as in obtaining the Act of Habeas Corpus, is another
thing: yes, Mr. Beckley, that is another thing.

How the Clerk of the House came to miscount, or how his miscounting came to
pass unreproved, when discovered, are questions well worth asking. Such
mistakes are not common; nor is it likely that an extraordinary degree of
inattentiveness would prevail at such an important moment. I do not pretend to
dictate to members of Congress; but, were I one, I would exert my utmost to
displace a Clerk who would dare to mistate a vote of the House, though that
Clerk should be the very image of Lord Chalkstone himself.

Finally, the resolution of Mr. Hillhouse was put, in its original form:
Resolved that the necessary laws be passed for carrying into effect, the treaty
concluded between His Britannic Majesty and the United States. -- The Ayes and
Noes were as follows: AYES. NOES. Mr. Ames Mr. Baird Baily Baldwin Bourne
Benton Bradbury Blount Buck Brent Christie Bryan Coit Burgess Cooper Caleb
Crabb Claiborne Dent Clopton A. Foster Coals D. Foster Dearborn Gilbert Earl
Gilman Franklin Glenn Gallatin Goodhue Gillespie Goodrich Giles Gregg Greenup
Griswold Hampton Grove Harrison Hancock Hathorn Harper Havens Hartley Heath
Henderson Heister Hillhouse Holland Hindman Jackson Kitchell Livingston Kittera
Lock Leonard W. Lyman S. Lyman Maclay Malbone Macon Muhlenberg Madison Murray
Milledge Reed Moore Richards New Sedgewick Nicholas Sitgreaves Orr J. Smith
Page N. Smith Parker Isaac Smith Preston S. Smith Rutherford W. Smith Israel
Smith Swift Sprigg Thatcher Swanwick Thomas Tatom Thompson Varnum Tracey
Venable Van Allen Winn Van Courtlandt Wadsworth Williams. 51. 48.

The resolution passed, of course, and a committee was appointed to bring in
the bills.

The reader will recollect, that, to know the real inclinations of the members,
be must observe, who voted for the call for papers, and who did not. In the
present list of Ayes, I have marked in italicks those members who voted in
favor of Mr. Livingston's paper motion, that such as labored through the heat
of the day may be distinguished from such as did not drop in until the eleventh
hour.

The Representatives who voted on this memorable question may be divided into
three classes: 1. staunch friends of the Constitution and the treaty; 2. the
converts; 3. the hardened political sinners.

As to the first of these classes I shall say nothing: the persons composing it
are so much above all praise, that I could not hope to do them justice. They
will find an ample reward in the success of their indefatigable efforts, and in
the grateful acknowledgements of all their worthy constituents.

The second class, or the converts, merit but little thanks from any body.
Their apologies for shifting sides were, as, indeed, apologies generally are, a
most monstrous abuse of words. What, for instance, could be more ridiculous
than for a man to get up and make a long harangue, in order to persuade others
to vote against the treaty, and conclude with saying that he should vote for
it? -- And why? -- Because he would not create a division between the different
branches of the government! surprising! he had voted for forcing the papers out
of the President's hands, he had also voted for the resolution that was to
remain as a protest against the President's refusing of these papers, and, at
last, he votes for the treaty in order to cultivate harmony between the
different branches of the government! the gentleman seems to have fallen out
with the other branches, merely to have the pleasure of making it up again.
This farce may, then, take the name of a comedy lately written by a Citizen of
Philadelphia: the triumphs of love; or happy reconciliation.

The fact is, however, this conversion was not owing to a conciliating
disposition in the converted. Had it not been for the manly, prudent and
well-timed measures of the Merchants of Philadelphia, this important treaty
would have been set aside. The following memorial was presented to the House on
the 17th of April.

To the Honorable the House of Representatives of the United States. THE
MEMORIAL OF THE SUBSCRIBERS Merchants and Traders of Philadelphia,
Respectfully Represents,
THAT they have waited, with anxious expectation, to see the necessary measures
adopted by your honorable House for carrying into operation the Treaty
concluded between the United States and Great Britain, and are now seriously
alarmed least those measures should be further delayed or entirely omitted.

Under that impression, they deem it incumbent on them to represent, That the
property of the Merchants of the United States, amounting, upon a moderate
computation, to more than five millione of dollars, has been taken from them by
the subjects of Great Britain, the restitution of which, they verily believe,
depends, in a great measure, upon the completion of the Treaty on our part.

Independent of this immense sum, they have embarked the principal part of
their remaining fortunes in vessels and adventures, the safety of which will,
as they apprehend, be materially affected by a refusal or neglect on the part
of the United States to comply with stipulations so solemnly entered into.
Besides their particular interests as Merchants and Traders, they feel an
interest, in common with their fellow citizens of other descriptions, in the
preservation of Peace, on which the prosperity of this country depends; -- and
they should deem themselves wanting in that spirit and independence which ought
ever to characterize freemen, if they forbear, on so interesting on occasion as
the present, to express their wishes and expectations. They, therefore, with
all due respect for the Representatives of the People of the United States, beg
leave to recommend, that no partial considerations of policy may influence
their decision on this important question; but that the Faith, the Honor, and
the Interest of the Nation, may be preserved by making the necessary provisions
for carrying the Treaty into fair and honorable effect.


Nor did the Merchants of the Capitol stop here: they appointed a committee to
correspond with other mercantile towns, and with the back counties of
Pennsylvania. This measure brought such swarms of petitions from the people of
property of every quarter of the Union, that the Opposition began to perceive
how little their own strength was.


However indifferent the converts might be to the suspension of insurance and
the general shock given to business of every kind; however they might affect to
laugh at the alarmists, they would have been afraid to return among their
constituents, had they plunged the country into distress and confusion. Very
probably their turn for roasting would have come; they might have seen their
effigies dragged about in a dung-cart, with French gold in their hands. Happy
might they have thought themselves, if a justly enraged people had confined
their vengeance to the burning of images and pictures, when the originals were
at hand. Their recantation was, in short, like that of a man who sees the stake
and the faggots before him. I look upon their support of government, on the
present occasion, as a sort of verbal conformity with a mental reservation. Few
people are dupes enough to believe them sincere. The dose they have swallowed
with so many wry faces, has only served to set their gall in motion: the
executive branch of government may expect at their hands every check and
impediment that disappointed malice can suggest.

But, little merit as I ascribe to the converts, and little hope as as I have
of their reformation, I must still prefer them to the hardened sinners; for,
though a sort of death bed repentance, such for instance, as that of the
casting voice, can never be supposed to atone for a life of political sin, yet
it is at any rate, less offensive to morality and decency, than to hear the
sons of reprobation blaspheming to the last gasp, and expiring with curses on
their lips.

All the 48 members, found in the opposition on the definitive question
concerning the treaty, will unavoidably meet with the approbation of the French
National Convention. They all certainly merit the fraternal hug; but there are
some of them whom it would be unjust to mix promiscuously with the common herd:
these ought to have a kiss on both cheeks, while the rest might be put off with
a kiss on one; or, if French politeness will insist upon the double baises, to
all the five kings might salute the leaders, while the rest might be left to
the skinny-lipped blood suckers of the Council of Elders.

In order to regulate the ceremonial, I shall point out those whom I think
entitled to the distinguished honor of being slobbered by the five sultans;
observing, once for all, that I do not wish to depreciate the value of any
man's labor, or interfere with any bargain that might be previously entered
into between the parties. The labourer is worthy of his hire, whether he
succeeds in his object or not.

To place the Italian at the head of these worthies is an act of justice, and
an act of justice which I have the more pleasure in performing, as I have
lately been accused (how falsely every body knows) of attempting to sink that
gentleman in the opinion of the public.

When the treaty-making power was to be attacked; or, in other words, when a
breach was to be made in the Constitution, and such a breach as never could
have been closed, the assailants seemed at a loss for a leader. Citizen M --
son shrank from the task. The eyes of the phalanx at last turned toward the
Italian. Murderers, when preparing for their horrid work, always choose, from
among their gang, some preciously ill-looking villain to give the first stab;
that done, they fall on with less remorse, and dispatch the prostrate victim. I
do not pretend to say, that the assailants of the Constitution acted upon the
same maxims of physiognomy: no, God forbid I should say or insinuate any such
thing: on the contrary, if person had any thing to do in the matter, I should
rather suppose that the leader was chosen for his beauty.

Let, however, the motive to the choice be what it might, that it was a good
one we all know. With what art did the Genevese approach! how did he twist and
turn, when he found an obstacle in his way! how did his eyes glisten, when
ready to dart in upon his devoted prey! Those that followed him had little more
to do than to mouth over what they had heard, as the yelping puppies of the
pack give tongue, when they hear the cry of the leading old hound.

" -- The stanch old hound,
"Guide of the pack, although gaunt and ugly,
"Is yet of great account. He Will often untie
"The Gordian knot, when reason at a stand,
"Puzzling, is lost, and every art is vain.
"As party chiefs in senates who preside
"With pleaded reason and with artful speech
"Conduct the staring multitude, so he
"Directs the pack, who with joint cry approve,
" And loudly boast discoveries not their own."
Had SOMERVILLE written his beautiful poem of The Chase but yesterday, with the
late proceedings of the House of Representatives before his eyes, he could not
have made a more apt allusion than is contained in the above quoted passage.
The rest did, indeed, with joint cry approve, and loudly boast discoveries not
their own; but the sagacious and indefatigable Genevese untied the Gordian
knot; and, though his game at last escaped him, he is entitled to all the
honors of the field. The grateful sportsman, to reward his faithful and
laborious cur, claps him on the back and spits in his mouth. And so out Italian
shall be distinguished from his colleagues, by some superior reward.

After the Genevese, I think we must give the precedence to the Long-man from
New York and the Short-man from Philadelphia.

From the first of these, who labors under an extreme poverty of talents, much
could not be expected. His head is generally thought to be as empty as his
purse ever was; yet, he certainly surpassed all his fellow laborers, except
the cunning Italian. He set out with blushing, and I leave any one to guess at
the efforts that must be made to get a blush through a skin like his. Besides,
where will you find a young man of his pretentions, a kind of creole Adonis, as
it were, who would risk his complexion for a single moment? who would suffer
his pure yellow, his fine golden hue, to be mixed with red, and thus debased to
a vile copper-colour? who would, in short, suffer himself to be changed from a
guinea to a halfpenny? I do not know whether the gentleman has been accustomed
to such depreciations or not; but, if this be the first time, such a sacrifice
is, in my humble opinion, worthy of a capital compensation.

I did not intend to trouble the reader with remarks on any particular passages
of this gentlemans' speeches: they are generally such strings of plagiarisms,
that, to censure them, you must censure their authors, and this is sometimes
disagreeable. One passage or two, however, call for observation; which I am the
more ready to bestow on them, as they appear to be original.

The gentleman, in defense of his paper motion, told the House, that it was
impossible to determine that they would not impeach, until the papers were
seen. Facts might then appear, which would render that an unavoidable measure
which was not now contemplated. If, for instance, instead of a treaty with
Great Britain, they were now discusing one formed with the Port, where it is
the custom for Ministers to give and to receive presents; and, on the
production of the correspondence, it should appear that our Minister had
received a douceur (bribe) on the signature of the treaty; would not the House
think themselves obliged to impeach?

This is a supposition, wound up with an interrogation. Now, let us see if we
cannot suppose and put questions as well as this Adonis. -- Suppose, then, that
the electors of a certain district or city were silly enough to choose, as
their representative, a man at once proud and poor, haughty and mean, insolent
and crawling; suppose that this man were an insolvent debtor, who had visited
the inside of a jail, and who had bilked his creditors by paying them but three
shillings in the pound. Now, should a man like this rise up in Congress, and,
adopting the sentiments, the style and even the gesticulations of the mob,
basely insinuate, that a public Minister, of unspotted fame, had received a
bribe from a foreign prince; what, I ask, would such a man deserve? -- To be
cut out, at full length, in a Living Stone, and stuck up at the corner of the
Fly-Market, for the boys to throw rotten eggs at, till the statue became as
yellow as the original.

The gentleman declared (and very sincerely, without doubt) that his
supposition was by no means applicable to Mr. Jay; and I declare, with equal
sincerity, that my supposition is by no means applicable to Mr. Livingston, for
whose feelings, as the reader must have already perceived, I have a wonderful
tenderness; a tenderness, indeed, that I would wish to equal that which he has
shown for the feelings of the President and Mr. Jay.

The next passage that attracts my attention seems to be a sort of side wind
eulogy on the five kings and their mild and humane government. All Europe says
our Adonis, was once free; all Europe, with the exception of France and
Switzerland are now in chains. Where then, will historical facts be found to
justify the charge? In the obsequious Parliament of Britain? etc. -- Poor
Adonis how little does he know about all Europe! -- and is it possible that any
one, pretending to be a reasonable creature, should yet talk to us about French
liberty? a decree launched forth by their merciful lords, the other day, will
give us a pretty correct idea of Frenchmens' freedom. This decree bears: that
the parents of Emigrants shall now give up to the nation that portion of their
property, which would have fallen, after their death, to their Emigrant
children. Let any one judge from this, whether the poor devils are in chains or
not. But, why do I cite particular instances of their slavery! what occasion
have I here to attempt a contradiction of what every one, even the most
ignorant of the people, knows to be false and ridiculous? "In Turkey, and in
Morocco" says PLYFAIR, the people know under what despotism they groan; they
know who their rulers are, and they know that whatever injustice they may be
guilty of toward individuals, they must have some regard to the general
interest, to the preservation of the whole. They have the satisfaction too of
complaining to a friend in secret of their misfortunes; but the miserable
French slave, who thinks himself a free citizen, does not know who his masters
are. He dares not complain, because all around him consider that their miseries
are the effects of freedom and philosophy, and like the Philosopher Pangloss,
though ruined and miserable, they have been taught to say, that all is as well
as possible. -- Wretched people among whom every thing is at the disposition of
a gang of intriguing despots, who, by means of a printing press and reams of
Assignats, pillage the nation, and excite to massacre and bloodshed. -- This is
the only people in Europe who, our Adonis tells us, is not in chains! I can
assure him, that such an assertion, at this day, is barely honored with a
sneer. The people of America have at last opened their eyes. They have seen
French liberty seated on her throne, the guillotine, surrounded with
confiscations, guards, manacles and dungeons; they have seen French religion
exhibited in blasphemies against the Almighty and in the adoration of a common
prostitute; they have seen French humanity in the form of a child torn from its
mothers womb and writing on the point of a bayonet. Yes, and they have seen the
effects of French gold too, and I can tell you Mr. Livingston, that they
despise the corruptor as well as the corrupted. French friendship they know
they do not want, and French enmity is become the object of their contempt. --
To ply them then, Sir, with this old, ridiculous, thread bare tale of French
liberty, though it may procure you a feu de joie from the hulks at New York, is
an insult to the understandings of your constituents, for which I much question
if even your ignorance will be thought a sufficient apology.

But, it seems, there is one other nation, besides the French, who are not in
chains; the Swiss. -- It is something singular that our orator forgot the
republics of Batavia and Geneva. They have both the happiness of having the
same kind of free government as his dear France. Their legislative and
executive branches, and all their offices of state, excepting the prime
minister, Citizen Guillotine, are the same. What then, could render them
unworthy of being called free nations! how comes Switzerland, the best part of
which groans under an Aristocracy, to be prefered to these regenerated states,
these apes of the French republic, these first born of the great Baboon? -- Our
Adonis's head was absolutely turned with his paper-kite motion.

Never surely was poor youth so discomfitted, scouted and routed as he has been
during this session. After a months hard labor, the President refuses him a
peep at the papers; he seeks vengeance, meets a second rebuff, and is at last,
reduced to the mortification of seeing the schemes of nine long months
overturned in a single moment, in spite of the counter efforts of his worthy
relations, at New York, joined to those of Chocolate grinder and Sergeant Cl --
ke. In this situation what is he to do! -- Jog back quietly to daddy's, make
the most of his personal charms, ogle the fair sex in place of grinning at
General Washington, and content himself with reading billets doux instead of
state papers. But, for mercy's sake, let him take care how he blushes: "the
bankrupt," says an author "never yet found the fair one kind;" and what then
could he expect for a yellow boy who should blush himself to Jersey copper?

Having thus dismissed the long raw boned Knight of the Woeful countenance, I
must now beg the readers respectful attention, while I bring on the scene
probably for the last time the little duck legged Squire. -- There he is, like
a balled singer in a fair! don't fright yourselves, Ladies; upon my soul he will
do you no violence. It Is as gentle a little creature as you ever set eyes on:
you may even stroke him without apprehending the lest mischief; do but listen
to his speech, and he will lick your hand like a spaniel.

This gentlemans' efforts on the opposition may be considered as confined to
the exaltation of the magnanimity of the king of Spain, and that of his own
disinterestedness. Indeed, both subjects were equally worthy of his small talk
eloquence. The magnanimity of a man, who shakes hands, in an humble peace, with
the murderers of the head of his family, is well matched with the
disinterestedness of another, who aims at the destruction of his country, or at
least, of all that is valuable in it, that he may raise himself on its ruins.

He told the House, that he had several vessels at sea, not insured; that he
had landed property in great quantity, and hence he took occasion to conclude,
that he could not be suspected as wishing to involve the country in a war. This
indeed, from a man of moderate views, from a man of moderate vanity even, ought
to have some weight; but, from one like the person here spoken of, it ought to
have none at all.

There are some men, who as the poet says, never are at hearts ease, while they
see a greater than themselves. Such is this gentleman. He must be every where,
and every where at the head; and, as it commonly happens with those of his
stamp, nature has absolutely disqualified him for the attainment by fair means.
Still, however, he drives on toward his object, and in his progress employs
all those little arts that worth and genius disdain. How has he labored to
establish for himself the character of a man of learning and taste! how often
and how barefacedly has he condescended to become his own puff in the common
papers! how many letters has he written to distant places to insure the
insertion of articles in praise of himself! what incredible pains has he taken
to procure the appearance of a silly poem, signed with his name, in a
periodical publication of a foreign country!

He told the House of Representatives of his ships and his lands; he might have
told them of his house too, unless indeed, he looked upon that as unnecessary,
from its being so perfectly known. This house, which resembles in furniture a
Dutch virtuoso's baby hutch, is become a kind of rareeshow. The vain proprietor
acts the part of a despicable showman. This house-that-Jack-built is his hobby
horse, and when mounted on it, he is more an object of ridicule than the whore
on the black ram, or poor Gulliver astride the nipple of the Brabdingnagian
maid of honor.

Money however he has, and with this he finds his way into almost every meeting
that bears the name of a society, a name, by the by, of which most men of sense
begin to be heartily tired. Our Lilliputian, with his dollars, gets access
where, without them, he would not be suffered to appear. But, of all his little
baits for admiration and consequence, none is surely so perfectly ludicrous as
his becoming the Mentor of the little misses. That a vain man should condescend
to cajole the mob, to grease the hands of the leaders of a club or society,
that he should crawl to news-printers, or even run dangling about after
spectators to advance his tasty mansion, is not so very surprising: but that he
should so far defy the power of ridicule as to profess himself the periodical
declaimer at the breakings-up of a boarding school, and even show an uncommon
anxiety to have his speeches on those occasions published, is what no mortal
could ever have expected, no, not from John Swanwick.

What attention is due to a man like this, when he produces the coincidence of
his own interest with that of his own country as a proof that his conduct is in
conformity to both? such a man feels interested in nothing that does not bring
food to his vanity, and if a greater quantity of this is to be obtained by the
loss of his property than by its prevention, he will never scruple to hazard
it; Where then, is his disinterestedness, and his patriotism?

At first glance, one would imagine that a being like this was formed for the
contempt, or, at least, for the diversion of mankind; and, under certain
governments, he would, indeed, be harmless; but, in a state where all depends
upon the popular voice, I do not know a more dangerous character. Of a proud
man you have some hold; his pride will not let him stoop to such meannesses, by
which alone he can come at the power that makes him formidable; while the vain
one will stop at nothing. Knowing that the accomplishments of his hopes depends
on the people and that it is to numbers he must owe his success, he speculates
in their errors and their prejudices, and turns them to his own advantage at
the expense of the community. No rebuss. no ill treatment or discomfit
discourages him: kick him out at your front door, and he will come in at the
back: drive him from one office of one assembly, and he will get into another:
some where he will be, where he can make himself talked of. He is ever the
cringing slave of power: he adores it in whatever hands it may be found: as he
wheedles a democratic populace, so would he the cruelest despot on earth; he
has not a drop of independent blood in his heart, and he is the mortal enemy of
all those who have.

That such a man as this should be the representative of a State of which I am
an inhabitant, is, I must confess a mortification; as to representing me,
however, he never did, nor shall he ever do it: therefore, as a fraction of the
sovereign people, I do hereby, once for all, enter my protest against every
thing that he may do, or have a hand in. When he looks round, from his
hobbyhorse, on the multitude who have been weak enough to commit their
interests to his sapient head and (...) heart, let him remember, that there is
one who would not trust him with the stump of an old worn out pen.

When I see people, who have chosen a representative like this, brought to the
verge of ruin by him and his associates, I cannot say I pity them. Many of the
Merchants and traders who were so alarmed the other day, on account of the
opposition to the treaty, had used every effort in their power to insure this
man's election. What must be their reflections, when they saw him, not only
voting for the destruction of their property and themselves, but endeavoring
to nullify their petition by another, signed by foreigners, blackguards and
negroes? Surely this ought to be a lesson to those, who are to choose or reject
him another time. But, indeed, men of property, men who ought to be of weight,
are in this country, as in most others, indifferent and slothful as to their
political rights. Whatever may be the cause of this, the consequences are well
known, they are already felt, and will from day to day and from year to year be
felt more severely.

Thus, I have endeavored to justify the preference to be given to these three
heroes of the hardened sinners. Citizen Madison was formerly reckoned as a sort
of chief; but he has so sunk out of sight this campaign that we can look upon
him, at least, as no more than an aide-de-camp. The firm and indivisible
phalanx of Virginia were led on by a younger, more bold and more artful
commander; had victory decided in their favor, the Citizen would have put in
his claim to a share in the glory of the day; but the timely desertion of the
heavy horse of Philadelphia, and the disgraceful defeat that succeeded, has left
him without even the hope of repairing his reputation. As a politician he is no
more; he is absolutely deceased, cold, stiff and buried in oblivion for ever
and ever.

There are, then, but three of these gentlemen whom I look upon as entitled to
the collade fraternelle from the five kings; the others must put up with a
smack from the elders or youngers.

There is one difficulty remaining, which it will not be very easy to get over;
that is, the parties are at such a distance from each other, that to embrace in
person would be impossible, unless one or the other would be content to make a
voyage; a thing which we cannot expect, for, like the buzzard, neither likes to
lose sight of their prey. It Is true, that, in France, they do embrace by proxy,
and probably this may be now resorted to. We can very well spare a deputation,
and if they should never return, few, I believe, would mourn their loss.

I now bid the opposers of the treaty farewell: they and I have been at war for
rather better than a year; I have seen them completely beaten, and though I
pretend to no other merit than the little that is due to diligent drummer or
trumpeter, I must be permitted to rejoice as well as others. Rejoice I
certainly do at their downfall, and notwithstanding I think it unmanly to set
my foot upon the neck of a prostrate foe, no endeavors of mine shall be
wanting to prevent them from rising again.

PAINE'S AGE OF REASON.
The Christian Religion teaches men to forego their private interests for the
sake of doing good, it is not therefore surprising, that deists and atheists
should forego their private interests for the sake of doing mischief. Things
opposite in their nature must be expected to be opposite in their effects.

The Editor of the Aurora of Philadelphia (Mr. Franklin Bache) has advertised
for sale a second part of Paine's Age of Reason, at a low price. It is said, he
has received fifteen thousand copies of this from Paris, and it is very certain
that he sells them at a price which will hardly pay first cost and expenses.
When I went to school, I remember we had for a copy: Zeal in a good cause
deserves applause. If this old maxim be a true one, I would ask; what zeal in a
bad cause deserves?

A person, to whom the parties were well known has assured me, that poor Pain
imbibed his first principles of deism of Doctor Franklin; if so, it is possible
that the Editor of the Aurora may look upon the distribution of the Age of
Reason as a means of propagating his Grand Father's principles, and so far some
persons will defend it, as an act of filial piety, or rather filial gratitude,
for as to piety I think we may venture to leave it out of the question.

This grateful young man should, however, recollect that a vender of poison
will not be excused merely because the compound was kneaded up, or the receipt
for it given, by his ancestor. Deism cannot be well said to run in the blood,
or I should really be afraid, that the decendant of the illustrious old deist
was contaminated. Charity bids me to hope the contrary, and to ascribe the
excess of his zeal to the amiable motive above mentioned.

It is going too far, perhaps, to say, that any loss on these blasphemous
pamphlets is to fall on Mr. Bache, The French republic has ever shown a sincere
desire of regenerating us, and as she finds us obstinate in politics, she may
be willing to try her hand in another way. The papers have told us lately, that
Mad Tom takes up his lodgings at the House of the American Ambassador; if this
second part of the Age of Reason should have come to us under his auspices, it
is a fact of a curious nature indeed.

As to the work itself, it cannot be better descried than by saying that it is
as stupid and dispicable as its author. The wretch has all his life been
employed in leading fools astray from their duty, and, as nothing is more easy,
he has often succeeded. His religion is exactly of a piece with his politics;
one inculcates the right of revolting against government, and the other that of
revoking against God. Having succeeded against the Lord's anointed (I mean his
and our ci-devant friend the most Christian king) he turned his impious arms
against the Lord himself. This process is perfectly natural, as has been
exemplified in the conduct of others as well as that of Pain.

How Tom came to think of exercising his clumsy battered pen upon the Christian
Religion is what has excited a good deal of curiosity, without ever being well
accounted for in this country; notwithstanding, the circumstances under which a
man writes ought to be attended to in forming a judgment of his opinions,
particularly if those opinions are new and extraordinary. For this reason, I
shall endeavor to trace this raggamuffin deist from America to his Paris
dungeon, and to account for his having laid down the dagger of insurrection in
order to take up the chalice of irreligion.

Thomas, after having retailed out a good deal of very Common Sense commonly
called Nonsense, found himself rather richer than when he began. In his second
Part of the Rights of Man, he says he has a place in the State of Delaware.
Whether this be a lie or not I cannot tell; but, if it be true, it was
certainly the product of the revolution; for every one knows he had nothing
before. This was encouragement for him to try his talent in other countries. A
confiscated castle in France, or some Abbey where he might join sacrilege to
robbery, was a sufficient temptation to lead him across the ocean.
This gave him a smack for revolutions; but finding himself sinking fast into
his native mud, and pretty universally despised and neglected by the people of
this country: finding, in short, that the Americans were returning to order,
and feeling that his element was confusion, he crossed the Atlantic to bask in
the rays of the French revolution.

The Propagande at Paris, that is, the society instituted for the propagation
of the vile and detestable principles of the Rights of Man, as laid down in the
famous French Constitution, fixed their Jacobinical eyes on Tom, as an
excellent missionary for great Britain and Ireland. Off goes Tom with his
Rights of Man, which he had the abominable impudence to dedicate to General
Washington. The Second Part was dedicated to Lafayette, to which nobody had any
kind of objection.
The English Jacobins stared at him at first: he went a step further than they
had ever dreamed of: his doctrines, however, grew familiar to their ears: they
took him under their wing, and he made sure of another revolution. This
security was his misfortune, and had nearly cost him a voyage to the South Sea.

From the thief-catchers in England Tom fled, and took his seat among the
thieves of Paris. After having distinguished himself in execrating the
Constitution he had written in defense of, he, and two or three others, set to
work and made a new one; quite brand new, without a single ounce of old stuff.
This covered Tom with glory soon after, when it was unanimously accepted by the
rich, free, generous and humane French nation.

This may be looked upon as the happiest part of Tom's life. He had enjoyed
partial revolts before, had seen doors and windows broken in, and had probably
partaken of the pillage of some aristocratic stores and dwelling houses; but,
to live in a continual state of insurrection, sacred, holy, organized
insurrection; to sit seven days in the week issuing decrees for plunder,
proscription and massacre, was a luxurious life indeed! It was, however, a
short life and a merry one: it lasted but five months. The tenderhearted
philanthropic murderer, Brissot, and his faction, fell from the pinnacle of
their glory: poor Tom's wares got out of vogue and his carcass got into a
dungeon.

This was a dreadful reverse for old Common Sense. To be hurled, all in a
moment, from the tip top of the Mountain of the Grande Convention Nationale
down to the very bottom of a stinking dungeon, was enough to give a shock to
his poor unsteady brain. But this was not all; he well knew that the national
razor was at work, and had every reason to suppose that his days were numbered.
He laid extended on the dirt like a sheep or a calf in a slaughterhouse,
expecting every moment that the Butcher would come for him.

How Thomas came to escape is something that will probably remain a mystery. It
was said, that Danton (the new chief tyrant) spared his life at the request of
certain Americans; but this is improbable, not that some Americans might be
found silly enough to petition for it, but because, when his enlargement was
afterward demanded upon the score of his being an American, the ruling tyrants
answered, that he was a sacre Anglois, a d -- nd Englishman. The fact is, I
believe, Danton and his party despised Tom too much to run any risk of
disobliging their friends in Great Britain and America by taking away his
worthless life. Be the motive what it might, he was kept in his cage, and there
he wrote the first part of his Age of Reason.

Now to the motive that led him to the composition of this blasphemous work;
which was no other than that of saving his ugly uncombed head from the
guillotine.

The reader will recollect, that it was under the reign of Danton that the
Christian Religion was abolished by a decree. A few days before Tom's
imprisonment the famous festival of Reason was held. A common strumpet was
dressed up as the Goddess Reason, She was guillotined soon after.
seated on a throne of turf, and, while incense was burnt before her altar at
some little distance, the idolatrous populace, with the Convention at their
head, prostrated themselves before her. Not many days before this, the
constitutional Bishop of Paris, The constitutional clergy means the new clergy,
the clergy of the revolution, the apostates.
with his vicars and three rectors, came to the Convention and and abdicated
their religion, declaring themselves to have been cheats, and that in future
they would profess no other worship than that of Reason. In short, Danton, and
Robespierre (then second in command) were incessantly occupied in extirpating
the small remains of Christianity from the minds of the poor brutified and
enslaved French. It was a necessary preparation to the bloody work they
intended they should execute.

Citizen Common Sense knew this, and therefore it was not wonderful that he
should attempt to soften his lot, and prolong, perhaps, his miserable days, by
something from his pen, calculated at once to flatter their vanity and further
their execrable views. Thomas had long railed against the baseness of
courtiers, but when the moment of trial came he was found as base as the
basest. The high-minded republican Pain, who had set Lords and Kings at
defiance, was glad to bend the knee before a vile low-bred French pettifogger.
He descended to make use of the very phrases that the new tyrants had
introduced. The Goddess was called Reason, the church which was profaned by her
worship was called the Temple of Reason, and the inscription on the banners
carried at the festival was "The Age of Reason" (Le siecle de la Raison) the
very title of Tom's book. Base adulation! adulation not to be excused even by
the situation in which he was. The old French clergy, with the dagger at their
breasts, scorned to purchase life at such a price.

I would by no means be understood as believing that Paine's book was a
desertion of his principles; for, as I before observed, he had been corrupted
years before. It is the disgraceful motive for publishing his creed that I am
exposing. That it was done to make his court to the tyrants of the day cannot
be doubted; for, in all his former works, if he has occasion to speak of the
Christian religion, he does it in decent if not respectful language. In his
Rights of Man, for instance, he extols toleration, and observes, that all
religions are good; but as soon as he got into his new-fashioned study, a
dungeon, he discovered that they were all bad, or at least the Christian
Religion, and it was of the diverse denominations of that religion that he
before pretended to speak. When he said, that all religions were good, he was
an abominable hypocrite, or he is one now, when he tells us that the Christian
Religion is a very bad one. Either he disguised his sentiments to deceive the
English, or he has since done so to deceive Danton and Robespierre. Tom knows
the value of a character for consistency too well to run the risk of losing it
unless upon a pressing emergency: but, the guillotine was yet red with the
blood of his comrades, and he well knew that there was but this one way of
keeping his own corrupted streams within his veins.

It will be said, by Tom's deistical Friends, that the Second Part of the Age
of Reason was written after his releasement, and at a time when he was in no
danger. Very true; but the die was cast; the First Part was out, and there was
no recalling it. He had openly attacked both heaven and earth; he could do no
more. One essay at blasphemy was as good as a thousand for establishing his new
pretensions to infamy; but Thomas had now something else to attend to besides
his reputation; I mean his belly. The usual means of subsistence had failed: he
was no longer a great Representative of a great and free people. The handful of
assignats he received daily were gone to some more staunch patriot, and the old
Rights of Man was left to dine where he could. As to political drugs Thomas's
were grown out of vogue in France as much as they now are in this country: his
constitution was declared to be the most stupid performance that ever issued
from a sick brain, and its author fell into discredit as rapidly as he had
risen to fame. Insurrection, revolution, constitution, a knowledge in all these
seems to be a necessary qualification in a professor of the Rights of Man. Tom
Pain understood the first perfectly well, he had a smattering of the second,
but as to the third he was, and, if alive is, totally ignorant.
Among thousands of others, he experienced the sudden change in the opinions of
the volatile Parisians: from being a sort of demi-god he was become the most
degraded thing in nature, a poor, half-starved despised pretender to renown.
Besides, the constitution that was now coming into play, with a council of
youngers and a council of elders and five kings, elected by people of some
property, or, at least, some qualification, was what Tom never could defend
with his right of universal suffrage and continual insurrection, and, for once,
he had the prudence to hold his tongue.

Tom's fate in France was nearly what it had been in America; when it was no
longer necessary to employ him he sunk into neglect. Happy if he could have
ceased eating when his insurrection talents became useless; but as he could
not, he must continue to write, and as he was in a country where he was
permitted to revile none but the Almighty, the Almighty he reviled. The present
of poison he has sent to his "fellow citizens" of America, not therefore, so
much the work of choice as of necessity. The Second Part of the Age of Reason
he wrote, for a living and the First Part he wrote for his life.

Those who prefer a few years of life to every thing else, may find an excuse
for this degraded man: it is impossible for any of us to say how we should act
at the foot of the guillotine. But, what shall be said to those, who, pressed
by neither danger nor want, make uncommon exertions to spread his infamous
performance among the ignorant part of their countrymen, and thereby sow in
their minds the seeds of vice inquietude, and despair? Again; deists may find
some apology for doing this; but who will dare to become the apologist of those
booksellers, who, professors of the Christian faith, throw out this bait of
blasphemy to catch unwary comers, and, smiling at their simplicity, pocket the
dirty pence. Such men (and they are but too numerous) are like the Hollander on
the coast of Japan, who, to outstrip others in trade with the natives, tramples
on the cross of his Savior. I know a printer and bookseller who has taken,
for his sign, the picture of the blasphemer Pain. This undoubtedly is to
inform the amateurs of insurrection and infidelity that they may be supplied
within. It is no more than fair to impute this intention to him who hangs out
such a sign. When Caterfelto placed the picture of the Devil over his door, it
was to inform people that hell was to be seen in the house.


I shall here take the liberty of adding an extract from an address, delivered
by Judge Rush to the Grand Jury of the County of Berks, with which I shall
dismiss this article.

Christianity, we are told by our law books, is part of the law of the land;
and as such a Judge may at any time, without stepping aside from the path of
duty, illustrate its precepts and enforce its evidences. It must therefore be
particularly incumbent on him at this time, when deism is daily venting itself
in ambiguous hints or sneers, or openly attacking religion with shallow
argument.

To the native growth of infidelity among us, it is more than possible,
augmentations may have been made, in consequence of our admiration of a certain
great nation in Europe, more especially as a member of the late convention in
that country (generally supposed to have been actuated by an uncommon zeal for
the Rights of Man,") availing himself of his literary reputation, has by an
attempt to overthrow all religion, indirectly endeavored to justify their
blasphemous measures to extirpate it. It is really astonishing, Gentlemen, that
a man who calls himself a patriot, should strive to undermine religion, the
only foundation of government and morality. The penetrating genius of
Montesquieu, taught him to entertain sentiments very different from those of
the "Age of Reason." Having compared the effects on society produced by
different religions, and examined them merely in a political light; what is the
decision? "The principles of christianity," says he, "deeply engraved on the
heart, would be infinitely more powerful than the false honor of monarchies,
the humane virtues of Republics, or the servile fear of despotic states." The
vast comprehensive mind of the great Bacon, saw the subject in the same point
of view. "There never was found," says this profound philosopher, "in any age
of the world, either philosophy, or sect, or religion, or law, a discipline
which did so highly exalt the public good, as the christian faith.

I have already, Gentlemen, consumed more time than I intended, and shall
therefore instantly close with a single observation.

If the great duties of truth and justice, and the purest precepts of morality;
if the most exalted benevolence and unbounded humanity; if sincerity, candor
meekness, magnanimity, gentleness, and forgiveness of injuries, have a native
tendency to improve the heart, and diffuse peace, order, and happiness among
mankind, and are strictly enjoined by the Christian religion, as indispensable
conditions of obtaining the favor of the Deity; what must we think of the
writer, who has exerted his talents to lessen our motives, or enfeeble our
obligations to the practice of these benificent and godlike virtues?

Save us, gracious Heaven, from such patriots, and the extension of their
baneful principles among us!

I am sure the reader will join with me in admiring this extract, and
applauding the man by whom it was delivered. How different his conduct from
that of those who are employed in sending the poison of the Frenchified English
desperado!

EPITAPH ON TOM PAIN.
SOME time after this little tribute to the memory of the great Pain was sent
me (which was about three months ago) it was reported, that the person, whose
deeds it is intended to commemorate, was still living. This unexpected
circumstance made me keep it back, 'till I had consulted the obliging author,
and I here subjoin his answer to my letter on the subject,

Sir,
With all due deference to your better judgment, I presume, that the report
concerning Pain can be no reason for delaying the publication of his Epitaph.
He has long since given up the ghost as a politician; of this our present
incertitude respecting his natural death is a clear, and for him, humiliating
proof: who would once have thought, that the time would come when it would be
unknown whether the great Rights of Man was in existence or not! being then
assured that he is politically dead, it is of little consequence whether his
person has survived his fame, whether his carcass be under ground, or whether
it be reeling about among the cutthroat philosophers of Paris.

If I am to understand your consulting me on this occasion as a delicate manner
of requesting me to withdraw the piece, I beg leave to assure you that the
precaution was unnecessary. My feelings as an author are not so extremely
tender. In short, Sir, I wish you to use your own discretion, and am,

Your, etc. etc.
Boston, 2nd April, 1796.
EPITAPH.
WHEN the wight, who here lies beneath the cold earth,
First quitted the land that had given him birth,
He commenced the apostle of bloodshed and strife,
And practiced the trade to the end of his life.
Sedition and nonsense and lies to dispense.
He took up the title of "Old Common Sense;"
Taught poor honest men how rich rogues to keep under,
Excited to pillage, and shared in the plunder;
But when there no longer was plunder to share,
His "common sense" led him to seek it elsewhere.
To his countrymen now he returned back again,
The Wronger of Rights and the Righter of Men;
He told them they still were a nation of slaves;
That their king was a fool and his ministers knaves,
And the only sure way for the people to thrive
Was, to leave neither one nor the other alive.
But Thomas, who never knew when he should stop,
Went a little too far, and was caught on the hop,
In short, it was determined that poor Tom should lose
His ears at a post, or his life in a noose.
"Old Common Sense" boggles, then skulks out of fight,
Then packs up his rags and decamps in the night.
His arrival at Paris occasions a fete,
And he finds, in the den of assassins, a seat.
Here he murders and thieves and makes laws for a season;
Is crammed in a dungeon: and preaches up "Reason;"
Blasphemes the Almighty, lives in filth like a hog,
Is abandoned in death, and interred like a dog.
Tom Pain for the Devil is surely a match;
In hanging O'd England he cheated Jack-Catch,
In France (the first time such a thing had been seen)
He cheated the watchful and sharp Guillotine,
And at last, to the sorrow of all the beholders,
He marched out of life with his head on his shoulders.
FRENCH GENEROSITY.
On the 27th of April last, there appeared, in the Philadelphia Gazette, an
order, said to be issued by the French Convention (I lump the five kings and
council of old ones and council of young ones all together) to the commanders
of their privateers, concerning the papers of Mr. Spillard, the famous
traveller. The person who sends this article to Mr. Brown, requests him to
publish it, as it will be acceptable to every friend of the French nation, and
of useful discoveries.

Before we say any thing about the order itself, we ought to observe, that it
is published to give pleasure to the friends of the French, by extolling French
generosity. The friends of useful discoveries too are to be obliged, and the
paragraphist seems to hint, that those who are friends of the latter must be of
the former. I must allow that the French have made several new discoveries, as,
for instance, forced-loans, assignats, the maximum, requisitions, revolutionary
tribunals, festivals to Reason, drowning boats, shooting en mass, and the
renowned guillotine. While Spillard has been employed in exploring the back
parts of America, the French have been employed in exploring both back and
belly parts of the human body: they have been cutting off the breasts of women
and secrets of men; they have been tearing out the heart from the breast and
the embryo from the womb. These are certainly discoveries; but, I imagine, the
"friends of France" alone will think them "useful" ones.

Now to the generous order. After having run on a long while, in the usual
bombastical cant of the Convention (but with less vaunting than formerly) the
order says:

As a philosophical traveller, he knew the chances of war: he knew how
formidable the courage of the French was. By venturing on sea to reach his
country, he undoubtedly puts his confidence in the generosity of a great
republic, founded upon the love of virtue, the sciences and arts.

No, Spillard's hope shall not be in vain, and to have recapitulated here his
interesting labors, is sufficient to be convinced of the readiness of his
captors to assist the views of the government. That is a debt which they will
acquit in the name of the republic, a great lesson which they will give to our
enemies, and a great claim to the glory which they will acquire; for a good
action deserves as much as a great victory.

The Convention could not, all at once, leave off their old style. We must yet
be dunned with the formidableness of French courage; and poor Spillard must be
called a philosopher, a name now synonymous, with cutthroats. They must yet
keep up their cant about a great republic, and their love of virtue and of the
arts and sciences. We have, indeed, seen some few instances of the force of
their genius, and of their application, in the discoveries above ennumerated;
but how long is it, I would be glad to know, since they have become the patrons
and protectors of the arts and sciences?

I have a book lying before me from which I shall here borrow a sact or two.
The library at Aney was crammed into hogsheads; at Narbonne the books were sent
to the Arsenal; at Fontaine le Dijon the library of the Fuillants was thrown
aside as waste paper. Many of the libraries of Monks contained editions printed
in the first days of the art of printing; books, sold in France for a few
crowns, were sold in London for 125 guineas. A clock en malachite was sold for
a trifle, though the only one existing. They mutilated or destroyed all the
famous statues, one in particular that cost 200,000 livres. At Pont Mousson, a
large picture, which connoisseurs offered to cover with guineas as its price,
was sold for less than two. At Nancy, in the space of a few hours, they broke
and burned to the value of 100,000 crowns in books and pictures. At Lions 800
antique medals of gold were thrown into the crucible. The antiquities of Arles
were destroyed to come at saltpeter.

One member of this Vandal Convention proposed to destroy the portal of St.
Denis; another wanted to kill all the rare animals in the museum of Natural
History; a third said he did not like learned men, and that the term was
synonymous with aristocrat; a fourth proposed, that soldiers might be promoted
to generals, without being able to write; to conclude, one of these monsters
said, that all men of genius should be guillotined.

These are lovers of the arts and sciences! These are the representatives of
that great republic to whose generous forbearance Spillard is to owe the
recovery of his papers. Amazing change! These people, who burnt Horace and
Virgil because they had been encouraged by kings, and who destroyed the royal
library, merely because it was royal, are now using their utmost endeavors to
preserve the papers of Spillard for the use of a king, and, oh, ye gods! for a
king of England too! A "despot" with whom they were never to make peace, 'till
he begged it on his knees, with a halter about his neck!

Kind, forgiving, generous fellows! how are they reformed! they who, in the
beginning of the war, seized on the property, even to the very cloths, of all
the British subjects who happened to be in France, and threw their persons into
loathsome prisons, where hundreds of them perished; they who, in the days of
their success, issued a decree for murdering every Briton taken in the field of
action; they, whose cannibal agents dug the half rotten body of the brave
General Dundas from the grave and hung it on a gibbet. Yes, these very people
are now uncommonly solicious to save, for an English gentleman, the little
memorandums he may have made in his travels!

How shall we possibly account for all this? let us see if the closing sentence
of the extract I have given from their order, will not throw some light on the
matter. "This will," say they, give a great lesson to our enemies; for a good
action deserves as much as a great victory. So, so! daddy Merlin is coming
round, is he? a great lesson of generosity is to be given to their enemies, and
this good action is to yield them as much as a great victory? this is what you
may call coaxing. No, no; none of your good actions; keep them for your
friends, and your great victories for your enemies.

And do I live to see the Grande Convention Francoise wheedling "the nation of
shopkeepers?" The people of that devoted Carthage, which they promised us they
would destroy? they may wheedle long enough: Billy Pit has not forgotten that
his head was to be brought before them, as a preliminary to any peace they
might grant to the "shop-keeping nation:" he has not forgotten that they
guillotined him in effigy along with his royal Master. Billy's turn is come: he
may now say to them, in one of Shakespeare's characters: And thus, my lads, the
whirligig of time brings in his revenges.

When the reader compares their patronage of the arts and sciences, in their
own country, and their generosity shown toward the English, in their
prosperous days, with their pretended motives set forth in this generous order,
I am persuaded he will attribute their change of conduct to the proper cause.

Pray then, Mr. Brown the gazette man, let us hear no more of your French
generosity. For shame, Sir! how can you suffer your fine large gazette to talk
about French virtue? tell your correspondent, if he should pester you with such
another paragraph, that the bore is discovered. Tell him that the "friends of
France" are very much reduced in numbers, and are daily and hourly decreasing.
Tell him, above all, that nothing can keep the sans-culotte cause alive but an
immediate supply of the ready; that the "friends of France" are not to be
satisfied with mere sounds of generosity; that fraternity and flattery go but
little way at the shambles or the grog-shop, and that, in short, flour
merchants or not flour merchants, they all prefer "solid pudding to empty
praise."

REMARKS. On the poetical Works of John Swanwick af Philadelphia.
In the last Censor I made my readers a sort of half promise to give them some
account of the poetical works of Mr. Swanwick, and I am now preparing to fulfill
it.

These works are, as yet, confined to a poem, which is to be found in the
Gentleman's Magazine for June, 1795, published by Sylvanus Urban of the city of
London. The reader will be surprised that a poem, written in Philadelphia,
should be exported to England for publication: I was and am yet surprised at
this; and still more, that Citizen Swanwick should send his works to the editor
of a Gentlemen's Magazine. He had heard, I presume, that this is the repository
of most of the little fugitive pieces written by men of learning and genius,
and so he condescended to enrich it with a piece of his own. This was certainly
generous in him, if we recollect what a hatred he has for all that is
gentleman-like.

The poem is entitled: The prospect of seeing the Fine Arts flourish in
America. -- After having spoken of the epoch, when the artists of America shall
stay at home to finish the glories of the risen day of Columbia, our author, by
a happy transition, turns our eyes to what we already possess: "But see what
flowerets we already claim,
"What lovely harbingers of future fame!
"Behold philosophy's bright temple rise,
"And fanes to learning every where surprise;
"What schemes of charity the soul excite
"To acts of bounty, and unmixed delight;
"Some to the jail with pitying steps repair,
"To minister to woes that languish there:
"Others the bed of raging illness smooth,
"And the worst pangs of human sorrow sooth."


Thus, then, Schemes of charity, Visiting the Jail, and Ministering to the Sick
are, by Mr. Swanwick called " flowerets, the lovely harbingers of fame;" and
hence are to spring the fine arts. Never did I before hear that poor-houses,
jails and sick beds were places for cultivating or encouraging the fine arts.
Mr. Swanwick may there practice fine arts, perhaps, such as are necessary to
gain him votes at an election; these are very fine arts indeed. -- But stop,
there are more of these arts to come yet.

"Some to fair freedom living altars raise,
"And bid the negro celebrate her praise:
"Others the farmer with their cares embrace,
"And pay due homage to his useful race;
"Some manufacturers and their arts protect,
"Others humane establishments erect.
"But cease the Muse! -- "
Our poet alludes to the negro society, or abolition society, as it is called;
and, I am ready to allow it a place among the harbingers of the fine arts. This
society is, indeed, a nursery for some of the finest arts ever practiced either
in Europe or America. But, how comes our author to number farming and
manufacturing among his fine arts? Ploughing and grubbing and making anchors
and cables, or grinding snuff or boiling up sugar; these do not seem to me to
be fine arts. After these come "humane establishments;" and, though these had
been before enumerated, Mr. Swanwick must thus sum them up together and express
them over again, for fear we should imagine that he did not look on them as
mere tricks of art. Mercy on us! who ever heard before, that humane
establishments were among the hot-beds of the fine arts!

So much for the vein of absurdity running through this meter: now to the
Nonsense.

Ministering to woes may be a fine art, but, when we are told that these woes
languish, what are we to think of the fine artist? to languish is to pine away,
to droop, to sink under affliction. Now, can it be said that a woe pines and
droops? let us change the principle words in this line for such as are
synonymous with them, but rather more familiar, and we shall be struck, nay,
knocked down with the nonsense.

"To succor pains that pine in the jail." I could say something about the
raging illness of sorrow, and sorrow stretched upon a bed too, but I hasten on
to the living altars of freedom. The poet tells us, that the slave society
raise living altars to freedom, and then bid the negroes celebrate her praise.
Now, what are these living altars? why, the persons freed, the negroes
themselves; and so, these kind gentlemen bid the altars praise the goddess! --
They will stand in no need of priests at any rate.

With respect to the farmer, I will leave it to the experience and good sense
of the reader to determine, whether it be either usual or fitting to pay homage
to the race of him whom we have taken under our care and patronage. -- Our poet
often makes use of figures of rhetoric, but that of the galimatias is the only
one he has perfectly at command. It requires neither learning nor taste to
discover that he has a plentiful lack of both.

Butler, in remarking on the verses of the would-be poets of his time, says
they made one line for sense and one for rhyme. It is certain that this is a
most sure mark of sterility; but our little man goes a step further, or rather
falls a step short, of this: he has one line for rhyme and the other for
nonsense.

This piece of rhyming prose I do not scruple to pronounce the most miserable
attempt at versification, that ever appeared in the Gentleman's Magazine: nor
can I persuade myself that the Editor would ever have admitted it without a
douceur. It appeared, indeed, to have experienced some considerable delay; for,
it is dated in 1788. Certain I am that if old Sylvanus Urban had been
acquainted with our little author's principles in politics, he never would have
suffered his chiming to enter his repository.

Had this been a piece scratched out in a hurry and sent away to the
news-paper, one might have winked at its faults, one might have yawned over its
insipidity and thrown it aside; but here is a studied trap for fame; this poor
dull morsel had been copied over a hundred times, perhaps, before it was sent
all the way to Old England. I think I see the little poet now, scratching his
head and gnawing his pen, telling his fingers and searching his rhyme book.
Alas! Mr. Swanwick, people do not make poetry this way. They may hammer out
lines 'till they clink, but as to poetry it never was hammered out of a dull
brain.

What is most laughable, is, to hear the little man calling out upon the Muse.
-- "But cease the Muse!" as much as to say that the Muse had inspired the
small-beer verses we have above extracted! It is with rapture I hear Milton
invoke the heavenly Muse, or Shakespeare wishing for a Muse of fire; but when,
at the end of fifty lines of vapid meter, I hear the little whiffling poetastor
calling on his Muse to cease her course, a sneer contracts the muscles of my
nose, in spite of all my complaisance and compassion.

If Mr. Swanwick reckons the noble art, taught by the famous Martinus
Scriblerius, I mean the art of sinking in poetry; if he reckons this among the
fine arts, I congratulate him on having brought it to perfection, for he has
certainly rolled from the very bottommost step of the Bathos.

Thus it is to be a pretender to universal genius without having any genius at
all. Instead of getting renown a man gets himself laughed at. It is a real
misfortune: Mr. Swanwick might have been happy all his days as a Tide Waiter;
but, from his dabbling in a variety of arts for which he is not calculated, he
will most probably preserve through life that character so despicable among
partisans; a Jack of all trades and master of none.

FRENCH FRATERNITY.
Since the autumn of 1793, we have heard talk about little else than British
depredations on the American commerce. Most of the newspapers have been
crammed with phillipics against the British government on this account; the
nation have been called thieves and their king the great sea-robber. This was
not very decent language, but even this was surpassed by certain members of
Congress, who seemed to vie with each other in the use of that sort of rhetoric
usually called Billingsgate. I have their speeches now before me, but the
extracts I would wish to give from them are too lengthy, and I should be sorry
to mutilate such elegant compositions.

I am the last on earth that would attempt to justify injustice, I cannot
therefore be thought to approve of the depredations of the British: but, at the
same time I know they have been a thousand times falsely accused, that every art
has been made use of to exaggerate their violences, that the number of vessels
taken by them has been counted fifty times over, and that language has been
imputed to them which they never held.

Nor can the British be justified by saying that they have done no more than
imitate the French; but, we must be permitted to wonder that the depredations
of one nation should excite such a lively resentment as to push the country
within a hair's breadth of a war, while equal depredations on the part of
France should excite not the least discontent, except among the merchants
immediately feeling the loss. At the very moment that the members of Congress
were execrating the sea-robbers of Britain, and ordering General Confiscation
and Admiral Embargo to take up arms against them; at this very moment the
depredations of our dear, generous, humane and pure fingered allies had
committed greater havoc and acts of dishonesty than "the king of pirates" (to
use a legislative expression) or his subjects, had ever done. I have in another
work quoted the report delivered to the House of Representatives on this
subject, stating that the French had not only been guilty of depredations equal
to those of the British, but that they had, besides, violated the treaty
between the two countries, and had, moreover, cheated the American merchants by
discharging in depreciated assignats a contract which should have been
discharged in coin.

When this report came to be examined, every uncorrupted man was astonished to
hear members fall upon the British tooth and nail, while they were ready to
give the baises fraternel to the robbing Garmagnoles. One said that, as to the
depredations of France, some allowance must be made for a great nation
combatting in the cause of liberty, and that he made no doubt that magnanimous
people would be ready to make every just compensation. This was the reasoning
of those times, and so an Envoy was sent to obtain redress from Britain and
which by the treaty is obtained; but some allowance was made for the great
nation who was fighting in the cause of liberty, and therefore all account
against her died away.

The merchants, however, though generally partial enough toward the grande
republique, still recollected the loss, which has been ever since increasing.
These men are too well acquainted with book-keeping to be real good republicans
a la francoise. They were as ready as any body to make some allowances of the
excesses of the French, provided always that those allowances did not come out
of their pockets. Their excesses in the low countries, their robbing of the
merchants at Amsterdam, set the bells to ringing at Philadelphia; but when they
came to lay their fraternal fingers on the Philadelphians themselves, oh! then
they were sad rogues, and so the merchants send a memorial to Congress. -- Now
we shall hear their own history of the affair.

The Memorial, etc. Respectfully Shows,
THAT the memorialists and diverse others in the regular course of their trade
in the year 1793, 1794 and 1795, inverted large sums of money in provisions and
other merchandises suited to the West Indian market and sent them thither,
where many cargoes were sold to the officers of Colonial Administration of the
Republic of France to be paid for in Cash or Colonial produce, many others were
taken by force by the said officers, from the supercargoes and consignees at
prices arbitrarily fixed by themselves to be paid for in produce at rates and
terms of credit fixed at their pleasure, and that others have been arrested on
the high seas, carried into their ports and taken for the use of the Republic
without any stipulated price or contract; that your memorialists confidently
believe that the amount of property, belonging to the citizens of the United
States, thus delivered to and taken by the administrative bodies of the French
Republic in the West Indies, exceeds two millions of dollars now in arrear, for
which your memorialists and others concerned have no mode of obtaining payment,
satisfaction or redress. That the usual course is after taking the cargo by
force and duress to detain the vessels under pretense of paying in produce,
until the masters and crews are wearied with idleness, sickness, delay, and
insult, so as to be willing to return either altogether without pay, or with
such small portions thereof, as scarcely to pay the freight and charges
occasioned by these long delays; whereby in most instances the whole capital
has been left behind, and in those instances where a considerable part of the
cargo has been paid for in Colonial produce, the expenses of demurrage have
consumed almost the whole, as by vouchers ready to be laid before the House or
a committee thereof will abundantly appear.

Your memorialists further show that some of the earliest sufferers among them
applied personally and by memorials to citizens Genet, Fauchet, and Adet, the
first and suceeding ministers of the French Republic for redress without
obtaining it. They also applied by memorial to the President of the United
States, who referred them to the Secretary for the department of State, whose
advice they pursued in committing their claims to James Monroe, Esquire minister
plenipotentiary of the United States to the Republic of France -- at the time
of his embarkation. That although your memorialists are perfectly satisfied
that the Executive authority of the Union has done all within its power to
procure redress to your memorialists, yet it has not had the desired effect.

Your memorialists further represent that they had hoped that some arrangement
would have been assented to, whereby the debt due from the Republic of France
to the citizens of America might have been discharged out of the debt due to
her from the United States, and under this expectation they exercised patience,
but finding that money funded and transferred to an agent of the republic, all
hope from that resource is vanished.

Your memorialists feel the more concern that while provision has been made by
the Executive of the Union for obtaining from other nations a redress for
spoliations committed on their commerce, no measures adopted have been
successful for procuring similar satisfaction from that nation which the
merchants of this have shown so decided an affection to, by supplying their
islands with provisions and necessaries at a greater risk than attended any
other branch of their trade, supplies that were absolutely necessary to their
Colonies and which they could from no other place nor in any other manner be
furnished with.

Your memorialists therefore pray that the legislature will take their
suffering case into consideration and afford them such relief and protection as
to their wisdom shall seem consistent with right and justice.


Some people will pity and others will laugh at these memorialists; the French
republicans will be among the latter. Upon my word, it was very cruel of our
dear allies, after having received such proofs of our "so decided affection,"
to cheat and insult us even more than the "great sea-robber" did I after the
patriotic and affectionate captains had run the gauntlet, as it were, to get in
to the ports of their dear friends and allies to save them from starving, how
silly they must look to have their cargoes seized, and be themselves thrown
into a dungeon! this was often the case. I have once before said, that the
Carmagnoles called them, les capitaines a coup de baton, or caned captains;
just as their Convention called the Prussians, les soldats a coup de baton, or
caned soldiers. Indeed, they did often kick and beat these captains, and,
though the poet tells us that such kind of blows wound honor more than any
other, yet we have never heard this called a national disgrace: on the
contrary, the more these fellows were kicked, the louder did they cry long live
the Republic, and the more lies did they bring us in her favor.

The hearts of the patriots at home partook of the insensibility of the backs
and posteriors of the gallant mariners, and, had it not been for this
after-clap memorial of the merchants, the whole would have sunk into oblivion.

Some persons of extraordinary patriotism went so far as to apologize for the
conduct of the French; as thus: The mother country engaged in combating
despotism at home, and endeavoring to calm those troubles which exist in her
bosom, cannot pay sufficient attention to the filling the offices in the island
with honest and upright characters, otherwise they certainly would not suffer
the conduct pursued. This is proved by the honorable and very ample payment
for damages and demurage made to Americans detained in their ports. They are
therefore not implicated in the charge of depredation. (See the Aurora of 28th.
May 1795.)

Now, Great Britain was at war in Europe as well as France was, why then was
not the same apology applicable to her? but, this apologist says, that ample
payment was made for damages, etc. If this be true the memorialists are
mistaken, for they say there are two millions of dollars yet unpaid in May
1796. I know very well that the French promised to pay amply: I recollect that,
when Mr. Randolph's report (the substance of which I have above noticed) was
published, it was accompanied with a note from his intimate friend Fauchet,
declaring the readiness of the French Republic to make immediate compensation.
This had the desired effect, for, though a single farthing will never be paid,
the declaration was looked upon as an acknowledgement of the debt and as a
security for the future; while the English minister, not daring to make a
promise which he was not sure would be fulfilled, was obliged to remain silent,
and his silence was considered as a proof that his court not only authorized,
but was resolved to continue its depredations. But, how deceitful are
appearances! he that promises every thing pays nothing, and he that promises
nothing pays every thing.

Either the apologist tells us a falsehood or the merchants tell us one. I have
no great inclination to interfere with the matter: I leave them to settle it
between themselves; or if they should be obliged to call in an umpire, none is
so proper as the dear nation for whom they both have shown so decided an
affection.

NEW DISCOVERIES IN The Regions of Corruption.
In the introduction to this work, I promised the public to give an account of
every democratic trick, whether of native growth or imported from abroad; to
unravel all the windings of the pretended patriots, and more particularly those
of the flour-merchants. Under this engagement, I should think myself
inexcusable, were I to remain silent at a time, when, if new plots are not
absolutely discovered, such are talked of in a manner calculated to excite
general curiosity.

Satisfied in my own mind, as I have long been in the habit of declaring, that
there is a numerous faction in this country acting under French influence, and
even in French pay, I must naturally rejoice at the discovery of whatever
promises to be more successful, than any thing I have hitherto been able to
say, in convincing the people of the existence of this faction. Under this
impression it is, that I publish the following article from the Minerva of New
York, and that I add such observations as appear to me pertinent.

Extract of a Letter from an American dated Paris, Feb. 14th, 1796.
Could you imagine, my dear Sir, that any American citizens could be so
abandoned as to invite France to attempt, by coercion, to prevent the free
exercise of the judgment of our country concerning its own interests, and to
awe it into a surrender of its own opinion to the mandate of a foreign country?
yet so the fact undoubtedly is. Influential men on your side of the water, have
invited the French government to speak to ours a decided language against the
execution of the treaty with Great Britain, and even to go so far, as to claim
our guarantee of the French West Indies; placing before us the alternative of
war with France or Great Britain. The idea has been listened to by the
government, and it has been in contemplation to send a new Minister with a
fleet to carry the plan into effect: though I am inclined to hope that it has
been recently laid aside. The extreme embarrassments of the affairs of their
country, especially with regard to its finances, and more serious reflections
on the hazard of driving us into an election to take side with Great Britain,
as well from the exposed state of our commerce, as from the resentment which so
dictatorial a conduct would naturally inspire, have at last produced a halt,
and, I trust, that the hesitation which has begun, will end in a resolution not
to risk so unjust and so mad a proceeding. Would to Heaven that the war was at
an end! for we shall not be safe from the machinations of this wicked portion
of the globe till that event takes place -- justice and morality have fled from
Europe -- but alas! are they flying from America also? I dare not trust to this
mode of conveyance the persons supposed to be the authors of this nefarious
plot. But a few months may enable me to make the disclosure with more
certainty: where I can do it with perfect safety.


This intelligence, if true, at once decides the question of French influence
and corruption; it is therefore of the utmost importance to form a correct
opinion concerning it. Let us first see what claims the letter itself has to
authenticity, and then, whether the alarming information it contains be
corroberated by facts already known.

The gazette in which this extract first appeared is remarkable for its
impartiality. The Editor is a man of much experience in his business, and
enjoys a high reputation for candor and understanding. It is not probable that
such a man should be deceived with respect the authenticity of the letter, and
it is still less probable, that he should be prevailed on to print it, not
believing it authentic. The manner, too, in which he introduces it to the
public, seems to me to be a strong proof of his persuasion, that it would be
soon followed up with a more explicit account. Indeed, had he not believed that
the whole affair must finally come to light, it is hardly credible that he
would have hazarded a piece of intelligence reflecting such indelible dishonor
on a portion of his countrymen, and not capable of answering any good purpose
whatever.

The Editor has never shown himself the enemy of France. He has not indeed,
like hundreds of others, approved of the massacres in that country; but the
instant those massacres ceased, he contributed his dole of praise to the
triumphant moderates. He was among the first to oppose the principles of the
present constitution in France to those of our Jacobins; and though he was
mistaken here, though he was opposing mischief to mischief, the mistake proves,
that the present French government had his approbation, and as it still
continues the same it must still have that approbation. There is then, no
reason to suppose that he would lend his hand to a fabrication tending to
discredit the French government. In truth, he is over cautious in speaking of
it: if the intelligence be true, the hardest terms he has for conduct of such
an infamous and treacherous nature are, "unkindness and imprudence." A man who
could so far get the better of the feelings he must entertain upon the sight of
this intelligence, is rather to be suspected of a partiality for, than against
the French government.

The Editor of the Minerva has, it is true, been a bold and able defender of the
British treaty; he might therefore be supposed to be anxious for its success,
as all men are zealous in a cause they have decidedly espoused; but, this cause
stood no longer in need of support when the extract appeared, the treaty having
passed the House of Representatives sixteen days before. Had this intelligence
been a mere invention to stir the people up against the opposition, or rather
against their destructrive projects, it should have made its appearance at the
time when petitions were handing about for and against the treaty. At that time
such a battery might have been opened to good purpose; but, after the treaty
was sanctioned, it would have been playing it off upon the defeated and the
dead.

In short, there is no reason whatever to suppose, that the Editor would have
published the extract, believing it a fabrication; and as it is almost
impossible he should be duped by any fabricator, we must believe it authentic,
especially when we see the intelligence contained in it strongly corroborated
by facts already most clearly and unequivocally ascertained.

It is certain that every American who loves his country, and who consequently
feels a deep concern for its honor, must be fired with indignation upon
hearing, that certain influential men on this side of the water had invited the
French government to force the government of America to set aside the treaty,
and that the French rulers had listened to the proposal; but the Editor of the
Minerva must excuse me, if I think it rather surprising, that he should imagine
either one or the other "impossible." Says he, it seems impossible that any
American citizens could be so lost to all sense of virtue and duty, as to
endeavor to bring upon their country so great an evil, and it seems less
probable, that the government of France should so far forget our rights as an
independent nation, and be so unmindful of the spirit and genius of freedom as
to be disposed to follow the pernicious advice. Now, the truth is, that what is
here represented as next to impossible is no more than a continuation of what
we have been witnesses of during four successive years.

In order to form a correct opinion as to the probability of the truth of the
intelligence from Paris, we must go back to the epoch when the ruinous and
ruined French nation was first called a Republic, I say called, because France
is no more a Republic in reallity than Turkey or Morocco, or any other despotic
state.
and trace down the chain of the machinations of its tyrants to the moment,
when the hostile determination, the ne plus ultra of impudence and of perfidy
is said to have been formed.

When Brissot and his colleagues declared war against Great Britain, Holland
and Spain they formed the plan of forcing this country to make a common cause
with them. For this purpose Citizen Genet was sent out to replace Mr. Ternant,
bringing with him the necessary instructions, and the still more necessary
rouleaux of Louis d'ors. Some time ago, I had a note sent me, giving an account
of the deposit as well as the removal of certain rouleaux, accompanied with a
poem entitled the confessions of Francois Louis d'or. The author has my thanks
for both; but want of room has delayed their publication for the present.
As it was foreseen that the Executive of the United States would resolutely
oppose the overtures for war, Genet was to effect by force what could not be
effected by persuasion. If the government of America was ready to aid the cause
of France it was to be respected, but if not it was to be destroyed by stirring
up the people to opposition.

Instead, therefore, of coming directly to the seat of government, the Citizen
landed at one of the ports the most distant from it, and in a part of the Union
the most likely to be led astray by his seductive and seditious arts. On his
arrival he found a proclamation of neutrality, strictly forbidding the people
of these States to do any thing contrary to their duty as a nation at peace
with all the world; but, in place of acknowledging this right of a neutral
nation, what did he do? He issued Letters of Marque and military Commissions:
by sea he sent Americans to cruise on the British, and by land to invade the
Spanish dominions. His journey through the Southern States was a kind of
triumphal procession, and he at last made his public entry at Philadelphia more
like a viceroy or a conqueror than a foreign minister.

His introductory letter to the Secretary of State was a clear declaration of
his intensions. "When," say he, the emissaries of our common enemies are making
useless efforts to neutralise the gratitude of your fellow citizens, etc. This
language was an unequivocal proof that he despised the President and his
proclamation of neutrality, and that he depended on the people for support.
Accordingly his endeavors were all directed toward this one object, exciting
discontent and disobedience.

Those who had succeeded in destroying one government by the infernal agency of
Jacobin clubs, knew their utility, too well to neglect employing them against
another. The Jacobins had hurled the king of France from his throne, and the
Democrats might hurl General Washington from his chair. It is something truly
singular, that a celebrated atronomer and a secretary of state should be the
president and secretary of the mother-club in each country; it is, however, a
fact: Bailly and Dumouriez once filled those honorable posts in France, as
David Rittenhouse and A. J. Dallas did in the first club that was formed in
America.

On the plan, and at the recommendation, of the mother-club at Philadelphia,
others were formed all over the Union. Their affiliations were as perfect in
their nature as those of the Jacobins in France, or of the Reformers in England
and Scotland, and the principles and object of all were the same. It would be
tedious to enter into a detail of their maneuvers, and disagreeable also, as
it would not fail to bring to mind the conduct of many persons who now wish
their folly to be forgotten.

When the Citizen saw that the clubs were become numerous, and thought that
things were ripe, he made an open avowal of his intentions of appealing from
the President to the people. This precipitant avowal, dictated by French
vanity, happily disconcerted all his plans. The hectoring minister was
mistaken; he thought he had the poor doltish Parisians to deal with; but he was
soon convinced of the contrary. The people of America, though their partiality
for the French nation, and their still greater partiality for what they then
imagined to be the cause of freedom, had led them into innumerable fooleries,
and distinctors as unwise as unjust, showed, when it came to the trial, that
they had too much love for their country, and for their friend and father to
espouse the cause of a man who aimed at the destruction of both. The French
republicans assert, with their usual insolence, that the people of this country
began to express their dislike to Genet only when they found he was recalled.
This is false. The democratic societies, indeed, played him this trick; but the
people expressed their detestation of his conduct, and that most unequivocally
too, the instant he talked of his appeal.


From the moment the insolent Brissotonian found himself baffled, his myrmidons
began to cry havoc. They attacked the citizens of Charleston at the door of
their playhouse, cut the traces of their coach-horses, wounded several
persons, and if I am not mistaken killed one or two. The militia were called
out, and the city was struck with terror. Not long after an American had his
skull cleft on board of one of their vessels, for a pretended insult to their
tricolored cockade. Many persons of this city of Philadelphia had the
mortification to see their peace officers hacked with swords in the middle of
the street. How all the offenders came to escape punishment is a question to be
put to the governor of Pennsylvania and others, who ought to have seen the laws
executed.
And yet we are now told that it seems impossible that the government of France
should attempt any thing against our neutrality.

I know I shall be told here, to make a distinction between the rulers in
France and their ministers in this country; and I would do this, if I saw the
least reason for so doing; if I were not well convinced that the latter have in
no case surpassed their instructions. The friends of the French government make
this distinction, and tell us that Genet was recalled for his misconduct. The
turbulent minister was, indeed, displaced; but the manner of doing this fully
proves, that it was a matter of expediency and not of choice. His masters, and
the masters of unhappy France, could not reject the Presidents' request,
without disgusting the people of this country, who must have looked on such a
step as a decided mark of approbation of Genets' insolence; nor could they call
home without punishing him. Therefore, at once to preserve the good will of the
Americans and avoid the punishment of a man whose conduct they did in reality
approve of, they dismissed him from his employment and left him quietly amongst
us, where, besides, it was possible for him still to act, though unseen, as the
show-man behind the canvass gives movement and volubility to his puppets. If
some good soul would but give us a peep into the dispatches that now and then
go over to Long Island, we should, perhaps, see some more "precious
confessions."


Let it be recollected, too, that Genet was displaced by Robespierre and his
crew, and I leave any one to determine whether the merciful Robespierre, the
very prince of cutthroats, could disapprove of the plans of our Long-islander.
The gentle Robospierre did, indeed, send us word that it pained his humane and
generous soul, to think that the representative of a great and brave nation
should so disobey its will; but we should have asked this bloody villain, what
he would have said if Genet had succeeded in his appeal from the President to
the people. Genet was displaced because he had failed, and not because he had
attempted our destruction. Robespierre has been aptly termed the scapegoat of
the Convention, in France, and Genet may with equal aptness be termed their
scapegoat in America.

The insurrection in the Western Counties of Pennsylvania was undoubtedly a
great evil, but much good has been derived from it. This insurrection was
imputed to the machinations of Great Britain, and as people's ears were all
open to every thing, however absurd, that was advanced against that nation, it
is not wonderful that many very well meaning men marched against the insurgents
with a full expectation of finding them under the command of the Governor of
Upper-Canada. This was sinning against conviction certainly; but, what errors
will not men plunge into, when blinded by prejudice and pricked on by revenge!
most people ware heartily ashamed of having been the dupes of this trick, long
before the appearance of Citizen Fauchet's intercepted letter; but that truly
inestimable essay on bribery and corruption has placed the whole matter in a
fair light, and, as the saying is, "clapped the saddle on the right horse."

Every man who seeks for truth and not for falsehood will regret, with me, that
we are not in possession of the famous No. 2 and No. 6, mentioned in Citizen
Fauchet's letter, and of the other dispatches preceding that letter. Had we the
perusal of these precious pieces, we might enter into some detail not having
them we must content ourselves with proceeding like mathematicians, from the
known to the unknown.

We know, that the same man, who was Secretary to the first Jacobin society in
this country, and who afterward denied his report concerning the appeal from
the President to the people; we know that this man is named, in the intercepted
letter, amongst the three or four who were balancing to decide on their party,
when the overtures for money were made to the French minister.

We know, that all the leaders in the insurrection, as well as their partisans
here, were then and are now the decided supporters of France in opposition to
Great Britain. If we look back to the meetings of the insurgent committees, we
shall there find the names of two members of the present House of
Representatives, and if we turn to the yeas and nays of that House, we shall
find them both voting against the British treaty, and opposing every measure of
the Federal government. When I said, in the first part of the Bone to Gnaw,
that the enemies of Great Britain were invariably the enemies of the Federal
Government, the good democrats affected to laugh at me: let them deny this now,
if they can. I defy even their impudence to deny the fact.


We know, that poor Citizen Fauchet expressed his severe regret at the failure
of the insurrection; and surely we know, that when a man expresses his regret
at the failure of an enterprise, it is certain he wished it to succeed. After
having justified the cause of the insurgents, and whined out their discomfit,
he says: Thus will the government acquire stability, for one complete cession
at least! Who knows what will be the limits of this triumph! perhaps advantage
will be taken of it to obtain some laws for strengthening the government! -- I
was tempted to throw in an alas, or two here; nothing else is wanting to render
the passage truly pathetic; as thus: My dear Masters, in spite of my teeth this
government will last one session longer at least! Alas! who knows what may be
the limits of this triumph over our brothers! Perhaps, Oh hell! we shall never
be able to knock it down.

Let the reader well remember, that these dreadful forebodings of Citizen
Fauchet are to be found in a confidential dispatch, intended for the perusal of
the Convention only. It is from documents like this, and not from public
declarations, that we are to judge of the dispositions of a foreign government.
Suppose, for instance, a letter from the British Minister had been intercepted,
containing expressions of his regret at the success of the government in
quelling the insurrection, and justifying the conduct of the insurgents. What
would then have been seen? need I ask this? Poor man! the Lord have mercy upon
him, if he had remained here after the discovery. Our language is copious, and
particularly in terms of execration; but I am mistaken if enough would have
been found. Those who talk high dutch would have had an advantage, as it is
said, a man can curse harder in that language than in any other.

Fauchet was recalled, and, as no misconduct was imputed to him, he went home
you see. But here is one circumstance that I must beg the good reader to attend
to, and that is, that Citizen Joseph was called away after a defeat, just as
his renowned predecessor was. As soon as it was known in France, that Father
Joseph's fatal dispatch had fallen into the hands of the English Ministry, it
was perceived that the writer would become odious here; that he would always be
suspected by the government, and that his friends would be afraid to trust
their precious confessions to his ear. How kind was it, then, to recall him and
send another, whom no mortal man could ever think of suspecting: no, certainly
not; it would be hard, indeed, to suspect a third. The most unfortunate
gamblers reckon with confidence upon a good throw out of three. Having stumbled
upon the word Gamblers, it puts me in mind of the Farro Banks, Gaming-Tables
and Gambling Lotteries, in all about two hundred now in this city. These noble
institutions we owe entirely to the French; and, when we add to these the
paganish calendar and the Age of Reason, must we not blush to think that these
generous enlightners of the world are still obliged to cry out on our
ingratitude! how much better are all those pretty things than the nasty
broad-cloths and linens we get from those sad dogs the British! -- And yet we
make a treaty with them! O, fie!


The third (and I hope the last) fair trial of the strength of French influence
was, the attempt to set aside the British Treaty. Here it failed also; but we
are not to conclude that, because it failed, it never was made. For my part, I
am confident the trial was made, and have not the least doubt that it would
have succeeded, had it not been for a disappointment.

It would be useless to repeat here what has been so often said respecting the
conduct of poor Mr. Randolph, at the time of the ratification, or to go over
all the maneuvers of the partisans of France, from the moment the treaty first
arrived in the country till the meeting of Congress. Still less necessary is it
to enter into a detailed account of what has passed since that time, as it is
fresh in every one's memory. One fact, however, I must relate here, as it is
well worthy of attention.

In the Censor for April, page 145, it was remarked, that the petition against
the treaty, said to be signed by fifteen hundred citizens of Philadelphia, was
carried round for signature by a Frenchman; to this I have now to add, that, in
the State of New Jersey, two Frenchmen went about soliciting signatures of
another petition of the same import. The person, who was so obliging as to
furnish this information, saw them at a public house pressing people to sign.
He was himself prevailed on to do so; but, thinking, upon recollection, that he
had done wrong, he returned to the house and scratched out his name. Would to
God that numbers of his countrymen were as ready to correct their errors!

After having given this short sketch of the history of French influence down
to the time when, as our Paris intelligence states, it was to break out into
action, let us compare that intelligence with the situation of things on this
side of the water. A few sentences will suffice.

The substance of the Paris intelligence is this: that certain influential men
in America had entered into a negotiation with the French government, the
result of which was; France was to oblige the Executive of the United States to
abandon the treaty with great Britain, by threatening it with a war in case of
refusal; but that this project, the writer believed to be laid aside on the
14th of February. On the 24th of March, Mr. Livingston's motion passed by a
majority of twenty five. This was only 38 days after France had given up the
project. On the 28th of April, 35 days later, this frightful majority changed
into a minority, and the treaty passed very quietly. This was 63 days after
France had given up the project. So that, it is possible that this might be
known when the latter vote was taken, and not when the former one was.

I by no means pretend to say, that any unfavourable news from France had an
influence on these votes; on the contrary, I am, alas! (as Citizen Fauchet
says) too well convinced of the purity of the Opposition, to suppose that they,
or any of them, could be the "influential men," hinted at in the extract. No,
no, God forbid I should think any such thing; mercy on us all! they, poor men,
changed their votes because their constituents changed their notes. It is these
constituents who are to blame then, and, of course, the "influential men" are
to be found among them. Now, constituents are every body, and every body is
nobody; and thus you see, reader, we all of us draw ourselves decently out of
the scrape.


