PORCUPINE's POLITICAL CENSOR, For DECEMBER, 1796.

CONTAINING, REMARKS ON THE DEBATES IN CONGRESS, PARTICULARLY ON THE TIMIDITY
OF THE LANGUAGE HELD TOWARD FRANCE. ALSO, A LETTER TO THE INFAMOUS TOM PAIN,
In answer to his brutal attack on the Federal Constitution, and on the conduct
and character of General Washington.

PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM COBBETT, OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH.

Price, One Quarter of a Dollar.

N. B. The title and table of contents, on the opposite page, are intended for
the convenience of such gentlemen as have been constant purchasers of the
Censor, and as may think them worth preserving in a volume.

PORCUPINE's POLITICAL CENSOR.

VOL. I.

CONTAINING: 1. The Censor for March 1796: 2. The Censor for April, embellished
with a striking likeness of a political sinner, endeavoring to stop the wheels
of government. 3. The Censor for May. 4. The Scarecrow. 5. The Life of P.
Porcupine. 6. The Censor for September, with the Life of Tom Pain, 7. The
Censor for November, replying to the insolent and seditious Notes of the French
Minister, Adet. 8. The Censor for December with a letter to the infamous Pain,
in answer to his Letter to Genesis Washington.


PHILADELPHIA: PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM COBBETT, OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH.

REMARKS ON THE DEBATES IN CONGRESS, During the Sessions, begun on the 5th of
December, 1796.
5th DECEMBER.
THIS day the Congress met, and, a quorum being formed, it was agreed, on the
6th, to inform the President that the two Houses were ready to receive such
communications as he might have to make to them.

7th DECEMBER.
The President went to the Representatives' chamber, in the usual manner,
where, the two Houses being assembled, he delivered the following address.
Fellow Citizens of the Senate, and of the House of Representatives,
IN recurring to the internal situation of our country since I had last the
pleasure to address you, I find ample reason for a renewed expression of that
gratitude to the Ruler of the Universe, which a continued series of prosperity
has so often and so justly called forth.

The acts of the last session, which required special arrangements, have been,
as far as circumstances would admit, carried into operation.

Measures calculated to ensure a continuance of the friendship of the Indians,
and to preserve peace along the extent of our interior frontier, have been
digested and adopted. In the framing of these, care has been taken to guard on
the one hand, our advanced settlements from the predatory incursions of those
unruly individuals, who cannot be restrained by their tribes; and on the other
hand, to protect the rights secured to the Indians by treaty; to draw them
nearer to the civilized state; and inspire them with correct conceptions of the
power, as well as justice of the government.

The meeting of the deputies from the Creek nation at Coleraine, in the State
of Georgia, which had for a principal object the purchase of a parcel of their
land by that State, broke up without its being accomplished; the nation having,
previous to their departure, instructed them against making any sale; the
occasion however has been improved, to confirm by a new treaty with the Creeks,
their pre-existing engagements with the United States; and to obtain their
consent to the establishment of trading houses, and military posts within their
boundary; by means of which their friendship and the general peace may be more
effectually secured.

The period during the late session, at which the appropriation was passed, for
carrying into effect the Treaty of Amity, Commerce and Navigation, between the
United States and his Britannic Majesty, necessarily procrastinated the
reception of the posts stipulated to be delivered, beyond the date assigned for
that event.

As soon however as the Governor General of Canada could be addressed with
propriety on the subject, arrangements were cordially and promptly concluded
for their evacuation, and the United States took possession of the principal of
them, comprehending Oswego, Niagara, Detroit, Michilimackinac and Fort Miami,
where such repairs and additions have been ordered to be made as appeared
indispensable.

The commissioners appointed on the part of the United States and of Great
Britain, to determine which is the river St. Croix, mentioned in the treaty of
peace of 1783, agreed in the choice of Egbert Benson, Esquire of New York, for the
third commissioner. The whole met at St. Andrew's, in Passamaquody Bay, in the
beginning of October, and directed surveys to be made of the rivers in dispute;
but deeming it impracticable to have these surveys completed before the next
year, they adjourned, to meet at Boston in August 1797, for the final decision
of the question.

Other commissioners appointed on the part of the United States, agreeably to
the seventh article of the treaty with Great Britain, relative to captures and
condemnation of vessels and other property, met the commissioners of his
Britannic majesty in London, in August last, when John Trumbull, Esquire was chosen
by lot, for the fifth commissioner. In October following, the board were to
proceed to business. As yet, there has been no communication of commissioners
on the part of Great Britain, to unite with those who have been appointed on
the part of the United States, for carrying into effect the sixth article of
the treaty.

The treaty with Spain required that the commissioners for running the boundary
line between the territory of the United States, and his Catholic Majesty's
provinces of East and West Florida, should meet at the Natchez before the
expiration of sixth months after the exchange of the ratifications, which was
effected at Aranjuez on the twenty-fifth day of April; and the troops of his
Catholic Majesty, occupying any posts within the limits of the United States,
were within the same period to be withdrawn. -- The commissioner of the United
States, therefore, commenced his journey for the Natchez in September, and
troops were ordered to occupy the posts from which the Spanish garrisons should
be withdrawn. Information has been recently received of the appointment of a
commissioner on the part of his Catholic Majesty, for running the boundary
line; but none of any appointment for the adjustment of the claims of our
citizens, whose vessels were captured by the armed vessels of Spain.

In pursuance of the act of Congress passed in the last session, for the
protection and relief of American seamen, agents were appointed, one to reside
in Great Britain, and the other in the West Indies. The effects of the agency
in the West Indies are not yet fully ascertained; but those which have been
communicated afford grounds to believe the measure will be beneficial. The
agent destined to reside in Great Britain declining to accept the appointment,
the business has consequently devolved on the minister of the United States, in
London, and will command his attention, until a new agent shall be appointed.

After many delays and disappointments arising out of the European war, the
final arrangements for fulfilling the engagements made to the Dey and Regency
of Algiers, will, in all present appearance, be crowned with success; but under
great, though inevitable disadvantages in the pecuniary transactions,
occasioned by that war* which will render a further provision necessary. The
actual liberation of all our citizens who were prisoners in Algiers, while it
gratifies every feeling heart, is itself an earnest of a satisfactory
termination of the whole negotiation. Measures are in operation for effecting
treaties with the Regencies of Tunis and Tripoli.

To an active external commerce, the protection of a naval force is
indispensable. This is manifest with regard to wars in which a state is itself
a party. But besides this, it is in our own experience, that the most sincere
neutrality is not a sufficient guard against the depredations of nations at
war. To secure respect to a neutral flag, requires a naval force, organized and
ready to vindicate it from insult or aggression. This may even prevent the
necessity of going to war, by discouraging belligerent powers from committing
such violations of the rights of the neutral party, as may, first or last,
leave no other option. From the best information I have been able to obtain, it
would seem as if our trade to the Mediterranean, without a protecting force,
will always be insecure; and our citizens exposed to the calamities from which
numbers of them have but just been relieved.

These considerations invite the United States to look to the means, and to set
about the gradual creation of a navy. The increasing progress of their
navigation promises them, at no distant period, the requisite supply of seamen;
and their means, in other respects, favor the undertaking. It is an
encouragement likewise, that their particular situation will give weight and
influence to a moderate naval force in their hands. Will it not then be
advisable to begin without delay to provide and lay up the materials for the
building and equipping of ships of war; and to proceed in the work by degrees,
in proportion as our resources shall render it practicable without
inconvenience; so that a future war of Europe may not find our commerce in the
same unprotected state in which it was found by the present?

Congress have repeatedly, and not without success, directed their attention to
the encouragement of manufactures. The object is of too much consequence not to
ensure a continuance of their efforts in every way which shall appear eligible.
As a general rule, manufactures on public account are inexpedient. But where
the state of things in a country leaves little hope that certain branches of
manufacture will for a great length of time obtain; when these are of a nature
essential to the furnishing and equipping of the public force in time of war;
are not establishments for procuring them on public account, to the extent of
the ordinary demand for the public service, recommended by strong
considerations of national policy, as an exception to the general rule? Ought
our country to remain in such cases dependent on foreign supply, precarious,
because liable to be interrupted?

If the necessary articles should in this mode cost more in time of peace, will
not the security and independence thence arising, form an ample compensation?
Establishments of this sort, commensurate only with the calls of the public
service in time of peace, will, in time of war* easily be extended in
proportion to the exigencies of the government; and may even perhaps be made to
yield a surplus for the supply of our citizens at large, so as to mitigate the
privations from the interruptions of their trade. If adopted, the plan ought to
exclude all those branches which are already, or likely soon to be established
in the country; in order that there may be no danger of interference with
pursuits of individual industry.

It will not be doubted, that with reference either to individual or national
welfare, agriculture is of primary importance. In proportion as nations advance
in population, and other circumstances of maturity, this truth becomes more
apparent; and renders the cultivation of the soil more and more an object of
public patronage. Institutions for promoting it, grow up supported by the
public purse: and to what object can it be dedicated with greater propriety?
Among the means which have been employed to this end, none have been attended
with greater success, than the establishment of Boards, composed of proper
characters, charged with collecting and diffusing information, and enabled, by
premiums and small pecuniary aids, to encourage and assist a spirit of
discovery and improvement. -- This species of establishment contributes doubly
to the increase of improvement; by stimulating to enterprise and experiment;
and by drawing to a common center the results every where of individual skill
and observation, and spreading them thence over the whole nation. Experience
accordingly has shown, that they are very cheap instruments of immense national
benefits.

I have heretofore proposed to the consideration of Congress, the expediency of
establishing a National University; and also a Military Academy. The
desirableness of both these institutions, has so constantly increased with
every new view I have taken of the subject, that I cannot omit the opportunity
of once for all, recalling your attention to them.

The assembly to which I address myself, is too enlightened not to be fully
sensible how much a flourishing state of the arts and sciences contributes to
national prosperity and reputation. True it is, that our country, much to its
honor, contains many seminaries of learning highly respectable and useful; but
the funds upon which they rest, are too narrow to command the ablest professors
in the different departments of liberal knowledge, for the institution
contemplated: though they would be excellent auxiliaries.

Amongst the motives to such an institution, the assimilation of the
principles, opinions and manners of our countrymen, by the common education of
a portion of our youth from every quarter, well deserves attention. The more
homogeneous our citizens can be made in these particulars, the greater will be
our prospect of permanent union; and a primary object of such a national
institution should be, the education of our youth in the science of government.
In a republic, what species of knowledge can be equally important? And what
duty more pressing on its legislature, than to patronise a plan for
communicating it to those who are to be the future guardians of the liberties
of the country?

The institution of a military academy, is also recommended by cogent reasons.
However pacific the general policy of a nation may be, it ought never to be
without an adequate stock of military knowledge for emergencies. The first
would impair the energy of its character, and both would hazard its safety, or
expose it to greater evils when war could not be avoided. Besides, that war
might often not depend upon its own choice. In proportion as the observance of
pacific maxims might exempt a nation from the necessity of practicing the rules
of the military art, ought to be its care in preserving and transmitting by
proper establishments, the knowledge of that art. Whatever argument may be
drawn from particular examples, superficially viewed, a thorough examination of
the subject will evince, that the art of war is at once comprehensive and
complicated; that it demands much previous study; and that the possession of
it, in its most improved and perfect state, is always of great moment to the
security of a nation. This, therefore, ought to be a serious care of every
government; and for this purpose, an academy, where a regular course of
instruction is given, is an obvious expedient, which different nations have
successfully employed.

The compensations to the officers of the United States, in various instances,
and in none more than in respect to the most important stations, appear to call
for legislative revision. The consequences of a defective provision are of
serious import to the government. If private wealth is to supply the defect of
public retribution, it will greatly contract the sphere within which the
selection of character for office is to be made; and will proportionally
diminish the probability of a choice of men, able as well as upright. Besides
that it would be repugnant to the vital principles of our government, virtually
to exclude from public trusts, talents and virtue, unless accompanied by wealth.

While in our external relations, some serious inconveniences and
embarrassments have been overcome, and others lessened, it is with much pain,
and deep regret, I mention, that circumstances of a very unwelcome nature have
lately occurred. Our trade has suffered, and is suffering extensive injuries in
the West Indies, from the cruizers and agents of the French republic; and
communications have been received from its minister here, which indicate the
danger of a further disturbance of our commerce by its authority; and which
are, in other respects, far from agreeable.

It has been my constant, sincere and earnest wish, in conformity with that of
our nation, to maintain cordial harmony, and a perfectly friendly understanding
with that republic. This wish remains unabated; and I shall persevere in the
endeavor to fulfill it, to the utmost extent of what shall be consistent with a
just, and indispensable regard to the rights and honor of our country: nor
will I easily cease to cherish the expectation, that a spirit of justice,
candor and friendship, on the part of the republic, will eventually ensure
success.

In pursuing this course, however, I cannot forget what is due to the character
of our government and nation; or to a full and entire confidence in the good
sense, patriotism, self-respect and fortitude of my countrymen.

I reserve for a special message, a more particular communication on this
interesting subject.

Gentlemen of the House of Representatives,

I have directed an estimate of the appropriations necessary for the service of
the ensuing year, to be submitted from the proper department; with a view of
the public receipts and expenditures to the latest period to which an account
can be prepared.

It is with satisfaction I am able to inform you, that the revenues of the
United States continue in a state of progressive improvement.

A reinforcement of the existing provisions for discharging our public debt,
was mentioned in my address at the opening of the last session. Some
preliminary steps were taken toward it, the maturing of which will, no doubt,
engage your zealous attention during the present. I will only add, that it will
afford me a heartfelt satisfaction to concur in such further measures, as will
ascertain to our country the prospect of a speedy extinguishment of the debt.
Posterity may have cause to regret, if from any motive, intervals of
tranquillity are left unimproved for accelerating this valuable end.

Gentlemen of the Senate and of the House of Representatives,

My solicitude to see the militia of the United States placed on an efficient
establishment, has been so often, and so ardently expressed, that I shall but
barely recall the subject to your view on the present occasion; at the same
time that I shall submit to your inquiry, whether our harbors are yet
sufficiently secured.

The situation in which I now stand, for the last time, in the midst of the
representatives of the people of the United States, naturally recalls the
period when the administration of the present form of government commenced: and
I cannot omit the occasion to congratulate you, and my country, on the success
of the experiment; nor to repeat my supplication to the Supreme Ruler of the
universe, and Sovereign Arbiter of nations, that his providential care may
still be extended to the United States; that the virtue and happiness of the
people may be preserved; and that the government, which they have instituted
for the protection of their liberties, may be perpetual.

12th DECEMBER.
The Senate presented to the President the following answer to his address of
the 7th.
WE thank you, Sir, for your faithful and detailed exposure of the existing
situation of our country: and we sincerely join in sentiments of gratitude to
an overruling Providence, for the distinguished share of public prosperity,
and private happiness, which the people of the United States so peculiarly
enjoy.

We are fully sensible of the advantages that have resulted from the adoption
of measures (which you have successfully carried into effect) to preserve
peace, cultivate friendship, and promote civilization, among the Indian tribes,
on the western frontiers; -- feelings of humanity, and the most solid political
principles, equally encourage the continuance of this system.

We observe with pleasure, that the delivery of the military posts, lately
occupied by the British forces, within the territory of the United States, was
made with cordiality, and promptitude, as soon as circumstances would admit;
and that the other provisions of our treaties with Great Britain and Spain,
that were objects of eventual arrangement, are about being carried into effect,
with entire harmony and good faith.

The unfortunate, but unavoidable difficulties that opposed a timely compliance
with the terms of the Algerine treaty, are much to be lamented; as they may
occasion a temporary suspension of the advantages to be derived from a solid
peace with that power, and a perfect security from its predatory warfare; at
the same time, the lively impressions that affected the public mind, on the
redemption of our captive fellow-citizens, afford the most laudable incentive
to our exertions, to remove the remaining obstacles.

We perfectly coincide with you in opinion that the importance of our commerce
demands a naval force for its protection against foreign insult and
depredation, and our solicitude to attain that object will be always
proportionate to its magnitude.

The necessity of accelerating the establishment of certain useful
manufactures, by the intervention of legislative aid and protection, and the
encouragement due to agriculture, by the creation of Boards, (composed of
intelligent individuals) to patronize this primary pursuit of society, are
subjects which will readily engage our most serious attention.

A national university may be converted to the most useful purposes -- the
science of legislation, being so essentially dependent on the endowments of the
mind, the public interest must receive effectual aid from the general diffusion
of knowledge; and the United States will assune a more dignified station, among
the nations of the earth, by the successful cultivation of the higher branches
of literature.

A military academy may be likewise rendered equally important. To aid and
direct the physical force of the nation, by cherishhing a military spirit,
enforcing a proper sense of discipline, and inculcating a scientific system of
tactics, is consonant to the soundest maxims of public policy: connected with,
and supported by such an establishment, a well regulated militia, constituting
the national defense of the country, would prove the most effectual, as well as
economical, preservative of peace.

We cannot but consider, with serious apprehensions, the inadequate
compensations of public officers, especially of those in the more important
stations. It is not only a violation of the spirit of a public contract, but is
an evil so extensive in its operation, and so destructive in its consequences,
that we trust it will receive the most pointed legislative attention.

We sincerely lament, that whilst the conduct of the United States has been
uniformly impressed with the character of equity, moderation, and love of
peace, in the maintenance of all their foreign relationships, our trade should
be so harrassed by the cruisers and agents of the republic of France,
throughout the extensive departments of the West Indies.

Whilst we are confident that no cause of complaint exists, that could
authorize an interruption of our tranquillity, or disengage that republic from
the bonds of amity, cemented by the faith of treaties, we cannot but express
our deepest regrets, that official communications have been made to you,
indicating a more serious disturbance of our commerce. Although we cherish the
expectation, that a sense of justice, and a consideration of our mutual
interests will moderate their councils; we are not unmindful of the situation
in which events may place us, nor unprepared to adopt that system of conduct,
which, compatible with the dignity of a respectable nation, necessity may
compel us to pursue.

We cordially acquiesce in the reflection, that the United States, under the
operation of the federal government, have experienced a most rapid
aggrandizement and prosperity, as well political, as commercial.

Whilst contemplating the causes that produce this auspicious result, we much
acknowledge the excellence of the constitutional system, and the wisdom of the
legislative provisions; -- but we should be deficient in gratitude and justice,
did we not attribute a great portion of these advantages, to the virtue,
firmness and talents of your administration; which have been conspicuously
displayed in the most trying times, and on the most critical occasions. It is,
therefore, with the sincerest regret, that we now receive an official
notification of your intentions to retire from the public employments of your
country.

When we review the various scenes of your public life, so long and so
successfully devoted to the most arduous services, civil and military, -- as
well during the struggles of the American revolution, as the convulsive periods
of a recent date, we cannot look forward to your retirement, without our
warmest affections and most anxious regards accompanying you; and without
mingling with our fellow citizens at large, the sincerest wishes for your
personal happiness, that sensibility and attachment can express.

The most effectual consolation that can offer for the loss we are about to
sustain, arises from the animating reflection, that the influence of your
example will extend to your successors, and the United States thus continue to
enjoy, an able, upright, and energetic administration.

16th DECEMBER.
The following answer of the House of Representatives was presented to the
President.

SIR,
THE House of Representatives have attended to your communication respecting
the state of our country, with all the sensibility that the contemplation of
the subject, and a sense of duty can inspire.

We are gratified by the information, that measures calculated to ensure a
continuance of the friendship of the Indians, and to maintain the tranquillity
of the western frontier, have been adopted; and we indulge the hope that these,
by impressing the Indian tribes with more correct conceptions of the justice,
as well as power of the United States, will be attended with success.

While we notice, with satisfaction, the steps that you have taken in pursuance
of the late treaties with several foreign nations, the liberation of our
citizens, who were prisoners at Algiers, is a subject of peculiar felicitation.
We shall cheerfully cooperate in any further measures that shall appear, on
consideration, to be requisite.

We have ever concurred with you in the most sincere and uniform disposition to
preserve our neutral relations inviolate, and it is, of course, with anxiety
and deep regret we hear that any interruption of our harmony with the French
Republic has occurred: for we feel with you and with our constituents, the
cordial and unabated wish to maintain a perfectly friendly understanding with
that nation. Your endeavors to fulfill that wish, and by all honorable means
to preserve peace and to restore that harmony and affection which have
heretofore so happily subsisted between the French Republic and the United
States, cannot fail, therefore, to interest our attention. And while we
participate in the full reliance you have expressed on the patriotism,
self-respect and fortitude of our countrymen, we cherish the pleasing hope,
that a mutual spirit of justice and moderation will ensure the success of your
perseverance.

The various subjects of your communication will, respectively, meet with the
attention that is due to their importance.

When we advert to the internal situation of the United States, we deem it
equally natural and becoming to compare the present period with that
immediately antecedent to the operation of the government, and to contrast it
with the calamities in which the state of war still involves several of the
European nations, as the reflections deduced from both tend to justify as well
as to excite, a warmer admiration of our free constitution, and to exalt our
minds to a more fervent and grateful sense of piety toward Almighty God for
the beneficence of his providence, by which its administration has been
hitherto so remarkably distinguished.

And while we entertain a grateful conviction that your wise, firm and
patriotic administration has been signally conducive to the success of the
present form of government, we cannot forbear to express the deep sensations of
regret with which we contemplate your intended retirement from office.

As no other suitable occasion may occur, we cannot suffer the present to pass
without attempting to disclose some of the emotions which it cannot fail to
awaken.

The gratitude and admiration of your countrymen are still drawn to the
recollection of those resplendent virtues and talents which were so eminently
instrumental to the achievement of the revolution, and of which that glorious
event will ever be the memorial. Your obedience to the voice of duty and your
country, when you quitted reluctantly, a second time, the retreat you had
chosen, and first accepted the presidency, afforded a new proof of the
devotedness of your zeal in its service, and an earnest of the patriotism and
success which have characterized your administration. As the grateful
confidence of the citizens in the virtues of their chief magistrate, has
essentially contributed to that success, we persuade ourselves that the
millions whom we represent, participate with us in the anxious solicitudes of
the present occasion.

Yet we cannot be unmindful that your moderation and magnanimity, twice
displayed by retiring from your exalted stations, afford examples no less rare
and instructive to mankind, than valuable to a republic.

Although we are sensible that this event, of itself, completes the luster of a
character already conspicuously unrivalled by the coincidence of virtue,
talents, success and public estimation; yet we conceive we owe it to you, Sir,
and still more emphatically to ourselves and to our nation, (of the language of
whose hearts we presume to think ourselves at this moment the faithful
interpreters) to express the sentiments with which it is contemplated.

The spectacle of a free and enlightened nation offering by its representatives
the tribute of unfeigned approbation to its first citizen, however novel and
interesting it may be, derives all its luster (a luster which accident or
enthusiasm could not bestow, and which adulation would tarnish) from the
transcendent merit of which it is the voluntary testimony.

May you long enjoy that liberty which is so dear to you, and to which your
name will ever be so dear: May your own virtues and a nation's prayers obtain
the happiest sunshine for the decline of your days and the choicest of future
blessings. For our country's sake, for the sake of republican liberty, it is
our earnest wish that your example may be the guide of your successors, and
thus, after being the ornament and safeguard of the present age, become the
patrimony of our descendants.

This answer, on which there was a pretty long and warm debate, is somewhat
different from that which was first proposed by the committee appointed to draw
it up. Some members were opposed to almost every part of it, but their
opposition was more directly levelled against three particular points; the
compliment to the President, the paragraph respecting the misunderstanding with
the French Republic, and the expression of the free and enlightened state of
the American people.

That a compliment to the President, or rather a faint acknowledgement of his
virtues and services (for on this subject any acknowledgement must be faint,)
should be opposed in the Congress of the United States, would be cause of great
mortification to every generous and grateful mind, were it not accompanied with
the consoling reflection, that Mr. Giles was at the head of the opposition.
There are certain persons, whose applause we shun with as much solicitude as we
seek for that of others, and I must confess, there are few men in the world
whose praises I should dread more than those of the Virginian Giles, and I dare
say the President is very happy to think that he has escaped them.

The answer expresses a grateful conviction of the President's wise, firm, and
patriotic administration, and regrets his departure from office. To all this
the virtuous and upright Mr. Giles objected. He said, that the President's
administration had been neither wise nor firm; and as to his departure from
office, he felt not the least regret on account of it. He hoped he would retire
to his country seat, and live comfortably there. He believed the government of
the United States would go on without him. The people were competent to their
own government. That for those, who had opposed some of the principal measures
of the President, to vote for the answer in its present form, would be writing
scoundrel on their foreheads.

It would be useless to take up mine and my reader's time in a justification of
the compliment to which Mr. Giles was opposed. The people of the United States,
from one end of the Union to the other, have unequivocally expressed, what this
gentleman is afraid to express, lest thereby he should write scoundrel on his
forehead. If the reader will look back to the Censor for April last, he will
find this same patriot declaring, that he adored the voice of the people, and
yet he has now the temerity to doubt its infallibility, to refuse obedience to
it, even to mutiny against and offer resistance to its awful commands. If ever
I derived an extraordinary degree of satisfaction from the embarrassment of
others, it was on seeing Mr. Giles and his brother patriots, the votaries of
the popular voice, reduced to take the unpopular side of a question. The leader
seems to have been sensible of the awkwardness of his situation, when he said
that the people are competent to their own government. This was a kind of
palliative, it was shifting the ground of opposition, it was a poor miserable
attempt to preserve consistency, and betrayed either a total want of
discernment in the speaker, or a consummate contempt for the understandings of
the people: for, if the people are competent to their own government, they are
certainly competent to form a judgment of the conduct of the President, and as
they have declared his administration to be wise, firm and patriotic, how dared
their zealous and pious adorer to say they are mistaken?

As to writing scoundrel on his front, of which Mr. Giles seemed to entertain
such unnecessary fears, if the approving of the compliment in question would
produce this effect, all the members of the state legislatures, and nine-tenths
of their constituents, had already taken the hideous inscription. What a
scoundrelly god, then, does Mr. Giles adore? If an obstinate opposition to all
the most important measures of an administration, which the answer approves of
in the aggregate, was calculated to imprint the terrific word, voting for the
answer could do no more than render legible what was already written; as
characters in certain liquids remain imperceptible till drawn forth by the
fire. Mr. Giles and his fellow laborers prudently shrank from the ordeal; but
they will excuse us, if our imaginations should supply its place. Read we
assuredly shall, and it will be nothing very extraordinary if we should extend
the signification of every term that we think we perceive.

The next subject of opposition was the paragraph which speaks of the
misunderstanding with the bloody Gallican Republic. In the reported answer it
stood thus: We have ever concurred with you in the most sincere and uniform
disposition to preserve our mutual relations inviolate, and it is, of course,
with anxiety and deep regret we hear that any interruption of our harmony with
the French Republic has occurred: for we feel with you, and with our
constituents, the cordial and unabated wish, to maintain a perfectly friendly
understanding with that nation. Your endeavors to fulfill that wish cannot fail
therefore to interest our attention. And while we participate in the full
reliance you have expressed on the patriotism, self-respect and fortitude of
our countrymen, we cherish the pleasing hope, that a spirit of justice and
moderation will ensure the success of your perseverance.

This was certainly tame enough, after all the outrages and insults of France.
The desire to re-establish harmony is expressed, as Mr. Ames observed, with
little less ardour than the requests of a supplicating lover; and the
confidence in the spirit of the country, in case of an appeal to arms, is
disguised with as much care, as if it were a crime to be courageous in opposing
the violence and resenting the indignities of a horde of base-born grovelling
tyrants.

How different from this hesitating tone was that of the Senate: "We are," say
they, not unmindful of the situation in which events may place us, nor
unprepared to adopt that system of conduct, which, compatible with the dignity
of a respectable nation, necessity may compel us to pursue. This manly answer
does infinite honor to the man who penned it, and let the insolent convention
recollect, that it was approved of by him with whom they will in future be
obliged to treat.

The answer of the Senate was all that could be wished, but it should have been
surpassed in warmth by those who call themselves the immediate representatives
of the people. Language that may be extremely proper, at such a crisis, from
cool and dispassionate Senators, whose business is rather to check than to
encourage the ardour of the public spirit, may be poor and cold when coming
from the Representatives. Every sentence from them should have smoked with
indignation at the insupportable insolence of the French; they should have
declared, that they were ready with their lives to defend that independence,
which had been so openly attacked, and to support the government in every
energetic measure it should take to obtain satisfaction for the indignities
that had been heaped on it. Yet, so far from this was the conduct of the House,
that even the paragraph above quoted was not humble enough for them: not
content with expressing their anxiety and deep regret at the interruption of
harmony, and their unabated wish to maintain a perfectly friendly
understanding, with the nation who had robbed, despised, and openly insulted
them and their country, they must needs add another sentence, wishing for the
restoration of that harmony and affection, which had hitherto so happily
subsisted. Not content with amplifying their tremulous accents till the quaver
had lost the sound of manhood, they must needs begin da Capo and repeat the
faltering tune. Nay, the last sentence of the paragraph, which speaks of a
spirit of justice and moderation, could not pass without being crammed with the
word mutual. Mr. Giles, indeed, wished to tack another phrase; viz. "on the
part of the Republic," to the end of this word mutual. He seemed to think that
the answer would be incomplete without a little nonsense. -- That a mutual
spirit of justice and moderation on the part of the Republic will ensure the
success of your perseverance. -- If you can go to the Sunday-Schools round the
city, and find me a boy out of his primer, stupid and illiterate enough to
compose a sentence like this, I will be bound to find you men in Virginia, who
shall vote him into Congress. -- " The Republic," too. What Republic? Is not
America a Republic as well as France? The French King forbade his subjects to
address him, or speak of him, under any other name than simply that of the
King, as if there were but one king in the world; just as we speak of the Sun
or the Moon. The despots who have cut his throat, seem to have taken possession
of his vanity as well as of his houses, his gardens, his coaches and his
jewels. They call their poor beggared enslaved country the Republic. But other
kingdoms never observed this style of eminence toward the French monarch, nor
will it be observed toward the French Republic, I trust, by any other
Republic, or any other mortal except Mr. Giles. It would seem that the
gentleman forgot where he was, and looked upon himself as a representative of
the swarthy French, instead of the more humane and more enlightened, though
sooty, citizens of the ancient dominion.

The imagination of this man, and of all those who voted with him, appears to
have been upon the rack to find out terms expressive of their dependence on the
generosity and magnanimity of the insulting foe, and of their want of
confidence in the people of this country. Was this what the President expected,
when he complained to them of the aggressions of the French, and of the threats
he had received from their minister? Was this what the people expected, when
that insolent minister appealed to them from their government? No; they
expected no such milk-sop tautology. They expected a good, plain, and resolute
tone, calculated to convince the treacherous French, that their independence
was not a mere name, and that, while a desire of peace dwelt in their breasts,
fear of a war found no place there.

It was said by those who opposed the introduction of that redundancy of
affection, which now dishonours the answer, that the first draught was dictated
by a spirit of accommodation; and, indeed, this was evidently the case, for no
one who knows Messrs. Ames and Sitgreaves, and reads their animated speeches in
the debate, will believe that this draught was dictated by their feelings. My
complaisance, however, would not have carried me so far; I would have stood
alone in the House; I would have opposed every sentence, every word, and every
syllable, that savoured of tameness, that indicated a reliance on the justice
and moderation of the French, or a fear of encountering their displeasure.

The third subject of opposition was, that sentence in the answer which styles
the people of America the freest and most enlightened in the world; and who
could help being surprised that the adorer of the people should take the lead
here also! One would imagine, that to be proper objects of adoration, they
should at least be the most free and enlightened in the world; unless we
suppose that Mr. Giles adored them for their purity and virtue, which there is
very little reason to do.

These words were at last changed for, a free and enlightened people. The cause
of this (with shame be it spoken) was, fear of offending the French Convention,
an assembly that every worthy American longs to spit upon; an assembly whose
approbation is a mark of dishonor ten thousand times greater than standing in
the pillory or being burnt in the hand. Talk of writing scoundrel in the
forehead! I would sooner bear the word scoundrel as a motto round the pupils of
my eyes, than be blasted with the approving grin of a gang of assassins.

That the cause of the opposition was what I have stated it, must be clear to
every one who recollects the language of the members who took a part in it, on
other occasions. There is hardly a people in Europe, except the French, whom
they have not, at different times, since the present war, represented as buried
in slavery and brutal ignorance. They insisted that the House had no right to
cast reflections on foreign nations; what right had Mr. Giles, then, to cast
reflections on the government and parliament of Britain? What right had another
member to call the Empress of Russia a she-bear, another, the King of Great
Britain a robber, and another, all kings in general a herd of crowned monsters?
"The fact may be true," said they, but we have no right to step beyond the
boundaries of our own country to contrast it with any other. Now, what did the
pretty Mr. Livingston, who was one of these inoffensive and modest gentlemen,
do last session.? -- Great Britain, was once free; but now Great Britain, and
all Europe, France excepted, is in chains! -- Was this stepping beyond the
boundary line? This was not being content with eulogium on America, but was
openly insulting every nation of Europe, except the French, the free and
enlightened heroes of the Bloody Buoy. But, why need we go back to past
sessions, when in the present one, and even in this debate, and on this very
question, we hear the delicate Mr. Parker exclaim: Kingcraft and priestcraft
have too long governed the world with an iron rod: more enlightened times, I
trust, are approaching, and I hope ere long republicanism will cover the earth.
-- Like the universal deluge I suppose.

It is pretty clear from this sally of Mr. Parker, that no nations were to be
excepted but those who are, or call themselves, republics. This might have done
very well, and the answer might have been thus amended with some little
consistency, but poor Mr. Parker has a short memory, and being pressed hard by
Mr. William Smith, who truly asserted that fear of giving umbrage to the
French, was at the bottom of the opposition, he tacked short about, and ran
headlong into the most monstrous contradiction that ever bemired a poor orator.
-- "No;" said he, I have not the French republic, or any other nation in view;
the Swiss Cantons have shown themselves more enlightened than we. -- All was
well yet, but Mr. Parker, like most other eloquent men, is very fond of
enumeration, and he unfortunately added the Danes and the Swedes. These nations
also, he said, were more enlightened than the people of America, though, in the
same speech, he declared that King-craft had too long governed the world with
an iron rod, and hoped that more enlightened times were at hand, and that
republicanism would soon cover the earth! He could not be so very ignorant, or
at least I should suppose so, as not to know that Denmark and Sweden are
governed by kings; but he was hemmed up in a corner, and did not know where to
look for more enlightened republics than his own, except France. -- A
legislator should always understand geography and astronomy, and then "his eye
in a fine fit of frenzy rolling," might, as Doctor Ruth says Rittenhouse did,
find out republics in the moon. However, a very little study of the former
science, might have led Mr. Parker, in his jump from Switzerland to Denmark, to
perceive the dear sister republic of Batavia. Here he might have found a
triumphant comparison. Republicanism has enlightened the Dutch with a
vengeance. The sans-culottes have worn them down till you may read a newspaper
through their ribs. Geneva too, which was so near him when he was got among the
Swiss, might, one would have thought, have claimed a preference to Denmark and
Sweden; particularly as the cheering rays of republicanism have been
communicated to it by the great luminary which seems to be the sole object of
his admiration.

Mr. Parker moved for striking out the words, "freest and most enlightened."
This Mr. Christie proposed to amend, by inserting, free-est, and amongst the
most enlightened; but still Mr. Swanwick thought the word "amongst" should come
before, instead of after free-est; because nothing could tend more to preserve
the peace of the country, than treating others with respect; and in this
opinion he was joined by Messrs. Coit and Dayton, the latter of whom most
humbly thought, that the amendment very much softened the terms, and rendered
them more palatable. -- At last, after these four words had undergone just as
many changes as can be rung upon four bells, the peal was closed with, " free
and enlightened people."

Gracious heaven! and have I lived to hear the American Congress, men whose
brow I had been taught to believe independence had made its chosen seat,
haggling three whole days about four words of compliment to their country, and
at last expunge them, lest they should give offense to a foreign nation! Mr.
Livingston and the news-monger Brown may dun us as long as they please about
the slavery of Britons, but if a member of their House of Commons were timid
enough to express his sears at calling his nation the free-est and most
enlightened in the world, I flatter myself he would never dare show his face
again in that assembly. For a nation, which dares not pass on itself whatever
compliment or encomium it pleases, to call itself free and independent, is an
abuse of words that nothing can be a sufficient punishment for, except the
consciousness of being, and of being thought, exactly the contrary of what it
strives to appear.

That the amendment should be adopted at all, is a circumstance in itself
sufficiently humiliating; but, when we consider that it was adopted for fear of
giving umbrage to France; when we consider that the representatives of the
people thought it unfitting to declare them more free and enlightened than the
base, the willing slaves, the brutishly ignorant and illiterate wretches left
in the French territory, we feel our superiority insulted, and despise the man
who would shrink from the declaration.

In that free country, France, the parent dares not yield protection to his
child, nor the child to his parent, without the previous consent of some petty
understrapping despot. Man possesses nothing; his property belongs to a mob of
tyrants, who call themselves the nation, who hold his labor and his very
carcass in a state of requisition. If his griefs break out into complaint, he
is dragged to a tribunal, where no evidence is required. A shrug, a look, a
tear, or a sigh, betrays him. To repine at the cruelty of his fate is to be
suspected, and to be suspected is death.

We need not stretch our view across the Atlantic for specimens of French
liberty; we may see enough without quitting our own country, or even our
houses. The cockade proclamation of Citizen Adet is at once an insult to the
United States, and an act of abominable tyranny on the unfortunate French who
have taken a refuge in them. They must not only suffer shame for their country,
but must bear about them the sign of its disgrace, the livery of the infamous
Orleans. They must not only be despoiled of their wealth, and driven from their
homes and their families, but must drag their chains into distant lands. It is
not enough that they should be branded with the name of slave; they must wear
the symbol of their slavery, and that, too, exactly where other men wear the
symbol of courage and of honor! -- Will not the people of America blush to
think, that their representatives were afraid to assert, that they enjoyed a
degree of freedom superior to this?

Of the enlightened people, now called the French nation, not one out of five
hundred can spell his own name. As to religion, four years ago they were seen
kneeling with their faces prone to the earth, blubbering out their sins, and
beseeching absolution from the men whom, in a year afterward, they degraded,
insulted, mutilated and murdered. After changing the catholic worship, at the
command of one gang of tyrants, for a worship that was neither catholic nor
protestant; at the command of another, they abandoned all worship whatsoever,
and publicly rejoiced that the soul of man was like that of the beast. A third
gang orders them to believe that there is a god: instantly the submissive
brutes acknowledge his existence, and fall on their knees at the sight of
Robespierre, proclaiming the decree, with as much devotion as they formerly did
at the elevation of the sacred host.

Politically considered, they are equally enlightened. Every successive faction
has been the object of their huzzas, in the day of its power, and of their
execrations in that of its fall. They crowded to the bar of the Convention to
felicitate Robespierre on his escape from the poignard of a woman; and, in less
than six weeks afterward, danced round his scaffold, and mocked his dying
groans. -- First they approve of a constitution with a hereditary monarch,
whose person they declare inviolable and sacred, and swear to defend him with
their lives. Next they murder this monarch, and declare themselves a republic,
to be governed by a single chamber of delegates. This second constitution they
destroy, and frame a third, with two chambers and five coequal kings. -- After
having spent five years in making war, in the name of liberty and equality,
upon arms, stars, garters, crosses, and every other exterior sign of
superiority of rank, they very peaceably and tamely suffer their masters to dub
themselves with what titles they please, and exclusively to assume garbs and
badges of distinction far more numerous than those which formerly existed in
France.

But, the circumstance best calculated to give a just idea of their baseness of
spirit and swinish ignorance, is, their sanctioning a constitution, which
declares that they shall elect the members of their assemblies, and then
submitting to a decree, obliging them to choose two-thirds of the number out of
the Convention. Nor was this all; the Convention, not content with ensuring the
re-election of these two-thirds, reserved to itself the power of rejecting such
members of the other third as it might not approve of! -- And yet the wise Mr.
Parker calls the French "a free and enlightened people," and very piously
wishes that King-craft may be done away, and that republicanism may enlighten
the whole earth! -- The House of Representatives were afraid even to hint that
this nation of poor, cajoled, cozened, bullied, bamboozled devils, were less
enlightened than the people of America!

There is not a true American, and I love to believe that a very great majority
of the people of these states are of that description, who does not reject with
scorn the idea of being upon a level with the regenerated French; not only in
understanding, but in any respect whatever. Their very friends, the Democrats,
nay their best paid hirelings, despise them in their hearts, as much as a
prostitute despises her cully.

After having contemplated the modest and humble tone of the Antifederal
members toward France, it may not be amiss to contrast it with their language
toward Great Britain, on an occasion somewhat similar. -- It was reported,
that His Britannic Majesty had issued instructions for seizing American
vessels, contrary to the law of nations. It was, indeed, well known that many
vessels were seized; but it was not known that the seizure was authorized by
these instructions. They were equivocal, and therefore left room to hope that
they were misconstrued, by interested individuals, and that an indemnification
would be obtained by a manly and temperate representation of the injury. This
hope, which was then entertained by the friends of the federal government, has
since been completely realized. But, what was the tone of Mr. Madison, Mr.
Clarke, Mr. Dayton, and all those who are now for softening their language
toward France, till it surpasses in effeminacy the pipe of a sickly girl? What
were the measures they then proposed? Lay a double duty on their goods, said
one; Prohibit all trade with them, said another; and Mr. Dayton offered a
resolution for sequestrating all debts due from the citizens of the United
States to the subjects of the king of Great Britain. -- Thus, without waiting a
moment to inquire whether the king's instructions were misinterpreted, or
whether an indemnification was likely to be obtained, the seizure was to be
regarded as a commencement of hostilities; reprisals were immediately to be
made, and that, too, in a mode that every honorable and honest man turns from
with scorn. -- Was this very "palatable," Mr. Dayton?

It was during this memorable debate, that Mr. Smith from Maryland, modestly
exclaimed: -- Let us adopt the resolution. It will arrest twenty millions of
dollars in our hands, as a fund to reimburse the three or four millions, which
we have been stripped of by that piratical nation, Great Britain, according to
the instructions of that king of sea-robbers, that Leviathan who aims at
swallowing up all that swims on the ocean, that monster, whose only law is
power, and who respects neither the rights of nations, nor the property of
individuals. -- Was this decent and honest speech very "palatable?" -- These
political cooks seem to be very skilful in distinguishing the difference
between the palates of Britons and that of the soupe-maigre, frog-eating
French, who can relish nothing that is not bien cuit, or coddled to mummy,
except the flesh and blood of aristocrats.

Striking as this contrast is, it is not seen in its proper light, till
accompanied with a comparative view of the injuries received from the two
nations. The British, when they were called pirates, sea-robbers, and monsters,
by a member of Congress, had unlawfully seized on American property, to the
amount of three or four millions of dollars. The French, even at that time,
were guilty of the same aggressions, and of this the Congress could not plead
ignorance, as it was stated to them by order of the President, in the same
report that complains of the conduct of the British. At the present epoch it is
acknowledged that the depredations of the French are double in amount to those
of the British, before any indemnification was obtained. But, to avoid all
dispute on this subject, let us suppose that the loss from both nations to be
of exactly the same amount, and confine our remarks to the vast difference in
their anterior situation and subsequent conduct with respect to this country.
Great Britain had no treaty, either of amity or commerce, with America; her
conduct toward us, therefore, was subject to no rule but that prescribed by
the general law of nations, the principles of which, often leaving room for
misinterpretation, give a scope to an abuse of power, that does not, if
reparation be demanded and obtained, fix the stigma of cowardice or dependence
on the injured nation. The situation of the French was quite different. The
depredations committed by them are in direct violation of a solemn contract,
voluntarily entered into with America. Great Britain excused herself by
declaring (whether truly or not is no matter) that her orders had been
misconstrued, that she was ready to make restitution, and it is well known that
she has made good this declaration, by paying the full value of the cargoes and
vessels illegally seized. But, the conduct of the French leaves no room for an
excuse. They cannot plead a misconstruction of their orders, their spoliations
have not taken place under an ambiguous instruction, but are warranted by a
decree of their tyrannical assembly; and, to deprive America of the hope of
indemnification, and even of the appearance of maintaining her rights, they
have hurled this decree in our teeth. The British unlawfully seized on the
property of Americans, or, if you will, in the polite language of Maryland Mr.
Smith, that nation of "monsters" robbed them; but the minister of these
"monsters" did not proclaim the plundering order in this country, and insult
the people whom they had robbed, by telling them that it was the fault of their
own Executive. The French have done all this and ten times more: they have
trampled upon the independence of Americans, braved them, scoffed at them; they
have done every thing but kick the President from his chair and take possession
of the government: and yet Mr. Dayton, the energetic Mr. Dayton, says not a
word about sequestration; he is even afraid to compliment his constituents on
their freedom and understanding, lest it should be unpalatable to this
insidious, treacherous and insolent nation. Not a word do we now hear about
pirates and sea-robbers, and leviathans, and monsters: all breathes a desire to
cultivate harmony, perfect friendship, and affection. In speaking of the
depredations of the British, "nothing," it was said, was to be expected from
the justice of a nation who had robbed us; but now, behold, every thing is to
be left to the "justice and moderation" of the French, after we are not only
well assured that their robberies have far surpassed those of the British, but
after their minister as contemptuously told us, that those robberies are
sanctioned by his government; that it has given orders for violating the
treaty, and is determined to continue in the violation. Thus, one nation is
spoken of with approbation, esteem and affection; is even flattered and
caressed, after loading us with injuries a thousand times greater than those
which drew down on another nation the indecent and opprobrious terms of
"pirates and monsters." Is this a proof of the candor or of the obstinate
prejudice, of the wisdom or folly, of the House of Representatives? Is it a
proof of the independence of America on Great Britain, or of its abject
dependence on France?

To what are we to ascribe the immeasurable difference between the daring and
insulting tone formerly assumed toward Britain, and the poor, piping,
pusillanimous language, that is now held toward France. Is it because one is a
monarchy, and the other calls itself a republic? I have heard, or read, of a
fellow that was so accustomed to be kicked, that he could distinguish, by the
feel, the sort of leather that assailed his posteriors. Are our buttocks
arrived at this perfection of sensibility? And do we really find that a
republican shoe wounds our honor less than a monarchical one? Is an injury
from a nation on whom we heaped every term of abuse, and for whose annihilation
we, and even some of our parsons, devoutly prayed, less calculated to rouse our
feelings, than the accumulated injuries and insults of another nation, whom we
distinguished by every sign of partiality, for whose misfortunes we put on
mourning, and for whose victories we mocked and insulted heaven with
thanksgiving? Is a single slap on the cheek from a power, with whom we had no
connection, less offensive than reiterated blows from an ally? Finally, is the
commerce of Britain less necessary to America than that of France, or is the
power of the latter more to be dreaded than that of the former? -- This last
question is the only one that requires to be examined: the rest, I trust, are
already answered in the mind of the reader.

The necessity of a commercial connection between Great Britain and America, is
so loudly and unequivocally asserted by the unerring voice of experience, that
nothing but the blindest ignorance, or the most unconquerable prejudice, could
possibly have called it in question. Immediately after the suspension of this
commerce, caused by the revolutionary war, it was on both sides resumed with
more ardour than ever, notwithstanding all the arts that France and her
partisans employed to prevent it. In vain did poor Louis issue edicts to
encourage his people to supplant their rivals, in vain did he take off his
duties and offer premiums; in vain did friend Brissot coax the Quakers, and
citizen Madison speechify the Congress: in spite of all their fine promises,
cajoling, and wheedling; in spite of the mortification of Britain, and the more
powerful prejudice of America, no sooner was the obstacle removed by the return
of peace, than, without a treaty of friendship or commerce, without any other
stimulus than mutual interest, confidence and inclination, the two countries
rushed together like congenial waters that had been separated by an artificial
dyke.

It is this natural connection with Britain, the British capital, which a
confidence in the stability of the government invites hither, together with the
credit that the merchants of that country give to those of this, a credit which
British merchants alone are either willing or able to give, that forms the
great source of American wealth. Mr. Smith from Maryland, the polite Mr. Smith,
who called the British "sea-robbers and monsters," incautiously acknowledged,
in the same breath, that these "monsters" gave a stationary credit to this
country amounting to twenty millions of dollars. Grateful gentleman! -- A very
great part of this credit is given for a twelvemonth at least; so that the
simple interest on it amounts to one million two hundred thousand dollars
annually; an advantage to this country that might have merited in return
something "more palatable" than " sea-robbers and "monsters."

If America could obtain what she stands in need of (which she cannot) from any
other country than Britain, from what country on earth could she obtain them on
terms like these? The capacity of France, in the brightest days of her
commercial prosperity, was fairly tried. Correspondencies were opened with her
merchants; but what was the result? The total ruin of them and of all those who
were concerned with them. They are no more; they are forgotten. Their trade
could be equalled in shortness of duration by nothing but the wear of their
merchandise.

To say, as some of the French faction have done, that America does not want
the manufactures of Britain, is an insult on the national discernment little
short of the Blunderbuss of my old friend Citizen Adet. Let any man take a view
of his dress (when he is dressed like a man), from head to foot, from the
garments that he wears to sea, to plough, to market or to church, down to those
with which he steps into bed; let him look round his shop, and round the shops
of his neighbors; let him examine his library, his bedchamber, his parlour
and his kitchen, and then let him say how great a part of all he sees, of all
that is indispensable, useful or convenient; let him say how great a part of
all this comes from Great Britain, and how small a one from France or any other
country; and then, if he be fool enough, let him say with the Gallican faction,
that we stand in no need of the manufactures of Britain.

The commercial connection between this country and Great Britain is full as
necessary as that between the baker and miller, while the connection between
America and France may be compared to one between the baker and the milliner or
toyman. France may furnish us with looking glasses; but without the aid of
Britain we shall be ashamed to see ourselves in them, unless the sansculottes
can persuade us that threadbare beggary is a beauty. France may deck the heads
of our wives and daughters (but by the bye, she shall not those of mine) with
ribbons, gauze, and powder, their ears with bobs, their cheeks with paint, and
their heels with gaudy party-colored silk, as rotten as the hearts of the
manufacturers; but Great Britain must cover their and our bodies. When the rain
pours down and washes the rose from the cheek; when the bleak north-wester
blows through the gauze, then it is that we know our friends. Great Britain
must wrap us up warm, and keep us all decent, snug and comfortable, from the
child in swaddling cloths to its tottering grandsire. France may send us
cockades, as she does (or has done) in abundance; but Great Britain must send
us hats to stick them in. France may furnish the ruffle, but Great Britain must
send us the shirt; and the commerce of the latter nation is just as much more
necessary to this country than that of the former, as a good decent shirt is
more necessary than a paltry dishclout of a ruffle.

As, then, the importance of a trade, with any nation, must be the standard
whereby to measure the embarrassment and distress that its suspension would
produce, it is evident that a war with Great Britain would, in this respect,
have been productive of infinite calamities to America, while a war with France
would hardly be felt. The dangers, therefore, to be apprehended from military
operations only, remain to be considered.

By going back to the epoch when the hostile tone was assumed toward Great
Britain, I could represent her as in possession of the Western Posts, and
consequently as in a situation to arm and support the Indians, to harrass that
frontier, and by those means find employment for an army of the United States,
and that a very expensive one too. But, I shall decline this advantage, shall
consider things in their present state; I shall even suppose all inroads from
Canada impossible, shall turn my eyes to the sea only, and there take a view of
what might be reasonably feared from a war with Great Britain, and what from a
war with France.

The mighty difference in the maritime power, skill and courage of the two
nations, is so universally known, and has undergone so many and so convincing
proofs during the present war, that any comparison in this respect would be
superfluous. The hirelings of France, do, however, pretend that she could eat
us up alive, crack us as a squirrel does a nut, while we could boldly bid
defiance to her rival. I shall not suppose it possible for Great Britain to
bombard our towns and burn our shipping, I shall look upon all our harbors as
completely defended; I shall even suppose it impossible for her to make a
landing on any part of our coast, to carry off a single sack of flour or head
of cattle; and only insist, that, with thirty detached frigates and a squadron
of twenty ships of the line, she could completely block up every principal port
in the United States, in defiance of the French and their new allies, Holland
and Spain. If I am told to look back to what she was able to do, in this way,
last war; I reply, that the commerce, the foreign relationships, of this
country, are not now what they were then, nor would the species of war, carried
on by Britain, be the same. Then she had armies on the land, on which the
operations of her fleet were dependent. It had garrisons to supply, convoys to
escort, and transports to conduct from one state to another. Those who look to
France and her allies for relief, forget that during this war France has lost
thirty-nine ships of the line, with a proportionate number of frigates; that
the remnant of her shattered fleet is now blocked up in her own ports, and that
her petty armaments skulk about from harbor to harbor, as if their only
object was to keep out of sight. They forget that the Dutch dare not peep out
of the Texel, and that the Spaniards, after mustering their all together, are
stationed before a place of refuge in the Mediterranean. In this situation of
things nothing could prevent Great Britain from totally cutting off the
commerce of America, exports as well as imports, trebling the price of every
article of foreign manufacture, and rendering the produce of the land a drug;
destroying the revenue of the country at the very moment that a tenfold
augmentation of it would be necessary.

From the French and their allies, on the contrary, America has little, nay
nothing to fear. When we are told about their demolishing our towns and
invading our country, it seems to be forgotten that they must cross the sea to
come to us. Fear seems to have deranged the trembling wretches who hold this
language. They talk and think about the prowess of the barbarian armies, till
they imagine us divided from them by a river only, or that it is as easy for a
hundred thousand of them to be shipped off and landed in America, as for them
to cross the Rhine; they imagine that a fleet of three hundred transports and
fifty ships of the line as easily erected as a bridge of boats. And, during
this terrific reverie, it never once strikes them that Great Britain is at war
with the French, or that her fleets would blow them to atoms, before they could
approach our coast. Mr. Giles, and all those who talk about the danger of
incurring the displeasure of the French, delight in representing her as ready
to make an attack on us in conjunction with the Spaniards. This is true, and we
are informed that they have already set these their "natural allies," to seize
and confiscate our vessels It is pretended by France, that our treaty with
Britain contravenes that with her; and for that reason she seizes our vessels.
Groundless and insolent as this pretext is, it is worth noticing now that the
Spaniards have begun to imitate her. We had no treaty with them, when that with
Great Britain was formed, and therefore, I presume, that the " magnanimous
Spanish monarch," as Mr. Swanwick called him, will allege that our treaty with
him was contravened before it was made; nor should I much wonder, if members in
Congress were to be found, courageous and patriotic enough to attempt to
support the charge. -- This is all that is wanted to fill up the measure of our
humiliation.
. There is no doubt but both nations would willingly cooperate in such an
enterprise; but I would ask Mr. Giles seriously, whether he thinks America
would stand singly in the war; whether he thinks the government or the people
so incorrigibly blind and stupid, as, while they see the French calling in all
hell to their aid, to refuse the only assistance capable of repulsing the
infernal host. -- Oh, Lord! says Mr. Giles, what are you talking about! I
dislike extremely any intimate connection betwixt this country and Britain,
notwithstanding pecuniary advantages may arise from it See his speech in this
debate.
. -- So says Citizen Adet, and so says every Frenchman as well as Mr. Giles.
Yes; this is what they "dislike," this is the thing, and the only thing, they
are afraid of, and it is for that very reason that it ought to take place.

But, I should be glad to know on what Mr. Giles founds his "dislike" to this
connection, in case of a war. He acknowledges its "pecuniary advantages," and
that is one great point gained; for you well know, Mr. Giles, that in
connections with foreign nations nothing goes on cheerly without money. What,
then, can be the objection? Because America is a Republic and Britain a
Monarchy? This was the old objection to the treaty of amity and commerce with
Great Britain; but it very luckily happened that, just before that treaty was
concluded, the Republic of France had made a similar treaty with the king of
Prussia; and now, as if on purpose to give us a second example, she has
concluded a treaty offensive and defensive with the king of Spain, and has
called that nation her " natural allies." -- Now, Mr. Giles, rub that forehead
of yours a little, and tell me sincerely, without any quibbling or subterfuge,
whether you think the Spaniards are more naturally allied to the French than
the Americans are to the British.

Surely no nation was ever so completely duped as America has been by the
French and their partisans! By a sincere and hearty alliance with Great
Britain, she would not only place herself in a situation to make a peremptory
demand of indemnification from France, but, in case of refusal, would be able
to strip both France and Spain of every inch of territory they possess in this
hemisphere. There is no danger of any other nation taking umbrage at this.
America and Great Britain might bid defiance to the world. The map of this
continent and its islands lies open before them: they might cut and carve for
themselves, and sit down in the quiet enjoyment of their conquests. The very
mention of such an alliance would scare the Dons at the bottom of their mines,
and would make the seven hundred and five tyrants tremble on their thrones. Yet
the hirelings of France tell us that this alliance must not be formed, because,
forsooth, Britain is a monarchy! Poor, paltry objection! France avails herself
of all the rascally aid she can rake together; she forms treaties with all the
monarchies she can find base enough to join her, and calls them her natural
allies; but, if America makes a treaty with a monarchy, be it merely for the
purposes of adjusting disputes and regulating trade, France, "terrible France,"
takes offense at it, calls it an unnatural connection, seizes our vessels as a
punishment for it, and (with shame be it spoken!) is justified by some of those
who are chosen to preserve the honor and independence of the country! -- All
the world are the natural allies of France; republics, aristocracies,
monarchies and despotisms; Dutch, Genoese, Spaniards, Turks and Devils; but
poor America has no natural ally at all, except France herself; and if she
chooses, with the aid of her allies, to rob and insult her, America must accept
of no one's assistance, but must stand and be pillaged and kicked till the
bystanders cry shame. -- Honorable Independence! "Glorious Revolution." -- If
this must be the case, let us hear no more boastings and rejoicings. Let the
fourth of July be changed from a festival to a fast, or rather, let it be
effaced for ever from the calendar.

A LETTER TO THE INFAMOUS TOM PAIN, IN ANSWER TO HIS LETTER TO GENERAL
WASHINGTON.
CEREMONY, and even silence, from whatever motive they may arise, have a
hurtful tendency, when they give the least degree of countenance to base and
wicked performances. With this maxim, Tom, you begin your remarks on one of
your then Sovereign's speeches to his parliament, and during which remarks you
pay a very high, though just, compliment, to the talents and virtues of General
Washington; the very man whom you now attempt to strip of every talent and
every virtue, public as well as private. Complain not, therefore, if your maxim
be adopted on the present occasion; if your brutal attack on this illustrious
character has got the better of silence, and drawn forth an answer, and if this
answer be conducted with very little ceremony.

Your letter professes to treat of affairs public and private. From this
adjunct to the title, we might have expected from the Great Tom Pain, the
prince of demagogues, something like a review of the President's administration
and a developement of diplomatic and cabinet secrets. It was not being over
sanguine to expect this much from a member of the "illuminated and illuminating
Assembly of France," and a maker of constitutions besides. But, alas! how have
we been disappointed! That part of your letter, which treats of what you call
"public affairs," is no more than a repetition of one or two passages of
Citizen Adet's insolent notes, which had been sentenced to general execration a
month before you letter appeared. Your "private affairs," were long ago public.
Every one knew, and every honest heart rejoiced, that you had found a Bastile
in the purlieus of your palace of freedom; that your filthy carcass was wasting
in chains, instead of wallowing in the plunder you had promoted.

In the minds of the people of this country, therefore, none of the assertions
contained in your letter require to be refuted. The public voice has pronounced
them as false and foul as the heart from which they proceeded. But, it is not
enough that such are our sentiments; it is necessary, to preserve us from the
shame of passing for your dupes, that these sentiments should be known: and, as
the world has a right to be informed of the reasons on which they are founded,
it is in compliance with that claim, and not in complaisance to the inhabitant
of a dungeon, that I proceed to observe on what you have had the impudence to
assert: viz. 1. That our treaty with Britain justifies the seizure of our
vessels by the French. 2. That the President was guilty of a neglect of duty,
in not demanding your enlargement from the cells of one of the thousand
Bastiles of your free and happy republic. 3. That our Federal constitution is
an inconsistent instrument, which, if you live to return to America, you will
have altered. 4. That all which General Washington did in the American
revolution, might have been done by any other man as well as by him, and that
he has neither talents nor virtues, either as a statesman or a general.

The first of these assertions; to wit, That our treaty with Britain justifies
the seizure of our vessels by the French, you attempt to support by a most
barefaced misconstruction of the second article of our treaty with France. This
article says, that the contracting parties engage mutually, not to grant any
particular favor to other nations, in respect to commerce and navigation, that
shall not immediately become common to the other party. Therefore, say you, all
the concessions made to England by Jay's treaty, are, through the medium of
this second article, made to France, and can be exercised by her as a matter of
right. This is a truth, but, like all the truths you have ever committed to
paper, it is advanced with the malicious intention of leading your readers into
a falsehood.

Having said, that all the commercial favors, or concessions, granted by
America to England, are, by the pre-existing treaty, granted to France also
(all which we knew while you were safe in your den), you proceed to number
among those concessions, the acknowledgment of Great Britain's right to seize
contraband articles and enemies goods, found on board neutral vessels, which is
just no concession at all. Great Britain had, prior to the treaty, as she still
has, a right to seize all such articles and enemies goods, so found. No
stipulation in a treaty was necessary to the recognition of this right. It is
established by the universal law of nations, and is, and ever has been,
rigorously maintained, when not surrendered by particular convention. It could
be no concession on the part of America to acknowledge that Great Britain
possessed a right which she did possess, and which she exercised too, before
the treaty was formed; and if this was no concession, how can the second
article of the treaty with France be in anywise applicable to the case?

I shall not here prove that the regulations, respecting seizures, adopted in
the treaty between Britain and America, are consonant to the principles of the
modern law of nations, and are moreover sanctioned by the practice of France.
Neither shall I enter into an explanation of the true meaning of the
stipulation for equal favor, nor attempt to expose the absurdity of applying
it to what every independent nation enjoys as a right. All this I have done,
and I hope to the satisfaction of every unprejudiced mind, in my answer to the
insolent and seditious Notes of Citizen Adet, to which I would refer you, Tom,
were I not well assured, that you are guided by villainy, and not misguided by
ignorance or error. I shall not avail myself of the advantage to be derived
from a repetition of these proofs. I shall admit your assertion in its fullest
extent, and convict you on your own words.

You say, that the treaty with Britain, as far as it relates to seizures, is
now become engrafted into that with France, and can be exercised by her as
matter of right. -- Now, then, let us turn to what the British treaty says on
this head. Where vessels shall be captured or detained on just suspicion of
having on board enemies property, or of carrying to the enemy any of the
articles which are contraband of war; the said vessel shall be brought to the
nearest and most convenient port; and if any property of an enemy shall be
found on board of such vessel, that part only which belongs to the enemy shall
be made prize, and the vessel shall be at liberty to proceed with the remainder
without any impediment. -- Compare this with your justification of the present
conduct of the French. Are they content with seizing only articles contraband
of war, or the property of enemies? And do they suffer the vessel to proceed
with the rest of her cargo? No; they seize all vessels bound to the ports of
the enemy, whether they have on board contraband articles, or enemies property,
or not! They seize and confiscate both vessel and cargo, and put the captains
and seamen in chains.

You will say that Great Britain stopped all our vessels bound to her enemy's
ports, some of which she also condemned; but this was before the treaty with
her was made, and therefore cannot be attributed to that instrument, by which,
on the contrary, she acknowledges the illegality of all such seizures, and
engages to make full compensation for the losses thereby sustained. -- Take,
then, the treaty with England, let it be the law to judge your Harlequin
masters by, and we shall soon have the pleasure to hear that they have shared
the fate they long ago merited, and which their servant has often so
miraculously escaped.

You were informed of the piratical orders they had issued, and were commanded
to prepare a justification. In compliance with this command you rummaged about
the treaty, as Milton rummaged the bible to find a justification for the murder
of his king. Your baleful eyes at last fixed on the eighth article. Here, you
say, the treaty makes a concession to England of other articles in American
ships. These articles are all other articles, and none but an ignoramus, or
something worse, would have put such a phrase into a treaty. Do you think that
we have never read this treaty? And, if we had not, do you think there is a man
among us fool enough to believe that it contains such a concession? If you do,
your opinion of the people of your beloved America must be much changed.

This article, out of which you have culled two, and only two words, runs thus:
And whereas the difficulty of agreeing on the precise cases in which alone
provisions and other articles, not generally contraband, may be regarded as
such, renders it expedient to provide against the misunderstandings which might
thence arise: It is agreed, that, whenever any such articles, so becoming
contraband, according to the existing law of nations, shall for that reason be
seized, the same shall not be confiscated, but the owners thereof shall be
speedily and completely indemnified. -- So that, you see, your all other
articles are reduced to such articles only as are contraband of war, according
to the modern, the existing law of nations.

Playfair calls you the clumsy advocate of insurrection, and you are certainly
as clumsy an advocate of piracy. Poor Citizen Adet is a lame hand enough, but
you are still worse; he did flounce about and made a noise before he sunk; but
you just make a bubble, and go to the bottom at once, like a stone or a lump of
lead.

I now come to your charge against the President respecting your detention in
prison. You insist that you were still a citizen of America, and that therefore
it was his duty to demand your enlargement. -- You perceived that you had lost
all claim to citizenship here, in virtue of the article which extends that
deprivation to all those who shall accept of any title or office under any
foreign king, prince, or state. To get rid of this you have recourse to a
curious quibble: you pretend that this provision did not embrace your case,
because France, at the time you joined the legislative mob was neither a
kingdom, principality nor state, but a people in a state of revolution.

That France was not worthy of the name of state I am very ready to allow. The
French were then, what they are now, a horde of savages, engaged in the work of
destruction. But, be this as it might, France was acknowledged as a state by
America, and even you, I presume, will not have the impudence to deny, that she
was declared to be a republic too, the very first day that you took your seat
in the convention, and, if a republic, she was certainly a state. Admitting
your own doctrine, then, to have preserved your claim to American citizenship,
you should have abdicated your seat, the instant this declaration took place.

You contend that a man may lend a hand to form a constitution for a nation who
has none, without forfeiting his citizenship in his own country. This may be
so: it is nonsense, and therefore not worth disputing about. But why did you
not retire as soon as your job was done. You continued your seat after you had
made and sworn to and made every one else swear to your silly work. You had
tasted the sweets of plunder, and you hung to it like a leech, till Robespierre
changed you from a legislator to a jail-bird.

You wish to persuade us, that the being a delegate to aid in forming a
constitution was not filling any office at all. -- Now suppose that I should
allow this, did you exercise no other functions than those of a constitution
maker? Was not the convention every thing, legislative, executive and
diplomatic; judicial, military and ecclesiastic? Were not some of you watching
the armies, others superintending the guillotine, and others preaching sermons
of atheism? Was this filling no office? And were you not at all times as liable
and as ready and fit to be thus employed as any of the gang? Nay, did you not
preside as judge ("ah! righteous rascally judge!") on the trial of Louis the
XVIth? And did not your swinish voice pronounce on him the sentence of
banishment? Was this filling no office?

But, whether you were an officer or not, or whether you had legally forfeited
your American citizenship, what a poor mean-spirited miscreant must you be to
make a complaint that your release was not requested by the President, the man
whom you call an apostate or an impostor! What! old Common Sense, who was at
all times ready to fight a hundred tories; the great Rights of Man, who
"proudly scorned to triumph or to yield;" is it this hero in the cause of
French liberty, who boldly defied the gallows of Old England, that now trembles
at the thoughts of the French guillotine! -- To such a pitch of rage and
suspicion was Robespierre and his committee arrived that it seemed as if they
feared to leave a man alive. No man could count upon his life for twenty hours.
This confession is valuable. The democrats will not now deny what I have ever
said about French liberty.
One hundred and sixty-nine prisoners were taken out of the Luxembourg in one
night, and one hundred and sixty of them guillotined. In the next list I have
good reason to believe I was included. -- Well, and what then? Why should you
not be included as well as the thousands you assisted in sentencing to death?
What a poor whimpering story is here! After all your boasting of the greatness
and dignity of the "democratic floor," you have not discovered a zeal nearly
equal to that of Lord Stanhope, one of "that class of equivocal generation,
called aristocracy." See Woodfall's Parliamentary Reports.


Lord Stanhope. What are all the executions and what is all the blood, about
which we hear such pitiful tales? The cause of France is the cause of freedom,
of mankind. Who would hesitate to be executed in such a cause? I would
cheerfully be hanged in her cause.

Lord Abingdon. My lords, his lordship wishes you to hang him. I beseech your
lordships to give the (...) peer rope enough and he will hang himself.

Are you not ashamed, Tom, to be surpassed by a lord? Instead of coming forth
from your den, a volunteer martyr in this glorious cause, and crying, Vive la
Republique! with your neck under the national razor, you tremble even now at
the thoughts of your danger. Instead of dancing to the music of your republican
chains, you pine and peak and cry for liberty: as if it were possible for a man
to want liberty in France!

I cannot help observing here how harmoniously you chime in with the cant of
the enslaved French and the American democrats. During the tyranny of
Robespierre -- the orders of Robespierre -- the cruelty of Robespierre. Just as
if the whole mob of tyrants, who passed the bloody decrees, were not as guilty
as he who proposed them? But the rest, or the greatest part of them, are alive
and in power, and Robespierre is dead.

You are obliged, however, to confess that the convention itself refused to
release you at the request of some silly Americans: but here again, to avoid
offending your despotic masters, you throw the blame on the president for the
time being, and he, poor cutthroat, "has since absconded." If he had been
present you would not have dared even to do this.

The committees, you acknowledge, did order your arrest; but then, as some of
them are alive, and even on the throne, you add: the committees, of which
Robespierre was Dictator. Thus you qualify your tone, kneel, creep and cringe
to those who have held you in chains, and brought you to the foot of the
scaffold. Nay you do more. Carnot, one of the five fellows now called the
Directory, was a member of these committees, he was Robespierre's right hand
man, the jackall that brought provision for the guillotine. This is he who
signs the decree for seizing the vessels of your "beloved America," and this
measure your pen, your poor old double-turned antithesises, are now employed to
defend. It is thus that you support "the dignity of man," that " dignity
compared to which that of lords, dukes and kings dwindles into nothingness."

If Robespierre were still living, you would be as much his flatterer and slave
as you are the flatterer and slave of Carnot. You were made for a French
republican; the baseness which they have constantly discovered, is in your
nature. While the tyrant is alive, he is a God; when dead, he is a devil. An
ignominious death, the awful avenger of crimes, and, with other men, the
oblivion of injuries, with you unlocks the faculties of reproach, and changes
your praises into execrations. You are like tame carrion-crows: you flutter in
flocks from the presence of the kite, but when he is wounded by the hunter and
lies gasping on the earth, you attack his prostrate carcass, and pick out his
eyes that are closing in death.

Now, Tom, for your attack on the Federal Constitution. On this head I shall be
very concise. -- You must recollect, if your memory is not as treacherous as
your heart, that, in your "Rights of Man," you every where coupled this
constitution with that of France, which your book professed to defend; and
that, you held the Federal Constitution, in particular, up for the imitation of
the English. -- Let us therefore contrast what you then said of this
constitution, with what you say of it now.

Letter to Genesis Washington.
I declare myself opposed to several matters in the constitution, particularly
to the manner in which, what is called the Executive, is formed, and to the
long duration of the Senate; and if I live to return to America I will use all
my endeavors to have them altered.

It was only to the absolute necessity of establishing some federal authority,
extending equally over all the states, that an instrument, so inconsistent as
the present federal constitution is, obtained a suffrage.

As the federal constitution is a copy, not quite so base as the original, of
the form of the British government, an imitation of its vices was naturally to
be expected.

Rights of Man, Part 2d.
The whole expense of the federal government of America, founded, as I have
already said, on the system of representation, and extending over a country
nearly ten times as large as England, is but six hundred thousand dollars, or
one hundred and thirty-five thousand pounds sterling.

The government of America, which is wholly on the system of representation, is
the only real republic in character and in practice, that now exists. Its
government has no other object than the public business of the nation, and
therefore it is properly a republic.

It is on this system that the American government is founded. It is
representation ingrafted upon democracy. It has fixed the form by a scale
parallel in all cases to the extent of the principle. What Athens was in
miniature, America will be in magnitude. The one was the wonder of the ancient
world; the other is becoming the admiration and model of the present.

There is a pretty little posey for you, Thomas! What a vile wretch must you
be! That which was becoming the admiration and model of the world, is now a
copy, not quite so base as the original, of the British government; and you
were exhausting all the hell of sophistry to persuade the English to change
their constitution for another, from which the vices of their own were
"naturally to be expected." -- Never, surely never, was a poor demagogue so
completely detected. Your letter will do good in this country; but in England
it will be a national blessing. Your sincerity will now be seen to the bottom.
Those whom you had the address to deceive will now blush at their folly: they
will see the pit you had prepared for them, and will bless the hand that saved
them from destruction. For my own part, what I owe to this performance in
common with every American and every Englishman, I have particular
acknowledgments to make. It has flattered my vanity as a political writer; a
species of vanity which you know, Tom, is none of the weakest, -- witness your
Second Part of the Rights of Man. I long ago declared that all who were the
enemies of the British Government, would be found to be the enemies of the
General Government of America. And no longer since than the September Censor,
which contains your infamous life, I said: I sincerely believe that he (meaning
you, Tom,) hated, and that he still hates, the general government of the United
States, as much as the Government of Great Britain. But it was necessary that
he should find out something to hold up to the imitation of the English; no
matter what, so that it differed from what they possessed.

Among the good effects that your letter will have, one is, and that not of the
least importance, it will tend to complete the reconciliation between America
and Britain. Your intention and that of your employers was quite different; but
you have overstepped your mark. When the people of this country first read your
"Rights of Man," they were naturally flattered with your compliments to their
wisdom. To have formed a government, the admiration and model of the world, and
to be held up to the imitation of their rivals in freedom, merited a return of
applause; and they were astonished and offended to find, that the English
refused to be instructed. Hence the appellations of "British tyrant," and
"willing slaves;" and all the acrimonious and disdainful language that was for
a long time held toward that nation. But now, when they perceive that their
flatterer is become an assailant, and that their admiration and model of the
world, is no more than a mere copy, not quite so base as the original, of the
British Government, they will begin to think that the people of England were
not so foolish; that they still are free men, and worthy of their friendship
and affection.

In a successive attack on all that is fair and excellent, the conduct and
character of General Washington naturally follows the Federal Constitution.

I will not cast a slur on this illustrious man by attempting to defend him
against the shafts of Tom Pain, but I will make you, Tom, defend him against
yourself.

Letter to Genesis Washington.
When we speak of military character, something more is to be understood than
constancy; and something more ought to be understood than the Fabian system of
doing nothing. The nothing part can be done by any body. Old Mrs. Thompson, the
housekeeper of headquarters, (who threatened to make the sun and the wind
shine through Rivington of New York) could have done it as well as Mr.
Washington. Deborah would have been as good as Barak. The successful skirmishes
at the close of one campaign matters that would scarcely be noticed in a better
state of things, make the brilliant exploits of Genesis Washington's seven
campaigns. -- No wonder we see so much pusillanimity in the President when we
see so little enterprise in the General.

Elevated to the chair of the Presidency you assumed the merit of every thing
to yourself, and the natural ingratitude of your constitution began to appear.
You commenced your Presidential carreer by encouraging and swallowing the
grossest adulation, and you traveled America from one end -- to the other, to
put yourself in the way of receiving it. You have as many addresses in your
chest as James the II. Monopolies of every kind marked your administration
almost in the moment of its commencement. The lands obtained by the revolution
were lavished upon partisans; the interest of the disbanded soldier was sold to
the speculator; injustice was acted under the pretense of faith; and the chief
of the army became the patron of the fraud.

And as to you, sir, treacherous in private friendship, and a hypocrite in
public life, the world will be puzzled to decide, whether you are an apostate
or an impostor; whether you have abandoned good principles, or whether you ever
had any?

Common Sense.
Voltaire has remarked that King William never appeared to full advantage but
in difficulties and in action; the same remark may be made on General
Washington, for the character sits him. There is a natural firmness in some
minds which cannot be unlocked by trifles, but which, when unlocked, discovers
a cabinet of fortitude; and I reckon it among those kind of public blessings,
which we do not immediately see, that GOD has blessed him with uninterrupted
health, and given him a mind that can even flourish upon care.

Rights of Man, Part 2d.
I presume, that no man in his sober senses, will compare the character of any
of the kings of Europe with that of General Washington.

As soon as nine states had concurred, (and the rest followed in the order
their conventions were elected) the old fabric of the federal government was
taken down, and the new one erected, of which General Washington is president.
-- In this place I cannot help remarking, that the character and services of
this gentleman are sufficient to put all those men called kings to shame. While
they are receiving from the sweat and labors of mankind, a prodigality of pay,
to which neither their abilities nor their services can entitle them, he is
rendering every service in his power, and refusing every pecuniary reward. He
accepted no pay as commander in chief; he accepts none as president of the
United States.

Dedication to the 1st part of the Rights of Man.
SIR,
I present you a small treatise in defense of those principles of freedom which
your exemplary virtue has so eminently contributed to establish. That the
Rights of Man may become as universal as your benevolence can wish, and that
you may enjoy the happiness of seeing the new world regenerate the old, is the
prayer of,

Sir, Your most obliged, and Obedient humble servt. THOMAS PAIN.

Now, atrocious, infamous miscreant, look on this picture, and on this. I would
call on you to blush, but the rust of villainy has eaten your cheek to the
bone, and dried up the source of suffusion. Are these the proofs of your
disinterestedness and consistency? In it thus that you are always the same, and
that you preserve through life the right-angled character of MAN?

The object of your masters, in having recourse to you on this occasion, is
evident to every one. Your letter was written at the time they were passing the
decree for authorizing the violation of their treaty with America. To prevent
the people here from resenting the injury, it was necessary to persuade them
that it was owing to the mal-administration of their own government, and this
could not be done without undermining the character of him who presided over
it. It was thought that you yet possessed influence enough to effect this, and
therefore the prostituted pen of the revolutionary ruffian was put in a state
of requisition.

Your tyrants are completely baffled. The effects of your letter are exactly
the contrary to what it was intended to produce. There is but one thing on
earth nearer to the hearts of all true Americans than their constitution, and
that is, the spotless character of their chief. Your brutal attempt to blacken
this character was all that was wanted to crown his honor and your infamy. You
never before sunk to a level with the damned, but now you are plunged beneath
them. The vile democrats, nay even Franklin Bache, with whom you boast of being
in close correspondence, can say not a word in its defense. All the apology for
you, is, that you wrote at the instigation of the despots of Paris. Thus the
great Rights of Man, the sworn foe of corruption, and the reformer of nations,
winds up his patriotic career: his being bribed is pleaded as an alleviation of
his crimes.

THE END.
PROPOSALS, By William Cobbett, Bookseller, of Philadelphia, FOR PUBLISHING A
NEWS-PAPER, TO BE ENTITLED, Porcupine's Gazette AND DAILY ADVERTISER.
METHINKS I hear the reader exclaim: What! have we not Gazettes enough already?
Yes, and far too many: but those that we have, are, in general, conducted in
such a manner that their great number, instead of rendering mine unnecessary,
is the only cause that calls for its establishment.

The gazettes in this country have done it more real injury than all its open
enemies ever did or can do. They mislead the people at home and misrepresent
them abroad. It was these vehicles of sedition and discord that encouraged the
counties in the West to rebel; it was they that gave rise to the depredations
of Britain, by exciting the people to such acts of violence against that
nation, as left her no room to doubt that we were determined on war; and it was
they, when an accommodation had been happily effected, that stirred up an
opposition to it such as has seldom been witnessed, and which was overcome by
mere chance. These gazettes it was, that, by misrepresenting the dispositions
of the people, encouraged the French to proceed from one degree of insolence to
another, till at last their minister braves the President in his chair, and a
bullying commander comes and tells us that his only business is to seize our
vessels, in violation of a treaty, by virtue of which alone he claims a right
to enter our ports: and it is these gazettes that now have the impudence to
defend what their falsehood and malice have produced.

I shall be told, that the people are to blame; that they are not obliged to
read these abominable publications. But they do read them; and thousands who
read them, read nothing else. To suppress them is impossible; they will vomit
forth their poison; it is a privilege of their natures, that no law can
abridge; and therefore the only mode left, is, to counteract its effects.

This must be done, too, in their own way. Books, or periodical publications in
the form of books, may be of some service, but are by no means a match for
their flying folios. A falsehood that remains uncontradicted for a month,
begins to be looked upon as a truth, and when the detection at last makes its
appearance, it is often as useless as that of the doctor who finds his patient
expired.

The only method of opposition, then, is to meet them on their own ground; to
set foot to foot; dispute every inch and every hair's breadth; fight them at
their own weapons, and return them two blows for one.

A gazette of this stamp is what I have long wished to see, but I have wished
and expected it in vain. Indignation at the supineness of others has at last
got the better of all diffidence in my own capacity, and has determined me to
encounter the task.

CONDITIONS.
I. PORCUPINE'S GAZETTE shall be of the usual size, and the subscription Eight
Dollars a year, to be paid at the expiration of each half year. II.
Advertisements will be inserted at half the usual price, which will always be
required in ready money. III. The Censor, containing those pieces from the
gazette that may appear worth preserving in a more portable form, with such
amplifications and amendments as time may give rise to, shall be published
monthly, and each subscriber shall be entitled to a copy, delivered with his
paper at the end of the month. IV. If a sufficient number of subscribers be
obtained, the first number of the gazette shall appear on, or before, the 5th
of March next.
N. B. A subscription-book is now open at my shop, opposite Christ Church,
whither gentlemen in the country, who wish to subscribe, are requested to send
their names.

Subscriptions are taken at Boston, by Mr. James White, bookseller; at Salem,
by Mr. Delany, postmaster; at New Haven, by Mr. Beers, bookseller; at Newbury
Port, by Mr. E. Blunt, bookseller; at New York, by Mr. S. Campbell,
bookseller; at Baltimore, by Mr. G. Hill, bookseller; at Chester Town
(Maryland) by Mr. James Arthur, postmaster; at Easton, do. by Mr. Greenbury
Neale; at Frederick Town, do. by Messrs. Isaac and John Mentz; at Richmond,
Virginia, by Messrs. Pritchard and Davidson; at Norfolk, by Messrs. Rainbow and
Hannah; and at Charleston, by Mr. Young, bookseller.

BOOKS PUBLISHED BY WILLIAM COBBETT, OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH.
ADAMS'S DEFENSE Is now in the Press, and will appear on, or before, the 15th
of February next. -- The liberal encouragement the publisher has received, has
enabled him to meet the wishes of the Subscribers, by embellishing this
invaluable work with a portrait of the author. -- Subscriptions will be
received till the tenth of February. THE HISTORY OF JACOBINISM, A most
excellent work for country libraries, particularly in places where the poison
of French liberty and equality has begun to operate. Once reading of this work
will set all to rights again. THE BLOODY BUOY. If the dose be too strong, or
has been swallowed too long, to be overcome by the History of Jacobinism,
recourse must be had to the Bloody Buoy. But this remedy ought never to be
applied unless the patient be of a very robust constitution.

