THE LIFE OF THOMAS PAIN, THE AUTHOR OF RIGHTS OF MAN, AGE OF REASON, etc.
WITH A DEFENSE OF HIS WRITINGS.

By FRANCIS OLDYS, A. M. OF THE UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA.

THE FIRST BOSTON, FROM THE SECOND LONDON, EDITION.

BOSTON: Printed by MANNING and LORING, For DAVID WEST, No. 36,
Marlborough-Street. 1796

THE LIFE OF THOMAS PAIN, etc. etc. etc.
IT has been established by the reiterated suffrage of mankind, that the lives
of those persons, who have either performed useful actions, or neglected
essential duties, ought to be recounted, as much for an example to the present
age, as for the instruction of future times.

Few men have more justly merited the honor of this notice, either as an
example to be avoided at present, or as a lesson to be learned hereafter, than
the personage, whose actions we are now to recount, and whose writings we are
about to defend.

The borough of Thetford, in the county of Norfolk, has in the same manner
become dignified by the birth of Pain, Our author's real name is Pain: his
fictitious name is Pain with a final e: For, his father's name was Pain; his
own name was Pain, when he married, when he corresponded with the Excise, and
when he first appeared in America: but, finding some inconvenience in his real
name, or seeing some advantage in a fictitious one, he thus changed the name of
his family; and he thus exercised a freedom, which only great men enjoy for
honorable ends.
as the Rubicon was ennobled by the passage of Caesar. At Thetford he was born
on the 29th of January, 1736-7. His father was Joseph Pain, the son of a small
but reputable farmer, a stay-maker by trade, and a Quaker in religion: His
mother was Frances Cock, the daughter of an attorney at Thetford, and of the
established church. Joseph Pain was a reputable citizen, and, though poor, an
honest man: Frances Cock was a woman of a four temper and an eccentric
character: and they were married in the parish of Euston, near Thetford, on the
20th of June, 1734. See the register of the parish of Easton.
By thus taking his wife from the church, Joseph Pain was by his own act and
the rules of the Quakers, at once expelled from their community. But, neither
this irregularity, nor this expulsion, prevented that benevolent sect from
pitying his distresses through life, and relieving his wants as they were seen.
The father and mother both lived to know their son's vices, to pity his
misfortunes, to hear of his fame, but to partake little of his bounty. Joseph
Pain was buried at Thetford, on the 14th of November, 1786, aged 78. -- Frances
Pain, widow, was buried on the 18th of May, 1789, recorded to be 94: but, as
she was born in January 1697-8, the parish register makes her age to be greater
than it was, though she had far outlived the period which is assigned to
mortals.
It arose probably from the tenets of the father and the eccentricity of the
mother, that our author was never baptized, As he was not baptized, the baptism
of Thomas Pain is not entered on the parish books of Thetford. It is a
remarkable fact, that the leaves of the two registers of the parishes of St.
Cuthbert's and St. Peter's in Thetford, containing the marriages, births, and
burials, from the end of 1733, to the beginning of 1737, have been completely
cut out. Thus a felony has been committed against the public, and an injury
done to individuals, by a hand very malicious and wholly unknown. Whether our
author, when he resided at Thetford in 1787, looked into these registers for
his own birth; what he saw, or what he did, we will not conjecture. They
contain the baptism of his sister Elizabeth, on the 28th of August, 1738.
though he was privately named, and never received, like true Christians, into
the bosom of any church, though he was indeed confirmed by the bishop of
Norwich; owing to the orthodox zeal of Mistress ^ocke, his aunt, a woman of
such goodness, that though she lived on a small annuity, she imparted much of
this little to his mother, while he neglected his aged parent, amidst his cares
for mankind.

Our author was educated at the free school of Thetford, under Mr. Knowles,
who, whatever were his merits, is said never to have risen to be master. The
expense of young Pain's education was defrayed, in some measure, by his father,
but chiefly by the relations of his mother. He was deemed a sharp boy, of
unsettled application; but he left no performances which denote juvenile
vigor, or uncommon seize. His tuition was directed, by his expectations,
to what is useful, more than to what is ornamental; to reading, writing, and
cyphering, which are so commodious to tradesmen, rather than to classical
knowledge, which is so decorous in gentlemen. With such instruction, he left
the school, at the age of thirteen, in order to learn his father's trade. The
business of a staymaker he never liked, or indeed any occupation, which
required attentive diligence and steady effort. He, however, worked on with his
father, fitting stays for the ladies of Thetford, during six years, except for
a short while that he labored with a cousin, in making bodices for the girls
of Shipdam, in the county of Norfolk. But though he had thus been educated,
according to the recommendation of Mr. Lock; though a trade be better than
house and land; yet the trade, and house, and land, are of no avail, if the
person have not moral rectitude, and no heedful industry.

At the age of twenty, and in the year 1757, our author adventured to London,
the common receptacle of the valiant and the wise, of the needy and the
opulent, of the busy and the idle. In this crowd, which confounds the greatest
with the least, Pain cannot be distinguished. With whom he worked, or whom he
fitted, tradition has not recounted. It is, however, certain, that London did
not enjoy long the honor of his residence; no master was helped for many
months by his journeywork; and few ladies had the happiness of being stayed by
his skilful hand.

He was soon prompted by his restlessness, to look for new prospects at Dover,
in 1758. For almost a twelvemonth our author worked with Mr. Grace, a
respectable staymaker in that ancient cinque-port. Meantime, Miss Grace either
won our author's heart, or our author attempted to win the heart of Miss Grace.
And the father was thus induced to lend him ten pounds, in order to enable our
adventurer to set up as a master staymaker at Sandwich. Yet is it certain, that
he neither married the lady, nor repaid the loan.

At Sandwich he settled early in 1759. Biographers have been diligent to
discover in what houses famous men had lived at particular periods of their
depression, or their elevation. Of our author it can be only told, that he
lodged in the marketplace. The well known antiquary of this ancient port has
not yet determined, whether he were not the first who had here used the mystery
of stay-making. It is, however, certain, that he practiced other arts. There is
a tradition, that in his lodging he collected a congregation, to whom he
preached as an independent, rather than a Methodist. While thus occupied, he
became enamoured of the person, or the property, of Mary Lambert, the waiting
maid of the wife of Richard Solly, an eminent woollen-draper at Sandwich. Mary
Lambert, who is still praised by her own sex as a pretty girl of modest
behavior, our author married on the 27th of September, 1759. In the church
register there is the following entry: --

Thomas Pain, of the parish of St. Peter's, in the town of Sandwich, in Kent,
bachelor, and Mary Lambert of the same parish, spinster, were married in this
church, by license, this 27th day of Sept. 1759, by me,

WILLIAM BUNCS, Rector.
In the presence of THOMAS TAILOR, JOHN JOSLIN, MARIA S^^LY.

THOMAS PAIN. MARY LAMBERT.



She was the daughter of James Lambert, who, with his wife Mary, came to
Sittingbourne, as an exciseman, some time before the year 1736; and who was
soon after dismissed for misconduct: on this dismissal he set up a shop; but
made greater gains, by acting as bum-bailiff of Sittingbourne; yet he died in
bad circumstances, on the 24th of May, 1753; The parish register of
Sittingbourne.
his wife dying about the same time, in a mad-house. The women of Sandwich, to
this hour, express their surprise, that so fine a girl should have married so
old a fellow: yet, Mary was scarcely twenty-one; Mary, the daughter of James
and Mary Lambert, was baptized on the 1st of January, 17^8. See the parish
register of Sittingbourne.
while Thomas was only twenty-two. The fact is, that our author has always
appeared to female eyes a dozen years older than he was, owing to the hardness
of his features, or to the scars of disease.

Marriage is the great epoch of a man's life. Our author was now to maintain
his wife and family by his trade. The tradition of Sandwich still repeats, that
he expected a fortune on his marriage, which he never found. In expectation
there are doubtless degrees of comparison. A man beginning life, as a
stay-maker, on ten pounds of borrowed money, has other hopes and other fears,
than men of vast wealth and unbounded expectancy. He certainly was disappointed
both in his pleasure and his profit: and disappointment has a sad effect on the
human constitution. Two months had hardly elapsed, when our author's ill usage
of his wife became apparent to the whole town, and excited the indignation of
some, with the pity of others. Influenced by the genuine goodness of the
English character, Mrs. Solly relieved the distresses of her favorite maid
with constant solicitude. For almost a twelvemonth this unhappy couple lived in
comfortless lodgings. At length he took a house, without being able to furnish
it. Mr. Rutter, a reputable broker of Sandwich, supplied him with such
furniture as he wanted. But it soon appeared, that our author rather desired
relief than wished for residence. And being embarrassed with debts, and goaded
by duns, he took the opportunity of the first Sunday morning to sail from
Sandwich, with his wife and goods, to Margate; where he sold by auction the
same furniture, which Mr. Rutter had supplied him on credit.

Our author, we fear, committed on this occasion an old crime, which has now a
new name. In Henry VIIIth's days, he who obtained another's property by false
tokens, was punished by pillory, as a cheat. By ^^ Hen. viii. ch* 1.
In George IId.'s reign, ^ Geo. 2. c. 2^.
persons convicted of obtaining goods by false pretenses, were to be
transported, as swindlers. What a fine opportunity for our metaphysical
statesmen to discuss, not so much our author's practice as our author's
principles. Had Thomas Pain been indicted at the Old Bailey, he might have
insisted, as he now insists, that the laws of England did not exist; and that
the judges did not sit on the bench. The court would have been reduced to the
dilemma of either sending him to Bedlam, or to Bridewell; or of proceeding with
the trial, and adjudging the guilty culprit to the colonies, or the cart's
tail. The beforementioned metaphysicians would have perhaps exclaimed, that in
force there is no argument. True: But, as philosophers, you do not surely
dispute first principles; as logicians, you must not argue against facts.
Whether the laws of Great Britain actually exist, is not a theory to be
debated, but a fact to be acknowledged: and he who denies the existence of
those objects, which with his senses he perceives, is not so much a declaimer
to be confuted, as a madman to be confined, or a cheat to be corrected.

But, admitting that facts cannot be debated, that first principles must not be
denied, that one's own existence must not be doubted, yet our author might have
pleaded what he now pleads, that since the statute of Henry VIII. was made
before he was born, he ought not to be sent to the pillory under its
provisions. Whether the court would have ordered the trial to proceed, or have
stopped to argue a plea, which is not usually urged, must have depended on
circumstances rather than on practice. You are tried, goodnature might have
said, under rules, which, having once been established by the Society, must
remain in force till the same authority shall repeal them. Laws as they must
equally apply to all persons, and must be uniformly executed at all times,
cannot depend on circumstances so fleeting in their nature, and so
unefficacious in their end, as the birth of some persons, and the death of
others. If no criminals could be tried but those who drew their first breath
since the existence of the law, many would be unrestrained, while the few alone
could be punished. If society be a blessing, this blessing could not be
enjoyed, were the members of society to be in this manner opposed to each
other; the guilty against the innocent; the profligate against the virtuous;
and the strong against the weak. As the culprit's plea strikes at the
foundation of society, society must either relinquish its authority, or reject
a plea, which is destructive of itself. Thus every criminal, who denies the
authority of those laws, that the society has enacted, and continues to
enforce, puts himself in a state of warfare against the society, which is
obliged, by a regard to its own security, to inform him of the sad alternative,
either of submitting, or ceasing to exist.

Against the act of George II. for the punishment of swindlers, our author
might have insisted, as he still insists, that though it was made since he was
born, he had not consented to be bound by its penalties. Those philosophers,
the court might have said, who resolve the sanction of laws into consent, must
either argue against fact, and therefore argue illogically, or they must admit
that this consent may be either express or virtual. Children, who are protected
by society from the moment of their existence, are obliged to obey the rules of
society, even before they arrive at such maturity of reason as to give their
consent in the smallest affairs. Strangers, who land on our shore, virtually
declare, by the act of their landing, that they are willing to obey the laws of
the country. When Englishmen circumnavigate the globe, they virtually avow,
wherever they may touch, for refreshments or inquiry, that they are willing to
conform to the customs of the people, whatever they may be. The most civilized
citizen, who goes amongst the rudest savages, must profess peace, and practice
obedience, or he would be treated as an enemy. Every man, therefore, who walks
about among a people, avowing his disobedience to their laws, because he had
not consented to their sanctions, declares himself to be in a state of warfare
to all around him, like a savage in a wilderness. This last plea of our author,
like his two former ones, must have been equally rejected by the court, as such
an attack upon the existence of society, as makes society hostile to him.

During a disputatious age, it would be an excellent question for metaphysical
disquisition, how much more good had resulted to the world, had our author,
when his peculiar pleas were thus rejected, been transported to the plantations
at the public expense, in 1760, instead of transporting himself, at his own
expense, in 1774. It might easily be proved without the arithmetical powers of
Dr. Price, that our author's seven years' servitude would have expired in 1767.
With his admirable pen he would have been just ready at that critical epoch to
have brought forward all the blessings of independence, at least seven years
sooner. Great Britain would in the same manner, and in the same time, have
equally partaken in the benefits of their independence. The French too would
have seven years sooner enjoyed the felicity of so bloodless a revolution, and
so tranquil a freedom. And last, but not least, the Constitutional Society
would have seven years sooner possessed the heartfelt happiness, amidst the
exhilaration of victuals and wine, of avowing their monarchical principles to
an admiring world.

When our author had disposed of Mr. Rutter's goods at Margate, he once more
mingled with the crowds of London. Of the fate of his wife, rumor has spoken
variously. By some she is said to have died on the road of ill usage, and a
premature birth. The women of Sandwich are positive, that she died in the
British Lying-in Hospital, in Brownlow-street, Long-acre; but the register of
this charity, which is kept with commendable accuracy, evinces, that she had
not been received into this laudable refuge of female wretchedness. A diligent
search in the books of the London Lying-in Hospital in the City Road found no
such person as Mistress Pain to have died in it, during the years (...)
And there are others, who have convinced themselves by diligent inquiry, that
she is still alive, though the extreme obscurity of her retreat prevents ready
discovery. The trials which our author had made of his trade, as they had
brought him no pleasure and little gain, induced him to renounce it at this
time forever. When a youth, he had inquired into the duty, and envied the
perquisites, of an exciseman. His wife had, doubtless, spoken of the honors
and emoluments of her father. And he was induced by these considerations in
July, 1761, to seek for shelter in his father's house, that he might prosecute
in quiet privacy the great object of his future course.

After fourteen months of study and trials our author was established in the
excise, in December, 1762, at the age of twenty-five. He owed this
gratification of his wishes to the friendly interference of Mr. Cocksedge, the
learned recorder of Thetford. He was soon sent as a super-numerary to gage the
brewers of Grantham; and in August, 1764, he was employed to watch the
smugglers of Alford. Whether, while he thus walked at Grantham, or rode as an
exciseman at Alford, his practices had been misrepresented by malice, or his
dishonesty had been detected by watchfulness, tradition has not told us: but,
it is certain, that he was dismissed from his office, in August, 1765.

Our author, who appears to have had from nature no desire of accumulation, or
rather no care of the future, was now reduced to extreme wretchedness. He was
absolutely without food, without raiment, and without shelter. Bad, alas! must
that man be who finds no friends in London. He met with persons, who, from
disinterested kindness, gave him clothes, money, and lodging. Thus he lived
till the beginning of July, 1766, when he was restored to the excise. But mere
restoration did not bring him present employment, or necessary supplies. And he
was about the same time obliged to enter into the service of Mr. Noble, who
kept the great Academy in Lemon-street, Goodman's fields, at a salary of twenty
pounds a year, with five pounds for finding his own lodging. Here he continued,
teaching English, and walking out with the children, till Christmas, 1766,
disliked by the mistress, who still remembers him, and hated by the boys, who
were terrified by his harshness. Mr. Noble relinquished our author, without
much regret, to Mr. Gardnor, who then taught a reputable school at Kensington:
yet, owing to whatever cause, he walked with Mr. Gardnor's scholars only the
three first months of 1767. His desire of preaching now returned on him: but
applying to his old master for a certificate, to the bishop of London, of his
qualifications, Mr. Noble told his former usher, that since he was only an
English scholar, he could not recommend him as a proper candidate for
ordination in the Church: yet our author determined to persevere in his
purpose, without regular orders. And he preached in Moorfields, and in various
populous places in England, as he was urged by his necessities, or directed by
his spirit. The text, which so emphatically inculcates, meddle not with them
that are given to change, we may easily suppose he superficially explained, or
seldom enforced.

The scene ere long shifted; and our author was at length to play an old part
on a new stage. In March, 1768, he was sent, after some delays, to be
excise-officer at Jews, in Sussex. He now went to lodge with Mr. Samuel
Ollive, a tobacconist and shopkeeper of fair repute, in Jews: but he seems to
have learned no practical lessons from his recent removals and his former
distress. At the age of thirty-one he was rather ambitious to shine as a jolly
fellow among his private companions, to whom, however, he exposed a temper,
obstinate and overbearing, than to be considered by his official superiors as
an exciseman, remarkable for diligence and fidelity: and such were his
enterprise on the water, and his intrepidity on the ice, that he became known
by the appellation of commodore. He lived on, suspected as an exciseman, and
unbeloved as a friend, with Samuel Ollive till his death, in July, 1769. This
worthy tobacconist died rather in bad circumstances, leaving a widow, one
daughter, and several sons, who have prospered as industrious citizens, and are
respected as honest men. Our author, attempting to retain some of the effects
of the deceased, was turned out of the house by Mr. Attersol, the executor,
with such circumstances as implied distrust of his integrity. He found his way,
however, into the house of Ollive, in 1770, by means of the widow and the
daughter, who, doubtless, looked on him with other eyes. He opened ere long the
shop, in his own name, as a grocer, and on his own behalf continued to work the
tobacco-mill of Ollive, however contrary both the shop and the mill were to the
maxims of the excise. Such was his address, or his artifice, that though he had
promoted the buying of smuggled tobacco, he was able, for several years, to
cover his practices, and to retain his protector.

The year 1771 forms one of the happy periods of his life. At the age of
thirty-four he now married Elizabeth Ollive, the daughter of his old landlord,
who was eleven years younger than himself, The following entry appears on the
parish register of St. Michael, in Jews: --

Thomas Pain, bachelor, and Elizabeth Ollive, spinster, were married in this
church, by license, the 26th of March, 1771.

By me, ROBERT AUSTEN, Curate.
Witnesses, HENRY VERRALL, THOMAS OLLIVE.
(Signed) THOMAS PAIN, ELIZABETH OLLIVE.


and who was a woman of such personableness and purity, as to attract men of
higher rank and greater delicacy. Pain had, however, gained her affections; and
she would have him, contrary to the advice of Mr. Attersol, her father's
friend, and the remonstrances of her own relations. This marriage began
inauspiciously, and ended unhappily. Before our author could have obtained his
marriage-license, he swore that he was a bachelor when he knew that he was a
widower, if indeed his first wife were deceased. As to the sanction of an oath,
he had learned that commodious maxim of the celebrated moralist: -- That he who
made, and forced it, broke it; not he, that for convenience took it. Our author
was, on this occasion, instrumental too, with his understanding clear and his
eyes open, in entering on the register that he was a bachelor, though he knew
he was a widower. Now, the statute, 26 Geo. II. chapter 33.
yclept the Marriage-act, which some consider as an infringement of men's
rights and women's rights, declares it to be felony, without benefit of clergy,
wilfully to make a false entry on the register, with intention to defeat the
salutary purposes of recording truth, discriminating characters, and
ascertaining property. Yet, our author, however he may use other men's goods as
his own, whatever he may think of the sacredness of oaths, however he may
regard the integrity of registers, can easily plead, that since he never
consented to be bound by what the nation had solemnly enacted, he cannot be
guilty; a doctrine which is convenient indeed to him, however injurious to the
people, whose property and whose happiness are secured by fair dealing and
honest practice; by the sanction of oaths, and the authenticity of records.

After these vicissitudes of fortune, and those varieties of fame, our author
commenced public writer in 1771. The electors of New Shoreham had lately shone
with such uncommon luster, as to attract parliamentary notice, and to incur
parliamentary disfranchisement. By 11 George III. chapter 55.
A new election was now to be held, not so much in a new manner, as on new
principles. The poets of Jews were called upon by Rumbold, the candidate of
fair pretensions, to furnish an appropriate song. Our author obtained the
laurel, with three guineas for his pains. It may, then, be doubted, whether it
be strictly true, what he asserted, in his news-paper altercations, in 1779,
that till the epoch of his Common Sense, he had never published a syllable.

If the distributing of printed papers be publication, it will soon appear that
our author had not been quite innocent of publishing, in England. He had risen,
by superior energy, more than by greater honesty, to be a chief among the
excisemen. They had long seen, that whatever increase there had been in private
wealth, or in public revenue, no increase came to them. Their allowance of one
shilling and nine-pence farthing a day, which had been always little, was now
made less, by the rise in the price of provisions, from the establishment of
taxes, and the expansion of luxury. They thought themselves shut out from the
general blessing; which they beheld, said our author, like a map of Peru. A
design was thus formed by the excise officers throughout the kingdom, to apply
to Parliament for a consideration of the state of their salaries. A common
contribution was made for the common benefit. And our author engaged to write
their Case, which he produced, after many months' labor, in 1772. This is an
octavo pamphlet of twenty-one pages, which, exclusive of The Introduction, is
divided into two head; The State of the Salary of the Officers of Excise;
Thoughts on the Corruption, arising from the Poverty of Excise Officers. On
these topics he says all that the ablest writer could have said. Truth indeed
easily slides into the mind without the assistance of ability, or the
recommendations of artifice. But, if our author's maiden pamphlet be inspected
by critical malignity, it will be found, like his maturer writings, to abound
in the false grammar of illiterature, and the false thoughts of inexperience.
Vigor of sentiment and energy of manner will not be denied him. His first
pamphlet will be considered as his best performance by all those, who regard
truth as superior to falsehood, modesty to impudence, and just complaint to
factious innovation.

Four thousand of The Case were printed by Mr. William Lee of Jews, in 1772.
But even the copies, which were intended for the Members of Parliament, were
not all distributed. Our author on that occasion wrote a letter concerning the
Nottingham officers, which was printed on a folio sheet; and to these he added
another letter, enforcing his case, on a folio page. Yet, all these efforts
ended in no application to Parliament, though our author bustled in London,
through the winter of 1773. A rebellion of the excisemen, who seldom have the
populace on their side, was not much feared by their superiors. The excisemen
could only reproach our author for receiving their money, without obtaining
them redress. And of Pain, who employed him, the printer complained, that he
had never been paid for printing, though much had been contributed and little
had been spent. This is a memorable instance how easily men may be led on to
complain of their present situation, without any other success, than making
their subsequent condition worse than their first.

Those were not our author's only cares, who was soon to encounter other evils.
With the year 1774 misfortunes crowded fast upon him. He is one of those
characters, who, as they attend more to other men's affairs than their own, are
frequently distinguished, in the world, by misfortune's scars. His inattention
to his shop, ere long lest him without a shop to attend. Difficulties soon
brought on distress; and distress drove him to do what strict honesty did not
absolutely warrant. He made a bill of sale of his whole effects to Mr.
Whiffeld, a reputable grocer at Jews, who was his principal creditor; and who,
seeing no hope of payment from his constant irregularities, took possession of
the premises, which he disposed of as his own, in April, 1774. Mr. Whiffeld, by
publishing the following advertisement, exposed to the whole town of Jews, the
desperate state of his debtor's circumstances: To be sold by auction, on
Thursday the 14th of April, and following day, all the household furniture,
stock in trade, and other effects, of Thomas Pain, grocer and tobacconist, near
the West Gate, in Jews: Also, a horse-tobacco and snuff-mill, with all the
utensils for cutting of tobacco and grinding of snuff; and two unopened crates
of cream-coloured stone ware.
The other creditors, thinking themselves outwitted by Whiffeld and cheated by
Pain, let loose the terriers of the law upon him. Like other hunted animals,
our author run for refuge to the Whitehart-inn, in the cock-loft of which he
lay, without bedding, and but for the female servant, had been without food,
till Sunday set him free. Alas! how often do men enjoy the greatest benefits
from the institutions of religion and the rules of society, without reflecting,
that in the first alone is their hope, in the second only is their safety!

Troubles seldom come alone. He had long been known at Jews as an officer,
inattentive, if not unfaithful. He had sometimes condescended, for the purpose
of concealment, to drink a bottle with the examiner. As every scrap of a great
writer is interesting to the curious, we have preserved the subjoined extract
of a letter from our author to a superior excise officer, dated at Jews, the
24th of March, 1774: Dear Sir,
I have requested Mr. Scott to put ye 3d and 4th rd. books for 74 under
examination, for as I was in London almost all last winter, I have no other,
which have any business in them -- Request the favor (if not too inconvenient)
to inquire and inform me when they are ordered -- and if you can find out the
examiner, desire you will drink a bottle or two of wine with him -- I should
like the character to go in as fair as it can.





But, the eagle-eyes of the excise were not to be blinded by bottles. With the
watchfulness, and jealousy, and acuteness, which make the excise the cleanest
collector at the smallest rate, his superiors had for some time beheld him
dealing as a grocer in exciseable articles, as a grinder of snuff, buying
smuggled tobacco; at others conniving, in order to conceal himself. He was
therefore dismissed from the excise after a dozen years' service, in April,
1774. He petitioned for restoration: but, such was his notoriousness, that his
patron was unable to protect him.

What had been seen at Sandwich of his conjugal tyranny, was ere long observed
at Jews. Such was the meekness of his wife, that she suffered patiently: but
as his embarrassments did not mollify a temper, which is from nature harsh; as
his subordination to others did not soften his treatment of inferiors; from
neglect of his wife, he proceeded to contumely; from contumely he went on to
cruelty; when, being no longer able to support his repeated beatings, she
complained to her friends. She, at length, told, that at the end of three and a
half year's cohabitation, their marriage had never been consummated. It now
became a question among the men, and among the women of Jews, what could be
the cause, that in so long a period, he had not performed the promise, which is
so emphatically enforced in the connubial ceremony; whether it could be owing
to natural imbecility, or to philosophical indifference. In the midst of this
disquisition, our author had the dignity, or the meanness, to submit to the
inspection of the faculty; and Mr. Manning, a very skilful surgeon of Jews,
reported, that he saw apparent ability. Our author said himself, that he
married for prudential reasons, and abstained for prudential reasons. Alas! are
the rights of men, the boast of the new philosophy, to subsist thus in personal
convenience, which disregards solemn engagements, and contemns the rights of
others! On the 24th of May, 1774, Pain and his wife entered into articles of
separation, which were skilfully drawn by Mr. Josiah Smith, a respectable
attorney of Jews; she engaging to pay her husband thirty-five pounds; and he
promising to claim no part of whatever goods she might gain in future.

Our author immediately hid himself in the obscurities of London. But though he
was unseen, he was not inactive: he contrived to discover his wife's retreat in
the house of her benevolent brother, who, though he had disapproved her
marriage, now sheltered her distress. The husband found no difficulty in
disquieting the wife's repose. He disputed the articles of separation, which he
had recently executed with such solemnity. The occasion gave rise to a question
among the civilians, who are most conversant in matrimonial matters, whether
this marriage were not void, ab initio. They thought clearly, that natural
imbecility had annulled the connubial tie; but they doubted, whether malicious
impotence amounted to habitual deficiency, though it was doubtless a sufficient
cause for a divorce, a menso et thoro. The common lawyers, who consider
marriage merely as a contract, held the bad faith of the husband, in refusing
to perform what he had solemnly stipulated, to have absolutely vitiated the
original agreement. Amidst these doubts and difficulties, on the 4th of June,
1774, the husband and wife entered into new articles of separation, which
amounted to a declaration on his part, that he no longer found a wife a
convenience; and on her part, that she had too long suffered the miseries of
such a husband.

Neither the bankruptcy, nor dismissal from office, nor separation from his
wife, weakened our author's interest with the late George Lewis Scott, who had
been appointed a commissioner of excise in 1758; and who, having been first
attracted by the case of the excisemen, was afterward captivated by the
softness of his manner, which concealed the harshness of his spirit. When his
patron, whose literature is remembered, while his benevolence is forgotten,
could not, for the third time, obtain our author's restoration as an officer of
excise, he recommended him strongly to that great man Dr. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, as
a person who could, at that epoch, be useful in America. The Doctor having
recently felt the mortification of dismissal himself, was supposed to be a
philosopher who was softened by his suffering. But the Doctor's heart was now
contracted by age. His knowledge of political life made him consider confidence
as the virtue of infancy: and he was displeased with his old acquaintance, for
recommending such a character to his notice. Our author had, however, resolved
to renounce his country, since his country had so often frowned on him: and in
September, 1774, he set sail for America, where tumult then reigned triumphant;
where the busy might find employment, and the idle associates; the base
concealment, and the brave applause.

Meantime, rumor carried to our author's mother, representations of his latter
life, which were probably exaggerated by enmity, or misstated by malice. She
certainly felt, that a child's ingratitude is sharper than a serpent's tooth.
She was almost distracted by her feelings; and she regretted, with a woman's
sympathy, that the wife, whose character had defied inquiry, and whose
amiableness deserved esteem, should be tied for life to the worst of husbands.
We subjoin the following letter from our author's mother to his wife; not only
for its own merit, but because it ascertains his identity and illustrates his
character: Dear Daughter, Thetford, Norfolk, 27th July, 1774.
I must beg leave to trouble you with my inquiries concerning my unhappy son
and your husband: various are the reports, the which I find come originally
from the Excise-office. Such as his vile treatment to you, his secreting
upwards of 30 l. entrusted with him to manage the petition for advance of
salary; and that since his discharge, he have petitioned to be restored, which
was rejected with scorn. Since which I am told he have left England. To all
which I beg you will be kind enough to answer me by due course of post. -- You Will
not be a little surprised at my so strongly desiring to know what is become of
him after I repeat to you his undutiful behavior to the tenderest of parents;
he never asked of us any thing, but what was granted, that were in our poor
abilities to do; nay even distressed ourselves, whose works are given over by
old age, to let him have 20 l. on bond, and every other tender mark a parent
could possibly show a child; his ingratitude, or rather want of duty, has been
such, that he have not wrote to me upwards of two years. -- If the above
account be true, I am heartily sorry, that a woman whose character and
amiableness, deserves the greatest respect, love, and esteem, as I have always
on inquiry been informed yours did, should be tied for life to the worst of
husbands. -- I am, dear daughter, your affectionate mother,

F. PAIN.
P. S. For God's sake, let me have your answer, as I am almost distracted.









Our author happily arrived at Philadelphia in winter, 1774, a few months, as
he recounts himself, before the battle of Lexington, in April, 1775. Al.
Rememb. 1778-9, page 319.
His first employment, in the new world, was shopman to Mr. Aitkin, a very
industrious bookseller, in Philadelphia, at twenty pounds a year. He, who was
born to illuminate the western hemisphere by his wisdom, was for some months
engaged in retailing politics by the pennyworth, and carrrying parcels by the
dozen. It shows the strength of his character, and the vigor of his powers,
that he should have speedily risen from the shopman to the statesman; from
being the distributer of stationary, to be the dismemberer of provinces.

From the shop he started to the laboratory, in November, 1775, in order to
furnish the Congress with saltpetre, when foreign supplies were stopped, and
domestic resources were doubtful. He now employed his fertile genius in making
experiments for the purpose of fixing on some easy, cheap, and expeditious
method of making saltpetre. He proposed the plan of a saltpetre association,
for voluntarily supplying the public magazines with gunpowder. Pennsyl.
Journal, Nov. 22d. 1775.
He thus evinced to the approving Congress, that he could furnish other
instruments of independence than the pen. November, 1775, was an anxious
moment, when every hand was busy, and Pain ran about among the Philadelphians,
like a giant among pigmies.

The great, the important day was now arrived, when our author was to dispel
the louring clouds by his refulgence, to illuminate the new world by his sun,
to invigorate by his brighter beams, and to direct by his superior luster. On
the 10th of January, 1776, was published COMMON SENSE, an octavo pamphlet of
three and sixty pages. In the Pennsylvania Journal, dated the 10th of January,
1776, there is the following advertisement: This day was published, and is now
selling by Robert Bell, in Third-street, [Philadelphia,] price two shillings,
Common Sense, addressed to the inhabitants of North America. As there was no
previous advertisement, this fixes the date of the publication, which
historians have mistaken.
This disquisition opens with a political discovery, which had escaped the
sagacity of Sydney, and eluded the understanding of Lock: That society and
government are not only different, but have different origins; that society is
a good, and government an evil. This fundamental dogma was not heard, however,
without a satisfactory answer. Society, it was said, is the union of man for
the safety of individuals; happiness is the end of this union; and government
is the means for the attainment of this end: Now, if you remove the means,
either in practice, or in argument, you at the same time destroy the end; and
if you defeat the end, you thereby dissolve the union. Government and society
being thus parts of one whole, and being thus directed to the same end, have
the same origin, and cannot without each other exist. In this manner, then, is
your COMMON SENSE plainly converted into NON SENSE. It was CATO, CATO was
William Smith, D. D. the president of the college of Philadelphia, who was
countenanced and assisted by some of the ablest members of the first Congress.
He was a veteran writer of established practice.
our author's most formidable antagonist, who argued thus with all the
sententiousness and authority of his great precursor of the Roman state. But
CATO did not sufficiently attend to our author's purpose; who intended more to
misrepresent than to reason; more to deceive than to convince: and his design
led him naturally to separate society from government, and to declare society
to be always a good, but government even of the best form to be every where an
evil; he could not have meant what he certainly said, In p. 1, and through the
whole section, which treats of The Origin and Design of Government.
because the unqualified assertion is inconsistent with Common Sense; but he
must have intended no more than that good government is only an evil to
evildoers.

Whatever may be the value of this fundamental dogma in theory, or its use in
practice, it was afterward stolen by the Abbe Raynal, one of the metaphysical
statesmen of the age, who writes history, as men take cathartics, for
discharging crudities, and for the pleasure of evacuation. In the Revolution of
America, by Abbe Raynal, p. 33.
The Abbe appears to have been so delighted, when he found it, that he did not
consider the immorality of appropriating as his own what belonged to another:
perhaps he regarded it as one of the rights of men, to adopt kindly what he saw
struggling for reception into the republic of letters. Our author however
reclaimed his goods, and by plain collation proved his property, By his Letter
to Abbe Raynal, p. 38, etc.
and convicted the culprit. Yet, as there are men who doubt their own
existence, so were there skeptics who disputed, whether this dogma were a
discovery either of Raynal, or of Pain. The doubtists produced a passage from
an eminent lawyer of the last century, who wrote with the precision of prose,
yet with the neatness of poetry: " -- Broken laws are never the worse;
"Nay, till they are broken have no force.
"What Is Justice to a man, of Laws,
"That never comes within their claws?
"They have no power but to admonish,
"Cannot control, coerce, or punish,
"Until they are broken, and then touch.
"Those only that do make them such."


Whether Cato disdained to pull down the superstructure after he had destroyed
the foundation, may be inferred, but cannot be discovered. He certainly
insisted through several papers, In the Pennsylvania Journal.
that he who treats the best government as an evil may be allowed to assers,
that the constitution of England, being an union of three powers reciprocally
checking each other, is sarcical;" that he who pronounces, "that no power which
needs checking can be from God," Page 8.
may be permitted to tell how government by kings is the most prosperous
invention the devil ever sat on foot for the promotion of idolatry: that he
whose purpose is to please the low, may easily insult the high; that he who
seldom reasons may often rail; and that he whose design is to dissolve society
may practice any means. All this our author did not hear patiently. The
stay-maker attacked the scholar through the same channel, under the title of A
Forrester. In the Pennsylvania Journal, the first Forrester was published on
the third of April, 1776; and the fourth Essay, which was the last, appeared on
the 8th of May, 1776.
The onset was furious, and the victory doubtful. The stay-maker had most
popularity; the scholar had most knowledge; the first had most smartness; the
last had most strength: our author's art consisted in assumption of premises,
and sophistry of deduction; Cato's power lay in solidity of principle, and
justness of reasoning: the exciseman, for once, had the applause of the mob;
the president of the college was approved by the young who read, and by the old
who thought. The scholar was studious to expose the stay-maker as an illiterate
writer: his false grammar thus: -- "Many circumstances has, and will arise."
[Introd.] "Here is the origin and rise of government." [P. 4.] "Absolute
governments has this advantage." [P. 5.] That the Commons is a check upon the
King. [P. 6.] Whom it has always supposed wiser than him. A mere absurdity! [P.
7.] His improprieties thus: -- "William the Conqueror was a usurper." [P. 20.]
-- " a union." [P. 25.] -- After thus showing false grammar and false idiom,
nonsensicalness [25 -- 26] and coarseness [every where], the scholar exclaimed,
That it would degrade criticism to chase a child to his horn-book. But, the
president of the college should have remembered, that classical writing was not
to be expected from a mere stay-maker, a mere grocer, a mere exciseman; but
that he is the true orator, who gains his end by affecting, and convincing. It
was the first American edition of Common Sense, which the scholar quoted
against the stay-maker. The edition of Almon was castrated and amended by some
other hand.


Yet it cannot be denied that Common Sense was universally perused, and loudly
praised. For the minds of the Colonists had been prepared by the previous
publication of Burgh's Disquisitions; and by the essays of similar writers;
"Who fancy every thing that is,
"For want of mending, much amiss."


Whatever is received, said the sapience of Johnson, is received in proportion
to the recipient. The planters had long wished the doctrines of Common Sense to
be true; and they thought the author infallible: they had, for years, been
traveling on the road of independence; and Pain showed them the shortest way.
The first edition was quickly sold. A second, with a supplement of one third
more, was immediately prepared. A German translation was printed. Pennsylv.
Journ. 31 Jan. 1776.
Bell, the bookseller, was changed, according to our author's uniformity of
acting, for Bradford, the printer: yet, after all these editions, and all this
applause, this wonder-working pamphlet brought the writer of it in debt to the
publisher L 29:12: 1, as he has told, who best knew. See Pain's Declaration in
Almon's Rem. 1780, Part I. p. 295.


But, who wrote it was the wonder. It must be Adams, said the Bostonians; it
must be Franklin, said the Philadelphians; it must be Washington, said the
Virginians. Many months had not elapsed, when our author claimed his profit and
his praise. Neither was this profit much diminished, nor this praise much
prevented, by the Answer, entitled PLAIN TRUTH, which, as it was hastily
written, was inattentively read; and, as it only taught the dull duty of
obedience, was not much heard amidst the ravings of anarchy.

Common Sense was at that time written to support the Congress; but the
Congress afterward confuted Common Sense. At the end of seven years'
experience, the Congress ingratefully determined, In the convention, which was
held at Philadelphia, in September, 1787; and which settled the present
constitution of the United States.
notwithstanding our author's capital dogma, that anarchy is an evil to be
avoided, and government a good to be cherished; that sovereignty and
subordination, being contradictory qualities, cannot both exist in the same
societies, or in the same persons; that the individuals, who compose any
political union, cannot be safe, if they be not restrained; that where
happiness is the end of a people, much must be sacrificed to the means, whereby
this end can alone be secured. In this strain it was, that General Washington
wrote the following paragraph, when he announced the final determinations of
the united wisdom of the New World: It was part of the letter which he wrote on
the 17th of September, 1787, as president of the grand convention, when he
communicated to Congress the establishment of a new constitution on new
principles.
-- It is obviously impracticable in the federal government of these States, to
secure all the rights of independent sovereignty to each, and yet provide for
the interest and safety of all. Individuals, entering into society, must give
up a share of liberty to preserve the rest. The magnitude of the sacrifice must
depend as well on situation and circumstance, as on the object to be obtained.
These must be allowed to be excellent observations, though they be not
altogether new. All these and more are taught to every Englishman in his
nursery, except, indeed, those Englishmen, who are educated at Geneva and
Lausanne, at Warrington and Hackney.

The times that tried men's souls (as our author has it) were, in America, the
year 1776. When all was done that the pen could do, the sword was drawn. But,
the first onset was unfavourable to the American arms. The troops of Congress
were expelled from Canada in June. They were defeated on Long Island in August.
They evacuated New York in September. They fled from the White Plains in
October. And Fort Washington, though garrisoned by three thousand patriots, was
taken by storm on the 16th of November. In the midst of these defeats, our
author was prompted by his courage, or his zeal, to join the army: but, whether
to counsel, to command, or to obey, curiosity could not discover amid the din
of war. It is only certain, that he accompanied the retreat of Washington, from
Hudson's river to the Delaware. Like Xenophon our author saw, and has recorded
In The CRISIS, No. I. -- There is a journal of this retreat in All. Rem. 1777,
p. 28, which was plainly written by Pain.
the events of this famous march, which may be likened to the celebrated
retreat of the ten thousand. When Washington had crossed the Delaware, he might
have exclaimed with Francis, All is lost, but our honor. The Congress fled.
All was dismay. Not so our author: he publicly thanked God, that he did not
fear: he saw no cause for fear. He knew well their situation, and saw his way
out of it. He endeavored, with no inconsiderable success, to make others see
with his eyes, to inspire others with his confidence. It was with this design
that he published in the Pennsylvania Journal, on the 19th of December, 1776,
The Crisis, Alm. Rem. 1777, p. 11.
wherein he states every topic of hope, and examines every motive of
apprehension. This Essay he continued to publish periodically, during the
continuance of hostilities, as often as the necessity of affairs required, that
he should conceal truth, or propagate falsehood; that he should exhilarate
despondency, or repress hope. The Crisis, No. XIII. was published at
Philadelphia the 19th of April, 1783, the same day that a cessation of
hostilities was proclaimed. This was the last. [Alm. Rem. 1783, Part II. p.
105.]


In the midst of those defeats and of that dismay, the Congress dispatched
agents to foreign powers to solicit warlike stores, and to engage experienced
officers. Deane, Franklin, and Arthur Lee, met together at Paris, in December,
1776, where they excited sympathy, whatever relief they obtained. Our author
did more real service, by publishing another Crisis on the 13th of January,
1777, Alm. Rem. 1777, p. 16. Pain published his third Crisis on the 13th of
April. [ib. 313.] His fourth Crisis on the 12th of September. [ib. 437.]
whereby he tried with wonderful success to inspire confidence in their own
abilities, and to infuse contempt of their opponent's negotiation and arms. The
year 1777 was to the Congress a period of alternate elation and depression, but
of final triumph. At first, its European concerns were managed by a Committee
for Secret Correspondence: but, as its demands for European aid became more
urgent, the Secret Committee was converted into the Committee for Foreign
Affairs. Of this Committee our author was now appointed Secretary, as an
approbation of his writings, and as a reward of his labors. All foreign
letters, that were officially written by Congress, after this epoch, went from
his office: the political epistles of Congress rested afterward in his hands.
Pain's Letter to Raynal, p. 29.
From that notable era of his honors, our author enjoyed the correspondence,
though not the confidence of Franklin, who we may remember, rejected him as a
bad character, in 1774; and who perhaps did not consider his morals as much
mended, even in 1777. Alm. Rememb. 1778-9, p. 319.


Our author's office required him in future to reside with Congress, who,
wheresoever it fled, or howsoever it were situated, deserve the praise of
steady firmness. During the winter, 1777, and the spring following, the
Congress was assembled at York-Town, in Pennsylvania. [Pain's Letter to Raynal,
p. 26.] The Congress returned to Philadelphia on its evacuation in June, 1778.
The success, which was the result of this magnanimity, did not however prevent
interestedness, or defeat cabal. In December, 1777, Silas Deane, the first and
ablest commercial agent of Congress in Europe, was recalled, to make room for
William Lee, the well known Alderman of London. Deane arrived on board the
French fleet in July, 1778. The Sieur Gerard was publicly received by
Congress, on the sixth of the subsequent August. In this manner was intrigue
transferred to Philadelphia from Paris. Deane was twice heard by the Congress,
on the 9th and 21st of August, in order to explain, what he had been recalled
to elucidate, the Congress affairs in the European world. Whatever may have
been the cause, whether ungracefulness of manner, or insufficiency of matter,
certain it is, that the Congress would not then hear Deane a third time, though
entreated by every mode of application. On this subject, and on this occasion,
he appealed to the free and virtuous citizens of America, This paper of Silas
Deane contains much interesting anecdote, which makes it not unworthy of the
historian's notice. [Alm. Rem. 1778-9, p. 185.]
on the 5th of December, 1778; professing great respect for the Congress, but
disclosing to the country, that a sacrifice had been made of patriotism to
cabal of family. The many, who saw two brothers of the Virginia Lees in the
Congress, and another brother ambassador at Vienna, and a fourth brother envoy
at Berlin, feared for popular rights from aristocratical prevalence. The few
regretted, that affected patriots were at all times, and in every place, the
same. Richard Henry Lee, the most eloquent and the most leading member of the
Congress, addressed his countrymen to suspend their decision against his
family, till the charges should be properly investigated. And Deane declared,
in December, 1778, that since the Congress were at length disposed to listen to
his plaints, he had now no occasion for the mediation of the people. See Alm.
Rem. 1788-9, p. 185 -- 190.


Of those events, and of that altercation, which thus interested the American
world, our author was no unconcerned spectator. He published his fifth Crisis
on the 10th of June, 1778; Alm. Rem. 1788, p. 340.
his sixth Crisis in October, and his seventh in November thereafter. Ibid.
1779, p. 304. 1780, p. 317.
At the same moment that Deane laid down the pen, our author took his in hand.
Without consulting his prudence, he attacked Deane, who, as a scholar, was
superior to himself; as a statesman, had held higher offices; as an individual,
was at least his equal. Without listening to Common Sense, he involved Robert
Morris, the far-famed financier of the United States, who stepped from the
floor of office, to correct his misrepresentations, and repress his insolence.
Ibid. 1778-9, p. 382.
Without considering official decorum, our Secretary retailed through the
newspapers, what he confidentially knew from the foreign correspondence. The
Sieur Gerard, who had been bred at the foot of Vergennes, was scandalized at an
imprudent infidelity, which disclosed the intrigues of his court. Of this
misconduct the minister of France complained to the Congress. See Alm. Rem.
1778-9, from p. 374-391. Ibid 1780, p. 290-397.
On the sixth of January, 1779, being ordered to attend the Congress, our
author was asked by Jay, the president, If he were the author of the
publications on Mr. Deane's affairs; and answering Yes, he was ordered to
withdraw. On the subsequent day he applied to Congress for an explanatory
hearing; but on motion he was refused; the Congress, no doubt, considering,
that the public officer, who had thus acknowledged his breach of trust, could
not by any explanation, re-establish his official credit. Our author was thus
forced to give in his resignation of the office of Secretary to the Committee
for Foreign Affairs, on the 8th of January, 1779. Yet, strange to tell, on the
16th of the same month, a motion was made in Congress, for dismissing him from
the office that he no longer held: And, though there were fourteen members for
it, to thirteen against it, the motion was lost; there being a tie upon the
States, who alone could vote, of five to five. See those memorable incidents in
our author's life, told by himself, in the Pennsylvania Packet of the 13th of
April, 1779.
On this event, our ousted Secretary made a political discovery to the American
Citizens, which they knew not before, That the sovereignty of the United
States, and the delegated representation of that sovereignty in Congress, were
two distinct things; which ought to be kept separate; and which proves, that
the first may be rising, while the second is sinking.

Our author, however, did not repose in insignificance, when he ceased to be
the secretary of a committee. He continued to bustle a while; to boast of his
services; and to complain of ingratitude. The Sieur Gerard thought him
important, or perhaps imagined, that he whose infidelity had disclosed many
secrets, might, by resentment, be induced to reveal still more. From Vergennes,
the Plenipo had learned, that a point is to be carried by any means; by the
fairest, if possible; by the foulest, if necessary. While Gerard complained to
the Congress publicly, he intrigued with our author privately. They had
several meetings, the object of which was Silence about Deane. Gerard made him
a genteel and profitable offer. But our author was pledged to prosecute Deane;
and he was determined, that pension and Pain should never be seen together in
the same paragraph. Gerard renewed his intrigues with Pain: Pain consorted with
Gerard: Gerard wished for opportunities of showing Pain more solid marks of his
friendship. Pain professed, that Gerard's esteem should be the only recompense.
Thus, a pension was offered, which was only declined; and a bribe was given,
though it was not accepted. See those intrigues detailed by Pain himself, with
little prudence and no forecast, in Alm. Rem. 1780, Part I. p. 294 -- 97. The
following public papers will supply what is defective in Pain's detail: SIR,
Philadelphia, Jan. 13, 1779.
It is with real satisfaction, that I execute the order of Congress for
transmitting to you the enclosed copy of an act of the 12th instant, on a
subject rendered important by affecting the dignity of Congress, the honor of
their great ally, and the interest of both nations.

The explicit disavowal and high disapprobation of Congress, relative to the
publications referred to in this act, will, I flatter myself, be no less
satisfactory to his Most Christian Majesty, than pleasing to the people of
these States. Nor have I the least doubt but that every attempt to injure the
reputation of either, or impair their mutual confidence, will meet with the
indignation and resentment of both.

I have the honor, etc. JOHN JAY.

To the Hon. the Sieur Gerard, Min. Plenip. of France.



In Congress, January 12, 1779. "Congress resumed the consideration of the
publications in the Pennsylvania Packet of 2d and 5th instant, under the title
of Common Sense to the Public, on Mr. Deane's affair, of which Mr. Thomas Pain,
Secretary to the Committee for foreign affairs, has acknowledged himself to be
the author; and also the memorials of the Minister Plenipotentiary of France of
the 5th and 10th instant, respecting the said publications; whereupon, Resolved
unanimously, That in answer to the memorials of the Hon. Sieur Gerard, Minister
Plenipotentiary of his Most Christian Majesty, of the 5th and 10th instant, the
President be directed to assure the said Minister, that Congress do fully, and
in the clearest and most explicit manner, disavow the publications referred to
in the said memorials; and as they are convinced by indisputable evidence, that
the supplies shipped in the Amphitrite, Seine, and Mercury, were not present,
and that his Most Christian Majesty, the great and generous ally of these
United States, did not preface his alliance with any supplies whatever sent to
America, so they have not authorized the writer of the said publications to
make any such assertions as are contained therein; but on the contrary, do
highly disapprove of the same."

To which Mr. Gerard returned the following answer: SIR, Philadelphia, Jan. 14,
1779.
I have received the letter with which you honored me on the 13th instant,
enclosing me the Resolve of Congress in answer to the representations I had the
honor to make them on the 5th and 10th.

I entreat you to receive and to express to Congress, the great sensibility
with which I felt their frank, noble, and categorical manner of destroying
those false and dangerous insinuations, which might mislead ignorant people,
and put aims into the hands of the common enemy.

To the King, my Master, Sir, no proofs are necessary to the foundation of a
confidence in the firm and constant adherence of Congress to the principles of
the alliance; but his Majesty will always behold with pleasure the measures
which Congress may take to preserve inviolate its reputation; and it is from
the same consideration, I flatter myself, he will find my representations on
the 7th of December equally worth his consideration.

I am, etc. GERARD.

Published by order of Congress, CHARLES THOMSON, Sec.




The American world soon grew tired of pertness and recrimination, when it
appeared, that against Deane nothing could be proved.

Our author's head, being thus shorn, of its political honors, was ere long
crowned with academic laurels. He was made master of arts by the university of
Pennsylvania, after the tumult of the times had driven his old antagonist, the
president, away. He was chosen a member of the American Philosophical Society,
when it was revived by the Pennsylvania Legislature, in 1780; and when our
author had himself the satisfaction of signing the act of revival, as clerk of
the General Assembly. He had the comfort of knowing, that though he had made
enemies by his petulance, he had gained friends by his patriotism. And when the
Congress had rejected him, as unworthy of trust, the Assembly of Pennsylvania,
being purged of Quakers by his pen, thought him fit for its clerk.

But though the Congress had wholly rejected our author, he did not totally
reject the Congress: yet, all that he could write, or others could do, did not
prevent the bankruptcy of Congress, in March, 1780, when the Congress paper
ceased to circulate. He gave the American citizens, soon after, A Crisis
Extraordinary. Alm. Rem. 1781, Part I. page 131.
He now recalled to their remembrance the original principles on which they had
resisted: he endeavored to convince them of their direct advantage in
defending the country: he compared the resources of the contending parties;
leaving the balance, by an easy calculation, in favor of his friends: and he
laid before them a glowing picture, containing every motive, which could cheer
the hearts, or engage the honor of a patriot people; which could make them
feel the line of their interest to be the line of their happiness.

But their ears were callous to the voice of the charmer. The pen had, however,
ceased to influence, during the clamor of contention, the intrigues of cabal,
and the distresses of war. While the American citizens denied supplies to the
cries of Congress, they sullenly determined, to suffer the miseries of
hostility, till the acknowledgment of independence should make them happy. Our
author cheered them from time to time with another Crisis, till his Crisis,
becoming common, was no longer a Crisis; and was therefore read without
attention, and thrown away without efficacy. Pennsyl. Gazette, 22d May, 1782.
Alm. Rem. 1782, page 183.
Hostilities seemed to cease of themselves in 1782, when mere weariness of
paying alternately for victory and defeat, prompted the belligerent powers to
ask each other, Why are we at war?

The Abbe Raynal hastened to give his history of the Revolution of America even
before it was really achieved. It was published at London, in December, 1781.
Of the crudities, which the sedentary Abbe had been collecting for years, he
now made a copious discharge. A bilious mixture, he exhibited, of truth and
falsehood, of sense and nonsense, of folly and philosophy. This galimafree, the
academy of Lions received with applause. The English world were too busy with
their contests, their taxes, and repentance, to listen, without apathy, to a
tale more worthy of attention. The American citizens heard the Abbe with
disgust rather than with disapprobation. But it was his facts more than his
(...) his independence more than his servility, which gave them offense; he had
asserted, Page 126.
that (...) of the energetic causes, which had produced so many revolutions,
existed among them; neither religion nor laws had been outraged; the blood of
no martyr or patriot had streamed from their scaffolds. He does not praise them
as men, who fought like heroes, after they had drawn their swords without real
provocation. Page 103.
And above all, he had on false pretenses obtained our author's metaphysics,
and sold them as his own; thus borrowing our author's moral with his maxims.

In August, 1782, our author reclaimed his property, by a letter to the Abbe
Raynal on the affairs of North America. This publication gave our author's old
antagonist, the president, an opportunity of sneering at his illiterature. Here
is a letter written to an Abbe, said he, who is treated in it throughout as a
third person. "The greater part of the Abbe's writings appear to me UNCENTRAL."
[P. 51.] Appear to me to be eccentric, the author probably intended. "It is a
useful addition." [P. 12.] As if he was [were] glad to get from them. [P. 12.]
"It is one of these kind of dominions." [P. 70.] The president might have
quoted many such peccadill^^ from our author's writings; but it ought to be
always remembered, that our author is but a mere English scholar; and few
English scholars can write the English language.
As the plagiarism of the Abbe was obvious, it was easy to convict him; but
where he had entrenched himself in facts, it was more difficult to dislodge
him. A battle of words was carried on through many pages, which, like other
contests of the metaphysicians, had sooner forced conviction, or had been
continued without logomachy, if the disputants had only explained their own
terms. The Abbe meant to say, that, in fact, the blood of no martyr had been
shed; no patriot had hung on the scaffold; no American citizen had been dragged
to a dungeon; all which had been the energetic causes of revolutions in the
European world. Against the fact our author quoted the declaratory act, which
left the Colonies no rights at all: by it, the blood of martyrs was shed
virtually: patriots were hanged virtually; citizens were dragged to dungeons
virtually. There is no despotism to which this iniquitous law did not extend,
contended our author furiously. Letter, p. 5.
Yet the Abbe could not be persuaded, that this almost metaphysical question
was of sufficient importance to make the people rise. Revolution, p. 127.
Alas! is it not always almost metaphysical questions, which have agitated
mankind, and even now agitate the world? Our own historian of the last century,
has treated this subject finely; because his representations are just, and his
language is terse: "When men fell out they knew not why;
"When hard words, jealousies and fears,
"Set folks together by the ears;
"And made them fight, like mad, or drunk,
"For dame religion, as for punk;
"Whose honesty they all durst swear for,
"Though not a man of them knew wherefore."


Our author turned a while from the Abbe, to teach America and Europe the
nature of paper money. In five years, the Congress issued about twelve millions
sterling, in dollars of pasteboard. This emission of paper, was a cornerstone
of independence. It was the Congress mode of finance, which, while it
prevailed, saved twelve millions of taxes for carrying on the war; and
consequently, the event to the people was exactly the same, whether they sunk
twelve millions of money, by the depreciation of paper, or paid twelve millions
by taxation. As early as March, 1780, common consent consigned it to rest, with
that kind of regard, which the long services of inanimate beings insensibly
obtain from mankind. Letter to Raynal, p. 22, 23.
Our author's address is admirable, in mentioning every circumstance of
commendation, while he suppressed every kind of objection. He concealed, that
the Congress made their pasteboards a legal payment of every debt, though they
were of no more value than the almanacks of the last year. The fraudulent were
thus enabled to pay the honest their just debts with waste paper. The rich were
thereby defrauded, but the poor were not enriched. All property and all labor
were depreciated by the same stroke of fraud. A transaction, which so violently
shook the interest and happiness of a country, has seldom occurred before. The
Abbe was so simple as to consider this discredited paper as an essential part
of the Congress debt. Not so our author: with a charming apathy he asserted, in
1782, with us its fate is now determined. This is a fine illustration of the
maxims and practice of the metaphysical reformers, who care not, when in
pursuit of their theories, whose heart they rend, whose property they waste,
whose safety they endanger.

Our author was more happy, though not more grammatical, in showing, that the
Abbe, as an historian, hastens through his narrations as if he was glad to get
from them. Letter, p. 12.
It must be allowed to be true, as our author asserted, Letter, p. 2.
that it is yet too soon to write the history of the Revolution; and whoever
attempts it precipitately will unavoidably mistake characters and
circumstances, and involve himself in error and difficulty: yet is it never too
soon to inculcate on nations the performance of contracts, or on individuals
the practice of honesty, because both form the strongest cement of society.

Our author had scarcely dispatched his letter to Abbe Raynal, when he wrote an
epistle to the Earl of Shelburne. A letter to the Earl of Shelburne, which was
published at Philadelphia, the 29th of October, 1782, on his speech of the 10th
of July, 1782.
The noble Earl had said in Parliament, it seems, in a tone which still
vibrates in the ears of Englishmen, that when Great Britain shall acknowledge
American independence, the sun of Britain's glory is set forever. Some other
orator had also said, in some other house, What is the relinquishment of
America but to desire a giant to shrink spontaneously into a dwarf? Our author
reasons and laughs, and laughs and reasons with our Parliamentary Prophets,
through a little pamphlet of eight and twenty pages. It required not his
ridicule to make folly ridiculous, his acuteness to detect sophistry, or his
ability to overturn weakness. We have outlived the time; yet many a
parliamentary prophecy is still unfulfilled. Great Britain continues to walk
with a giant's port among the powers of the earth, even without the help of the
Earl's energy.

Our author published his last Crisis, on the 19th of April, 1783, the same day
that a cessation of hostilities was proclaimed. This essay was soon printed as
a pamphlet, entitled Pain's Thoughts on the Peace. In eighteen pages, he
concluded his valedictory oration in the following sentence: Now, Gentlemen,
you are independent; sit down, and be happy. But, happiness is not always in
our own power. Without food, and raiment, and shelter, what man, except
Diogenes, ever was happy? When their rejoicings were over, the American
citizens were all surprised, that they were not happy. Amidst distrust, and
penury, and pride, and indolence, what happiness, alas! could they enjoy? They
were all disappointed in their hopes; they were all exhausted in their
fortunes; they were all suspicious in their tempers; they were all uneasy in
their families; but, they were independent. In all this wailing and gnashing of
teeth, our author -- "Found nothing left but poverty and praise."

The American Revolution is a happy instance of what may be done by
metaphysical reformers, who run furiously forward, in pursuit of their
theories, without regarding the end. In order to obtain independence, every
principle, which ought to actuate the human heart, was weakened; all the
maxims, which knit society together, were impugned, and government, which is
the efficacious energy of political unions, was contemned as an evil. But,
independence was obtained. Subordination however ceased; justice fled from the
land; freedom, and property, and life, were no longer safe; the Association
among the States dissolved in its own insufficience; and the Congress continued
to exist indeed, but disgraced by its impotence, and unavailing in its efforts.
Meantime, Shays' rebellion raged for years in New England, the most vigorous of
the American Republics. Civil discord distracted New York. Insurrection
disturbed the quiet of Philadelphia, which had once been the happy seat of
concord and diligence; from which our author retired to Bordenton, in
New Jersey, for shelter. The Southern States were all shaken, by similar
disorders, owing to similar causes. The American Union was little respected in
Europe. The American Citizens were distrusted naturally by foreigners, when
they distrusted one another. They were considered as a people, who were doomed
to distraction; to suffer the miseries of anarchy, till they should acknowledge
by their conduct, that they rejected metaphysical theories, and regarded just
government as the greatest good.

Whether our author smiled at the mischief, which his pen had done, or lamented
that his prescriptions had not produced happiness, it is impossible to tell. He
seems to have been silent, because, during the uproar of anarchy, even Common
Sense could not be heard. He certainly suffered all the miseries of dependent
penury. He busied himself for several years, in soliciting the American
Assemblies to grant him some reward, for having contributed by his labors to
make the American Citizens independent, and miserable. New York conferred on
him forfeited lands at New Rochelle, which, as they were neither tenanted nor
cultivated, brought him no annual income. Pennsylvania gave him five hundred
pounds; which, at six per cent. may be considered as a pension of thirty pounds
a year, current money, or eighteen pounds sterling; and thus were united, what
he had anxiously wished to avoid, pension and Pain in the same paragraph. In
the Maryland Journal, dated the 31st of December, 1784, there is the following
article: "On the 6th instant, his Excellency John Dickenson, President of the
State of Pennsylvania, sent a message to the Assembly respecting Mr. Thomas
Pain, the author of Common Sense and other political pieces; strongly
recommending to their notice his services and situation; and concluding in the
subsequent words: -- We confide that you will then feel that the attention of
Pennsylvania is drawn toward Mr. Pain, by motives equally grateful to the
human heart, and reputable to the republic; and that you will join with us in
opinion, that a suitable acknowledgment of his eminent services, and a proper
provision for the continuance of them in an independent manner, should be made
on the part of this State."
Whether any other of the States, or the Congress, relieved our author's needs,
we have never heard. They were all poor, and unable to help themselves,
distracted as they were by their maxims, and enfeebled in their powers. As his
principles and his pen were no longer of much use to the United States, our
author departed for France, in autumn of 1786; leaving the American Citizens to
build up, as they could, the several fabrics, which he had contributed so
powerfully to overturn. They all experienced, after his departure, that it is
more easy to break windows than to mend them.

What writers on government suppose to have happened in the darkest periods,
when men existed as savages, actually occurred, in America, during September,
1787. Three millions of people, who were urged by their miseries, assembled at
Philadelphia, not indeed in person, but by delegates, to consider their present
calamities, and provide for their future happiness. When these deputies met in
Convention, with Washington at their head, they did not begin their
deliberations, by reading our author's Common Sense. All had seen the people's
sufferings. Like the metaphysical statesmen of the old world, they did not deny
the evidence of their own senses. But, considering the general misery as a
fact, they proceeded to investigate the cause of that fact, which could not be
disputed. By running furiously in quest of private liberty and of public
independence, the people, said they, have involved themselves in anarchy, and
the States in imbecility. WE consider then, said the Convention and Washington,
self-legislation, or anarchy, as the efficient cause of all our ills. WE must
remove the cause before we attempt to free the people from its effects. WE must
put restraints upon self-legislation, upon self-actions, upon self-redress. WE
must sacrifice the principles, the passions, the prejudices, of one to the
safety of millions. WE must restrain the liberty of each, in order that the
whole may be free. WE must, in this manner, establish restraint as the
fundamental principle of the Society, into which we are about to enter. WE must
lay restraint as the cornerstone of our New Constitution.

In that numerous Convention, there were men of republican principles, who,
with our author's Common Sense in their hands, and their own importance in
their heads, spoke a very different language. With our last breath, said they,
WE will retain self-legislation, that inherent right of man to will for
himself; because, where there is no self-will, there can be no liberty. WE
would as soon relinquish life itself, as part with self-action; because what
are freemen, if they cannot do as they please? WE will never agree to be
restrained, they exclaimed, because restraint is the death of liberty.

In reply to these declamations, the Convention and Washington argued very
patiently. Remember, WE pray you, the people's miseries, and the people's
cries; you have seen, that it is self-legislation, or the power of willing as
each thinks proper, which is the real cause of all their sufferings:
self-action, or the practice of doing what each thinks fit, is the genuine
effect of that efficient cause: have you not felt how the young abuse the old;
how the strong overpower the weak; how the wicked oppress the virtuous: can you
enjoy your own liberty where such abuses exist, and where all legislate and
none obey? If you wish to be safe, you must relinquish this savageness for
society: now, what is society, but a compact, either expressed, or understood,
that private will shall submit to public will; that individual action shall be
subordinate to general direction; that no one shall will or do any action,
which is inconsistent with the rules and agency of the many: and what is this
subordination and this obedience but restraint, that must necessarily be the
foundation of society, which has been variously modified in different climes,
as men were urged by their various sufferings?

The few in this Convention were, in this manner, obliged to submit to the
wills, and what is of more importance, to the reasons of the many. And the
Convention and Washington proceeded to form their compact, which is the record
of their union; to establish their constitution, which is the detail of its
end; and to settle their government, which is the means of effectuating the end
of their union. Upon these reasonings they acted, though they were not
unanimous. And finding it impracticable to secure, either to individuals or
communities, dependence and independence, subordination and sovereignty, they
modified their system, so as best to provide for the interest and safety of
all. See Washington's Letter before mentioned.
History will record it as an indubitable proof of their wisdom, that they
built as much as possible upon old foundations; preserving their old common
law, their old acts of assembly, their old modes of public proceeding. It
deducts, indeed, something from this commendation, that the metaphysical
reformers, with our author as their instructor, are more active to pull down
than to build; are more studious to recommend new theories than to act on old
experience.

Those who have surveyed the regions of the earth must have every where seen
societies of some kind, whose forms would no doubt be modified, by their
ignorance, into greater simplicity, or by their civilization, into more
numerous checks. The Convention and Washington maturely considered all those
varieties; and that great jurist, Mr. John Adams, had inspected every book, in
every language, that he might lay before them the beauties and defects of the
different governments, which had resulted from ancient wisdom and modern
experience. After this inquiry, and those considerations, the united wisdom of
the new world adopted, as far as circumstances would allow, the British
constitution, though our author's Common Sense had declared it to be a farce.
The American constitution, which was then established, provided powers
legislative, executive, and judicial. The legislative, which, as the sovereign
has the power of prescribing rules of action for all, consists of the House of
Representatives, or Commons; of a Senate, or Peers; of the President, or King;
who have each a vote in the making of laws. The executive power is vested in
the President, with monarchical authority, who is entrusted with the whole
energy of government. The judicial power is thrown into separate departments,
which distribute justice in the various districts that a wide country, and a
scattered people, require. Now, this is the British constitution, though it be
less efficient, because the materials were less perfect; and though it be more
complex, because circumstances required additional checks.

In this manner, and upon those principles, was settled the present American
government, which has answered in practice beyond expectation. It is of
importance to investigate the causes of that establishment and of that
efficiency. Our author, who had inculcated by his Common Sense, Page 8.
that no power which needs checking can be from God, was now fortunately
absent. Sad distress had induced the people to plain truth; they had no longer
a disposition to believe our author's doctrine, that the best government is a
necessary evil; and recent experience had fully convinced them that there can
be no security for property, freedom, and life, unless restraint be imposed by
the laws, and government be obeyed, as the energy from which social happiness
can alone be enjoyed.

Mean time, our author safely arrived in Paris, the beginning of 1787. He
carried with him his fame as a writer, and the model of a bridge, which showed
that he had a genius, equally formed for mechanics, as for politics. The French
academy viewed his model, and thanked him for the sight; but whether he gave
the people of France, who were than beginning to think for themselves, a lesson
or two of political happiness, we have never heard. Were we allowed to argue
from experience, it might be easily proved, that since the epoch of his visit,
the French have proceeded regularly, "In falling out with that, or this,
"And finding somewhat still amiss."


Our author, like other animals who delight in savage life, longed to return to
his old haunts. And he arrived at the White Bear, Piccadilly, on the 3d of
September, 1787, just thirteen years after his departure for Philadelphia.
Neither the length of time, nor the change of circumstances, prevented his
former acquaintances from recognizing the specific staymaker, the individual
grocer, the same exciseman; but as he had taken French leave, he met some old
friends with new faces. In London, he did not remain long. Before the end of
September he hastened to Thetford, where he found his mother, who was now
advanced to the age of ninety, but oppressed by penury. At the era of rejoicing
for independence, this dutiful son had remitted his necessitous parents twenty
pounds, in payment, no doubt, of the money, which had been lent him on bond,
See his mother's letter before, p. 13.
before his emigration. He now talked of allowing his mother nine shillings a
week, to be paid by Whiteside, an American merchant, in London. But owing to
the confusion in that trader's affairs, or to some other cause, this allowance
was soon stopped. At Thetford, he seldom saw the companions of his youth; he went
little out, being wholly occupied in reading and in writing. He who has once
been employed in great affairs cannot easily condescend to converse with puny
men, or look, with gratification, on little matters.

When our author had finished his reading and his writing at Thetford, he
returned to London: and before the end of the year 1787, he published his
Prospects on the Rubicon; or, an Investigation into the Causes and Consequences
of the Politics to be agitated at the Meeting of Parliament. The critics
ascertained the authorship by collation of the style. Thus, in page 59 of his
Prospects, it is said, "there is a uniformity in all the works of nature." "But
there is another circumstance that do not fail to impress foreigners," page 63.
"Where is the profit of manufactures, if there is [be] no increase of money,"
page 39. "But it signifies not what name it bears, if the capital is [be] not
equal to the redemption," p. 35. The amazing increase and magnitude of the
paper currency now floating in England, exposes her to a shock as much more
tremendous than the shock of the South Sea Funds, as the quantity of credit and
paper currency is now greater than they were at that time," p. 24. "But though
Democrites [Democritus] could scarcely have forbore [forborn] laughing
[laughter] at the folly." p. 2.
This is an octavo tract of sixty-eight pages, which treats of the state of the
nation. The affairs of Holland which were then unsettled, are now a subject for
history, whose pen will do justice to the conductors of a great transaction to
a happy end. Beside temporary matters, our author gave his opinion of money,
credit, and banking, of agriculture and manufacture, of commerce and shipping:
but, by remaining too long in America, he had allowed Dr. Adam Smith to occupy
his ground, to forestal his thoughts, and to teach the people not to be
terrified by any pensioned pamphleteer. Our author's Prospects soon faded from
the public eye. And the newspapers had the impertinence to tell him, that he
who had lately shown America the road to independence, and now endeavored to
exalt France over England, was a fit subject for transportation to the one, or
a proper object a la lantern of the other.

During the year 1788, our author was chiefly occupied in building his bridge.
For this end he made a journey to Rotheram, in Yorkshire, in order to
superintend the casting of the iron, by that ingenious man and respectable
citizen Mr. Walker. While thus occupied at Rotheram, our author's French
freedom is said not to have much pleased the English ladies. Their displeasure
did not, however, prevent the operations of the furnace; and the bridge was at
length erected, in a close at Leasing-Green; being an arch constructed of iron,
one hundred and ten feet in the span. five feet from the spring, and twenty-two
feet in breadth. It was erected chiefly at the charge of Mr. Walker; but the
project had cost our author a large sum, which was mostly furnished by Mr.
Whiteside, the American merchant, who soon discovered, that advances without
returns leave the trader, ere long, without money or credit. Our author's
bridge is to this day shown at the Yorkshire-Stingo, for a shilling. As this
was not the first iron bridge which was known to the English world, it is not
easy to discover, why the projector, who had a model, should incur so great an
expense merely to make a show.

It is, however, happy for mankind, that imprudence and folly seldom escape
punishment. Whiteside, by trusting much money in bad hands, soon became a
bankrupt. The assignees, seeing so great a sum as six hundred and twenty pounds
charged against our author, caused him to be arrested on the 29th of October,
1789, at the White Bear, in Piccadilly. He was carried to that commodious
spunging house, which is kept by good Mr. Armstrong in Cary-street. Here he
lay, for three weeks, in durance vile. Those benevolent persons, Benjamin
Vaughan, Mr. Hoare the Quaker, and William Vaughan, all interested themselves
in his fate. They asked the assignees, if they knew that they confined the
great writer of Common Sense. Our concern, said the creditors, is not with the
dignity, but the identity of the debtor: Will you be his security, to obtain
his freedom? Upon the departure of his visitors, without obtaining his liberty,
our author is said to have hummed -- -- "They promise to pity;
But shift you for money from friend to friend."
He now applied to Messrs. Clegge^ and Murdock, two American traders of great
respectability; pleading his services to them as Americans, in giving them
independence. Without considering themselves as much obliged to him for
confining rather than enlarging their trade, they became his bail. And our
author, paying four hundred and sixty pounds, which he had at length received
from America, and giving his own note for one hundred and sixty more, was set
free, in November, 1789, to pursue his projects, and to scribble pamphlets.

While thus restrained in Cary-street, by a power which he had never
authorized, our adventurer was not inattentive to French affairs. In France he
had beheld the fair blossoms of liberty in the genial Spring; he had seen the
vigorous shoots of Summer's invigoration; and he now hastened to that happy
land, in order to partake in the autumnal maturity of the fairest fruit, that
metaphysicians had ever cultivated in the fields of theory. While thus
gratified, by enjoying the harvest of his own labors, he had the additional
pleasure of perusing Dr. Price's celebrated sermon, which had been frowned from
England, into France. But, while he saw the people of France thinking and
acting for themselves, he heard with astonishment, no doubt, that the people of
England were about to resign the prerogative of thinking. Prospects on the
Rubicon, p. 2^.


In this Crisis, our author recrossed the channel, in order to protest against
this vassalage idea, Rights of man, p. 82.
and to avert that submission of themselves and their posterity, like bondmen
and bond-women, forever. Id.
He was encountered, as he ran to London, by Mr. Burke's pamphlet, which was
published a few days before the sad celebration of the French Revolution, on
the 5th of November, 1790. He may have heard indeed, what doubtless quickened
his steps, that such a work was in the press, and though long delayed, was at
length to appear. Never was the public expectation more amply gratified. Such
vigor from sixty-three the world had seldom seen. Thousands and tens of
thousands of Mr. Burke's pamphlet were sold, without the recommendation of the
Constitutional Society. But, it was not the wisdom of his policy, or the zeal
of his patriotism, the learning of his illustrations, or the bursts of his
eloquence which captivated the English nation. No: the universal applause of
the English people, was an indubitable proof of their genuine sentiments: It
was a declaration of their affection for the king; of their attachment to the
constitution; of their veneration for the laws; of gratitude to their fathers,
who had transmitted the system, which ensures to them their present happiness.
To Mr. Burke's pamphlet, every week produced a new answer. But, as his
antagonists fought him on his own ground of law, their aims were feebly
directed, and their attacks were easily repulsed. The metaphysical statesmen
cried out for a new assault, upon a fresh field, by dissimilar weapons,
according to the approved tactics of wordy warfare.

In this manner was our author induced to furbish up his old weapons of Common
Sense, to fashion his Crisis, ordinary and extraordinary, into a new cuirass,
to review his Prospects, that he might take the vantage ground to "Decide all
controversies by
Infallible artillery."


A few months' labor produced the far-famed pamphlet, yclepp'd Rights of Man.
It was submitted to the revisal of Mr. Brand Hollis, and a committee of
Democrats. It was fitted by them for the press, after some struggles, between
the desires of the author, and the wishes of his patrons. It was printed in
February, 1791, for that worthy citizen, Mr. J. Johnson, in St. Paul's
Churchyard; but his regard for the shop induced him to decline the selling of
prohibited goods, though he occasionally dealt in Dr. Priestly's wares. This
unexpected refusal caused a month's delay. A few copies were, however, smuggled
into private hands. Impatience was now apparent on every face. The desire of
gratification became, as usual, more ardent, in proportion, as the object was
denied. The men-midwives determined to deprive the child of its virility,
rather than so hopeful an infant should be withheld from the world. At length,
on the 13th of March, 1791, this mutilated brat was delivered to the public, by
Mr. J. S. Jordan, at No 166, Fleet Street.

To the parent this was a moment of peculiar anxiety. Beside his cares for his
child, he feared that the messengers of the press might be even then prowling
for their prey. He found shelter and concealment in the hospitable house of the
said Mr. Hollis; and in order to carry the hounds from their scent, the agent
of a foreign power ran about whispering in every ear, that he had last night
given Mr. Pain a pass for Paris; though every Englishman, to whom this tale was
told, did not hear with the same patience, that foreign agents should trouble
themselves with English affairs. It is hardened guilt only which is never
fearful. While concealment was thus studiously consulted, the messengers of the
press did not trouble themselves about Mr. Pain or his pamphlet.

Such was the agency by which this production was brought to the notice of the
English nation. There were numbers, no doubt, who praised it; because they
wished that its tenets were triumphant. There are some who, in every country,
rejoice to see real learning defied by gross illiterature. And the
Constitutional Society, whose business it is to spread constitutional
information, strenuously recommended this constitutional tract to the perusal
of the people. But it was still to encounter the critics. This is a race of
men, whose hearts are generally contracted by years; whose judgments, being
matured by experience, are not often captivated by novelty; and whose pens are
sometimes dipped in gall, by an excessive impartiality.

After a decorus procrastination, the critics reviewed our author's
performance. They divided their strictures into two heads; the manner, and the
matter. With regard to the first, they observed, that as the language
immediately offers itself to the reader's eye, and must ultimately inform the
reader's understanding; so the language is an essential object of the critic's
animadversion. Of style, perspicuity is the principal quality, without which
all other qualities are useless; but without grammatical purity, that great
essential of language cannot be obtained. Like fair critics, they gave
examples, as the best proofs of their precepts; and they arranged their
observations, and stated their quotations, under distinct classes, in the
following order:

THE BAD GRAMMAR OF A CHILD.
In page 15, Mr. Pain says, "There is [are] some proposals for a declaration of
rights." In p. 34, "There are [is] in all countries a large class of people of
that description, which, in England, are [is] called the mob." In p. 35, "A
vast mass of mankind are [is] degradedly thrown into the back ground." In p.
45, "Because there have [has] been an upstart of governments, thrusting
themselves between." In p. 66, "The folly of titles have [has] fallen." In p.
81, "The parliamentary language is free, and extend [extends] to all the
parts." In p. 82, "This vassalage idea and style of speaking was [were] not got
rid of at the revolution." In p. 92, "As money matters was [were] the object."
In p. 100, "When their worth and consequence is [are] considered." In p. 104,
"There was [were] a visible imbecility and want of intellects in the majority."
In p. 116, " Does not [do] its own inhabitants say, it is a market." But of
such examples enough, though other instances, which are equally level to a
child's capacity, might be added.

THE BAD GRAMMAR OF A MAN.
In p. 5, Mr. Pain says, " Why Mr. Burke should commence an unprovoked attack
is a conduct that cannot be pardoned, on the score of manners, nor [or]
justified on that of policy." Thus, the why must be the nominative of the verb
is; and cannot and nor are two negatives in the same sentence. In p. 6, "But
such is the ingenuity of his hope, or the malignity of his despair, that it
[they] furnishes him with new pretenses." In p. 56, "Have sit," for sat or
sitten. In p. 71, "The greatest characters have rose," for risen. In p. 72,
"Whether the archbishop precedes," [precede.] In p. 75, "If he believes"
[believe.] In p. 81, "If any matter comes," [come.] These and many other
examples, which might be quoted, evince, said the critics, that Mr. Pain has no
notion of the subjunctive mood. In p. 79, "There are frequently appearing in
the London Gazette, extracts from certain acts to prevent machines, and as far
as it [they] can extend to persons." In p. 79, "The representatives of the
nation, which [who] compose the national assembly, and who [which] are the
legislative power, originate in the people by election, as an inherent right."
This terrible sentence had ended better thus: "The representatives originate in
the people, who have an inherent right to choose representatives." In p. 115,
"What are the present governments of Europe, but a scene [scenes] of iniquity."
In p. 116, "Since the taking [of] the Bastile." But of such quotations from Mr.
Pain's pamphlet there would be no end!

Under the head of grammatical purity, the critics proceeded to remark, that
pure English necessarily requires, that the words be English; that their
constructions be in the English idiom; that the words be employed to express
the precise meaning, which custom has affixed to them. The fault of using
words, which are not English, has been called by grammarians

BARBARISM.
Thus Mr. Pain uses the following words which are not English: in p. 67,
Punyism; in p. 74, Intoleration; in p. 77, Anti-political; in p. 35,
Degradedly; in p. 80, Designates; in p. 81, Right Angled; in p. 85, Priorily;
in p. 96, Disrespected; in p. 104, High beneficed; in p. 110, Imprescriptible.

The second fault, which consists of not making use of the words in the English
idiom, philologists have agreed to denominate

SOLECISM.
Mr. Pain, for example, has used, in page 66, " Chivalry character:" now,
chivalry is not an adjective. In p. 67, "By engendering the church with the
state, a sort of male animal is produced." In p. 71, "He degenerate the human
species." Degenerate is not an active verb. In p. 80, "Neither can he use it
consistent [consistently] with the constitution." In p. 84, both is used to
couple more plurals than two. In p. 85, "The nation showed no disposition to
rise [rouse] from its lethargy." In p. 95, "The crowd threw out trite
expressions:" he perhaps meant tart. In p. 96, "The king, as if unconsulted
upon with the cabinet." In p. 101, "They situated [placed] themselves in three
chambers." In p. 109, "The conspiracy being thus dispersed" [dissolved] or [the
conspirators being dispersed.] Solecisms abound so much in Mr. Pain's pamphlet,
that they may, indeed, be said to occur in every paragraph.

The third and last class of faults against purity of language, the critics
arranged under the head of

IMPROPRIETY.
In page 88, Mr. Pain remarks, "That the deplomatic character is the narrowest
sphere of society that a man can act in:" thus, with his usual violence, he
converts his ambassador into a globe. "And a deplomatic," [diplomatic] he adds,
"is a sort of unconnected atom, continually repelling and repelled." We have no
such substantive as diplomatic, which, as a foreigner, is hardly endured as an
adjective. "But this," says Mr. Pain, p. 88, "was not the case with Dr.
Franklin. He was not the deplomatic of a court, but of man." He meant to have
said, this philosopher was the envoy of mankind. But of deplomatic enough! In
p. 89 Mr. Pain says historically, "That the then Marquis de la Fayette was in
close friendship with the civil government of America, as well as with the
military line." Private friendship with a civil government; friendship with a
line!! In p. 81, Mr. Pain remarks, "That the addresses of the English
parliaments are not of foreign extraction, but originate from the Norman
Conquest: they [the said addresses] are evidently of the vassalage class of
Page 82.
manners; and," he adds, "that this vassalage idea and style of speaking was
[were] not got rid of in 1688." "Submission," he proceeds, Ibid.
"is wholly a vassalage term, repugnant to the dignity of freedom, and an echo
of the language used at the conquest." Thus, submission is an echo of
language!! "The graceful pride of truth preserves," he asserts, Page 81.
"in every latitude of life, the right-angled character of man." Such
rectangular improprieties of language, ill-natured critics might detect in
every passage; since they certainly stand in every paragraph of one hundred and
sixty pages. See p. 79, 84, 91, 104, 108-9, 120, 122, 125, 126, 127, 129, 130,
131, 132, 133, 136, 139, 140, 146, 147, 149, 150, 152, 154, 155, 156, 157, 159,
160, etc


The critics closed their strictures, with regard to the manner, by
recommending to Mr. Pain, with more good nature than generally relaxes the brow
of criticism, to study the English language. With his abilities, and the aid of
philology, they declared he might soon qualify himself to write such English,
as an Englishman would endure. They kindly advised him to begin with Ash's
Institutes, to proceed to Priestley's Rudiments, to go on to Lowth's
Introduction, and to end with his friend Horn Tooke's Diversions of Purley.

To this elaborate criticism there is a short answer. Let the quotations be
allowed to be accurate; The critics appear to have used the genuine edition of
Johnson
and an unquestionable fact will furnish a proper reply: the manuscript of
Rights of Man was revised and altered by Mr. Brand Hollis, and a committee of
Democrats, as before mentioned. Now, the Editors, who use the freedom to change
the style of their author, are answerable for the consequences. It was unkind
also in the Constitutional Society, formed, as it is, of Doctors of Law,
Doctors of Divinity, and Doctors of Physic, to recommend the castrated edition
of Jordan, before they had tortured the style.

The critics proceeded, Secondly, as they had proposed, from the language to
the sentiment; from the manner to the matter of our author's great performance.

This is a disquisition, said they, with regard to RIGHTS of MAN. By thus
suppressing designedly the article the, he shows his intention to be, not to
treat of the whole rights of mankind, but of particular rights. And, with great
propriety he follows up his evident purpose, by enlarging chiefly on the savage
rights of man, without regarding much their social rights.

When he dedicated his book to George Washington, he seemed, however, said
they, to depart somewhat from his previous design. He now wished, that the
rights of man might become as universal as Washington's benevolence. They
doubted the propriety of our author's sentiment; because the rights of man must
be as universal as the residence of mankind.

The critics were thence led into a very learned inquiry as to the cause that
NONSENSE so often escapes being detected both by the WRITER and the READER.
They were at no loss to discover various causes of this phenomenon: namely,
confusion of thought; affectation of excellence; want of meaning; and
considering, that our author's pamphlet had been affectedly praised and
politically propagated, they seized so good an occasion to give illustrations
of their salutary doctrine, by exhibiting various examples of our author's

NONSENSE.
In page 48 it is said, "That the duty of man is not a wilderness of turnpike
gates, through which he is to pass by tickets from one to the other." Here,
said the critics, the author, in attempting to give a specimen of fine writing,
wrote without meaning. In p. 51, "That governments might avail themselves of
every engine in their favor, they united fraud to force, and set up an idol,
which they called Divine Right; and which, in imitation of the Pope, who
affects to be spiritual and temporal, and in contradiction to the founder of
the Christian religion, twisted itself afterward into an idol of another
shape, called Church and State." Here is an instance of the unintelligible,
from the length of the sentence. In p. 66, Mr. Pain quotes it as a maxim, "
Titles are but nicknames, and every nickname is a title;" and he states it as a
fact, "That it is properly from the elevated mind of France, that the folly of
titles have [has] fallen." This writer is not more happy in his religious
opinions; in p. 74, "Toleration is not the opposite of intoleration, but is the
counterfeit of it. Both are despotisms; the former is church and state, and the
latter is church and traffic." Mr. Pain was thence led on to speak, in page 80,
of the fountain of honor: "In England a king is the fountain; but as this idea
is evidently from the Conquest, I shall make no other remark upon it, than that
it is the nature of conquest to turn every thing upside down; and as Mr. Burke
will not be refused the privilege of speaking twice, and as there are but two
parts in the figure, the fountain and the spout, he will be right the second
time." After this transparent elucidation of the fountain of honor, he
naturally tells, in p. 138, what a parliament is: "What is called the
parliament, is made up of two houses; one of which is more hereditary, and more
beyond the control of the nation, than what the crown, (as it called) is
supposed to be." He goes beyond even this, in page 139: "The continual use of
the word constitution, in the English parliament, shows there is none; and that
the whole [of what] is merely a form of government, without a constitution." As
an illustration of this mode of writing the sublime, the critics quoted the
famous couplet of two illustrious poets: "My wound is great, because it is so
small;
It would be greater, were it none at all!"


Mr. Pain thence descends to meaner matters, and gives in page 144, a
mathematical estimate of the quantity of money: "Lisbon and Cadiz are the two
ports into which (money) gold and silver from South America are imported, and
which afterward divides and spreads itself over Europe, by means of commerce,
and increases the quantity of money in all parts of Europe." The critics at
last exclaimed: "How vast a head is here without a brain!"

But they had softened this severity of animadversion, had they at that time
known, what is now known, that Mr. Brand Hollis and the committee of democrats
corrected the manuscript, and that Jordan, the bookseller, castrated the copy.
The castrating hand of Mr. Jordan appears in the title page; he there makes
Thomas Pain, a Secretary for Foreign Affairs to Congress, instead of the
Secretary to a Committee of Congress for Foreign Affairs. The clerk of the
House of Commons, and the clerk of a committee of that House, are quite
distinct officers.
Such freedoms are the more reprehensible, as they leave the republic of
letters to dispute the identity of the book, and the scholiasts of aftertimes
to investigate the real sentiments of so great an author.

After so learned an exposition of the causes why writers write, and readers
read NONSENSE, without perceiving that they write and read non-sensically, the
critics proceeded regularly to review the matter of Mr. Pain's pamphlet under
the three heads, into which he divides it himself: the argument; the history;
the miscellaneous.

It was a sad sight, said they, to see at the opening of the controversy, so
able a polemic as Mr. Pain turn his back on his opponent. Mr. Burke every where
considers the British Constitution as an actual authority, and the legislative
power, the executive power, and the judicial power, which are emanations from
it, as existing energies, that preserve the quiet of the public, and produce
the happiness of the people. On the other hand, Mr. Pain throughout his
argument, not only supposes, but asserts, that the British Constitution no
where exists; that the constitutional system, composed as it is of the
legislative, the executive, and judicial powers, were its existence even
acknowledged, has no valid authority to direct or punish any grown man. As a
logician, then, he supposes what he ought to prove; and as a philosopher he
asserts, much more than argues, against incontrovertible facts. Thus, Mr. Pain,
as a bruiser, shifts before he is struck, and falls before he has put in his
blow. And thus the bully, who turns his back, and shifts, and sinks, even
before the set-to, shows that he is conscious of his own weakness, or fears the
strength of his antagonist.

The great art, said the critics, of Mr. Pain, as a polemic, consists in
misquoting plainly, or misrepresenting designedly, the positions of his
adversary. Mr. Burke had said sarcastically, that every future king of England
would succeed hereditarily to the government in contempt of the Constitutional
Society. Mr. Pain now converts, by the magic of his wand, this plain assertion
of fact and law into a positive affirmation of an hereditary succession in
contempt of the people: and he thereupon enjoys, through twenty pages, the
triumph of his own artifice; without reflecting, that the day of detection
would come, when the sophister would be exhibited to his own sentimental mob,
as an object of ridicule.

In treating of rights of man, said the critics, Mr. Pain either artfully, or
ignorantly, refers always to the rights of savages; never to the rights of
citizens. How ridiculous is it to reason about the circumstances of men who do
not exist on earth! Within the wide circumference of the globe, there have not
been found a people, however savage, who had not some rules of action. A fair
(...), then, was bound to refer, in his argument, to those rules, as existing
energies. Every nation, however civilized, or however savage, has its own civil
rights, which are the result of those energies: we speak familiarly of the
rights of Englishmen, the rights of Dutchmen, and the rights of Russians. All
those various rights spring out of their several systems. If there be a
question with regard to the rights of Englishmen, we must refer for a solution
to the laws of Englishmen. And, in the same manner, if it be inquired, what
fact constitutes the crime of swindling in England, we must refer to the
statute, which describes the offense; so of perjury, forgery, and other
offenses, which, as they infringe the rights of particular citizens, are
regarded as attacks upon the whole society.

All this was premised, said the critics, in order to enable the reader to
determine the grand question, which was debated first between Dr. Price and Mr.
Burke, and, secondly, between Mr. Burke and Mr. Pain, as to the manner of
cashiering government, and choosing governors. Among cool reasoners, it must be
allowed in argument, that if every man, woman, and child, in any community,
were to vote for cashiering government, they have a right to give such vote,
and to appoint new governors. But, did every man, woman, and child, ever meet
for such purposes? Never. Will every man, woman, and child, ever meet for such
purposes? Never: for it is physically impossible, that every man, woman, and
child, should ever meet together for any purpose. To talk of deputies is not to
conquer the difficulty. The very appointment of delegates to do any act is an
advance within the limits of society: but Mr. Pain is in a savage state; he is
arguing about rights of man who have not yet entered into society; and,
therefore, it is not allowable, in candid discussion, to mingle different
rights together; to borrow from the laws of society, in order to support the
feeble condition of savageness; and yet, to insist, that he adopts none of the
notions of society, for the uses of sophistry.

This grand question, then, is to be determined by the maxims of general
society; by the rules of the particular society of Great Britain. Thus much
being settled, said the critics, there can be no doubt, that according to the
laws of the land, every man, any number of men, any community, may petition for
the redress of grievances; for the repeal of an old law, or the introduction of
a new one. This is done daily, during the sitting of parliament, and it is done
rightfully. About this right, then, there is no question.

But the question is, whether, according to the laws of Great Britain, any man,
any number of men, any club of men, may attempt by violence to cashier
governors, to change government, or to alter the constitution. The answer is,
that the laws of Great Britain do not allow such attempts; that the laws of
Great Britain punish all persons, as traitors, who make such attempts. Thus,
Lord Loughborough explained the law, upon the point, when he delivered his
charge to the grand jury, in the Borough, who were to indict the rioters, in
1780. The critics generally use such authorities as they have at hand; and they
quoted, on this occasion, that useful book, Dodsley's Register, 1780, p. 277,
for Lord Loughborough's celebrated charge.
Thus, upon the trial of Lord George Gordon, Lord Mansfield declared the
opinion of the whole court, which was not controverted by any lawyer or by any
man. Lord Mansfield went a step further: as there had been some doubts, he
declared the opinion of the judges to be, that though every one, and any number
of persons, had a right to ask for the redress of grievances, yet the petition
must be presented by no more than ten persons, or the parties would be punished
as criminals. Dodsley's Register, 1781, p. 236, for Lord Mansfield's more
celebrated charge to the jury.


But this mode of reasoning has no weight with Mr. Pain. He declares the
constitution of Great Britain not to exist; the laws not to exist; the
government not to exist. We are now, said the critics, discussing an important
subject heartily. It is not sufficient to assert any position, from which
interesting deductions are to be drawn; upon which Revolutions are to be built.
Every reasoner must prove his own premises, before he be allowed to draw his
conclusions. Now, as it is a fact, to the truth of which the senses of a whole
nation bear testimony, that the constitution, and laws, and government, of
Great Britain do exist, we are obliged, said the critics, to tell Mr. Pain,
that as a reasoner he argues here, and through the greater part of his
pamphlet, most illogically; because he constantly reasons against facts.

When it is once admitted in argument, because it cannot be denied, that Great
Britain is a formed society, having a constitution and laws, it follows as an
undeniable consequence, that all the political cases, in Mr. Pain's pamphlet,
are to be determined by a reference to the code; to the body of laws. It is
therefore unphilosophical in Mr. Pain, to refer continually in his reasonings,
to a state of savageness that does not, in fact, exist; or, indeed, to any
other state than the laws of the particular country, about which he treats. And
as old men, said the critics, we are thus led to suspect, that the ultimate
object of Mr. Pain, and of those who circulate his tract, must be, to give
themselves little trouble about the constitution and laws of Great Britain,
when they can collect numbers enough to annihilate all by a tumult.

We were urged, said the critics, by our years and our apprehensions, to look
forward from such reasonings and such an object, to the end. What would be the
immediate consequences of annihilating the constitution and the laws by a
tumult? All the rights of society, which are emanations from them, would be
annihilated by the same stroke of violence. Whoever holds any right under the
common law, would lose it; whoever enjoys any privilege, under an act of
parliament, would lose it; whoever partakes of any franchise from a charter,
would lose it: for all these rights are derived only from the laws of society;
and the foundation being removed, the superstructure must fall. Yes, say the
metaphysical reformers, with wonderful apathy, all this and more would happen,
if such events were not prevented; but we can remove your apprehensions by a
single vote, that such mischiefs shall not ensue. Having lived long enough,
said the critics, to prefer present enjoyment to future expectation, we would
not trust our liberty, our effects and our lives, to the promised vote of a
metaphysical mob.

Thus much, then, with regard to the argument of Mr. Pain's pamphlet. The
critics proceeded, secondly, to consider the historical part. As an historian,
Mr. Pain plainly takes his side. He avows his purpose, to elevate one party,
and to depress the other. A party pamphlet may answer a party purpose: but
mankind agree to reprobate a party history. The style, which in historic
writing is of essential consequence, being written to please and instruct,
will, no doubt, gratify all those, who find delight in bad grammar and false
idiom; in harshness of expression and feebleness of pause. It was reported in
1784, we may remember, that Mr. Pain intended to write the history of the
American war: but, from this specimen of his impartiality and his language, we
are led to imagine, that however many readers he might meet among the heroes of
his tale, he would find few in Britain.

The critics proceeded, thirdly, to the miscellaneous part of Mr. Pain's
pamphlet. As they had said already so much of society, government, and law,
they chiefly reviewed what he delivered on political economy. All that he had
retailed in his Prospects on the Rubicon, with regard to money, and credit, and
commerce, he interweaves into his Rights of Man. As he deals much in dogmas, he
now disposes of great variety of such goods. He is, however, chiefly anxious to
prove, that there is no wealth but money. The cattle of the farmer are not
wealth, it seems; whatever wares the shopkeeper may have in the warehouse, he
is not wealthy, if he have no money in the till; the knowledge and industry of
a tradesman are not wealth, if he have no cash in the chest. By thus asserting
money alone to be wealth, and showing how much coin had been brought into this
island, and how little remained; he endeavors to prove, that Great Britain has
at present less commerce and opulence, than in former times. He has no notion,
it seems, that there is a traffic in bullion. He does not know, that foreign
coins are continually imported and sent out, just as there is a demand for them
at home or abroad; but, said the critics, since the people were instructed by
the Political Economy of Stewart, and the Wealth of Nations of Smith, they are
not to be captivated by such sophisms and fooleries.

The foregoing criticism, with all its elaboration, admits of a satisfactory
answer. Let the truth be told, and justice be done, whatever may be the
consequences. Our author knew, that he asserted what he could not prove; that
he misrepresented what he could not controvert; that he aimed to delude rather
than convince: and his design to vent his prejudices, and serve a party, must
be carefully scanned, before his merits can be accurately settled, either as a
writer or a man. We foresee, but we despise the retort, which malignity may
make, that in order to establish his abilities, you must sacrifice his morals.

Notwithstanding the reviews of criticism, our author received the applause of
party. Nay, philology came in the person of Horn Took, who found his retreat
after some inquiry, to mingle her cordial gratulations with the thanks of
greater powers: You are, said he, like Jove, coming down upon us in a shower of
gold. Our author was highly gratified by such attentions; yet he was not happy:
he plainly wished for something that was studiously withheld. Like honest
Rousseau, he longed for prosecution. While fluttering on the wing for Paris, he
hovered about London a whole week, waiting to be taken, not by the catchpoles
of creditors, but by the runners of Bow-street.

Yet, the messengers of the press would not meddle either with his person or
his pamphlet. Upon what motives the government of England acted, with regard to
both, we have never heard. Whether the ministers trusted to the good sense of
England, which generally gains the ascendant; whether they left his style to be
detected by the schoolboys of England; whether they relinquished his sentiment
to be despised by the men of England; whether they gave up such a character to
the contempt of the women of England; we may conjecture, but cannot tell.

At length, stung by disappointment, our author departed for France, about the
middle of May, 1791. He soon found that his prescriptions had worked wonders.
The land was tranquil: the people were happy. Yet, in the midst of this
tranquillity and happiness, the executive power departed from Paris: the
executive power was soon arrested by the executive power. These events induced
our author to observe, with his usual coolness, to his congenial friend, Mr.
Thomas Christie: "You see the absurdity of monarchical government; here will be
a whole nation disturbed by the folly of one man!" See Mr. Thomas Christie's
letter, dated from Paris, June 22d, 1791; and published in the Morning
Chronicle, of the 29th of June, 1791.
Thus the tongue continually blurts out the prevailing thoughts of the heart!
The experience of such men had never taught them what mischiefs had arisen, in
every country, from the madness of the multitude.

An example soon occurred, which ought to have instructed both: a sentimental
mob Id.
assembled in Paris, to behold the executive power return; and concurrence of
opinion led our author to mingle with the many, on that pleasing occasion. An
officer proclaimed the will of the National Assembly, that all should be silent
and covered. In a moment all tongues were still; all hats were on. Not so our
author: He had lost his cockade; and to have a hat, without a cockade, was
treason. A cry arose, Aristocrat! Aristocrat! A' la lantern! A' la lantern!
Whether he preserved his usual coolness, during this uncommon danger, we are
unable to tell. A Frenchman, who could speak English, desired him to put on his
hat: But the hat, having no cockade, he was involved in a sad dilemma; but the
sentimental mob was at length in some measure satisfied by prudent explanation.
Our author was now left to balance cooly in equal scales, whether the folly of
one man, or the madness of the multitude, be most mischievous, be most
inconsistent with freedom. Metaphysical prejudice, like the jaundice, gives a
yellow color to the effervescence of the mind. And we may easily suppose, that
our author, like other men, who confound liberty and anarchy together, was not
even now convinced, by his personal danger, that there is no safety for
property, freedom, or life, in a country, where the individual may be instantly
executed, for having no cockade in his hat. Our author returned to London just
time enough to partake in the celebration of the French Revolution, on the 14th
of July, 1791, though he did not attend at the Crown and Anchor, till eight
o'clock in the evening, when the multitude had frowned the seven hundred and
fifty celebrators into the obscurity of their (...). On the night of his
arrival our author slept at his usual haunt, the White Bear, Piccadilly, on
Wednesday the 13th of July; he breakfasted there the next morning; he
afterward dined in the house of one of his well known patrons in the city:
yet, it was thought proper that he should not attend the public dinner. And the
runners of the Democrats were dispatched to the coffee houses and booksellers'
shops to insist, that our author was not in town; and to attain some object,
that cannot be explained, "To lend a lie the confidence of truth."


Biography treats only of the past. Prophecy alone can reveal the future. And
as we are not prophets, we will not conjecture with regard to our author's
subsequent life and fate.

THE END.

