A PILL FOR PORCUPINE: BEING A SPECIFIC FOR AN OBSTINATE ITCHING Which that
Hireling has long contracted for Lying and Calumny, CONTAINING, A VINDICATION
OF THE American, French, and Irish Characters, AGAINST HIS SCURRILITIES.

BY A FRIEND TO POLITICAL EQUALITY.

"It cannot be dissembled, my dear Sir, that we are indebted to this man and a
rabble of scribblers, that have yelped in unison with him, for all the
execrable trash that has been disseminated throughout the kingdom.

-- Because I am convinced of the ruinous consequences that must ultimately
result to the country, if these writers are suffered, by a mistaken opinion of
their utility, to have any considerable influence on the public opinion."

Miles in answer to Burke's address to the Duke of Bedford. PHILADELPHIA:
PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR. September 1, 1796.

PREFACE.
SOME may ask, why I have not taken notice, in the following pamphlet, of
Porcupine's life? to which I would answer, that this pamphlet was written and
ready for the press before he published his life; and as he has brought forward
no fact or argument to induce me to change my belief, but rather to confirm it,
with respect to his being "a hireling writer;" I declined altering it, or
taking any notice of his life. But if I have occasion to write another
pamphlet, "out of his own mouth will I condemn him;" and prove to the world,
whatever his supporters may think of him, that it is true what the Reviewers
have said of his writings, that "they are a dishonor to any party." And more I
will prove, that he and his party had supported their measures by falsehood,
and misrepresentation; in proof of this I will recur to one fact only, on the
present occasion. It is a well known circumstance that all the writers, in
support of the treaty, from Philadelphia on to the eastward, raised the "hue
and cry" among the farmers, that if they would not turn out and petition in
support of the treaty, it would be rejected; and the consequence finally would
be, that their grain would become a mere drug, they would find no market for
it; and it would lie, and rot on their hands. But when the treaty was adopted
to their entire satisfaction, and time brought round things in their natural
order; what was the consequence that actually took place, which we have heard,
which we have seen; and which is known to every farmer from one end of the
union to the other. Then I will tell you Mr. Fenno, pshaw! its nothing more
than about six, or seven weeks after the treaty was finally ratified; wheat and
flour fell in New York, and many other towns, to nearly one half less than it
was previous to the adopting of the treaty; what think you of the treaty now
Johnney? go blush ye fabricators! Ye false story-tellers! and hide your heads
among the pumpkin vines of Connecticut, and Massachusetts; and amuse your
countrymen by fabricating mavelous stories. Go tell them! that one of Mr.
Ames's constituents had a large turkey cock, that hatched a dozen of eggs in
consequence of the treaty's being ratified; and that the clouds poured forth
showers of fish, upon the plantation of one of Mr. Buck's constituents. Go tell
them! that the cats would not kitten, neither the yews bring forth their young,
nor their young men bundle with the bonny lasses, unless the treaty would be
adopted. Go ye fabulators! and sing hosannas to the Lord, and tell your
countrymen, that even the mules of Connecticut have become prolific since the
treaty was ratified.

"But Porcupine abuses all men!" exclaimed a republican, to a well known
aristocrat with whom I was conversing the other day; "you are mistaken, replied
the gentle aristocrat, he has in the history of his life paid Mr. Carey a very
handsome compliment;" and so the matter ended between them. But in order to
satisfy my own curiosity, I went and purchased the history of his life; and to
my great surprise I found the compliment to be precisely this, that Mr. Carey
had acted with respect to Porcupine, in concealing his person from the public,
as a man of honor; and Porcupine simply relates the cricumstance, but with
evident reluctance; now where is the compliment? If Porcupine by saying it was
an act of honor in Mr. Carey to conceal his person, had made it become so, as
the edict of kings has often attached honor, or dishonor to an action; then,
and not until then would he have paid Mr. Carey a compliment. For the action
was itself an honorable one, and the opinion of Porcupine, or any other
individual will neither make it more nor less so. If every man who performs an
honorable action must be under a compliment to another, it establishes at once
a check upon every virtuous proceeding; and we are in future to look for honor
and virtue, only among slaves and cowards; where we have the least prospect of
finding them. He complains that Mr. Carey treated him with a certain degree of
contempt, on his first interview with him; and wishes for another yellow fever,
that he might also acquire a fortune. The insinuation here conveyed is obvious,
that is, that Mr. Carey has become elate with prosperity. I have conversed with
him both before and since the yellow fever, and have never discovered any
change in his conduct; and am persuaded an hundred others in town will say the
same thing. He has underwent a change it is true, but it is a change of a
different nature from what Porcupine insinuates; it is the change of care into
contentment on finding his industry rewarded; it is a change which every man,
under the same circumstances, must feel, who lives among "a people where riches
fix the only consideration," where men are esteemed and caressed only in
proportion to their wealth. -- An artful sentiment indeed, that riches ought to
fix the only consideration, for our modern fine gentlemen of yesterday to
introduce to obtain respect, whose merit is commensurate with their riches; and
whose genius or abilities is below the notice of mankind; for deprive them of
their wealth and you rob them of the only merit they possess. Were they
elsewhere, but by their own fire sides -- were they elsewhere, but in
Philadelphia, they would find to their eternal shame, that something more than
riches would be necessary, to render them respectable in the opinion of others.
Had Mr. Carey, like Mr. Y --, when he acquired a fortune, plumed himself in a
bob-tailed coat, with the collar hanging half way down his back, and bedaubed
with powder; had he, like him, purchased a country house, and drive in his
carriage every morning behind his counter, with a tippee cane in his hand;
would he, like him, when a poor man comes into his shop, to purchase a
pamphlet, (...) up his nose as if he felt an offensive smell; and answer him,
with a ^^eering grin, some minutes after the poor man had asked him for it,
(...) that he had no such pamphlet;" then might it be insinuated indeed that
(...) Carey had become elate with prosperity.

ERRATA.
Page 53, line 17 from the top, for them read thee. -- Page 64, l. 7 from the
bottom, for loses read loves.

A VINDICATION.
HAD a writer, who styles himself Porcupine, taken the advice of Doctor Swift,
when he published his two first pieces; he might have passed on the world as a
humorous facetious writer. There is a brain that will endure but one scumming;
let the owner gather it with discretion, and manage his little stock with
husbandry. But of all things let him beware of bringing it under the lash of
his betters; because that will make it all bubble up into impertinence, and he
will find no new supply: Wit without knowledge being a sort of cream, which
gathers in a night to the top, and by a skilful hand may be soon whipped into
froth; but once scummed away, what appears underneath, will be fit for nothing,
but to be thrown to the ^ogs.
The citizens being unaccustomed to receive such pieces, from the press of an
American printer, their novelty procured them a general circulation; whilst the
ridicule they contained served to indulge a spirit of party spleen: by exciting
mirth at the expense of others. For most men may be laughed out of their money,
but there are few who can be reasoned out of it. The rapid sale of his two
first pieces ensured him success, with the party whose cause he had espoused;
and a foreign agent, finding to what advantage his turn for ridicule might be
employed, to support the detested cause of a British faction, has consequently
paid him several visits; this has been some time ago made known to the public,
and is now generally believed. What a cabal was raised against citizen Genet,
three years ago, because a certain party had asserted, that he interfered in
the internal government of our country. Admitting he did interfere, was he more
culpable than the other, who does it by means of an hireling. Surely his being
a native of this city, and a tory; nay were he the royal ass himself, it would
never justify him in the opinion of those, who regard the internal peace and
happiness of their country. Had Porcupine confined himself to translations from
the French, and giving instructions in that language, to those who thought
proper to employ him; he would not have drawn upon himself the just indignation
of a whole people; for those insults and gross epithets, with which he has
vilified them. Nor would we have seen him under the contemptible alternative of
forging a letter; See his Scarecrow.
wherein he censures himself for his gross calumny; that he might, by that
mean, afford himself an opportunity of vindicating his conduct, and apologizing
for those insults he has given to the American citizens. He has now opened a
book-store, through the bounty of this pious agent, and his interest tells him,
he ought, to conciliate the affection and confidence of all parties. For it is
asserted, by some, that his employer having now gained his point; and having
discovered by his last pieces, that the fountain has nearly ran dry, and an
eternal drought must succeed; he has consequently withdrawn his golden
auspices, and thrown Porcupine on the mercy of an offended people. But a
momentary contrition will not palliate for mob, banditti, etc. with which he
has so often vilified the peaceable citizens of the United States; cutthroats
and murderers, with which he has abused their friends the French; thieves and
robbers, with which he has calumniated the Irish; who contributed so largely,
in the late revolution, to humble the blustering pride of Britain. How far the
different parties, whom he accuses, are deserving of his calumny and slander,
we need have recurrence but to a few facts, and arguments, to discover. There
has not been, in my remembrance, a collection of the inhabitants, in this city,
since after the establishment of peace in eighty-three; who showed the least
disposition to riot, or act in open defiance of the laws of the state, or of
humanity and decorum; except one It was this mob, or a party of it, that
dragged from their lodgings, to the Assembly-room, the members in the minority
of the state legislature, who had withdrawn on taking the question, "Shall the
federal constitution be now adopted," and compelled them to make a quorum, that
the house might proceed to take the vote.
on the adoption of the federal constitution, when some of Porcupine's present
friends -- the old tories of '76 -- the very scum of society, assembled
together, and were headed by a certain gentleman; who led them (it was after
night) to a respectable clergyman's house in this city; who was a known friend
to the revolution, and insulted him and his family, with every mark of
indignity. The next day it was affirmed, by an eyewitness, that this same
gentleman, who headed the mob, went upon his hands and feet, at the clergyman's
door; and bow-wowed in imitation of one of his domestic animals, in hopes of
gaining admission The odium of a bankruptcy, and a derangement of his pecuniary
circumstances, still pressing heavily upon his shoulders; he cunningly took
this method to recommend himself to a certain party, who have always had the
banks, the principal source of wealth, under their direction. He succeeded in
his scheme, and his son now drives, in state, to his compting-house.

The next mob that appeared was during the time of the embargo; when a party of
British sailors assembled, and paraded through the streets, in a haughty
manner. They marched up behind congress-hall where the members were sitting;
and became noisy and clamorous, in such a degree, that one of Porcupine's
party, not knowing it was his friends who had assembled there, got greatly
alarmed, started from his seat, and made a motion for the adjournment of
Congress, to some other place.

The last collection of people, who had the least appearance of a mob, showed
themselves at the close of the town meeting, in the State-House yard, last
summer; when some boys, to the number, perhaps, of two hundred; among whom were
several sailors, who wisely foresaw, that the treaty would afford them no
protection, against the inhumanity and savage cruelty of the British; paraded
through some of the streets, burnt the treaty in effigy, and proceeded to the
house of a certain senator, and broke a single pane of glass, in one of his
windows; without showing any other mark of a riotous disposition. And it is
more than probable, that even that solitary pane would not have been broken,
had not a well known Viscount, who was riding forward in company with the
proprietor of the house, the folly and presumption, to get upon one of the
gentleman's coach-horses, and attempted to ride down the boys; in order to
ingratiate himself, no doubt, into the esteem of the senator and his family.
Such a wild, and extravagant attempt of a sorry individual like him, who was,
and is himself detested by the people, was sufficient to excite them, to that
single act, of outrage -- and it did so. As soon as they discovered, that it
was the noble Viscount, who was on horseback; some one of the mob, who
accidentally had a stump of an old fishing rod, or a small pole, in his hand,
ran up to our modern Don Quixote, and gave him a blow across his shoulders;
which so cooled his courage, that he scampered off Sans ceremony. If I have in
the above narrative of facts mistated any circumstance, I am willing to be
corrected; but, I believe, there are too many living witnesses in this city, to
day, that will bear testimony of the truth of what I have here related, with
respect to mobs. And I am convinced, that upon a candid examination and
enquiry, mobs will be as rarely met with, in other parts of the union, as in
Philadelphia; so that Porcupine, instead of casting an odium on the friends of
Republicanism, has called forth an examination of facts, which recoil with
dishonor upon the very heads of his supporters.

With regard to the murders and outrages committed by the French nation; there
are none who will believe a single fact stated by Porcupine, except credulous
children, or prejudiced old women sinking into their dotage. To believe that a
nation so enlightened as the French, "and always, says Mr. Bruce, foremost in
the acts of benevolence and humanity," would tie men and women in pairs, and
drown them by tens, and by fifties; nay even sink boat loads of them, and thus
wantonly sport with the lives of their fellow creatures, as Porcupine asserts,
is what no man in his senses can ever believe. For calumny herself blushes at
the exaggeration -- humanity treats it as an insult -- reason and truth spurn
the daring imposition -- whilst poor credulity is upon the rack. The implacable
hatred, which Englishmen are known to entertain toward the French nation,
ought to put every prudent man upon his guard; before he gives his assent, to
all those Porcupine accounts of "horrid massacres;" a man who is a declared
enemy to the French revolution, and the liberties of mankind in general. What
confidence can we place in the veracity of a man, who would sit down and
deliberately tell the world, as Porcupine did, that there were two hundred
gaming-tables kept in this city by Frenchmen? If I am rightly informed,
Porcupine will find, that one of his own countrymen kept the principal gambling
table in town.
John Fenno himself, who is not very remarkable for his modesty, when an
opportunity offers of abusing the French nation, allows there were but about
twenty; before they were expelled by the magistracy. By this false assertion,
he endeavored to cast a dishonorable reflection on the republican party; but
gamblers were never known to be the friends of a republican government. Those
French are well known to be men of aristocratic principles, the associates of
Porcupine; who were expelled France, and the West India Islands for attempting
to subvert the liberties of the people; and having no means of supporting
themselves they had recourse to gambling. They are now banished, and it is to
be lamented, the corporation had not taken earlier steps to have them punished;
before their villainy produced those evils it did. Exaggerating their own
prowess, and calumniating their enemies, are tricks, which the British
government have been always known to practice, upon their poor deluded
subjects. He must be very little acquainted with the British accounts of the
American revolution, who does not acknowledge the truth of what is here
advanced. For every battle they gained was magnified into a victory; and the
American character was degraded, by them, to a level with the uncivilized
Indian of the woods. With the Hessians, in particular, they were solicitous in
representing the Americans, as a cruel, vindictive, and savage people; in order
to rouse them to commit acts of wanton barbarity. And I have the authority of
an English gentleman in saying, that these impressions are not yet entirely
worn off his countrymen. Many people in England, who live remote from the
seaports and have but little means of information, believing to this day, that
the citizens of the United States, are scarcely a degree removed above
uncivilization; and he assigned this as a reason, why so few of the farmers,
and laboring poor, emigrate to this country.

That the French have gullotined, every man who was brought before their
tribunals of justice, is no evidence of their cruelty and injustice; but is the
fullest proof of their lenity and forbearance; because it was not until after
their crimes became so notorious, that even the slightest doubt could not be
entertained of their criminality, that they were brought before their
tribunals; when the united voice of the people, and the preservation of the
republic, required their execution. Their condemnation was the result of
irresistible necessity, and not of choice, or wanton barbarity. The Republicans
were forced into those sanguinary measures, by the stupid obstinacy of the
royalists -- an obstinacy which nothing could conquer but death.

That the accounts of massacres, in France, published by Porcupine, Fenno, and
Webster; are often false and exaggerated, I can testify upon the authority of
some French citizens; men of education and principle, residing here. These
gentlemen have frequently read, in the public papers, of persons being
gullotined, who were actually living when they received their last accounts
from France; and which was many months subsequent to the time, wherein it was
said, that those persons were executed. No doubt there have been many
gullotined, in the course of the revolution; but when the clouds of prejudice
are dissipated, and an impartial investigation of all the facts, and
circumstances, take place, relating to those who suffered under these
sanguinary measures; I am persuaded, there will be but a small number found
amongst them, of the innocent and unoffending.

Although there be no principle of candor, truth and honor, which Porcupine
has not violated, in his abuse of the French nation; yet he is not alone
censurable, for Mr. Hamilton has trodden the path before him. The latter, in
his writings, has endeavored to prove, that it was not from disinterested
motives, France took an active part in the American revolution; but to pull
down the enormous and overbearing pride, of England. Admitting this was the
motive, which made France declare war against that power, this all men must
acknowledge, that if their motives in serving us were not so pure, as Mr.
Hamilton wishes, they certainly loved us more than Great Britain did; and if
they loved us more, ought not our gratitude to be in proportion to that love,
in preference to Britain, as theirs was in preference to us. Why then reject
their overtures for entering into a treaty, both friendly and advantageous; and
meanly crouching solicit England to grant us one, which is equally injurious to
our interest, as degrading to our national dignity and honor? Although I
believe universal benevolence and disinterested friendship, are found amongst
mankind, in their private individual capacity; yet I could never learn from
history, that they were ever found amongst monarchies. I am persuaded Mr
Hamilton cannot produce, from history, one instance of monarchies, whether
ancient or modern, being actuated toward each other; with that cordial
attachment, as has been known to exist between Republics. What have we then to
expect from our union with England? Has not experience already convinced us,
that when her interest is concerned, every principle of justice, of humanity,
and the law of nations, are violated by her in their turn; to gratify her
rapacious, haughty, and overbearing spirit. To illustrate what has here been
said, with regard to the disinterestedness of monarchies, let us take a general
view of the kingdoms in Europe, for a few years back. England, in the last
Turkish and Russian wars, assisted the Turks privately, against the Russians;
she has since the commencement of the present revolution, entered into a triple
alliance, with the Austrians, and Russians, against the Turks. In the American
revolution, Spain assisted France against England, and in the present
revolution she assisted England against France; and it is universally believed,
if a general peace does not soon take place, she will join the French against
the English. England has sought several times for, and against, the Hollanders.
Behold the haughty contemptible Victor Amadeus, king of Sardinia; who, not many
months ago, swore eternal enmity to the French republicans, lately upon his
knees before the Executive Directory, the very same republicans, like a
disobedient snivling schoolboy, asking pardon for his former transgressions;
and declaring, with the same lying tongue, with which he cursed them, that if
they will pardon him his folly and presumption, he will, in future, be to them
a faithful ally. It is more than probable the next account we receive from
Europe, of this bigoted old monarch, is that he is marching the shattered
remains of his army against the English and Austrians. Was it not, three years
ago, equally as improbable, in the opinion of all Europe, that the king of
Sardinia would ask pardon of the National Directory, for his presumption and
folly; as that the idiot George the third, would three years hence, be upon his
bended knees, begging of the National Directory, in the same humiliating voice,
forgiveness of his transgressions? National pride, ambition, folly, and
interest, are the governing, and only motives, which actuate kings toward each
other; and which give rise to all this versatility of conduct: For no man of
common sense surely will say, it was the effect of disinterested friendship.

But France, more enlightened and magnanimous than all the rest, gave America
early proofs of her friendship; by entering into a treaty of amity and
commerce, in the most perilous times, involving herself in a general war, at
the hazard of loosing some of her most valuable possessions. And to convince
America, and the world, more fully; that her former services were not the
effect of a temporary, sordid, selfish interest; she has since made overtures
for entering into a treaty anew; on principles the most honorable, and
flattering, to the national dignity of America, and advantageous to her
interests. But Mr. Hamilton, "stiff in opinion always in the wrong," by his
influence in the cabinet council of America, defeated her friendly designs; and
rendered all her overtures abortive. Let us now admit, that France took an
active part in the late revolution from interested motives; for we admit it
only, because Messrs. Hamilton and Smith, S. Carolina.
with all their contemptible quibbles, will never be able to prove it; until
they convince the understandings of men, that France would have gone to war
with England, at that period, independent of the solicitations of America. It
is a fact, known to the whole world, that America solicited the friendship and
assistance of France, and that she granted their request; which was beyond all
controversy an act of friendship, if there be any such thing as friendship in
this world. Hence it follows, from what we have admitted, that France was
actuated by two motives, that is, a friendship for America, and a personal
interest she had in checking the domineering pride, and arrogance of England.
This personal interest, and the independence of America, which was the natural
consequence of such a check, were the only objects the two countries had in
view. In accomplishing these, France being governed by two motives, it is
certain, she would act with a vigor proportioned to the force of those motives
-- she did so; and American independence was secured. Let me now ask the
ex-secretary and his coadjutor, was there no friendship in her sending her
armies, and her fleets, to fight our battles, both by sea and land? -- was
there no friendship in her furnishing our armies, and our privateers, with
ammunition, and arms; the only necessary means of defense? -- was there no
friendship in her opening her ports, for the sale of the prizes captured by our
privateers? -- was there no friendship in her supplying our naked and
defenseless citizens, with her manufactures, the absolute necessaries of life
-- and was there no friend in her opening her treasury, and lending us five
million of dollars: were all these nothing? Speak thou demons of ingratitude
and answer me.

Much has been said, by Mr. Hamilton indirectly, in his writings, against the
French, about motives. The doctrine of motives is perhaps one of the most
obscure, and ambiguous, in nature. For an individual to attempt to pry into the
feelings of men's heart's, in order to discover the secret springs of actions
which may there operate, is at once absurd, and presumptuous; it belongs to
omniscience only to view the motives, and secret springs of action with men;
and consider them accordingly. If I solicit a favor of my neighbor, and he
grants my request; I want no more to complete my happiness, so far as the
supply of a single want will render me happy. I am not to enquire, whether his
motive in serving me, was disinterested, or not; admitting it was, in this
case, it is an imaginary good only; for before we can pretend to discover what
men's motives are, the action must either be resolved upon, or performed. It is
not by motives we live, but by actions; and considering or judging of men's
motives subsequent to their actions, will never feed the hungry, nor clothe the
naked. If my neighbor renders me a service, it is the most certain proof which
I could receive from him, that he entertains no hatred toward me; and if he
entertains no hatred toward me, but renders me an essential service, what is
he? is he not my friend? if he be not, I know not who is; I am apprehensive I
will not find one in Mr. Hamilton. Actions are to motives, what light is to the
sun, were it not for them we could have no idea of men's motives, no more than
we could have an idea of the sun, were it not for his light. Now to suppose the
sun an impure and opaque body, because he diffuses light, is not a greater
absurdity, than to suppose a man who is capable of friendship and of performing
a friendly action; is governed by base and selfish motives. If by serving my
friend, I serve myself at the same time, am I to be censured as a selfish
interested man, Mr. Hamilton says yes, If Mr. Hamilton does not expressly say
so, his writings admit no other deduction.
but I answer the contrary, for if he, in consequence of that circumstance,
rejects my friendship, I will then consider him as the surly dog -- would
neither suffer me to do myself a kindness, nor would he receive one of my
hands, because I was indirectly serving myself. Is he not the selfish man, who
would allow himself only to receive the good I would do? nay, is he not
something worse than a selfish man, who would deprive himself of that good,
that he might also deprive his benefactor, from rendering himself alike
service. A virtuous man will always rejoice, when he finds a two fold good
resulting from an action; but according to Mr. Hamilton's reasoning, because a
two fold good arose from the service of the French, during the late revolution;
that is, they procured the independence of America; whilst they added to their
own consequence, in the balance of the European powers, we ought to treat them
as a selfish interested nation. I repeat again, that a virtuous man will always
rejoice, when he finds a two fold good resulting from an action; but Mr.
Hamilton and his coadjutor, snarl at it, and call the French a selfish,
wheedling, and interested people. That a man of Mr. Hamilton's abilities, would
advance such preposterous arguments, as he so frequently does, in his writings,
is to me the greatest astonishment in life. For this singularity in him, I can
find no better solution, than the observation of Mr. Duncan; speaking, in his
introduction to his logic, of the happy talent some men possess of unravelling,
and throwing light upon, the most intricate subjects; "others, says he,
confound the easiest speculations, their understandings seem to be formed awry,
etc." From what has been here advanced upon the doctrine of motives, I am
convinced every candid thinking man will acknowledge, that the conduct of the
French nation toward America, during her struggles for liberty, was highly
honorable and friendly, and worthy of a magnanimous nation: or admitting she
was interested, a twofold good resulted to the world from her conduct, during
that period; and therefore ought not to lessen, but doubly increase, our
gratitude and esteem. How unanimous were the citizens, six years ago, in
declaring their steady and unfeigned attachment to that nation; they would have
continued in these sentiments, had not Mr. Hamilton, like a mushroom of
yesterday, started up and poisoned their minds, by endeavoring to impress them
with the belief, that gratitude to the French nation was repugnant to their
interest; this was the mean by which he collected all the men of sordid
principles in the union, and several ladies, around him; they became his steady
friends, and the open avowed enemies of France. For there is no tie of
gratitude, no principle of honor and virtue, which avaricious men will not
sacrifice, to accomplish their sordid views. It is asserted, upon good
authority, that Mrs. Maginnis was among the number of those ladies, which Mr.
Hamilton let into the secrets of the funding system; whether this particular
kindness to her, was owing to her steady attention to him, in furnishing him
always with a clean room, and a fresh pullet; when he went to sup with her, is
of no consequence to the public. It is however well known, to all the gentlemen
of the quill, at the different banks, that she speculated largely; and has been
enabled by her speculations, and the bounty of her visitors, to retire on the
fruits of her labor. Having since purchased a snug house, a coach, a footman
in genteel livery; she now drives about the city in great splendour, the warmest
advocate of Mr. Hamilton's measures. What a glorious proof, it is, of the
purity of Mr. Hamilton's administration, when all the whores and russians, from
New Hampshire to Georgia, are become his advocates. From Mrs. Maginnis, even
down to Porcupine, F -- o, and W -- r.
It is said also, that she has already begun to canvass votes for Mr. Latimer,
at the next election, as she still has great influence amongst a certain
description of gentlemen. What Doctor Charles Davenant said of a party that
existed in England in his time, may be also said, with great truth, of those
friends of Mr. Hamilton, whom avarice collected around him; "an ignorant, says
he, mercenary, and servile crew; unanimous in evil; diligent in mischief,
variable in principles, constant to flattery, talkers for liberty; but slaves
to power," stiling themselves federalists, and the President's only friends.
From the influence Mr. Hamilton's writings has had, in giving a tinge to the
American character, I am convinced it will render them the contempt, and scorn,
of Europe. Have we not daily striking proofs of my assertion? have not the
American citizens been treated with coldness by the French? -- have they not
been vexed, harrassed, and buffetted by the English? -- and have not the
Algerines, one of the weakest and most contemptible powers in that part of the
globe, compelled us to purchase a treaty, at the enormous sum of twelve hundred
thousand dollars?

When we turn aside from viewing his conduct toward the French -- the manner
in which it has influenced the public sentiment, to that nation; the only one
from whom America could expect to receive real acts of friendship; and view his
conduct with regard to the United States internally, I am apprehensive, we will
find as little cause of approbation and panygeric. Let us therefore take a
general view of his conduct, from the meeting of the federal convention. In
that enlightened body of patriots, for patriots they were, in comparison to Mr
Hamilton, we find him making a motion for the establishment of a monarchial
government; and when he failed, in his attempts, to get such a form introduced
into the United States, he got offended, like a capricious silly girl; and left
the convention in a pout; It is generally understood, that when attached to the
President's household, in the late revolution, he left it also in a pout; and
that he is very much addicted to those little girlish poutings; for shame
colonel Hamilton, once the great Financier General of America!
for all his fine oratory was lost in a breath of air. How mortifying, must it
have been, to a man of his ambitious views and nice feelings to be thus early
discomfited, in his political career; and in an object too wherein he seemed so
warmly interested. However, he meditated revenge, and he sought for it. On
finding the constitution admitted great latitude of constructive power, he
returned to the convention and signed the constitution; but with strong marks
of disapprobation, declaring that he signed it only in consequence of its
ambiguity, in defining the powers of the different branches of government. The
constitution being now published, and soon becoming popular; from the
confidence the citizens placed in General Washington, Doctor Franklin, and some
others; Mr. Hamilton had no alternative, to preserve his popularity with the
leading party, but to join, in conjunction with Mr. Madison, It was not, until
some time after, that the public were let into the secret, that Mr. Madison was
concerned in writing the Federalist: But Mr. Hamilton is not the only one who
founded a reputation upon the merits of a modest man.
and write in support of it. Having thus established his reputation, as a man
of abilities, and a warm federalist, amongst the real friends of the
constitution; and possessing an insinuating manner of address, it procured him
many friends; who were active in promoting his advancement, to the head of the
treasury department, on the organization of the constitution. It was now, that
he had the fullest opportunity of indulging that revenge, which he meditated on
signing the constitution; by insulting the good sense of the citizens. No
sooner was he fixed in his office, than he endeavored to introduce all the
etiquette, bustle, noise and impertinence of royalty; by introducing levees, a
courtly gazette, etc. the latter under the direction of John Fenno, of pious
memory; who stuffed it occasionally with all the nonsense, and empty sound of
royalty, etc. Just arrived in town, says Mr. Fenno, in his paper, the
honorable Mr. such a one, etc. Many thinking, soberminded citizens, became
doubtful of Mr. Fenno's outward piety, considering all this trash and nonsense,
as an insult offered to their understandings. His paper, in consequence, lost
its circulation; and to save his reputation, he was under the necessity of
changing it into a daily gazette; and depend on the speculators, and a few
governmental men, for its support. He interspersed it occasionally, with some
pious saying of some good old woman to the eastward, who, perhaps, suffered
under the martyrdom of witchcraft; probably his old grandmother, as some will
have it, that he was educated by her; be this as it may, his liberality of
sentiment, is a proof, that he must have been educated by some old grandame;
The religion of too many old women, seldom arrives to a greater degree of
perfection, than the restraining those natural appetites; which, when indulged
to excess, reduce us to a level with the brute creation. When they have
suppressed these, or to speak with more truth, but severity; when by reason of
their old age, these have left them; they begin to think that they are pious,
and are on the strait path to obtain an eternity of bliss. But they either
forget, or do not wish to understand, that malevolence, falsehood, spiritual
pride and ill nature; when indulged, or practiced in any degree; reduce us to
the character of devils; these are properly the evils of the mind. The truly
pious will be careful, in suppressing the evils of the one, as well as those of
the other.
for he seldom shows a conscientious scrupulousness, in saying the most
uncharitable things, of those who are opposed to him in principle, and
afterward gild it over with some pious saying; but the devil, as well as Mr.
Fenno, has been often known to assume the character of a religious man, in
order to accomplish his diabolical schemes. Whilst the trash, and nonsense of
his paper, was just cause of regret to many genuine republicans; it afforded
others, of more levity, much cause of laughter and ridicule. To hear him
announce in his paper, the arrival of the honorable Mr. --, from Richmond,
Norfolk, or Charleston, on his way home to the eastward; after having swindled
numbers of the old continental officers, and soldiers out of their
certificates, at two shillings and sixpence in the pound; who were not let
into the secrets of the funding system; may have been cause of laughter, to
those who knew this gentleman, and others of the speculating order, when they
had not a shirt to their back; but must ertainly shock the feelings of every
man of reflection; who regards justice and moral honesty, as the basis of all
civil society. Yet these were the men, Mr. Fenno decorated with the epithet
"honorable;" whilst the patriots of seventy-six, were often insulted and
ridiculed, in his paper, for petitioning congress, for a remuneration of their
losses. But a bare insult, was not sufficient to gratify Mr. Hamilton's
vindicative spirit; nothing short, would do, of subverting the liberties, peace
and happiness of the citizens. The constitution possessed great latitude of
constructive power, and he was determined to exercise it. Hence we find him
introducing laws partial and oppressive in their operation. The funding system,
assumption, and excise laws, and the bank of the United States; are all the
offspring of his brain In contradiction to the foregoing; it is asserted by
some, that Duer, who is now in the goal of New York for his swindling; the
friend, the assistant and associate of Mr. Hamilton; was the person who first
proposed the establishment of the bank, funding system, etc. -- See Thirteen
Letters, by A Citizen.
The author of "thirteen letters by a citizen," in speaking of the latter, with
great justness of thought, humourously observes, that "Mr. Hamilton, by
committing a rape on the constitution, begot the bank of the United States."
Surely it was a violence offered to the constitution; for there is no clause in
it, that will justify such an establishment. It was founded upon that clause,
which says, "Congress shall provide for the general welfare;" although it has
been five years in operation, who of its friends will now step forward, and
prove in what particular manner, it has been productive of general welfare; to
the community at large? Experience, on the contrary, has convinced us; that
there is no bank in the United States, more partial, limited, and selfish in
its discounts. The fact is, it has been conducted in such a manner as to
assist, and enrich a few governmental men; who neither care, in principle, for
bank, or government; longer than either minister to the enlargement of their
pecuniary circumstances. The conduct of Porcupine, their champion, the other
week to the tax-gatherer, exhibits a strong proof of the attachment of his
party to government, when their purse is in question. Although the bank has
contributed to enrich a few, at the entire neglect of others, yet the evil is
partial, in comparison to those arising from the funding system, assumption and
excise laws. By the two former, Mr. Hamilton has reversed the original
contract; and in so doing, the United States have become responsible, for the
payment of some millions of dollars, more than they were by the original
contract. This he has done, to enrich a few sycophants, as rapacious as
vultures, ever ready to prey upon the vitals of their country. To discharge
this enormous mass of national debt, it became necessary to lay heavy taxes
upon the people; among these, we find "a law laying duties upon spirits
distilled within the United States, and upon stills:" a law which is every way
repugnant to the principles of a republic; it has grown, and flourished, under
the despotism of monarchial governments only; where it required a military
force to put it into operation. But oppressive taxes, and facility in
increasing the national debt, were not the only objects Mr. Hamilton had in
view; a military establishment was wanting, as a key stone to the arch.
Michavel himself never invented schemes, fraught with more cunning, and
duplicity; or more subversive of the liberties of a free people. By introducing
an excise, he foresaw, as there was no law within the reach of government, more
discordant to the feelings of the citizens, and repugnant to the spirit of a
republic, that it would naturally meet with opposition; hence would arise the
necessity of a standing army, to support the dignity of government. But Mr.
Hamilton's inordinate passion for a military establishment, to perfect his
system, heated his imagination too much; he foresaw more than really happened.
The opposition to the excise law, at first, was but trifling, partial; and
without system, or coincidence of sentiment, among those who were opposed to
it. At the commencement of its operation, when a few discontented persons
showed themselves in opposition, had he ordered suits in law to be commenced
against the refractory, it is universally believed, by those who know, better
than Mr. Hamilton, the temper of the people in the western counties of
Pennsylvania, and the respect which they have always manifested for the
judiciary authority, that submission, by aid of the judiciary, might have been
obtained. But it was not submission Mr. Hamilton desired, it was opposition. If
Mr. Hamilton did not desire opposition, why sport with the rights of the
citizens, and the authority of the Judiciary Department; by serving the
distillers of Fayette County with writs, that were illegal, to attend at
Philadelphia, nearly three hundred miles from their homes. I say illegal, for
when the distillers had come to give in bail, they were found to be so. Was
this not mockery, and sporting with the liberties of the people? but Mr.
Hamilton will reason by analogy, and give us a long story about a cock and a
bull.
Hence we find him giving encouragement to the opposition, by an ill-timed
forbearance of urging the judiciary authority; which gave the people time and
opportunity, to discover the force of the opposition, by a general expression
of the public sentiment. Whilst the negligence, or connivance of government,
impressed them with the belief, that it was feeble -- wanting energy and
firmness, to enforce obedience to its laws. Two powerful motives to induce a
people, already dissatisfied, with other heightened measures of Mr. Hamilton's
administration, to become violent in their opposition; to a law which was more
particularly oppressive on them, than on any other part of the union. In the
mean time we find him, in the cabinet council, advocating, more probably giving
birth to the treaty with England; and afterward soliciting the President, to
appoint him to the embassy; which was rejected by the influence of Mr.
Randolph; this, at once, gives a solution to that bitterness, which Mr.
Hamilton's party have shown toward Mr. Randolph since his resignation. For it
is certain, that if Mr. Randolph had resigned from motives different from what
he did, we would have never heard of Mr. Hamilton's solicitations for the
embassy, His pride and vanity were, no doubt, considerably mortified; on
finding that his solicitations were rejected by the President. This evidently
shows, how fast, the President's confidence in him was diminishing; for it
cannot be urged, that it was a greater impropriety to appoint a Secretary, than
a Chief Justice; it must therefore be owing to a diminution of the President's
confidence in him. Happy would it have been for America, if no such confidence
had ever existed! How highly pleasing would it have been for Mr. Hamilton, to
become personally acquainted with Pit, Grenville, and the immaculate George
Rose; men, whose corrupt, and corrupting influence, he has been so anxious to
imitate. What a delicious gratification would it have afforded him, to have
dined with those renowned liberticides; he would then have been in his proper
element, breathing his native air. This group of liberticides, would be like an
assemblage of devils; leagued against the peace, welfare, and happiness of
mankind.

Scarcely had the agitation subsided, which the public mind had been thrown
into, by the unconstitutional appointment of Mr. Jay, as Minister
Plenipotentiary to the court of St. James; when the western insurrection burst
forth, like a mighty torrent, ready to sweep every thing before it. Now it is,
that Mr. Hamilton unmasks himself; and the little man appears to the world in
his native plumage. It is now that he gives vent to his meditated revenge, in a
hellish ejaculation, "Oh! that the insurgents would burn Pittsburgh!" What a
forcible argument for a military establishment? It is here we behold him losing
sight of the dignity of his office; and like the wily serpent, assuming all
that variety of character, which malice, meanness, and treachery could invent;
to ruin the reputation of Messrs. Findley, Smilie, and Gallatin, in the public
estimation: who were the most active in suppressing the insurrection; but who,
on other occasions, were opposed to the arbitrary measures of his
administration. One moment we find him in the character of an hospitable
friend, inviting an innocent, unsuspecting man, Major Powers. -- See Findley's
History of the Western Insurrection.
from his wife, his house, and family; and putting him under a military guard
for several days; because he would not perjure himself, in proving the
criminality of those gentlemen. Next instant, we find the little secretary
assume a different shape; and with all the subtilty of a fiend, endeavor to
extort evidence from those who were examined by him; first by telling them,
that he had already sufficient testimony, in his pocket, of the guilt of those
gentlemen. A cobweb subtilty it was indeed; it shows the man's embicility of
mind, for the greatest fool upon earth would be capable of seeing through it,
and thus reason with himself; "If Mr. Hamilton has sufficient testimony of the
guilt of those gentlemen, why does he attempt to extort evidence from me." What
a low, contemptible and mean procedure, for a secretary of the treasury; yet he
has frequently, says Mr. Findley in (...) ^^^surrection, acted in this manner.
Like Mr. Pope, (...) every thing by stratagem; if it be only to take a (...)
with his neighbor, or eat a plate of capers; all must be done (...)!
And when he could not succeed, in this womanish proceeding, we next find him,
like the frog in the fable, bloated with an imaginary consequence; assuming all
the terrors of an inquisitorial monk; with knitted brow, and angry look,
threatening the evidence's own personal safety, if they would not confess to
the guilt of these gentlemen: -- of whom I will assert, upon a strict
examination of facts, are more genuine federalists than Mr. Hamilton; for it is
now well known that he signed the constitution, with strong expressions of
disgust; -- that it was wholly from its admitting such a latitude of
constructive power; -- and that he has often spoken of it since, not as a
sacred compact, entered into for the general welfare and happiness of the
citizens, but as a piece of paper and parchment.

After thus taking a general view of his conduct, in what terms ought we to
address so black, so cowardly, and treacherous a tyrant? who, under the
imposing name of public good, attempted to stab, assassin-like, the liberties,
peace, and happiness of the citizens; whilst he, with his diabolical
principles, were corrupting their morals, by combining vice with the luring
hope of gain. Thou worse than Arnold, Noy, and all the Dumouriers!

After what has here been said, I will not hesitate to predict, that when the
clouds of prejudice are dissipated, and the present generation pass away; and
when future historians will arise, to give an account of the present day; if
they find a single transaction in the life of General Washington, that will
cast a dishonorable reflection upon his memory; it will be the appointment of
Mr. Hamilton, to the head of the treasury department.

In discussing the measures of our own administration, and the revolutionary
principle of the French government; I cannot conceive why occasion is taken, by
Porcupine, to traduce the Irish nation; as a banditti of thieves and robbers.
It argues in the man a degree of impudence and folly, which is rarely met with
amongst individuals; but certainly never amongst men of sentiment and
education, or amongst sensible well-informed writers; who will never run into
digression, from the point in controversy, to indulge their malice and hatred,
in abusing any people. But to calumniate all nations, except his own, seems to
be the general design of this hireling; and this marked ill nature shows
itself, in a greater or less degree, in the writings of almost every
Englishman; when he has had occasion to speak of the national character of
others.

From a pamphlet published this present year, by Moreau de St. Merry, on the
prisons of Philadelphia, which is now lying before me; I will be able to prove,
to the honor of Irishmen, that Porcupine's strictures upon the character of
the Irish, who emigrate to this country, are false; and can only arise from his
invincible ignorance of facts, and national pride and surliness of disposition.

The fact then to be proved, is, that there are fewer rogues, consequently more
honest men, emigrate to this country from Ireland, than England, in proportion
to the whole number of emigrants. Moreau de St. Merry, in this pamphlet states,
that during the space of four years, ending June 1791, there were three hundred
and twenty-one foreigners, under conviction in the prisons of Philadelphia;
"among these, says he, two hundred and thirty-one were Irish, and eighty-four
English or Scotch;" and during the next four years, ending March 1795,
continues the above writer, "among the hundred and thirty-five strangers,
ninety-two are Irish, and nineteen English or Scotch." To prevent trouble, in
the calculations, and deductions let us combine the two periods, which make a
term of eight years; so that the whole number of Irish convicted during this
term, is three hundred and twenty-three. There are twenty-seven hundred Irish
arrive in this port every year. The data, upon which I found this calculation,
are, that generally one year with another, five vessels sail from the port of
Londonderry, with passengers, and four from Belfast; besides others from Newry,
Killebegs, Donnegal, and some from Dublin, Limerick, Cork, and Sligo; but
seldom from the latter. The nine vessels, sailing from Derry and Belfast,
contain from two to four hundred passengers each; so that each vessel may be
averaged at three hundred passengers; this makes the whole number of emigrants,
amount yearly to twenty-seven hundred; as I have stated above. But if we go
back in our calculations, to the four years subsequent to the peace in
eighty-three, we will find that upwards of three thousand emigrated each year,
to this port, from Londonderry alone; and if we did justice to our calculations
and deduction, we would: because a man, however roguish he may be inclined,
will rarely commence thief, or robber on his first arrival in a strange
country; he must remain an honest man for some time, until he becomes
acquainted with the manners, and customs of the people; the situation of the
country; and above all, until he gets acquainted with others of his profession.
But I need not go so far back, for proof, to convince the world, that the
number of dishonest men, who emigrate from Ireland to this country, is much
less, in proportion to the whole number of emigrants, than either from England,
or Scotland. I have already shown upon what data, I suppose twenty-seven
hundred emigrate to this port yearly; which, in the space of eight years,
amount to twenty-one thousand six hundred; the number of those, who were
convicted during that period, according to Moreau's statement, was three
hundred and twenty-one, which are nearly as one is to sixty-two.

Let us now see how the honesty of Englishmen, will bear to be analized, in
like manner. It is so generally known, I need scarcely repeat, that, for four
years subsequent to the establishment of peace in eighty-three, there were few
or no Englishmen emigrated to this country; except some clerk, who were sent,
by their masters, into the seaports, on schemes of speculation. Many of those
gentlemen, have since fattened upon the spoils of the war-worn soldier; as well
as upon the labor, and industry of the unsuspecting farmer. They now assume a
big-bellied consequence, in our streets, little inferior to a London alderman;
who has been fed upon turtle-soup, and calves heads. They may be known by an
affected sneer, at every thing which is American; and a frothy insolence in
their looks; when they see a man, whom they suspect to possess less wealth than
themselves. In the eight years, de St. Merry has given us, of those under
condemnation in the prisons of Philadelphia; that is, from June 1787, to March
1795, there were not more English and Scotch, I am convinced, arrived in this
port, to settle in the country, than one hundred each year, upon an average;
which amount, in eight years, to eight hundred. The number of English convicted
during that period, I have already stated, amounted to one hundred and three;
the proportion, therefore, of the whole number of convicts, to the whole number
of emigrants, is somewhat more, than, as one is to eight. Hence it
unquestionably appears, that out of every sixty-two, who emigrated, from
Ireland to the United States, one in the course of eight years is convicted,
for committing some offense against the laws of the state; whereas, out of
every eight Englishmen who emigrated, one is convicted in the same space of
time. To which I may add, without hazarding my reputation, as a candid writer,
that there are generally five, or six speculators or swindlers, arrive in our
city every year from the different ports of England. These are generally styled
d -- d smart fellows, but of whom the laws can take no cognizance; and who are
perhaps, as pernicious to society, and contribute as largely in corrupting the
morals of our citizens, as the openly profane. These gentry appear to be fully
acquainted with the maxim of a certain Quaker, who is well known, among the
speculating order; for a peculiar address, and dexterity, he has in negociating
all his transactions. Being called to an account one day, by a gentleman for
want of candor, in his dealings, Obediah replied with more warmth, than
caution; "friend, thee art mistaken, thee needs not complain; I did not cheat
thee, I only outwitted thee." From the foregoing deductions, which I have drawn
from the most unquestionable data, it appears that if the same number of
English, as of Irish, emigrated to this country in the same space of time;
there would be two thousand seven hundred and fifty-four convicted; whereas
there are only 321 of the Irish; what a blessing it is to the United States,
that national pride, ignorance and prejudice keep them at home? Although fully
satisfied of having convinced the most obstinate and prejudiced, as far, as
well established facts will do so; that there are fewer rogues emigrate, to
this country, from Ireland than from England, nearly in a proportion as one is
to eight. Yet if the whole number of Englishmen who were convicted, for
committing offenses against the laws of the state, had been found innocent on
their trials; still there are a few of their countrymen, who have escaped
punishment, by a strange perversion of the laws, -- have done more injury to
society, and have robbed the citizens of the United States of more property,
than all the articles would amount to, that were stolen by Irishmen since the
first settlement of America. Among these I will mention two only, because more
would be unnecessary. Duer of New York, it is well known, failed in one million
five hundred thousand dollars; it is also known that a great part of this he
borrowed in five, ten, fifteen, twenty, etc. dollars, as he could get them;
from every fruit-woman, drayman, and carter. But if an Irishman, from want of
education or from necessity, robs a man of a cow or a horse; the whole nation
must be calumniated by a contemptible wretch, as thieves and robbers. The other
I will mention is Stabler, who failed in New York, ran off to this city; and
soon after opened a large store, and as soon after failed in forty thousand
dollars; and fled to Amsterdam.

And now let it be affirmed to the honor of Irishmen, that three-fourths of all
the merchants, who turn bankrupts throughout the United States, are English and
Scotchmen; although there are as many of the former merchants, as there are of
the latter.

There is another circumstance, which ought not to be concealed on the present
occasion; as it affects the honor and honesty of Englishmen, in a very delicate
point; its consequences are extensive in their operation, and baneful to
society; it ought therefore to receive publicity: I mean the counterfeiting the
notes of the bank of the United States, and North America. It is a truth, which
the heads of the judiciary department of the state can testify, as well as the
sheriff and jailer of Lancaster county; that there were an English man and
woman tried, and convicted at Lancaster; for forging the notes of these two
banks. This circumstance, with a combination of others, has thrown such light
upon that affair; as will justify us in asserting, that there was a banditti of
Englishmen and women dispersed over the United States; from New Hampshire to
Georgia, employed in counterfeiting, and passing these notes. It is a fact,
known to all Europe, that the immaculate Pit employed several men in
counterfeiting French assignats; but owing to the watchfulness of the national
convention, few of them ever went into circulation: on finding that he failed
in his attempt to raise money, by his counterfeit assignats, to carry on "a
just and necessary war;" have we not the most presumptive proof, that he turned
his attention to counterfeiting the notes of these two banks? We all know, that
the British counterfeited the paper currency of the United States, in the late
revolution; and why not now the paper currency of these two banks? their
necessities are greater now, than they were during the American war; and what
faith, or moral rectitude can we expect from a set of corrupt unprincipled men,
goaded on by necessity? Surely there is no barrier which national faith, honor,
and justice can erect, that such men will not break through and violate; to
accomplish their nefarious designs. And when we consider that these banks are
situated in a more extensive, and larger trading town, than any other in the
United States; their notes having therefore a more general and extensive
circulation; is a circumstance which renders them fit objects of Pitt's
designs. To which if we add, that these counterfeits appeared shortly after he
had advertised French assignats for sale, and was defeated in his attempts to
get them into circulation; it gives additional force to the evidence. But there
is one fact yet remains to be told, which must remove the doubts of every man,
and silence at once the clamours of the British faction. It is well known, to
many citizens of Philadelphia, that at the time when Pit published his
counterfeit assignats, there was an Englishman residing in this city of the
name of Hancock; who had fled from London, some years before, for crimes
alleged against him there; and for which he would, no doubt, have received a
Tyburn elevation, had he been taken. About this time Hancock left this city for
London; and soon after returned with all the apparatus for coining dollars; and
several copperplates, upon which were engraved the counterfeit notes. He had
several hundred copies struck off the plates, in London; and brought over the
bank-notes in sheets. Now to suppose that Mr. Hancock, who is well known to be
an accomplished villain, would be so stupid as to return to London, when
conscious of his guilt, and that certain death awaited him there, if he were
detected, is improbable. It is a supposition that cannot be admitted, as there
is not one circumstance, except the man's stupidity, which is not a
characteristic in him, that could justify us in forming the supposition; since
it is well known that there are some of his countrymen residing within the
United States, fully capable of counterfeiting bank-notes; why then endanger
his life, in returning to London, when all things might be as well accomplished
here? It is evident he must have returned, under the authority of Mr. Pit, who
employed him in disposing of the counterfeit notes; as Lord North did many of
the old tories, who now assume amongst us, no small degree of consequence.
Hancock was detected and convicted in Lancaster, and an Irishman with him, who
lent him his house, and became the dupe of his villainy. What pity our laws did
not make a just distinction, and inflict a twofold punishment on the man, who
would act the villain himself, and corrupt the morals of another, who might
have lived and died an honest man.


To attempt pursuing Porcupine through all the digressions, turnings, and
labyrinths of his writings; would be like himself hunting a flea, amongst the
plaits of his old grandmother's petticoat, under the little damson tree. See
his Life.
One moment we find him abusing Mr. Swanwick of Philadelphia; the next instant
we discover him, all the way in Virginia, snarling like a surly dog, at Mr.
Giles; thence in New York, puffing his foetid breath in the face of Mr.
Livingston; and next instant we find him in the western counties of
Pennsylvania; like a beast of prey, prowling after Mr. Gallatin.

The republican party being so numerous, that to vindicate the conduct of each
individual, against Porcupine's illiberal and ill-natured abuse; would consume
more time than I have to spare on the present occasion, and occupy more pages
than I have assigned to this pamphlet. Let us therefore pursue some method, and
begin with Mr. Swanwick first; because he lives nearer us than the others. It
is urged by Porcupine that he is a vain man; but what relation has vanity to
politics? a prejudiced mind, like Porcupine's, may think there is a connection;
for my part I can discover none, more than there is between vanity and
religion; nor do I see how vanity can interweave itself with politics; I know
ambition may -- ambition will lead a man to strain his faculties, in composing
a harangue; which will take him three or four hours in delivery. Some are
ambitious of being thought men of parts, great orators, or ingenuous men; and
others are again so weak, as to grow ambitious of being esteemed rich men; as
if riches were permanent; and some through meanness, are ambitious of being
considered poor men. But all this time we never say, we are vain to be thought
great orators, men of parts, etc. An ambitious man will leave no attempts
unessayed, to have his political sentiments adopted with all their prejudices;
at the hazard of every thing, that is connected with his country's welfare; and
in this respect, I believe, Mr. Hamilton and Porcupine are two of the most
ambitious men we have; consequently the most dangerous. In their own way,
neither of them has left a path unexplored; in order to have his favorite
principles adopted; one by sophistry, frequently of the slightest texture, and
an analogical method of reasoning; which oftener leads men into error than any
other. It is indeed the method chiefly practiced by sophists, as they
frequently take for granted, that there is a likeness between things; when
there is none in nature. Who ever discovered a likeness between the President
of the United States, and the army; before Mr. Hamilton attempted to exculpate
the President, from those charges brought against him, by the "calm observer?"
Mr. Hamilton takes for granted there is a likeness between them, hence he
concludes, as the army have often drawn more money out of the treasury; than
the specific sums appropriated by Congress, and those at an earlier period;
that the President was also justifiable in doing the same; which, in other
words, is saying that the President's necessities are equal to the army's; for
unless Mr. Hamilton proves this, which I think he will not attempt to prove,
his deductions are all childish, and frivolous; and will never exculpate the
President in the public opinion. This vein of analogical reasoning, is the
basis of all Mr. Hamilton's writings; and if one had time to analyze them, I am
persuaded, the greater part of them, as well as of those wherein he prides
himself most, would tumble to the ground like a baseless fabric; for reasoning
by analogy is like building a house upon a sandy foundation. But to illustrate
more fully Mr. Hamilton's method of reasoning, let us suppose him crossing a
field, at Albany, to seduce his neighbor's wife, or daughter; as it is said,
he has a wonderful itching after other men's wives; and when he has gotten into
one of these catterwalling moods, no he-cat is more lascivious; for rather than
be disappointed, he would rush into the ebony arms of an African, provided she
had a husband. I say let us suppose, that he is crossing a field, and in his
way meets a white pig; if he had never seen one before, what would be his
method of reasoning on this occasion? not like an enlightened philosopher, who
would examine if it possessed those properties, in common, with the species to
which it belongs; or whether it was a variety only; but the first idea, that
would enter the mind of our analogical reasoner, would be that of milk; if he
were necessarily led to reason on the properties of the pig, he would proceed
thus, "milk is white, and we all know it is nutritive; therefore it must be
good to make men go a catterwalling. The pig is white, it must consequently
possess the same properties; I will therefore make a funding system of it. If
the funding system has not set men a catterwalling, it has certainly set many a
beggar upon horseback. -- The above reasoning is not more absurd, than the
reasoning of Mr. Hamilton, in support, that "a public debt is a public
blessing."
Among the various bonds of union which direct men's understandings, to
associate their ideas, resemblance is one; and I believe there are few who
possess that associating quality in a higher degree, than Mr. Hamilton; like an
ignus fatuus, he bewilders us in the multiplicity of his ideas; hence he has
been very justly styled "the long winded Pacificus."

But Porcupine is a writer of a different cast from Mr. Hamilton; although
their principles, and the object they have in view, are precisely the same, the
discredit of republicanism; yet they pursue roads widely different. Porcupine
more bold, and adventurous; but less artful, and designing; like a head strong
stubborn horse, that runs off with his rider, he dashes through mud and mire,
making the dirt fly in all directions. If truth he in his way, he besmears it
with calumny and falsehood; for he has on every occasion fully shown, that no
truth, however sacred, he will respect. There is no calumny too gross, no
falsehood too glaring and absurd; for this hireling to practice, as weapons, in
butchering the man's reputation, who is opposed to him in principle. And when
he has calumniated him today, he will return to it tomorrow with the same
eagerness, that a dog would to his vomit.

But let us return to Mr. Swanwick, of whom I am justifiable in asserting, that
if he acquits himself, in his political capacity, as an honest man; his
constituents will never enquire, whether he sent a piece of poetry to the
editor of a London magazine, for publication, or not: or whether he has his
house ornamented with paintings, busts, and statues; -- that he has acquitted
himself to the entire satisfaction of his constituents, Porcupine will not
attempt to deny. But if he has sent a piece of poetry, across the atlantic for
publication, is that any proof of his vanity? common sense spurns the idea. If
such a thing be a proof of a man's vanity, how many vain men will we find
amongst mankind? I could here, were it necessary, name several; who, if they
did not send poetry, sent other works for publication; yet who ever thought,
before Porcupine, that such a circumstance constituted a vain man? Porcupine
criticizes upon this poetry, but Mr. Swanwick may reply to him with the same
justness of thought, that Hanibal replied to the philosopher; who had the folly
and presumption, to discant before him upon the principles of war. "Of all the
silly old men, says Hanibal, that I ever heard talk, thou art the silliest." I
need not ask the reader, whether Hanibal or the philosopher was the vainest
man; neither need I ask him, whether Mr. Swanwick or Porcupine is the vainest
man. Porcupine criticizes upon Mr. Swanwick's poetry, like the vain philosopher
upon the principles of war; without having had any experience, or possessing
one of the necessary qualifications of a warrior. And Porcupine criticizes upon
Mr. Swanwick's poetry, without possessing one of the necessary qualifications
of a critique; except his ill nature. Porcupine urges also, because Mr.
Swanwick has his house ornamented with paintings, busts and statues; he must
therefore be a vain man. If he had reflected, for fifty years, and as many
centuries, provided he outlived that period, for a fact or an argument to
prove a man to be vain, he could not have brought forward one more
preposterous. Those things are evidently a proof of Mr. Swanwick's love of the
arts; and in this opinion, I believe, every sensible man will coincide with me;
for if we judge of causes by their effects, we can draw no other conclusion. By
purchasing those things does he not reward the labor of the artist? he who
rewards the labor of the artist, gives encouragement to the art itself; and he
who encourages the art must love it. How simple and easy it is for men to
reason, when they have truth on their side, and candor to acknowledge it. If
every man would act their part, in that respect, as well as Mr Swanwick; the
arts would not languish in this country, so long in their infancy, as they do.
But men's minds are too much absorpt in speculation, and pecuniary
aggrandizement, to admit a taste sufficiently refined to relish them. Why then
censure a man for contributing his share, to the encouragement of those arts;
which enlightened ages and nations have approved? nay more, it was owing to the
encouragement that the arts met with in those times; which make future writers
apply to them, the appellation of an enlightened age, or enlightened people.
Why do we call the Indians an uncivilized people? it is not because they
possess fewer of the social, and domestic virtues than we do; for travelers
all agree, that these they fulfill with more warmth, than even the pious folks
of New England; if we except bundling, as we have not yet learned, whether that
social virtue has been introduced amongst them. It is not because they possess
less moral honesty, than is found amongst Porcupine's friends; for travelers
agree also, that amongst them are found no brokers, no speculators, no stock
and land-jobbers; nor have they yet discovered, notwithstanding several years
residence amongst them, one instance of mercantile fraud and meanness. But it
is alone from the circumstance of their having no relish for the arts, and
sciences; that we apply to them the degraded appellation, of "an uncivilized
people." Why then, in the name of heaven! should we accuse a man of vanity, for
encouraging those things; by which we acquired the honorable appellation of "a
civilized people?" But what lengths, will not envy and malice go: when
determined upon murdering a man's reputation The same malice and envy, which
persecute Mr. Swanwick today; persecuted Mr. Nicholson for nine long years in
this city; his political sentiments did not harmonize with a certain party; and
he was treading the path, to acquire a fortune, by which he was likely to
obtain a pre-eminence over them; as far as riches will do so, in a free
country. They were like the surly dog in the manger, who could not eat the hay
himself; neither would they suffer Mr. Nicholson, to obtain a fortune; as far
as their malignant influence could go, in preventing it. But when he had
acquired that fortune, which was the sole object of his wishes; and which he
pursued with the most unremitted exertion, and industry; he then changed his
political sentiments, turned his back on his old friends; and became the
rallying-point of almost all the land-jobbers, and speculators, throughout the
United States, Since that time they have taken him into their bosoms, and some
of them even now court his friendship. We do not (...) that party accuse him,
to day, of a single faux-paus; nay he is to them, as immaculate, as the virgin
rose. I would ask any man of sense, and candor -- for it is only to such men I
wish to speak on the present occasion, is Mr. Nicholson an honester man today,
than he was six years ago, or is he less vain? I suppose the next charge,
brought against Mr. Swanwick, by Porcupine; is, that he is a vain man, because
he eats -- he drinks, and sleeps; for these he may repeat tomorrow. "The short
man from Philadelphia," what ingenuity of thought! who would have believed
their own eyes, on seeing Mr. Swanwick, that he was a man of moderate size; if
the humourous, the witty, and ingenuous Porcupine had not told us? What a happy
discovery!

Had ancient biographers and historians, been as particular in transmitting to
us; the size, figure, and tone of voice, of their respective heroes, as
Porcupine is in handing Mr. Swanwick's down to futurity; what a glare of light
would it have diffused upon their histories? For he seems to insinuate that the
capacity of men's minds, ought to be measured by the bulk of their bodies. The
observation exactly contains as much profoundness of thought, and good sense;
as one made by the learned Doctor Belknap, in his history of New Hampshire.
Speaking of the climate of that state, and the coldness of the winter season;
the Doctor profoundly tells us, that this is the time, "when nature teaches the
hens to set on the cow's back, to keep their feet warm." Vol. III. page 19.
Heavens! who would have thought? if the learned Doctor had not told us, that
the hens of New Hampshire possess so much sagacity. I suppose a Virginia, or an
Irish hen, would be such a stupid, silly devil; as to run in a cold day, and
set herself down upon a sheet of ice, or a heap of snow. But if the hens of
New Hampshire possess so much sagacity, how much more must the learned Doctor
possess? he would never have thought, I presume, of setting himself down upon a
cow's back, in a cold day, to keep his feet warm, had not the hens put him in
mind of it; nay, I am persuaded, he would prefer to sit by a good fire; for
certainly it is no uncommon thing, to find a learned Doctor sitting by a
pleasant fire, in a cold day, in preference to a cow's back; which
unquestionably proves, that a Doctor in divinity as well as Porcupine, may
possess more sagacity than a hen.

While I am thus speaking of the sagacity of hens, and doctors in divinity; it
brings to my recollection, the author of "the American Universal Geography;"
who has lately been crowned with the aristotelian cap. This geographic divine
speaking of the political dissentions which prevailed in New Hampshire,
respecting the adoption of the federal constitution, brings in the following
argument to prove, that the delegates to the state convention, who had received
instructions from their constituents, were not in duty bound to obey them.
"Although, says this learned son of Aristotle, the instructions of constituents
cannot, on the true principles of representation, be binding upon a deputy in
any legislative assembly, because his constituents are but a part of the state,
and have not heard the arguments and objections of the whole, whereas his act
is to affect the whole state." I would ask Mr. Morse, what are the majority in
any legislative assembly? are they not a part? but says Mr. Morse, "a part
ought not to govern;" a majority being a part, (for it is evident that a
majority of the towns might have given instructions) therefore they ought not
govern, according to his mode of reasoning. A doctrine subversive of every
principle of true republicanism. Some men show so much ambition to be thought
ingenuous writers, that they would even sacrifice truth for the sake of a
sophism; nay even violate the sanctity of their clerical profession, for the
sake of a logical falsehood. Strange that men so enlightened as the people to
the eastward, are represented to be by those two writers, and not know their
political rights, and the rank which they ought to hold in society! to be
enlightened and not know ones's political rights, is a manifest absurdity; to
know one's political rights and not be capable of giving instructions to a
deputy, is an absurdity no less glaring. Wonderful philosophers! ages to come
will read with delight, and astonishment your learned productions! For one, in
the very depth of his philosophical researches, has discovered that
New Hampshire is situated upon the terraqueous globe; Vol. III. page 1.
and that the hens of that state are so sagacious, as to sit upon the cow's
back, in a cold day, to keep their feet warm. And the other has proved --
logically proved, to an astonished world, that the servant ought not to obey
his master, nor the agent his employer. Wonderful philosophers! what an
irreparable loss it is to modern literature, that these thy learned
productions, did not appear before Swift published his "battle of the ancient
and the modern books;" for Herodotus, and Livy; Aristottle, and Plato; who led
on the ancients, must have fallen before them, and modern literature crowned
with unfading laurels. Wonderful philosophers!

The disposition of the New England clergy, to get themselves interwoven into
the government of their respective states; is manifest upon every important,
political question; which comes before the public. It is a well known fact that
the clergy of Massachusetts, once held the reins of that government; and since
they have been ousted by the good sense of the citizens, they have not ceased
to grasp at every opportunity; whereby they might regain their ancient
unlimitted power, over the rights and consciences of the citizens. Does not
this exactly correspond with the part, which many of the New England clergy
have acted, upon a late important question? In support of my assertion
generally, I have only to appeal to the writings of Mr. Morse, wherein he says,
that the very democratical government of Connecticut, is counterbalanced by the
aristocracy of the clergy. We know then, that the interests of aristocracy and
democracy are diametrically opposite; and when such interests exist in a state,
they must naturally create dissension among its citizens; but we hear of no
such dissension among the citizens of Connecticut; for the aristocracy of the
clergy, like a slow poison in the human body, has paralized the democratical
part and rendered it merely nominal. The clergy of the eastern states are like
those women, who are more remarkable for subtilty, than candor; and who
through principles of cunning and artifice, govern their silly husbands,
without letting them know that they are governed. When a certain divine
personage, at whose name every knee ought to bend, and the tongue of clamor
cease, was asked by one of those brothers; who thought himself unjustly dealt
with, in regard to his patrimonial estate, what he should do? "Man, replied the
Son of God, who made me a judge?" giving him to understand that carnal, or
worldly affairs; were foreign to the true spirit, and intention of his mission.
And when others, to try the political sentiments of the same divine personage,
presented him with a piece of silver; and after being informed that the image
and superscription it bore, were Caesar's; he declined all interference in
political matters, by giving them the following evasive answer; "render, says
he, unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's." Are not those circumstances
which directly and unequivocally prove, that the Christian religion, in its
purity, does not admit clergymen interfering in political concerns. Hence we
are no longer surprised, to find clergymen of ambitious views and mercenary
principles, attempting to prove that the servant ought not to obey his master.
Better such clergymen would relinquish, at once, their clerical functions; than
longer pervert the precepts of Christianity, by making them subservient to
their mercenary purposes.

Porcupine's criticisms, on Mr. Swanwick's poetry, are not the only instance we
have of his vanity and ill nature. The illiberal and vulgarly manner which he
has treated Telemachus, a work of the celebrated Fenelon, in a French grammar
he published some time ago in this city, is disgusting to the feelings of every
man, who regards virtuous and enlightened men, as the greatest blessing and
ornament to society. Of this work, which Porcupine treats with contempt and
ridicule, a writer highly esteemed for his candor and good sense, speaks in
the following manner; "no work, says he, ever had a greater reputation; the
style of it is lively, natural and beautiful; the fictions well contrived; the
moral sublime; and the political maxims all tending to the happiness of
mankind." But Porcupine, in contempt of the universal opinion of mankind,
ridicules this work; and calls Telemachus a simple fellow. Why? because he
would not go to bed to Calypso, who was in love with him. Gracious God! that a
man would be so lost to all sense of decency, and moral sentiment, as to call
another "a simple fellow;" because he would not prostitute himself, and indulge
his brutal appetites; at the expense of innocence and virtue. This is uniformly
the method, which men of vicious habits endeavor to propagate their nefarious
principles; by ridiculing virtue, and innocence; for if they could get men to
be once ashamed of their innocence, and virtue; they were then sure of
succeeding. When we view Porcupine himself in the character of a seducer, we
are no longer surprised to find him ridiculing Telemachus, as "a simple
fellow." When we behold him inveigling an innocent girl, not more than sixteen
or seventeen years, from her aged parents -- their only remaining blossom --
and last best hope; when we consider him breaking the ties of parental
affection, and filial duty; exciting animosity between parent and child; our
wonder ceases when we find him endeavoring to excite animosity, between the
citizens of the eastern and the southern states. When we view him giving an
aged parent occasion to exclaim, in the bitterness of his heart, "If I am
bereft of my only daughter, I am bereft!" What parent of sensibility, who has a
daughter; or what brother of sensibility, who has a sister; that would not be
roused with indignation, at reflecting on such circumstances? Are the tears and
sighs of an aching heart -- a bereft parent, unworthy of our notice! is female
happiness of no consideration amongst men, that we should pass it over in
silence! In answer to the foregoing we have only to observe, that it was
generally believed, by those who were intimate at the house where Porcupine
lodged, on his arrival, that he had seduced the girl who lived with him as his
wife: they believed, and said so, but upon what authority I never enquired.
When we moreover consider him abusing the archbishop of Cambray, and Doctor
Franklin; two of the most enlightened men of their age; it confirms us in our
belief, that his writings tend to the subversion of all those principles; upon
which rest the peace, happiness, and well-being of society.

The archbishop of Cambray believed and supported the being of a Deity, and the
Christian religion; Porcupine says, that Doctor Franklin a deity only, and
moral rectitude. The latter he reproaches in the most grovelling manner, and the
former he calls a "silly babbler." Taking a general view of the principles of
mankind, so far as they relate to religion, we are naturally led to divide them
into three classes; those who believe in a Supreme Being and a Redeemer, are
styled Christians; those who believe in a Supreme Being alone, and the fitness
of moral actions to procure eternal happiness, are styled Deists; and those who
believe as neither of the former, are styled Atheists. Porcupine ridicules
Doctor Franklin's principles in the silliest manner, without refuting them; now
if he ridicules the principles of a Deist, and laughs at the principles of a
Christian? what inference can we draw? but that he is himself an Atheist; and
if to this conclusion, which I think every man of candor will acknowledge to
be just, we add the contempt he has shown for the Christian religion, by not
attending any of its public institutions; for who ever saw Porcupine at a
religious assembly in this city? it must confirm every man's belief, that
Porcupine is an Atheist in the fullest latitude of the word. I have taken for
granted, all this time, on the authority of Porcupine, that Doctor Franklin was
a Deist; a man of candor and an enlightened understanding, will never make an
assertion, which he cannot support by some fact, or fair deduction; but what
proof has Porcupine brought forward, that will lead us to believe, that Doctor
Franklin's principles were deistical; surely not one, that would induce a
credulous child to believe so. He has brought forward the heresay of an
envenomed old man; who is universally known to entertain an irreconcilable
hatred, to the memory of Doctor Franklin; because he took such an active part
in the late revolution; well may we apply to him, on this occasion, the saying
of a celebrated writer; "as bad as men are, they dare not appear to be the
enemies of virtue, and when they resolve to persecute it, they pretend to
believe it false, or lay some crime to its charge." I repeat again, that
Porcupine has not adduced one sentiment of the Doctor's of a deistical
tendency; only the malignant aspersions of a turbulent old man, who is more
remarkable for his bankruptsies, and clamorous disposition; than for candor,
fair dealing, and a desire of seeking after truth. But I have produced both
sentiments and actions of Porcupine; from which I have, by the fairest
deduction, proved him to be an Atheist. For if we believe in a deity, the
immortality of the soul, and in future rewards and punishments; in which no
Atheist ever believed; To obtain those future rewards, there can be only the
following principles of general conduct; that is we must either believe in the
merits of a Redeemer and moral actions, which are always the consequence of
such a belief; or in the fitness of moral rectitude alone, to procure us those
future rewards; now he who ridicules and laughs at men for believing and
practicing one or other of these general principles; cannot be said to believe,
or practice either himself; and if he neither believes, nor practices either,
it is then self evident, he must be an Atheist. For it would be preposterous,
in the extreme, to suppose a man would treat with contempt and ridicule those
sacred principles of action in others, which mark the general tenor of his own
conduct. Before we attempt to ridicule a thing, we must remove from it all
those ideas of sacredness, which we formerly considered attached to it.

In his "Scare Crow," he quotes the following passage out of Doctor Franklin's
will, to prove him an aristocrat; notwithstanding the services he rendered his
country, and the cause of liberty, and science in general. "I bequeath, says
the Doctor, to my worthy friend George Washington, my gold-headed cane,
surmounted with a liberty cap: if it were a scepter he is worthy of it."
Porcupine then makes the following remark; "after all the Doctor's clamor
against kings, he thought a scepter something more than a liberty cap." But, I
answer, it was directly the reverse; it was not owing to any estimation the
Doctor held a scepter in; but being well convinced, that General Washington
always entertained a womanish longing after a scepter; which made him use that
soothing expression. It shows the Doctor's goodness of heart, that he wished to
part in peace with all mankind; and give cause of chagrin to none. Instead of
proving, that the Doctor held a scepter in higher estimation than a liberty
cap, it proves only, that General Washington always held it in higher
estimation; for is it not self-evident, that if the President entertained an
antipathy toward a scepter, or viewed it as a contemptible bauble; and the
Doctor, under these circumstances, offered him his cane, by saying, "Sir, if it
were a scepter, you are worthy of it;" would not such conduct be something like
irony? would it not be degrading the present in the President's opinion, and
directly insulting his feelings? Porcupine further observes, that "poor Richard
(Doctor Franklin) certainly deserves to be tumbled from his niche, for his
dying confession;" because he discovered to the world the President's fondness
for a scepter; "and I trust, continues Porcupine, when the day of retribution
comes he will not be forgotten;" the above passage of this humane hireling
needs but little comment; it fully shows of itself to what savage lengths, his
party would extend their persecutions if they dared -- that they would even
wreak their feeble vengeance, upon a senseless block of marble. This is the
generous -- the immaculate hero, who first accuses, and then condemns the
French nation; for a crime which he threatens to put into execution, when a
suitable opportunity will offer. Would it not be well for the corporation, to
take notice of him; before his hellish malice may tempt him to deface, that
beautiful statue? Surely threats are as cognizable in law, as real crimes: No
doubt his good old friend, Mr. Olden, would spare time from his private
discounting, to go before a magistrate and pledge some of his dirty acres, as a
security for his good behavior. But still the magistracy ought to assert their
dignity; and be a safeguard to the works of genius, as well as to that property
which is too often acquired by fraud, and speculation.

I have already adduced arguments and facts, sufficient to convince the most
prejudiced, that Porcupine is neither a Christian, nor a moral man. But the
following fact, establishes beyond all controversy, the impiety of this
wretched scribbler. In his Censor of May, page 189, speaking of Mr. Swanwick,
he advises, with the most unblushing effrontery, the ladies of Philadelphi to
go, and "even s -- him:" monstrous obscenity! assuring them at the same time,
by a solemn oath, that "they need not apprehend any mischief." Heavens! what an
incitement does he offer to vice! What shall we in future think of this
hireling's modesty, morality and discretion? How long will he be suffered to
pass with impunity? I have not the least doubt, were he in London, but he could
easily get some cockneigh wench, to act that vile abominable part: But sure I
am that the American women, though the Yankees may bundle, have not yet become
so lost to every sense of modesty and virtue; as that he could even find one
among Mrs. Maginnis's girls so abandoned. When William Penn was tracing out his
beloved city of Philadelphia, (...) Crow.
if any one had told him, that the time would come, when one of his own
countrymen would have the canine impudence; for to advise the ladies of
Philadelphia, in many of whose veins his own blood was trickling, to prostitute
themselves; I much question if the good old man, though a Quaker, would not
have said "that it was a d -- d lie;" and if it would be further told him, that
it was a grey-haired old Quaker who himself had daughters, that was vending all
this obscenity and prostituted trash; would not the good old man have exclaimed
with warmth? "Fellow, thee art a d -- d confounded liar." Poor old man! he
little dreamed what was to happen, about the close of the eighteenth century;
but William was no dreamer -- he knew how to employ his time to more advantage.
He would rather be giving strings of beads, and old horse shoes to the Indians
for their lands; than sitting up in his great armed chair dreaming about the
discord, which Porcupine and his associate Ben Davis, would endeavor to
excite, among the peaceable citizens, by their lies and calumnies. What a
golden age! when men with a little religious artifice, on the tip of their
tongues; and a few strings of beads and old horse shoes, could purchase land in
any quantity. What pity some of our present monopolizers, had not lived in
those days of beads, and old horses shoes; instead of giving hard dollars for
their lands, or mortgaging their property to save their credit; they would have
nothing more to do, but to order their servant to pull off an old shoe off one
of their horses feet, or take a string of beads from little Miss Polly; pay for
their lands, and lift their notes. The streets of our city would not then be so
crowded, with the pious horse-stealers from Connecticut; gathering up every bit
of old iron they could find. But instead of them we would see Messrs. M -- s, N
-- n, old Doctor R -- n, N -- ls, the expatriated viscount, and the gallant Mr.
G -- f all the way from New York; dispersed through the different streets of
our city, scraping the dirt, and gathering up every bit of old iron they could
find. Why not? when it would pay for their lands, and prevent them from
mortgaging one part to save the other. The beautiful and all-accomplished Mr. G
-- f, with his rosy cheeks, would not then be under the dire necessity of
purchasing India muslins, on security and long credit, from a certain
mercantile house in this city; and send them the next day to vendue, to sell
for what they could bring. His matrimonial attachment prevents him from
returning to Amsterdam, to renew his speculations there; for it is said, when
there, that he loved with all the ardor of a Russian. Nevertheless, I will
venture to affirm, that his Amsterdam speculation was the best he ever made; be
this as it may, it is pretty generally understood, that a certain brunette has
often exclaimed with a heavy heart, in the language of one of Dryden's females,
"our thoughtless giddy sex, is caught by outward form, and empty noise, and
loses itself in man." There is, notwithstanding, one thing yet remaining, to be
said, of this virtuous friend of Porcupine's -- this honorable member of the
speculating order; but until things are more fully explained, and the friends
of -- have spirit to vindicate their personal honor; it would be cruel to
confound the innocent with the guilty. For cowards they must be who would not
shed their last best drop, to wipe away an ignominious stain. -- Ten or twelve
thousand pounds! Aye, Master B --, ten or twelve thousand pounds! who would not
speculate, turn plagiarist, make verses, get drunk at a beer-house, sue for a
divorce, put their heart in a glove, and swear "With equal truth and grief;
That Chloe is an arrant thief?
Before the urchin well could go,
She stole the whiteness of the snow;
And more than whiteness to adorn,
She stole the blushes of the morn.
At twelve she stole, from cypress queen,
Her air and love commanding mein." etc. etc.


At the sight of L. 10,000, there are many of our old, as well as young
poachers, who would cock up their hats, look big; and laying their finger-ends
upon their mouths, exclaim as the Italian did, when he saw a beautiful girl
asleep, "Oh! what a delicious morsel!" But to use a phrase of Mr. Porcupine's,
"upon my soul," I believe there is a number, besides Mr. G -- f, and Master B
--, who would deposit their hearts in a close-stool, instead of a glove; if
they could by that means obtain 10,000 l. And John Fenno would publish
calumnies against the Republicans, tell lies on the French, and sing psalms
until his beard would grow as long as the hair upon the tail of Balaam's ass,
and as gray as old puss's back, for less than that sum.

In his Censor of April, page 133, Porcupine observes, that in the Philadelphia
Gazette of last year, he found the following words made use of by Mr. Giles, in
the debate on the allowances to members of Congress. "Mr. Giles said there was
a country, from which America copied a great deal too much. The members of the
British house of commons received no wages, while the officers of state had
immense salaries. It was, however, understood that the British house of commons
were very well paid; he did not wish to see scenes of that kind introduced into
this country. It was, I think, very uncivil in you Mr. Giles, to mention the
word "scenes," as all men suppose you meant scenes of bribery and corruption;
and what honest man ever doubted, that such scenes were practiced by the
British. It was, notwithstanding, unpolite to press so hard upon Mr.
Porcupine's sores; that he has such sores, the following sentence fully
evinces; it needs no comment; "now, says he, would it, I wonder, be permitted
me to ask this talkative gentleman, what he means by "scenes." He then goes on
with his interogatories; If, says he, this were permitted, I would go on, and
ask him what he meant by copying too much from Great Britain." In the next
sentence he means to quibble, or appear witty, or say something to the
disadvantage of Mr. Giles; but his idea was certainly too complex, his feeble
faculties must have been strained, he could not therefore develope it; and he
sinks into such unintelligible jargon, that Des Carte, if he were living, could
not explain. It is as follows, "If he himself, speaking of Mr. Giles, be a copy
of some original from that country, (Britain) which I believe to be the case,
in this instance I shall not contend, that we have copied too much." To say
that we have copied Mr. Giles from some original in England; is as mere
nonsense, in the common acceptance of the word, as ever was uttered; we might
say with some propriety of thought, that Mr. Giles himself imitated, or copied
some original person, or great orator in that country, had he ever been there;
but to say that we have copied him, is altogether nonsense. For a man of Mr.
Giles's superior abilities to think of imitating the Englishmen, who come into
this country, its entirely out of the question; its what no man in his senses
would ever think of doing; except some silly Scotchman, who was too lazy to
work and wished to become either a knave, or a drunkard. "Again, says
Porcupine, I would ask him," -- notwithstanding all this bombast of Peter's, I
will venture to affirm, that if he met Mr. Giles fifty times in the streets, he
would not dare ask him a syllable; but satan like, conscious of superior worth,
he would stand abashed and hang his guilty head. "Again, says Porcupine, I
would ask him, how he came to understand that the members of the British house
of Commons were very well paid, or in other words corrupted by the king? he
knows how severely I could retort upon him here. I could dare him to a
comparison." Lord have mercy on us! how Peter brandisheth his sword! he puts me
in mind of certain gentlemen, upon a late expedition, who exclaimed, "show us
the fellows, and we will skewer them! we want neither Judge nor Jury!" See
Findley's History of the Western Insurrection.
Peter brandisheth his sword, turns short upon his heel, and whispers softly in
Ben's ear; never mind me, you know it is the act of a Briton, to bluster and
threaten; but it often Ben serves our purpose. As Mr. Giles's time and
attention are occupied, on subjects of too much importance to the community at
large; to answer such impertinent, silly questions; I will undertake to inform
Mr. Porcupine, where he may understand that the British house of Commons are
very well paid. Let him read the Patriot, or the Political, Moral and
Philosophical Repository published in London by G. G. and J. Robinson; also
M'Pherson's and Torcy's memoirs, which he will find in the house of every
honest citizen; but that may be a reason, why he will not read them. He may
likewise read, "a statement of facts published, in 1795, by Mr. Morgan F. R.
S." in which he will find, among other items, that 150.000 l. sterling have
been appropriated by the British government to secret service money. Now
Porcupine be for once an honest candid fellow, and declare upon your
conscience, for your friends will not like you the worse, I do not mean that
conscience of yours which is like a piece of gum-elastic, that stretches or
contracts itself, as circumstances may require; that is when you abuse Messrs.
Madison, Giles, Gallatin, Livingston, and Swanwick, it expands to such a
length, so as to loose all sensibility, and then you can afford to let slip a
thousand lies; and when you speak of Messrs. Sedgwick, Ames, Buck, and Count
Murray with his red whiskers, from Maryland; it becomes so contracted, that not
even one little one can get escaping; notwithstanding your great propensity to
falsehood. But Peter, I mean your Sunday conscience, the conscience you know
you go to church with; for since you have abused Doctor Franklin for
irreligion, we all suppose you must be a very pious man; and like the Pharisees
of old, I expect to find you and John Fenno, fulfilling your duty in the public
streets and highways; thanking God that you are not as other men are,
understrappers, false-story-tellers, calumniators, sycophants and extortioners.
Now Peter, heartily declare, upon this Sunday conscience of yours, that you do
not receive any part of the 150,000 l. granted by the British parliament, as
secret service money, from the hands of a certain agent residing in this city;
for abusing the Republican party in Congress, and the citizens generally
throughout the United States; and to enable you to advance 600 dollars to your
friend Mr. Olden, as rent of a house to open a book-store. This will afford you
a better opportunity of scribbling, in support of the British faction; and
spreading your nefarious principles; paving the way to a monarchial government.
For you dare not attack the principles of a republican government, openly and
avowedly; but endeavor to cast an odium on the principles of republicanism, by
your illiberal and vulgarly abuse of the members individually; whether in
Congress, or throughout the United States. For all men are not capable of
distinguishing between men and principles; neither are you yourself, capable of
making that necessary distinction; for we often find you when you speak of a
certain party, loose sight of your own avowed principles; and fall into the
most absurd inconsistencies. And so it is, with the party to whom you have
attached yourself; for in debating on the principles of government, and the
rights of the citizen; they deny that any part of the citizens have the right
to give instructions to a deputy; See Mors^^ Universal Geography, Vol. I. page
305
but when those very men obtain a place in government, and are acting in a
legislative capacity; if they receive petitions, which are but instructions
expressed in milder terms, in support of their favorite measures, they bring
those very petitions forward, in proof of the necessity of adopting them See
Mr. Smith^ speech of S. C. on the treaty.


The scurrilous and commonplace epithets of mob, banditti, etc. which
Porcupine has so lavished, upon the great body of the American citizens; must
be disgusting to every man of sentiment, be his principles whatever they may.
Such epithets may serve to irritate the citizens, but will never convince them;
for they are repugnant to every principle of common sense, and common decency;
and are proofs only of a cankered heart, inflated with pride. A people who,
from principles of gratitude and similarity of principles in government, are
attached to the French nation. And if they be attached to the French nation, it
is certainly none of Porcupine's business; he is not a native, neither is he a
citizen, according to his own exposition of things; why then assume the air of
a dictator, and tell the citizens who they are to love, and who they are to
hate? Such conduct exhibits, a degree of arrogance, and presumption, which we
could expect only from an Englishman. For Porcupine has taught us, that it is
an Englishman only, who would be capable of preaching the doctrine of
ingratitude. When other foreigners arrive in this country they act with some
modesty; they take no decided part in politics, until they have become
citizens: But no sooner has an Englishman arrived upon our shores, than he
commences paragraphist in our newspapers, if he be capable of aranging his
thoughts, abusing the French nation, and the citizens generally throughout the
United States; for being attached to them: Or if he be not capable of
expressing his thoughts in correct language, he is sure to make noise enough at
a town-meeting. Mr. S. Claypoole can testify to the truth of what is here
advanced, that at the last town-meeting which was held in the City-hall, for
nominating candidates to the federal House of Representatives; a certain young
Englishman, who assumes by his air and strut, no small degree of consequence
amongst us, was standing upon a bench along side of him, when a certain
gentleman's name was proposed as a candidate; the young Englishman instantly
began hissing, with great violence; and turning round to Mr. Claypoole,
insisted on him to join in the hiss. Mr. Claypoole, with true republican
dignity, declined degrading himself by imitating an animal, which nobody would
imitate, except an Englishman. If these gentlemen, at the next town-meeting,
when they propose to offer Mr. Latimer as a candidate in opposition to Mr.
Swanwick, would imitate the brayings of an ass; it would perhaps be more
congenial to their intellectual faculties. But this despicable, as well as many
other vulgar practices, is the blessed effects of our intimate connection with
England. For there are some amongst us, who show such a passion for every thing
that is English; that I believe in my soul, they would even * * * * * * * *
aye, and old men too! turn macaronies, and walk the streets in bob-tailed
coats. I repeat again, that it is no Englishman's business who the American
citizens esteem, or who they disesteem. For to attempt to alienate or restrain
the affections of the heart, in the fulfillment of its duty; is a degree of
tyranny too brutal and absurd, even to enter the mind of a Dyonisius. I have
already said, that the attachment of the American citizens, to the French
nation, arose from principles of gratitude and similarity of principles in
government; and not as Porcupine wishes to insinuate, because they have
guillotined their king, and a set of avaricious, unprincipled and vicious
aristocrats; who attempted to subvert the liberties of the people. The
Americans have never shown a disposition to interfere, in the internal
government of any country. I am convinced, and I believe, I know as many of the
peoples sentiments as Porcupine; that it was, and is, a matter of indifference
to the great body of the American citizens; whether the French guillotined
their king and nobles, or sent them to the glacial promontery in Asia, to
brouze with the goats amongst the rocks; or to the plains of Dalmatia
Nebuchadnezzar-like, to feed with the beasts of the field; or did with them as
your countrymen Porcupine, often do with themselves, put a halter about their
neck. "In the gloomy month of November, says Voltaire, when Englishmen hang
themselves;" and I will add, the redoubtable Duke of York ran away from
Flanders; Frenchmen walk out and take the air, well may we exclaim, wonderful
people! whilst Englishmen are hanging themselves upon the borders of their
fens, and marshes; or behind their barns, and in their necessaries; with the
same deliberation as an Irishman would hang his unruly dog, for killing his
neighbor's sheep. The London newspapers which were brought to this city, by
the spring vessels, announced to the world, that 250 Englishmen hung
themselves, in the course of a few days, in and about London. This shocking
instance of human frailty, was said to be owing, to their disappointment with
regard to the lottery. If the English had such a man, at the head of their
lottery, as Mr. Blodget who would sport with their property, and their
patience; as much and as long, as Blodget has done with the citizens of the
United States; Query, to what lengths would the suicide have extended? There is
no calculating, if some honest sturdy drayman, for humanity sake, would not put
a halter about his neck. What honor does this man reflect upon the President,
and the federal city?


In his Censor of May, Porcupine observes, in a dirty insinuating manner, that
a Frenchman carried about the petition against the treaty. The services which
that gentleman rendered to the citizens of Philadelphia, during the calamity of
1793, can never be forgotten; except by a Porcupine, or an old hypocritical
Quaker, whose principles may easily be resolved into something worse, than mere
selfishness. But will any man of sense, who is not blinded by party and
prejudice, say that it was more criminal in a Frenchman, who is bona side a
citizen of the United States, and carries on an extensive trade, by which he
contributes twenty times more to the support of government, than Porcupine and
old Ben together. I say was it more criminal in him to carry about a petition
against the treaty, than for an old tory to carry one about in support of it,
who has been through the late revolution notoriously attached to the British;
and whatever his circumstances may be, from his situation in life, does not
contribute half the sum that the other does to the support of government. Of
this old tory, who sometimes assumes the garb and language of a Quaker, the
following anecdote is in circulation; which shows in a striking point of view,
the maneuvers and artifices practiced by his party; when they wish to carry a
favorite measure. Being on his tour through the northern parts of the city,
soliciting subscribers in support of the treaty, he stepped into a Mr. B -- 's,
and asked was he at home; there was none present but a young girl about sixteen
or seventeen, who told him her papa had stepped out; old trim paused a little,
then asked her could she write, she answered in the affirmative; "Well friend,
what is thy name," Nancy replied the girl; "Nancy, continues old hypocrisy, N.
will also stand for Nathan, which is a respectable scripture name." The old
serpent then pulled out his subscription-paper, "friend, says he, will thee
sign thy name to this paper;" the innocent girl told him, it was what she never
did to any paper of the kind, for she was sure her papa would be displeased
with her, "Friend, continues the old serpent, thee does not understand me, thee
may set down N. for thy first name, and annex to it the other; and people will
generally read it Nathan. It is customary for our wives, and daughters to do
so; on certain pressing occasions, and it will be no harm for thee to do the
same; thee knows I would not suffer any of female friends to so, if I thought
it were criminal." The girl looked at him all this time, with a stedfastness
mixed with surprise, until he had done speaking; when she replied, "Sir, I
think, you are the man my papa has often pointed out to me, as the associate of
Roberts and Carlisle; who were executed here during the late revolution for
toryism; and some months after my papa had returned from the battle of
Monmouth, it was generally believed that you would share their fate also." The
simple unaffected manner in which she expressed these sentiments, struck old
broadbrim quite silent: he said not a word in reply, but pulled down his hat
over his face; and it is confidently affirmed, that this was the first time he
was ever known to blush; or his rigid nerves were agitated. He put his brief in
his pocket, and walked off repining, no doubt, at his unlucky stars; for
suffering him to act so incautiously. Aristocratic artifice, is like the
pitcher that goes too often to the pump, it will be broken sometime. The above
transaction brings to my recollection, the following lines of Milton's Paradise
Lost.

So speak the cherub; and his grave rebuke,
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace
Invincible: abashed the devil stood,
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw
Virtue in her shape how lovely; saw and pined
His loss: --
Although Porcupine may curse, and swear; tell lies, and wage eternal war
against the Republicans; yet in all this he is not alone censureable; for it is
universally acknowledged that the receiver is as bad as the thief; and he who
exerts himself in propagating lies and calumnies, is as criminal as the
inventor. Amongst those booksellers who have lent their aid, in spreading
Porcupine's scurrilities abroad we find B -- n D -- s standing foremost with
brazen front. There are two or three others we ought to notice; but it would
swell this pamphlet to too great a size, we are therefore obliged to connive at
them; until another occasion.
Yet I will venture to affirm, there is no bookseller in Philadelphia, whose
life has been chequered with such vicissitudes, or conduct, except in political
matters, more doubtful: Pride, and humility; hatred, and love; ambition, folly,
avarice, and disappointment, excite in this man's heart, ten thousand complex
emotions in the course of one day. His whole life has been a series of strange
inconsistencies, and absurdities; strange, I say, or why should he condemn a
whole people for a fault which he is daily guilty of himself -- the
non-payments of his debts? It is remarkable that those men, who are most
outrageous, in abusing the Virginians, for an old law existing in their state,
which prohibits men's real property from being sold, to pay their debts; are
the very men amongst us, who are most unwilling to pay their own debts.
Why does he not take the mote out of his own eye, before he attempts to
censure his brother, for the beam in his? Has he yet to learn in his old age,
that the first act of an honest man, is the payment of his debts? Why will he
wantonly provoke the censure of a whole people, who never did him any injury?
-- does he think they will tamely submit to his calumny, and slander; when his
own life is not irreproachable? -- for he has neither dwelled in a corner, nor
have his actions been performed under a bushel; that he should pride himself in
his security, and wantonly sport with the reputations of men. Of all the
disgusting sights in nature, there is none which is so really shocking to a man
of moral sentiment; as to behold an old man, with gray heirs, standing upon the
brink of eternity, persisting in his youthful follies; crippled -- bowed down
-- and tottering under the load of his transgressions; it is not alone
sufficient that he should vilify his neighbor; but like the hungry leopard
that tears the earth for prey, he and Porcupine rake up the ashes of the
deceased patriot, and philosopher, Doctor Franklin.
to find matter of accusation against the living, and the dead. It is not alone
sufficient to gratify his boundless hatred and revenge, that he should
calumniate the patriots in Congress; but the short-lived prejudices of a whole
people, See the Bloody Buoy.
must be blackened into crimes. Yet all these are not sufficient to satiate his
vindicative, and rancorous spirit; but like the ravenous wolf, that is prowling
after food, he roams abroad to find matter of reproach against the innocent,
and unsuspecting of opposite principles; by enquiring into the private
characters of men, that he may, jackal-like, furnish Porcupine, that poisonous,
bloody-minded monster, with matter for ridicule, and vulgar abuse.

But to sum up all, on the present occasion, with regard to Porcupine and his
friends -- the former, through the whole of his writings, ridicules the
republican party, for the emptiness of their purses; and calls them a set of
"poor devils." When we consider, that his principles, on his arrival in this
country, and for some time after, were republican. This is a fact which
Porcupine cannot deny, for he is still well known to several gentlemen who
lodged, and were intimate in the house where be lodged, in Pine-street,
immediately after his arrival in this city; "and he was then, say they, so warm
a republican, and an admirer of Paine's writings; that his Rights of Man were
seldom out of his hands."
We may justly infer, that he first offered his services to that party; so that
his principles and interest, might go hand in hand; or how could he pretend to
know the depth of their purses. Riches do not consist in a well trimmed coat --
a powdered head -- a pair of large whiskers -- a gilded chariot -- a well
chosen spencer -- or a pompous building: he must have lived a short time in
Philadelphia, who does not see the truth of this remark. These are childish
trifles, and rarely occupy the attention of republicans. How then could he
ascertain the wealth of the republican party? the answer is obvious, because
they would not purchase him; hence he infers they are poor. But undue
influence, or secret service money being contrary to the principles of
republicans, they would not therefore take him into pay; Peter's self-pride was
wounded, and what will not a proud man do, to seek revenge, when his overtures
are neglected, or a slight indignity offered to his imaginary consequence: the
story of Haman is a striking proof. From these observations we will easily find
a solution for the scurrilities and unmanly abuse; which he has poured upon Mr.
Madison, Giles, Gallatin, Swanwick, and Livingston: these gentlemen possessing
less of that fastidious pride, which distinguishes many of our well-born; and
being easier of access, he expected they would have taken him into pay; but
Peter was mistaken in his judgment of human nature, when he supposed that
simplicity and sociability of manners, were connected with corruptness of
principles. Their cause was good -- they sought for no hireling scribe -- no
wha-wants-me; to blazon their motives, and sound their trump of fame. But
whether the republican party be poor, or rich; or whatever their circumstances
may be, what property they possess, I may with confidence affirm, is their own
-- it is real -- their wealth is not imaginary, depending upon a precarious
credit with the banks, subject to the whims and caprice of the directors. A
hard boiled egg, or a tainted oyster, in the stomach of one of these gentlemen,
may blast such a man's reputation for ever. For it is well known that these
create indigestion; and indigestion, to a man of delicate nerves, perverts his
understanding, renders him peevish, fretful and captious; and excites in his
mind, a thousand absurd prejudices; like a man possessed with the jaundice, he
sees every object through a false medium. When to these observations we add,
the manner of transacting business at the banks; the truth of my remark must
appear still more unquestionable. The directors assemble together, and resolve
upon discounting a certain sum; the assistant cashier, or some other, collects
the notes presented for discount, and reads in an audible voice, each note;
after which he asks in the same tone, "if this man be good;" here is a full
opportunity, for a mind fretted by indigestion, to vend its malice and ill
nature; if such a one says "no," it inevitably damns the note, as none of the
other directors will offer to contradict him; for contradiction creates
animosity, and animosity, among the directors, might lead to the discovery of
something serious, and important.

How long will you then my fellow citizens, be gulled by men of such factitious
wealth; can truth, honor, and integrity, be no where found but amongst riches!
How long will you suffer yourselves to be deluded, by the sportive insolence of
an hireling scribbler? and suffer him to ridicule the principles of your
constitution, which recognizes no distinction among the citizens; but what
arises from a virtuous conduct? A hireling wretch, who talks of property,
whilst he can only obtain it by prostituting his principles. A fraudulent
British mercenary, who holds up his countrymen agents, and merchants, with Jay
and Hamilton at their head; as the standard of all that is disinterested and
patriotic; in opposition to the great body of the American citizens, whom he
occasionally styles, mob, banditti, etc. Let us take a view of those
individually, who compose this class whom he extols, for the silence of
Porcupine is praise, and two thirds of them we will find to be men, without
either genius, or abilities, who sprang from poverty, and now grown fat in
opulence, bask in the sunshine of presidential favor; sneering at the despised,
but virtuous poverty of their old associates. Among these fat-fisted lords of
America, have we not seen some whose insatiable thirst for riches, and
speculation, overreached their credit? in consequence of which, have we not
seen their notes fly about the streets of Philadelphia, like chaff before the
wind, or bubbles light as air? Among these have we not seen bank directors,
turn private brokers, procure discounts at the banks for their friends, and
afterward charge those very friends with the moderate sum of thirty per cent?
How far the foregoing is a fabrication, I refer the reader to the reports which
were circulating through town, at the last election for directors to the bank
of the United States. The stock holders were so well convinced, that these
maneuvers were practiced, that all the former directors were turned out;
except four, or five. Yet I do not mean to insinuate, that the present
directors are men of stricter integrity than the former; the next election will
bear testimony of their probity.
And among these have we not seen others, when it suited their private
interest, kick honesty out of doors and lock them -- turn bankrupts to day, pay
off their creditors tomorrow with two shilling and sixpence in the pound; and
set up a coach the third day? These are Englishmen, the friends of Englishmen
-- and the supporters of the English faction throughout the United States; but
if a t -- rd, much less a knave came from England; by my soul, I believe,
either would smell sweet to the nose of Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, and many
of the well born here.

FINIS.

