AN ANTIDOTE FOR TOM PAINE's THEOLOGICAL AND POLITICAL POISON: CONTAINING 1.
Tom's Life, interspersed with Remarks and Reflections by P. Porcupine. 2. An
Apology for the Bible, in a Series of Letters addressed to Pain by the Bishop
of Landaff. 3. An Apology for Christianity, by the same learned, elegant
Writer. 4. An Answer to Paine's Anarchical Nonsense, commonly called, the
Rights of Man.


PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR, AND SOLD BY, WILLIAM COBBETT, NORTH SECOND STREET,
OPPOSITE CHRIST CHURCH.

Oct. 1796.

THE POLITICAL CENSOR, For SEPTEMBER, 1796.
LIFE OF THOMAS PAIN, Interspersed with Remarks and Reflections.
"A Life that is one continued scene
"Of all that is infamous and mean."
CHURCHILL.
BIOGRAPHICAL memoirs of persons, famous for the great good or the great
mischief they have done, are so sure to meet with a favorable reception in
print, that it has long been subject of astonishment, that none of the
disciples of Pain should ever have thought of obliging the world with an
account of his life. His being of mean birth could form no reasonable
objection: when the life of his hero is spotless, the biographer feels a pride
as well as a pleasure in tracing him from the penurious shed to the pinnacle of
renown. Besides, those from whom we might have expected the history of Old
Common Sense, are professed admirers of all that is of low and even base
extraction. They are continually boasting of the superior virtues of their
"democratic floor," as they call it; it, therefore, seems wonderful, that they
should have neglected giving an instance of this superiority in the life of
their virtuous leader.

This unaccountable negligence of Paine's friends has, in some measure, been
compensated by the diligence of the friends of order and religion. His life was
published in London, in 1793; but, like most other works calculated to stem the
torrent of popular prejudice, it has never found admittance into the American
press. I am afraid it will be a lasting reproach on those, into whose hands
this press has fallen, that while thousands upon thousands of that blasphemous
work, "the Age of Reason," were struck off, the instant it arrived in the
country, not a single copy of the life and crimes of the blasphemer, so fit to
counteract his diabolical efforts, was printed in the whole Union.

This little pamphlet has, at last, fallen into my hands, and were I to delay
communicating it to the public, I should be unworthy of that liberty of the
press, which, in spite of lying pamphlets and threatening letters, I am
determined to enjoy, while I have types and paper at my command.

The reader must observe that this account of Paine's Life, is an abstract of
his life, a larger work, written by Francis Oldys, A. M. of the University of
Pennsylvania, and published by Mr. Stockdale of London. The following extract
is taken from the London Review of the work. -- A more cogent reason cannot be
given for this publication, than that which is assigned by the writer of Mr.
Paine's Life, in the following short exordium. -- It has been established by
the reiterated suffrage of mankind, that the lives of those persons, who have
either performed useful actions, or neglected essential duties, ought to be
recounted, as much for an example to the present age, as for the instruction of
future times. -- THOMAS PAIN In a note we are informed by Mr. Oldys, that this
is the real name; and that his fictitious name is Pain with a final e; for
that his father's name was Pain; his own name was Pain when he married, when he
corresponded with the excise, and when he first appeared in America. But
finding some inconvenience in his real name, or seeing some advantage in a
fictitious one, he thus changed the name of his family; and he thus exercised a
freedom which the great enjoy for honorable ends.
(proceed the Reviewers) is placed precisely in this predicament. His actions
have stamped him a public character, and from his public conduct much useful
information and instruction may be derived. In his transactions as a private
individual, we find the records of villainy in various shapes, not imposing
upon mankind under any impenetrable mask, or close-wrought veil, but, almost
from the beginning, openly and avowedly practiced in the broad face of day. The
facts on which he stands convicted by his Biographer are not lightly stated,
but are supported by authentic documents and substantiated by evidence.

I shall detain the reader here but a moment, to observe, that these Reviewers
were, and are, the partisans of Pain, rather than otherwise; and that, in many
parts of their review, they have attempted to palliate his crimes.

The following abstract of the Life of Pain, by Mr. Oldys of Philadelphia,
will perhaps be acceptable to the world; as every fact in it is, by the
confession of Pain himself, of his friends, and of his enemies, undeniably
authentic. That part of this essay which the reader finds thus marked with
inverted commas, is taken from the printed copy. The rest, whether good or bad,
whether republican or anti-republican, I am ready to take upon myself.


THOMAS PAIN was born at Thetford, in the county of Norfolk (in England), on
the 29th of January, 1736-7. His father was Joseph Pain, a staymaker by trade,
and of the sect of the Quakers. His mother, Frances Cock, daughter of an
attorney at Thetford, and of the established Church.

By some accident, probably arising from the disagreement of his parents in
their religious sentiments, the son was never baptized. He was, however,
confirmed at the usual age, by the Bishop of Norwich, through the care of his
aunt, Mistress Cock.

At the free school of Thetford, under Mr. Knowles, young Pain was instructed
in reading, writing, and arithmetic. The expense of his education was defrayed
by his father, with some assistance from his mother's relations. -- At the age
of thirteen, he became his father's apprentice, in the trade of a staymaker. At
this employment he continued for five years; although he, himself, forgetful or
regardless of the truth, has, in the second part of his Rights of Man, related,
that he entered, at the age of sixteen, on board the Terrible privateer,
Captain Death; which was not fitted out till some years afterward.

He went, at the age of nineteen, to try his fortune in London; where he worked
for some time with Mr. Morris, an eminent staymaker in Hanover-street,
Long-acre. -- After a very short stay in this situation, he repaired to Dover;
and there obtained employment with Mr. Grace, a respectable staymaker. While
Pain remained here, an attachment began between him and Miss Grace, his
master's daughter: in consequence of which, Mr. Grace was induced to lend our
adventurer ten pounds, to enable him to settle as a master-staymaker at
Sandwich.

He settled at Sandwich in April, 1759; but forgot to repay the ten pounds, or
to fulfill the marriage, in expectation of which the money had been advanced to
him. -- Here, it seems, he took up his lodging in the market place; and formed
a little congregation, to whom he preached, in his lodging, as an independent
minister.

In the mean time, he fell in love with a pretty, modest, young woman, Mary
Lambert, daughter of James Lambert; who, with his wife Mary, had come to
Sittingbourne as an exciseman, before the year 1736; but, having been dismissed
for misconduct, had opened a shop, and acted, besides, as bum-bailiff of
Sittingbourne. Both father and mother were by this time dead, in indigent
circumstances; and the daughter was now waiting woman to Mrs. Solly, wife of
Richard Solly, an eminent woollen-draper at Sandwich. -- Mary Lambert and
Thomas Pain were married on the 27th of September, 1759. Although he was only
twenty-two, and she twenty-one years of age, yet, by the scars of disease, or
by the native harshness of his features, he appeared at the time of the
marriage so much older than she, that the good women of Sandwich expressed
their astonishment, that so fine a girl should marry so old a fellow.

Thomas, soon after the marriage, finding himself somehow disappointed, began
to maltreat his wife. Little more than two months had passed, when this became
visible to the whole town. By Mrs. Solly's aid, their poverty was occasionally
relieved. From the furnished lodging in which Pain had hitherto lived, the
young couple soon removed to a house, for which they, with some difficulty,
obtained furniture upon credit. But he having contracted debts which he was
unable to discharge, our adventurer, with his wife, found themselves obliged to
take what is called in Scotland, a moonlight flitting; and, on the night
between the seventh and eighth of April, 1760, they set out from Sandwich to
Margate; Thomas carrying with him the furniture which he had purchased on
credit, a stove belonging to his house, and the stays of a customer. The stays
were recovered from him by a timeful claim. He sold the furniture by auction at
Margate. -- The sale of goods obtained upon credit on a false pretext, is a
crime that was formerly punished by exposure on the pillory, which has since
been changed for transportation.

At this place, the reader will undoubtedly call to mind Paine's vehement
sallies against the English penal code. All the patriots look upon lawgivers,
judges, juries, and the whole suite of justice, as their mortal enemies.
"Inhuman wretches," says Tom, that are leagued together to rob Man of his
Rights, and with them of his existence. This is like the thief, who, when about
to receive sentence of death, protested he would swear the peace against the
judge, for that he verily believed he had a design upon his life. -- Reader,
while you live suspect those tenderhearted fellows who shudder at the name of
the gallows. When you hear a man loud against the severity of the laws, set him
down for a rogue.

From Margate, Pain returned to London. His wife set out with him: but her
subsequent fate is not well known. Some say that she perished on the road, by
ill usage and a premature birth: others, in consequence of diligent inquiry,
believe her to be still alive; although the obscurity of her retreat prevents
ready discovery.

Now, who that reads this, does not feel a desire to kick the scoundrel of a
stay-maker, for exclaiming against aristocracy, because, as he pretends, its
laws and customs are cruel and unnatural? -- "With what kind of parental
reflections," says the hypocrite in his Rights of Man, can the father and
mother contemplate their tender offspring? -- To restore parents to their
children, and children to their parents, relations to each other, and man to
society, the French Constitution has destroyed the law of primogenitureship. --
Is not this fine cant to entrap the unsuspecting vulgar? Who would not imagine
that the soul which pours itself forth in joy for the restoration of all these
dear relatives to each other, was made up of constancy and tenderness? Who
would suspect the man whose benevolence is thus extended to foreigners, whom he
never saw, of being a brutal and savage husband, and an unnatural father? -- Do
you ask, with what kind of parental reflections the father and mother can
contemplate their tender offspring? -- Hypocritical monster! with what kind of
reflections did you contemplate the last agonies of a poor, weak, credulous
woman, who had braved the scoffs of the world, who had abandoned every thing
for your sake, had put her all in your possession, and who looked up to you,
and you alone, for support?

Paine's humanity, like that of all the reforming philosophers of the present
enlightened day, is of the speculative kind. It never breaks out into action.
Hear these people, and you would think them overflowing with the milk of human
kindness. They stretch their benevolence to the extremities of the globe: it
embraces every living creature -- except those who have the misfortune to come
in contact with them. They are all citizens of the world: country and friends
and relations are unworthy the attention of men who are occupied in rendering
all mankind happy and free.

I ever suspect the sincerity of a man whose discourse abounds in expressions
of universal philanthropy. Nothing is easier than for a person of some
imagination to raise himself to a swell of sentiment, without the aid of one
single feeling of the heart. Rousseau, for instance, is everlastingly babbling
about his genre humain (human race) and his "coeur aimant et tender" (tender
and loving heart). He writes for the human race, his heart bleeds for the
distresses of the human race, and, in the midst of all this, he sends his
unfortunate bastards to the poor-house, the receptacle of misery! Virtuous and
tenderhearted and sympathetic Rousseau! Certainly nothing is so disgusting as
this, except it be to see the humane and sentimental Stern wiping away a tear
at the sight of a dead jack-ass, while his injured wife and child were pining
away their days in a nunnery, and while he was debauching the wife of his
friend. Sterne's writings are most admirably calculated to destroy the morals
of the youth of both sexes; but it was reserved for some of the printers in the
United States to give those writings the finishing touch. What the lewd author
was ashamed to do, they have done for him. They have explained his double
entendres and filthy inuendos by a set of the most bawdy cuts that ever
disgraced the pencil. -- I was shown a copy of the Sentimental Journey in this
style at the shop of Citizen Thomas Bradford of Philadelphia, the only place in
the city, I believe, where it is to be had.


In July, 1761* Thomas returned, without her, to his father's house. -- Having
been unsuccessful in the business of a stay-maker, he was now willing to leave
it for the Excise. In the Excise, after fourteen months of study and trials, he
was established on the 1st of December 1762, at the age of twenty-five. The
kindness of Mr. Cocksedge, recorder of Thetford, procured for him this
appointment. He was sent, as a supernumerary, first to Grantham; and on the 8th
of August 1764, to Alford. -- Being detected in some misconduct, he was, on the
27th of August 1765, dismissed from his office.

In this state of wretchedness and disgrace, he repaired to London a third
time. Here charity supplied him with clothes, money, and lodging; till he was,
on the 11th of July 1766, restored to the Excise, although not to immediate
employment. -- For support, in the mean time, he engaged himself for a salary
of five and twenty pounds a year, in the service of Mr. Noble; who keeping an
academy in Lemon-street, Goodman's fields, wanted an usher to teach English,
and walk out with the children. He won nobody's favor in this family: and, at
Christmas, left the service of Mr. Noble for that of Mr. Gardner, who then
taught a reputable school at Kensington. With Mr. Gardner he continued only
three months. -- He would now willingly have taken orders; but, being only an
English scholar, could not obtain the certificate of his qualifications
previously necessary. Being violently moved, however, with the spirit of
preaching, he wandered about for a while as an itinerant Methodist; and, as
urged by his necessities, or directed by his spirit, preached in Moorfields,
and in various populous places in England.

At length, in March 1768, he again obtained employment in his calling of an
Excise-officer; and was sent in this capacity, to Jews in Sussex. -- He was
now, at the age of thirty-one, ambitious of shining as a jolly fellow among his
companions; yet without restraining his sullen, overbearing temper; although to
the neglect of his duty as an Excise-man. By his intrepidity in water and on
ice, he gained the appellation of Commodore. He had gone to live with Mr.
Samuel Ollive, a tobacconist; and in his house he continued till that worthy
man's death. Mr. Ollive died in bad circumstances; leaving a widow, one
daughter, and several sons. For some dishonest intermeddling with the effects
of his deceased landlord, Pain was turned out of the house by Mr. Attersol,
the executor. But, being more favorably regarded by the widow and daughter, he
was received again by them in 1770. He soon after commenced grocer; opening
Ollive's shop in his own name. He, at the same time worked the tobacco mill on
his own behalf; and, regardless of the regulations of the Excise, and of his
duty as an Excise-officer, for several years continued this trade, engaging
without scruple in smuggling practices, in order to render it lucrative.

In 1771, at the age of thirty-four, he again ventured on matrimony. Elizabeth
Ollive, the daughter of his late landlord, whom he now married, was a handsome
and worthy woman, eleven years younger than himself; and, had it not been for
her unfortunate attachment to him, might have married to much greater
advantage. -- Upon the occasion of this second marriage, Thomas Pain thought
proper to represent himself as a bachelor, although he must have known that he
was either a widower, -- or, indeed, if his former wife was then alive, a
married man; -- and although the marriage act has declared it to be felony,
without benefit of clergy, for a person thus wilfully to make a false entry on
the register. -- In the same year, Pain first commenced author. -- Rumbold,
candidate for New Shoreham, required a song to celebrate the patriotism and the
conviviality of the occasion. Pain produced one, which was accepted, and
rewarded with three guineas. -- His poetical honors he seems to have
afterward forgotten; for, in 1779, he asserted in the newspapers, that, till
the appearance of his Common Sense, he had never published a syllable.

By a certain boldness and bustle of character, although without the
recommendation of honesty, he had become a sort of chief among the Excisemen.
They began about this time to be dissatisfied, that their salaries were not
augmented with the increase of the national wealth, of the public revenue, and
of the price of the necessaries of life. Citizen Pain undertook to write their
Case; and, in 1772, produced an octavo pamphlet of one and twenty pages,
containing an Introduction; The State of the Salary of the Officers of Excise;
and Thoughts on the Corruption arising from the Poverty of Excise-Officers. Of
this pamphlet four thousand copies were printed. A contribution was made by the
Excisemen, to supply the expenses attending the solicitation of their case.
Pain bustled about, as their agent, in London, in the winter of 1773. But
nothing was done; and although liberally paid by his employers, he forgot to
pay his printer.

In his attention to the common cause of the Excisemen, he had neglected his
own private affairs. His credit failed. He sunk into difficulties and distress:
and, in this situation, made a bill of sale of his whole effects to Mr.
Whitfield, a considerable grocer at Jews, and his principal creditor. Mr.
Whitfield, seeing no prospect of payment, took possession of the premises, and,
in April 1774, disposed of them as his own. The other creditors, thinking
themselves outwitted by Whitfield, and cheated by Pain, had recourse to the
rigours of law. Pain sought concealment for a time in the cock-loft of the
Whitehorse-inn.

About the same time, he was again dismissed from the Excise. His carelessness
of the duties of his office -- dealing as a grocer in exciseable articles --
buying smuggled tobacco, as a grinder of snuff -- and conniving at others for
the concealment of it himself -- could no longer be overlooked or excused. His
dismission took place on the 8th of April, 1774. He petitioned to be restored,
but without success.

Reader, how often have I observed, that disappointment, and refusal of favors
asked from government, are the great sources of what is nowadays called
patriotism? Here we are arrived at the cause of Tom Paine's mortal enmity to
the British government. Had his humble petition been granted; had he been
restored to his office, he might, and undoubtedly would, have stigmatized the
Americans as rebels and traitors. He would have probably been among the
supplest tools of Lord North, instead of by the champion of American
Independence.

Who, after reading this, will believe that he was actuated by laudable
motives, when he wrote against taxation; when he called the excise a hell-born
monster? He long was, you see, an advocate for this hell-born monster, and even
one of its choice ministers, and such would he have been to this day, had not
his petition been rejected. What, Thomas! Petition to be one of the
under-devils of a hell-born monster!

Whatever may be the services which his vindictive pen rendered to the cause of
the United States, the people of this country owe him no tribute of gratitude,
any more than they do to the pretended friendship of the French court, or
nation. Both had the same objects in view: the furthering of their interests
and glutting of their revenge. They looked upon the revolted colonists as their
tools, and if America profited by their interference, it was owing to the
wisdom of her councils, and not to their good will.

When patriot Tom began his career in America, it was assuredly very necessary
for him to assert, that, till the appearance of his Common Sense, he had never
published a single syllable; for, it would have looked a little awkward to see
that work coming from the pen of a discarded excise officer, who had petitioned
for a reinstatement in his oppressive office. Not a whit less awkward does it
now appear, to hear clamours against the expenses of the British government
coming from the very man who would willingly have added to those expenses by an
augmentation of his own salary. He tells the poor people of Great Britain, that
their hard-earned pence are wrung from them by the king and his ministers; yet,
we see, that he wished a little more to be wrung from them, when he expected a
share. -- Disinterested and compassionate soul!

The English Clergy, too, and the tithes they receive, have been considerable
objects of Thomas's outcry. Those battering-rams, called the Rights of Man,
have been directed against these with their full force. But what would the
hypocrite have said, had he been able to slip within the walls of the church?
Like Dr. Priestley, Tom looks upon tithes as oppressive, merely because he is
not a rector.

How little his attempt to obtain. Holy Orders (sacrilegious monster!) and his
Methodist preaching agree with the opinions expressed in his Age of Reason I
shall notice, when I come to that epoch in his life, when he found it
convenient to throw aside the mask, and become an open blasphemer; but I cannot
quit him in this place, without observing on the remarkable similarity in the
career of Tom and that of Old John Swanwick. Both had paid off their debts in
England with a sponge, both had been field preachers, and both had been excise
officers, when the American war broke out: at this moment they separated. After
having gone side by side during their whole lives, they steered a course
directly opposite to each other. Pain became a flaming patriot, while Swanwick
remained a royalist. -- How came this? Why, Swanwick was still in office,
whereas poor Tom was dismissed. Had Swanwick been dismissed and Pain in
office, Tom would have followed the British wagons to New York, and Swanwick
would, probably, have written Common Sense.

With the reader's permission, I will just step aside from my subject, to ask,
how it happened, that Citizen John Swanwick, now one of the august
representatives of the city of which I have the honor to be an inhabitant,
came to be a stanch whig, while his respectable sire was as zealous a
waggonmaster as any in the Royal army? Mr. Swanwick was, I presume, too young,
at that time, to perceive the amazing advantage that a citizen enjoys over a
subject; and, as he professes a great deal of filial piety, one may reasonably
suppose, that he would have followed the fortunes of his father, had not his
remaining behind been in consequence of a concerted plan. This is a stroke of
domestic policy, which has been often practiced in ticklish times, but never
with more complete success than in the present instance. The father was a
faithful subject and the son a firm patriot; the father sang God save the king
and the son Yankey-doodle; the father got a pension and the son a seat in
Congress. -- I could continue a little further here, but it is time to return
to our old broken exciseman.

Amid this knavery and mismanagement, Pain had not distinguished himself by
conjugal tenderness to his second wife. He had now lived with her three years
and a half, and, besides cruelly beating, had otherwise treated her, wilfully
and shamefully, in a manner which would excite the indignation and resentment
of every virtuous married woman; and which must ensure to him the detestation
of every honorable man. From an attention to the known delicacy and modesty of
our fair country-women, we forbear, in this abstract, to state the particulars,
though they are published at length in Mr. Oldys's pamphlet. -- The consequence
of all this was a separation between him and his wife, upon the conditions of
her paying her husband thirty-five pounds sterling, and his agreeing to claim
no part of whatever property she might thereafter acquire.

Pain now retired to London; but would not leave his wife in peace till they
had mutually entered into new articles of separation; in which it was declared
on his part, that he no longer found a wife a convenience, and on hers, that
she had too long suffered the miseries of such a husband.

This is the kind and philanthropic Tom Pain, who sets up such a piteous howl
about the cruelty and tyranny of kings! -- I have known many of those bold
champions for liberty in my time, says the good old Vicar of Wakefield, yet do
I not remember one who was not in his heart and in his family a tyrant. What
Dr. Johnson observes of Milton may with justice be applied to every individual
of the king-killing crew: he looked upon woman as made only for obedience and
man only for rebellion. I would request the reader to look round among his
acquaintance, and see if this observation does not every where hold good; see
if there be one among the yelping kennel of modern patriots, who is not a bad
husband, father, brother, or son. The same pride and turbulence of spirit that
lead them to withhold every mark of respect and obedience from their superiors,
lead them also to tyrannize over those who are so unfortunate as to be
subjected to their will. The laws of nature will seldom, if ever, be respected
by the man who has set those of his country and of decorum at defiance; and
from this degree of perversity there is but one step to the defiance of heaven
itself. The good citizen or subject, the good husband, parent and child, and
the good christian, exist together or they exist not at all.

From the circumstances attending Tom's separation from this last wife, we may
make a pretty correct calculation of his value as a husband. The poor woman was
obliged to pay him thirty-five pounds sterling to get rid of him; so that, a
democratic spouse, even supposing him to come up to his great leader in worth
is (in Federal currency) just one hundred and fifty-six dollars, sixty-six
cents and two-thirds of a cent, worse than nothing. Oh, base democracy! Why, it
is absolutely worse than street-sweepings, or the filth of common-sewers.

The mob of kings that the poor French have got, have lately set Thomas to
writing down the credit of English bank-notes, a task that the dregs of his old
brain were quite unequal to. Instead of useless labors of this kind, instead
of attempting to write down the Bible and bank-notes, I would recommend to him
to oblige the people of his beloved America, as he calls it, with a statement
of the sums necessary to pay off all the democratic husbands in this continent,
at the price his own wife fixed on himself; adding to the gross amount as much
as would defray the expenses of their transportation to their proper climate,
France. Their wives, I dare say, would have no objection to imitate Mrs. Pain,
as far as their last farthing would go, and if all wisdom is not banished from
within the walls of the Congress, they would never refuse to make up the
deficiency.

We have seen enough of Tom as a husband; now let us see what it is to be
cursed with such a son.

Citizen Pain now finding that his notoriously bad character rendered it
advisable for him to leave a country where he was known; he had the address to
procure a recommendation to the late Dr. Franklin, in America, as a person who
might, at such a crisis, be useful there. He accordingly sailed for America in
September 1774.

The following letter from his mother to his wife, written about this time,
proves that she had the distress of knowing his crimes and misfortunes, and of
feeling for them as a parent naturally feels for a child, wicked or unhappy.

DEAR DAUGHTER, Thetford, Norfolk, 27th July 1774.
I must beg leave to trouble you with my inquiries concerning my unhappy son
and your husband: various are the reports, the which I find come originally
from the excise office; such as his vile treatment to you; his secreting
upwards of L.30, entrusted with him to manage the petition for advance of
salary; and that, since his discharge, he have petitioned to be restored, which
was rejected with scorn. Since which, I am told, he have left England. To all
which I beg you will be kind enough to answer me by due course of post. -- You
will not be a little surprised at my so strongly desiring to know what is
become of him, after I repeat to you his undutiful behavior to the tenderest
of parents: he never asked of us any thing but what was granted, that were in
our poor abilities to do; nay, we even distressed ourselves; whose works are
given over by old age, to let him have L.20 on bond, and every other tender
mark a parent could possibly show a child; his ingratitude, or want of duty,
has been such, that he has not wrote to me upwards of two years. -- If the
above account be true, I am heartily sorry, that a woman, whose character and
amiableness, deserves the greatest respect, love, and esteem, as I have always
on inquiry been informed yours did, should be tied for life, to the worst of
husbands. -- I am,

DEAR DAUGHTER, Your affectionate Mother, F. PAIN.
For God's sake, let me have your answer, as I am almost distracted.




He arrived at Philadelphia in the winter of 1774, a few months before the
battle of Lexington. He was first engaged as shopman, by Mr. Aitkin, a
bookseller in Philadelphia, at the wages of twenty pounds a year. In November
1775, he was employed in a laboratory. He took great pains in experiments for
the purpose of discovering some cheap, easy, and expeditious method of making
saltpetre. He was also the proposer of a plan for the voluntary supplyiog of
the public magazines with gunpowder; and earnestly labored to persuade the
inhabitants of Philadelphia to adopt it.

On the 10th of January 1776, was published his Common Sense, an 8vo. pamphlet
of sixty-three pages. This pamphlet was eagerly read, passed through several
editions, and was even translated into German. Prosecuting the career, upon
which he had thus not unsuccessfully entered, he, on the 19th of December 1776,
published, in the Pennsylvania Journal, the first number of the Crisis,
intended like the former work, to encourage the Americans in their opposition
to the British government. -- The Crisis, he continued to publish in occasional
numbers, till the 13th and last appeared on the same day on which a cessation
of hostilities between America and Britain was proclaimed at Philadelphia, the
19th of April 1783.

Thus, we see, that he was hardly arrived in America, when he set about digging
up saltpetre for the destruction of his countrymen, the servants of that king
whom he himself had served, and whom he would still have served, had he not
been dismissed in disgrace. And can any one have the folly to believe, or the
impudence to say, that this man was actuated by a love of liberty and America?

The unprincipled, or silly, admirers of Pain, when they hear their hero
attacked, never fail to stigmatize his enemies as enemies of the American
cause. Their object in doing this is evident enough: but, in the name of common
sense, what has the justice or injustice of that cause to do with an inquiry
into the actions and motives of Pain? Is a man to be looked upon as regretting
that America obtained its independence, merely because he detests a cruel,
treacherous, and blasphemous ruffian who once wrote in favor of it? Are the
characters of the men who effected the separation from Britain so closely
united with that of Pain, that they must stand or fall together? Are the
merits of the revolution itself at last to be linked to all that is base and
infamous?

No one, not even Congress itself, ever attempted to justify the colonists in
their revolt against their sovereign upon any other ground than this: that they
were an oppressed people, unable to obtain a redress of their grievances,
without appealing to arms. Seeing them in this light we must be careful to
exclude from this justification all those subjects of the king, who assisted
them without having partaken of the oppression of which they complained. Among
the Americans themselves a difference of opinion might, and did, prevail. Some
looked upon themselves as oppressed, others did not; both parties were fully
justified upon the supposition that they acted agreeably to their consciences:
but a man like Pain, just landed in the country, could have no oppression to
complain of, and, therefore, his hostility against his country admits of no
defense. He was a traitor, as were the Priestleys, the Prices and all others of
the same description. No good man, however zealous he might be in the
revolution, ever respected Pain, of which the coldness and neglect he
experienced, as soon as order was re-established, is a certain proof. The
faithful citizen, or subject, naturally detests a traitor: it is an impulse
that none of us can resist: however we may differ in opinion in other respects,
we all agree (to use one of Tom's own expressions) that a traitor is the
foulest fiend on earth.

In 1777, he was appointed by the Congress, secretary to their committee for
foreign affairs. When Silas Deane, commercial agent for the Congress in Europe,
was recalled, to make room for William Lee once alderman of London, a
contention ensued between Deane and the family of the Lees; and Pain took part
in the controversy, by attacking Deane. He took occasion to involve in the
dispute the famous Robert Morris, financier of the United States. Morris
interfered against him. And Pain was inadvertantly provoked to retail, through
the channel of the newspapers, information which had been communicated to him
in his office of secretary. This information betraying intrigues of the French
court, their ambassador complained to Congress. Pain being interrogated,
confessed himself the author of the newspaper correspondence in question, and
was in consequence dismissed from his office.

What remarks I have to make here I shall preface by an extract from Swift's
excellent work, lately published, on the laws of Connecticut, Book V. Chap.
vii. Speaking of Paine's baseness in his attack on Christianity by publishing
his Age of Reason," Mr. Swift observes: "this work is said to be written by
Thomas Pain, Secretary for foreign affairs to Congress in the American War.
Now, the truth is, that during some period of the American War, Congress
appointed a committee for foreign affairs, to which Pain was secretary, but he
had no power, and performed no duty, but that of clerk to the committee;
without any portion of the authority, afterward annexed to the office of
secretary for foreign affairs. From the post of secretary to the committee for
foreign affairs, he was dismissed for a scandalous breach of trust. What must
we think of a man, who is capable of such a pitiful artifice to gratify his
vanity, and render himself important?

These are not the words of an Englishman, but of a native American, a learned
and elegant writer, and a tried friend and servant of his country.

The account given by Mr. Swift of Tom's dismission confirms that which is
given of it in his life. Both accounts, however, are silent as to the nature of
the intrigues which he divulged. As I have heard this matter often spoken of,
by my old bookseller and others, I will just repeat what I have heard, without
pledging myself for the truth of it.

While Silas Deane was agent under the plenipotentiary administration of Doctor
Franklin, at the court of Versailles; these intriguing patriots had the address
to procure a present of 200,000 stand of condemned arms from the king of France
to the American Congress: but, as this was done at a time when the French court
had solemnly, though treacherously, engaged not to interfere in the dispute,
the present was to be kept a secret among the immediate agents. The condemned
arms, given as a present, were, by the faithful agents, charged as good ones,
and paid for by the United States. Who pocketed the money, was then, and is
still a question; but there seems to have been but little doubt of its having
undergone a division and a subdivision, as the secret had extended far and
wide, before poor Tom was silenced. I have heard more than one American,
reputed democrats, curse Dr. Franklin for having misapplied the money of the
country, and I imagine this must be what they allude to. He must certainly have
found the philosopher's-stone, if he thus possessed the gift of turning old
iron into gold; and, as I do not see, in his will, to whom he bequeathed this
precious stone, I would thank his grandchild to inform us, in the next number
of his polite and patriotic paper, who the happy mortal is.

After having heard these accounts of this dismission, which all agree, let us
hear what Thomas says about it himself, in the second part of his Rights of
Man. After the declaration of Independence, Congress unanimously appointed me
secretary in the foreign department. But a misunderstanding arising between
Congress and me, respecting one of their commissioners then in Europe, Mr.
Silas Deane, I resigned the office. -- Was there ever a more pitiful attempt at
acquiring reputation than this? He was in England when he wrote thus; he would
not have dared to write this passage in America. He calls himself secretary in
the foreign department, thereby giving to understand that he was a secretary of
state in America, as Lord Grenville or the Duke of Portland is in England, and
as Mr. Jefferson then was in the United States. Secretary to the committee for
foreign affairs would have sounded small; it would have made a jingle like that
of halfpence, whereas secretary of state rang in the ears of his empty-headed
disciples, like guineas upon a hollow counter.

But a misunderstanding arising between Congress and me. Here is another fetch
at importance. "Between Congress and me!" How the London Corresponding Society
and affiliated mobs stared at this, I dare say. If his misconduct ever became a
subject of discussion before Congress, that was all. A complaint was lodged
against him, and Congress dismissed him; but his offense was exposing what
should have been kept secret, in writing for the Lees against Silas Deane. How
does he twist this into a misunderstanding between Congress and him? As well
may the criminal say, he has had a misunderstanding with the judge who condemns
him.

"And so I resigned the office." Mr. Swift says, and every one in America
knows, that he was dismissed for a scandalous breach of trust; but this would
not have been so convenient for the purpose of those infamous combinations of
men who had undertaken to spread his works about the three kingdoms. In the
courtier's vocabulary, resigned has long been synonymous with dismissed,
discarded, and turned out, and we see that Thomas, though he rails against
courts and courtiers, did not scruple to employ it in the same way.

But there was another reason for substituting resigned for turned out. He had
every reason to believe that his life would be published, and he wisely
foresaw, that his having been turned out of the excise, and again turned out in
America, would stagger the faith of some of his proselytes. To be turned out by
a monarchical government, and afterward by a republican one, would have been a
pretty convincing proof, that he was friendly to no government whatever. I
sincerely believe that he hated, and that he still hates, the general
government of the United States (as at present happily established), as much as
the government of Great Britain. But it was necessary that he should find out
something to hold up to the imitation of the English; no matter what, so as it
differed from what they possessed. Being obliged, therefore, to make this use
of the American government, he was the more anxious to hide the truth with
respect to his dismission; for how awkward would it have looked, at the end of
his pompous encomiums on the government of America, to add: this was the
government that turned me out?

In August 1782, Thomas Pain published a controversial letter to the Abbe
Raynal, in consequence of the latter author's publication of his history of the
Revolution of America. Absurd as were the general principles which Pain had
advanced in his Common Sense, Raynal being in great distress for want of
something to say on the occasion, had adopted some of them. Pain reclaimed what
was his own, and controverted much of the rest that the Abbe said. -- His next
production was a letter to the Earl of Shelburne, on the effects likely to
arise to Great Britain from the acknowledged independence of America.

His labors had not yet received any substantial reward. He, in the mean time,
suffered all the miseries of penury. He now solicited the American Assemblies
to grant some recompense for the services by which he had contributed to the
establishment of their independence. New York bestowed on him lands of little
value at New Rochelle; Pennsylvania granted him five hundred pounds.

In the autumn of 1786, he departed for France, after having, at New York,
seduced a young woman of a reputable family. In the beginning of the year 1787,
he arrived in Paris, and exhibited before the French academy of sciences, the
model of a bridge of peculiar construction.

On the 3d of September, in this same year, Thomas Pain arrived at the White
Bear in Piccadilly, London, after an absence of thirteen years from Britain. --
His old friends recollected him; although he might have been better satisfied
to have been forgotten by some of them.

Before the end of 1787, he published a pamphlet, entitled Prospects on the
Rubicon, etc. -- In the year 1788, he was busy at Rotherham, in Yorkshire,
about the casting of an iron arch for the bridge of which he had presented a
model to the French academy. This bridge proved merely an expensive project, by
which the contriver was impoverished, and the community not benefited. At
Rotherham, his familiarities became disagreeable to the women.

Through various circumstances, Pain became indebted to Whiteside, the
American merchant, whom he had employed to receive his remittances, and to
furnish his expenses, in the sum of six hundred and twenty pounds. Upon the
bankruptcy of Whiteside, Pain was arrested by order of the assignees, at the
White Bear, Piccadilly, on the 29th of October 1789. He remained for three
weeks, confined in a spunging-house, till he was at length relieved by the kind
interference of two eminent American merchants, Messrs. Clagget and Murdock.

Meanwhile, Pain had, during his involuntary retirement, listened eagerly to
the news of the rising commotions in France. Soon after he was set at liberty,
therefore, he crossed the channel, in order to be a nearer spectator of events
in which he rejoiced. He returned to England about the time of the publication
of Mr. Burke's pamphlet on the French revolution. His next work was an answer
to Mr. Burke, in the first part of his Rights of Man.

This work was published on the 13th of March 1791, by a Mr. Jordan in
Fleetstreet. Conscious of the seditious falsehoods which he had advanced in it,
Pain dreaded even then the inquiries of the King's messengers, and sought
concealment in the house of his friend, Mr. Brand Hollis; while it was
industriously given out by those in his secret, that he had hastily departed
for Paris.

The work which caused these fears, was perfectly of that cast, by which
superficial readers and thinkers are most readily affected; grossly invective,
frequently quibbling, confounding generals with particulars, and particulars
with generals, audaciously bold, and speaking the language of prevalent
prejudices. It was, besides, warmly recommended to the people by a Society, who
took the denomination of Constitutional.

In the middle of May, after having thus labored to enlighten or confound the
British nation, Pain returned to Paris. While sojourning there, he entered
into a controversy with Emanuel Syeyes, who had been chiefly active in framing
the new constitution of France; Syeyes in defense of that limited monarchy
which the new constitution had established; Pain, against the whole hell of
monarchy, -- to use his own words. This controversy was soon dropped.

On the 13th of July 1791, Pain again arrived at the White Bear in Piccadilly,
just in time to assist in the celebration of the anniversary of the French
Revolution. He did not, however, appear at the public dinner on the following
day. But he joined the celebrators about eight o'clock in the evening; when the
people, enraged to see them brave the laws, and exult in events unfriendly to
the happiness of Britain, had assembled tumultuously, to drive them away from
the Crown and Anchor tavern, the place of their meeting. Mortified at finding
those hostile to them, whom they had hoped to seduce to become the instruments
of their turbulence, our republicans published, on the 20th of August 1791,
from the thatched house tavern, a seditious declaration, the writing of Pain,
which obliged the innkeeper to forbid them his house.

After these transactions, Pain was preparing to visit Ireland, in the
character of an apostle of Democracy, when he learned that the Irish were
already so well acquainted with his real character, that he might probably meet
with an unfavourable reception. On this news, he retired in disgust, to
Greenwich.

On the 4th of November 1791, he assisted, on the eve of the gun powder plot,
at the accustomed commemoration of the 5th of November, by the Revolution
Society. He was thanked for his Rights of Man; and gave for his toast, the
Revolution of the world.

Immediately after this, preparing to bring forth the Second Part of his Rights
of Man, he hid himself in FETTER-LANE. None knew where he was concealed, except
Mr. Horn -- Took, whose friendly care corrected the inaccuracies of his
style, and Mr. Chapman, who was employed to print his book. At Mr. Chapman's
table he occasionally spent a pleasant evening, after the solitary labors of
the day. After this commodious intercourse had subsisted for several months,
Pain was somehow moved to insult Mr. Chapman's wife; See Chapman's testimony
on oath; Paine's trial.
in consequence of which the printer turned him out of doors with indignation;
exclaiming that he had no more principle than a post, and no more religion than
a ruffian.

Pain has ascribed a different origin to this quarrel with his printer: but,
it is proper that even in so small a matter the truth should be known. A false
tale was held out to the public, as is stated at length in Mr. Oldys's
pamphlet; and that part of the work which had been rejected by Mr. Chapman was
transferred to a Mr. Crowther.

This Second Part was at length printed and published: being recommended by the
same qualities as the First, it met with a similar reception. Its author,
finding that he had now excited against himself the strongest abhorrence of all
the worthier part of the nation, thought it prudent to retire to France. In the
mean time he printed a letter to Mr. Secretary Dundas, and another to Lord
Onslow, the absurd scurrility of which, might be supposed matchless; were it
not that the same author has since exceeded it in an Address to the Addressers
upon his Majesty's proclamation for the suppression of seditious writings, --
and in a Letter to the National Convention of France.

His actions and writings, however little credit they may have done him in
Britain, recommended him to a seat in the French Convention.

It would be difficult for him to find any other assembly in the world in which
he would be not less respectable than most of the leaders. To what issue this
last preferment of his may lead, it is not easy to predict. But, from the
complexion of some of the late sittings of the Convention, it seems extremely
probable that his career may finish with that miserable end to which providence
generally permits the machinations of such men to conduct them at last.

For the publication of those writings, the tendency of which is avowedly
seditious, and of which there has been too much use made toward the disturbing
of the domestic tranquillity of the British empire -- our author has, since his
retreat into France, been indicted at the instance of the king, as usual in
such cases; tried at Guildhall, before Lord Kenyon; and found guilty by a very
respectable jury, as the Author and publisher of a book, called "Second Part of
the Rights of Man, containing many false, wicked, scandalous, malicious, and
seditious assertions.

It is scarcely necessary to add, that booksellers and other venders of Paine's
works must see, by this Verdict, that the laws of their country, if diligently
enforced, are ready to punish them for so dishonest a Traffic.

The reader of this plain, candid narrative, may judge for himself, whether
Pain be a friend to Great Britain, or a man whose conduct he would choose to
imitate, or whose advice he would follow in ordinary cases; and what reliance
can be placed on the facts which he has boldly asserted as the ground work of
most of his wild theories.

Here ends the account of Paine's life, as I find it in print, and which, as I
formerly observed, was published about the beginning of 1793. I shall now
attempt a continuation of it down to the present time, dwelling on such parts
only of his conduct as will admit of no dispute respecting facts.

Thomas's having merited death, or, at least, transportation in England, was a
strong recommendation to him in France, whose newly enlightened inhabitants
seem to have conceived a wonderful partiality for all that is vile. Several of
the departments disputed with each other the honor of having a convict for
their representative; a thing not so much to be wondered at, when we recollect,
that their wise rulers declared, by a decree, that the galley-slaves were all
most excellent patriots, and that the hangman's was a post of honor.

The exact time of Tom's flight to this country of liberty and virtue is not
mentioned, I believe, in the above account; but I recollect hearing his arrival
talked of in the month of June, 1792. I had been on a trip from St. Omer's to
Dunkirk, and on my return, I first heard the news announced to a pretty
numerous company in the canal stage. Voila (says an old monk, who had been
driven from his cell by the sans-culottes, and who was now looking over the
gazette) "Voila ce coquin de Pain qui nous arrive de l'Angleterre." "Why, that
rascal Pain is just arrived from England."
-- "Ah, mon Dieu (exclaimed a well-dressed woman who was sitting beside me)
Ah, la pauvre France! Tous les scelerats de tous les pays de l'univers vont
s'assembler chez nous. Ah, my God! Ah, poor France! All the scoundrels from all
the countries in the universe are flocking amongst us.
The justness of this observation struck me at the time, and has often occurred
to my memory since. Indeed, every man of infamous character, every felon and
every traitor, began, at the time I am now speaking of, to look upon France as
his home; and this circumstance, better than any other, marks the true
character of the revolution. The property of the nation was laid prostrate, and
these villains were assembling round it, as birds of prey hover over an
expiring carcass.

Whether Pain was really in France, or not, in June 1792, is immaterial: it is
certain that he took his seat among that gang of bloodthirsty tyrants, usually
called the Convention, just time enough to assist in proscribing that
Constitution which he had written two whole books in defense of, and in
conferring every epithet of ridicule and reproach on the Constituent Assembly,
whom he had a few months before extolled, as the most august, illuminated and
illuminating body of men on earth. It was now that the English reformers and
the democrats of America would have blushed, had not their fronts been covered
with bull-hide, for the pompous eulogiums they had heaped on the author of the
Rights of Man.

The first job that Tom was set about, after the destruction of the
Constitution, was, making another. This was a thing of course, for there is no
such thing as living without constitutions nowadays. Thomas and his fellow
journeymen, Brissot, Claviere and about half a dozen others, fell to work, and,
in a very few days, hammered out the clumsy, ill-proportioned devil of a thing,
commonly called the Constitution of 1793. Of this ridiculous instrument I shall
only observe, that, after being cried up by the American Newspapers, as the
masterpiece of legislative wisdom, it was rejected with every mark of contempt,
even by the French themselves. What is too absurd for them to swallow must be
absurd indeed!

About the time that this constitution work was going on, the unfortunate king
was brought to trial by his ten times perjured and rebellious subjects. Pain
did not vote for his death, a circumstance that his friends produce as a proof
of his justice and humanity, forgetting at the same time, that they thereby
brand all those who did vote for it, with injustice and barbarity. However,
upon closer inquiry, we shall find little reason for distinctions between Tom
and his colleagues. He voted for the king's banishment, the banishment of a man
perfectly innocent, and it was owing merely to his being embarked with the
faction of Brissot, instead of that of Danton, that he did not vote for his
death. Brissot afterward published, in the name of his whole party, the
reasons why they looked on it as good policy not to put the king to death; on
these reasons was the vote of Pain founded, and not on his humanity or his
justice. Petion, the infamous Petion de Ville-neuve, did not vote for the
king's death; yet certainly no one will believe that motives of justice or
humanity restrained the man, who, after having plotted the insurrection of the
tenth of August, brought it against the king as a crime, and who loaded the
royal captives and their children with every insult and cruelty that the heart
of an upstart savage tyrant could suggest.

The whole process of the trial of the king of France, from the beginning to
the end, was the most flagrant act of injustice that ever stained the annals of
the world. It was well known to every one, and particularly to the audacious
regicides themselves, that he was innocent of every crime laid to his charge.
The sentence of banishment was therefore as unjust as that of death. Injustice
is ever injustice: it may exist in different degrees, but it can never change
its nature. Had Pain been a just and humane man, he would have stood up boldly
in the defense of innocence, in place of sheltering himself under a vote for
banishment. Banishment! Great God! Banishment on the head of the towering
family of Bourbon, pronounced by a discarded English Exciseman! -- What must
have been the feelings of this forsaken prince, who was once called the great
and good ally of America, when he heard the word banishment! come from the lips
of a wretch raised to notice by the success of a revolution of which he himself
had been a principal support! -- I hope no such thought came athwart the mind
of the unfortunate Louis; if it did, certain I am it must have been ten million
times more poignant than the pangs of death.

However Pain might find it convenient to vote upon this occasion, it is
certain he did not feel much horror at the murder of the benefactor of his
beloved America, or he would not have remained with, and in the service of, his
murderers. He was told this by his quondam friend Mr. King, in a letter sent
him from England soon afterward. If the French kill their king, it will be a
signal for my departure, for I will not abide among such sanguinary men. --
These, Mr. Pain, were your words at our last meeting; yet, after this, you are
not only with them, but the chief modeller of their new constitution, formed so
heterogeneous and inconsistent, so hypothetical and contradictory, as shows me,
that provided your theories obtain fame, you are indifferent how the people may
be disappointed in the practice of them.

Having introduced this correspondence here, it is a proper place for me to
give the reader a striking proof of Thomas's disinterestedness, a quality for
which he sets a very high value on himself. Politics and self-interest" (says
he, in the second part of what he calls his Rights of Man) "have been so
uniformly connected, that the world has a right to be suspicious of public
characters: but, with regard to myself, I am perfectly easy on this head. I did
not, at my first setting out in public life, turn my thoughts on subjects of
government from motives of self-interest; and my conduct from that moment to
this proves the fact. -- After this bouncing out-set, he goes on and tells his
readers how disinterested he was in America, quite forgetting, however, to
observe that he solicited, and obtained, a recompense for his services, as is
stated in the above account of his life. -- The following letter will put his
disinterestedness in a very clear point of view, and may, perhaps, serve to
remove the film from the eyes of some of those, who are apt to place too much
confidence in the professions of our disinterested patriots.

DEAR KING,
I don't know any thing these many years, that surprised, and hurt me more,
than the sentiments you published in the Courtly HERALD, the 12th December,
signed JOHN KING, Egham Lodge. You have gone back from all you ever said. --
You used to complain of abuses as well as me, and wrote your opinions on them
in free terms. What then means this sudden attachment to Kings? This fondness
of the English Government and hatred of the French? -- If you mean to curry
favor, by aiding your government, you are mistaken; they never recompense
those who serve it; they buy off those who can annoy it, and let the good that
is rendered it, be its own reward. Believe me, KING, more is to be obtained by
cherishing the rising spirit of the people, than by subduing it. Follow my
fortunes, and I will be answerable, that you shall make your own.

THO. PAIN.
Paris, January 3, 1793.

This letter ought to be stuck upon every wall and every post in the United
States, and in every other country where the voice of the people is of any
consequence. It is the creed, the multum in parvo, of all the pretended
patriots that ever infested the earth. It is all in all; it is conclusive, and
requires neither coloring nor commentary.

After the death of the king of France, there was a long struggle between the
faction of Brissot, to which Tom had attached himself, and that of Danton,
Robespierre and Marat. The last named murderer was dispatched by a murderess of
Brissot's faction, after which her abettors were all guillotined, imprisoned,
or proscribed. Thomas saved his life by countenancing the degradation of the
Christian religion, in his "Age of Reason."

When Danton was solicited to spare him on account of his talents as a writer
in the cause of liberty, "tu ne vois pas donc fo -- tu beat," replied he to the
solicitor, que nous n'avons plus besoin de pareils fanatiques. You do not
perceive then, you simpleton, that we no longer want fanatics of that sort.
Cutthroat Danton was right enough: indeed they no longer stood in need of a
fanatical writer in the cause of liberty, when they had made it a crime for men
to weep.

Danton made a calculation of Tom's head and talents, just as a farmer makes a
calculation of the labor, carcass, hide and offal of a bullock; and he found
that he would fetch more living than dead. By writing against religion, he
might do his cause some service, and there was little or no danger to be
apprehended from him; because, being an Englishman, it was only giving him that
name, and he could any when have him killed and dressed, a la mode de Paris, at
five minutes warning.

Horrid as Paine's attack on revealed religion must appear to every one
untainted with deism or atheism, the base assailant is not seen in his true
colors, in his blackest hue, till the opinions in his Age of Reason are
compared with the hypocritical canting professions of respect for "the Word of
God," contained in some of his former writings. In his Common Sense, calling on
the people to separate themselves from the government that had discarded him,
he says it is a form of government that the word of God bears testimony
against; and in another part of the same work, proposing the promulgation of a
new charter, he says: that we may not appear to be defective even in earthly
honors, let a day be solemnly set apart for proclaiming the charter; let it be
brought forth placed on the divine law, the word of God. -- In another place he
spends whole pages in endeavoring to persuade his readers that monarchy is
disapproved of by God, and he brings his proofs from Holy Writ, concluding with
these words. These portions of the Holy Scriptures are direct and positive.
They admit of no equivocal construction. -- In one part of the same writings he
complains of the "impiety" of the Tories, and in another of the unchristian
peevishness of the Quakers. He calls upon the people to turn out in the name of
God. Say not," adds he, "that thousands are gone out, turn out your tens of
thousands; throw not the burden of the day upon Providence, but "show your
faith by your works," that God may bless you.

-- We claim (says he again, keeping up the cant) we claim brotherhood with
every European christian, and glory in the generosity of the sentiment. --
Generous and sentimental rascal! Whom do you claim brotherhood with now? Who
will admit as a brother, the wretch, who, at one time calls the Scriptures the
word of God, and quotes them as an infallible guide, and at another, ridicules
them as a series of fictions, contrived by artful priests to amuse, delude, and
cheat mankind?

From Paine's Common Sense and his Age of Reason we may perceive how his
opinion differed concerning the Americans at the two epochs of his writing.
When he wrote the former, he looked upon them as a conscientious and pious
people; but when he wrote the latter, he certainly looked upon them in the
opposite light, or he never would have ventured to address the work to them.
The fact is, he had altered his opinion of them upon the strength of what he
saw in the greatest part of the public papers. After seeing a minister of the
gospel abused, for having boldly asserted the truth of its doctrines, in
opposition to the horrid decrees of the French Convention; after having seen
the name of Jesus Christ placed in a list of famous democrats, along with the
names of Pain and Marat, it was no wonder if he thought that his manual of
blasphemy would be an acceptable present to his "beloved Americans."

Indeed, there is but too much reason to fear, that the Age of Reason being
translated into English, apparently for the sole purpose of being published
here, its being dedicated to the citizens of the United States, together with
the uncommon pains that have been taken to propagate it and the abuse that has
been heaped upon all those who have attempted to counteract its effects, will
do but little credit to the national character, in the opinions of those
foreigners who are not well acquainted with it. Every effort should, therefore,
be exerted to convince the world, that all men of sense and worth in America
agree in their abhorrence of the work and its malignant author. From this
persuasion it was, that I inserted in the Political Censor for May, an extract
from Judge Rush's pious address to the grand jury at Reading, and that I now
honor the present Censor with an extract from Mr. Swift's System of Laws of
Connecticut, a work that every one should read, and that every one who reads
must admire.

To prohibit (says this learned and elegant writer) To prohibit the open,
public, and explicit denial of the popular religion of a country, is a
necessary measure to preserve the tranquillity of a government. Of this no
person in a christian country can complain; for, admitting him to be an
infidel, he must acknowledge, that no benefit can be derived from the
subversion of a religion which enforces the best system of morality, and
inculcates the divine doctrine of doing justly, loving mercy, and walking
humbly with God. In this view of the subject, we cannot sufficiently reprobate
the baseness of Thomas Pain, in his attack on christianity, by publishing his
Age of Reason. While experiencing in a prison, the fruits of his visionary
theories of government, he undertakes to disturb the world by his religious
opinions. He has the impudence and effrontery to address to the citizens of the
United States of America, a paltry performance, which is intended to shake
their faith in the religion of their fathers; a religion, which, while it
inculcates the practice of moral virtue, contributes to smooth the thorny road
of this life, by opening the prospect of a future and better: and all this he
does, not to make them happier, or to introduce a better religion, but to
embitter their days by the cheerless and dreary visions of unbelief. No
language can describe the wickedness of the man, who will attempt to subvert a
religion which is a source of comfort and consolation to its votaries, merely
for the sake of eradicating all sentiments of religion.

Of the many answers to Pain no one demands so much of our praise and our
gratitude as DR. WATSON'S Apology for the Bible. From some weak attempts, by
persons either unskilled on the subject or unaccustomed to wield the weapons of
disputation, the deists began to triumph in the thought that the clumsy
cavillings of their leader were unanswerable, when this most excellent work
appeared, and left nothing unanswered or unrefuted. The Rights of Man also,
has, in this country, been pretty generally looked upon as unanswerable. This
is not so much to be wondered at, when we consider the pains that have been
taken to hide from the people every thing that might tend to wean them from
their partiality to the newfangled doctrine of liberty and equality. The
Rights of Man has, however, been answered, and that in a most complete and
masterly manner. This answer is now in my possession, and I promise myself the
honor of communicating it to the public in a few days. This work ought to
accompany Dr. WATSON'S Apology: the two together will be an effective antidote
for all Tom's theological and political poison.
It is as much impossible for me to do justice to the Apology, as to express my
veneration for its author. Learning, genius, candor, modesty and humility, all
seem to have united here, to do honor to the cause of Christianity and cover
its enemies with shame and confusion. And, a circumstance that must be
particularly mortifying to Pain, and to all the enemies of order and religion,
the man to whom the world is indebted for this production, is an aristocrat,
and a Prelate of the Church of England, raised to his dignity by the choice of
a King.

Let us now return to the hoary blasphemer at the bottom of his dungeon. There
he lies! manacled, besmeared with filth, crawling with vermin, loaded with
years and infamy. This, reader, whatever you may think of him, is the author of
the Rights of Man, the eulogist of French liberty. The very same man who a few
months back boasted of being the representative of twenty-five millions of free
men. Look at him. Do you think now, in your conscience, that he has the
appearance of a legislator, a civilian, a constitution maker? It is no
tyrannical king, I Will assure you, who has tethered him thus. He was condemned
by his colleagues, and his fetters were rivetted by his own dear constituents.
Here he is, fairly caught in his own trap, a striking example for the
disturbers of mankind.

After Thomas got out of his cachot (a word that, I dare say, he understands
better than any other in the French language), it was reported that he was
dead, which occasioned the epitaph on him, to be seen in the Censor for May;
but, it has appeared since, that the report of his death was owing to a mode of
expression which the French have, whereby a person sunk into insignificance is
said to be dead. He, or some one in his name, has lately written a work,
entitled, the Decline and Fall of the British System of Finance, of which it is
quite enough to say, that it is of equal merit with the rest of his writings.
All his predictions have hitherto remained unfulfilled, and those contained in
the last effort of his malice will share the same fate. It is extremely
favorable for British bank-notes, that he who doubts of their solidity will
not believe in the Bible.

How Tom gets a living now, or what brothel he inhabits, I know not, nor does
it much signify to any body here or any where else. He has done all the
mischief he can in the world, and whether his carcass is at last to be suffered
to rot on the earth, or to be dried in the air, is of very little consequence.
Whenever and wherever he breathes his last, he will excite neither sorrow nor
compassion; no friendly hand will close his eyes, not a groan will be uttered,
not a tear will be shed. Like Judas he will be remembered by posterity; men
will learn to express all that is base, malignant, treacherous, unnatural and
blasphemous, by the single monosyllable, Pain.

REMARKS On the Pamphlets lately published against Peter Porcupine.
DEAR FATHER, when you used to set me off to work in the morning, dressed in my
blue smock-frock and woollen spatterdashes, with my bag of bread and cheese and
bottle of small beer swung over my shoulder on the little crook that my old
godfather Boxall gave me, little did you imagine that I should one day become
so great a man as to have my picture stuck in the windows, and have four whole
books published about me in the course of one week. -- Thus begins a letter
which I wrote to my father yesterday morning, and which, if it reaches him,
will make the old man drink an extraordinary pot of ale to my health. Heaven
bless him! I think I see him now, by his old-fashioned fireside, reading the
letter to his neighbors." "Ay, Ay," says he, Will will stand his ground
wherever he goes. -- And so I will, father, in spite of all the hell of
democracy.

When I had the honor to serve King George, I was elated enough at the putting
on of my worsted shoulder-knot, and, afterward, my silver-laced coat; what
must my feelings be then, upon seeing half a dozen authors, all Doctors or the
devil knows what, writing about me at one time, and ten times that number of
printers, book-binders, and booksellers, bustling, running and flying about in
all directions, to announce my fame to the impatient public? What must I feel
upon seeing the newspapers filled from top to bottom, and the windows and
corners of the hoofes placarded, with, a Blue Shop for Peter Porcupine, a Pill
for Peter Porcupine, Peter Porcupine detected, a Roaster for Peter Porcupine, a
History of Peter Porcupine, a Picture of Peter Porcupine? The public will
certainly excuse me, if after all this, I should begin to think myself a person
of some importance.

It is true, my heroic adversaries do all set out with telling their readers,
that I am a contemptible wretch not worth notice. They should have said, not
worth the notice of any honest man, and, as they would all naturally have
excluded themselves by such an addition, they would have preserved consistency
at least: but, to sit down hammering their brains for a fortnight or three
weeks, and at last publish each of them a pamphlet about me and my
performances, and then tell the public that I am not worth notice, is such a
gross insult to common sense that nothing but democratic stupidity can be a
sufficient excuse for.

At the very moment that I am writing, these sorry fellows are hugging
themselves in the thought that they have silenced me, cut me up, as they call
it. They think they see me prostrate, and they are swaggering over me, like a
popish priest over a dead corpse. It would require other pens than theirs to
silence me. I shall keep plodding on in my old way, as I used to do at plough;
and I think it will not be looked upon as any very extraordinary trait of
vanity to say, that the Political Censor will be read, when the very names of
their bungling pamphlets will be forgotten.

I must now beg the reader to accompany me in some few remarks that I think it
necessary to make on each of their productions, following the order in which
they appeared.

A ROASTER FOR PETER PORCUPINE.
What can I say worse of this blustering performance, than that it bears all
the internal evidence of being written by the blunderbuss author who disgusted
the city with Rub from Snub?

THE BLUE SHOP; or Humorous Observations, etc.
The inoffensive and unmeaning title of this pamphlet is fully expressive of
the matter it is prefixed to, excepting that the word humorous was, perhaps,
never before so unfortunately applied. Every one who has been taken in with
this quarter-dollar's worth, whether a friend or an enemy of Peter Porcupine,
curses it for the most senseless and vapid piece of stuff that ever issued from
the press. The author, I hear, retorts, and swears the Americans are a set of
stupid jack-asses, who know not what true humor is. It Is pity he had not
perceived this before, he might then have accommodated his humor to their
understandings. It is now too late to rail against their ignorance or want of
taste, for, in spite of his railing and fretting, James Quicksilver will, by
them, ever be looked upon as a most leaden-headed fellow.

PORCUPINE A PRINT.
This is a caricature, in which I am represented as urged on to write by my old
master King George (under the form of a crowned lion), who, of course, comes
accompanied with the devil. The Jay, with the treaty in his beak, is mounted on
the lion's back, though, by the by, it has ever been said, by the democrats,
that the lion rode the Jay. His Satanic Majesty holds me out a bag of money, as
an encouragement to destroy the idol, liberty, to which he points. The American
Eagle is represented as drooping his wings in consequence of my hostility, and
America herself on the same account, weeps over the bust of Franklin. This is
almost the only part of the print of which I find fault; for, if by America the
people of America be to be understood, I believe most of those who have read my
essays will do me the justice to say, that I have endeavored to make America
laugh instead of weep. -- As to myself, I am the hero of the piece, I am
brought forward to the front of the stage, where the artist makes me trample
upon Randolph's Defense, the Rights of Man, Old Common Sense, Madison,
Gallatin, Swanwick, and Peter Pindar. How this blundering fellow came to place
Pindar among the rest I cannot imagine. It discovers a total ignorance of that
author's writings and of my opinion concerning them. Can the American democrats
approve, and can I disapprove, of a writer who says of Tom Pain: "Pain, in
his thirst for reputation,
"Has written to deserve damnation."


Can the democrats approve, and can I disapprove, of a writer who speaks of
France and of Frenchmen in the following manner: "Keel up lies FRANCE! long may
she keep that posture!
"Her knav'ry, folly, on the rocks have tossed her;
"Behold the thousands that surround the wreck!
"Her cables parted, rudder gone,
"Split all her sails, her mainmast down,
"Chok'd all her pumps, crushed in her deck;
"Sport for the winds, the billows over her roll!
"Now I am glad of it with all my soul.
"To BRITAIN an insidious damned Iago --
"Remember, ENGLISHMEN, old Cato's cry,
"And keep that patriot model in your eye --
"His constant cry, " Delenda est Carthago.
"Love I the French? -- By heavens it is no such matter!
"Who loves a Frenchman wars with simple nature.
"The converse chaste of day, and eke of night,
"The kiss-clad moments of supreme delight,
"To love's pure passion only due;
"The seraph smile that soft-ey'd FRIENDSHIP wears,
"And sorrow's balm of sympathizing tears,
"Those iron-hearted fellows never knew.
"Hear me, Dame Nature, on these men of cork --
"Blush at a FRENCHMAN'S heart, thy handy work;
"A dunghill that luxuriant feeds
"The gaudy and the rankest weeds:
"Deception, grub-like, taints its very core,
"Like flies in carrion -- Prithee make no more.
"Yes, FRENCHMEN, this is my unvarying creed,
"Ye are not rational, indeed;
"So low have fond conceit and folly sunk ye:
"Only a larger kind of monkey!"


And yet this is the writer that the learned and sagacious democrats make me
trample upon! I think my namesake Peter speaks here like a good honest
Englishman, and though Mr. Bache publishes his works, and boasts of being in
correspondence with him, I am very far from either trampling on those works or
disliking their author.

Perhaps I ought to take some notice of the quarter whence this Caricature and
the Blue Shop issued, as it furnishes an instance, among thousands, of that
degradation which the first movers in the French revolution have long been, and
still are, exhibiting to the world. These poor miserable catch-penny pictures
and pamphlets are published by a man of the name of Moreau, who was one of
those whom Tom Pain and his comrades Price and Priestley called, the great,
illuminated and illuminating National Assembly of France. -- Goddess of
Liberty! and do thou permit this thy great, illuminated and illuminating
knocker-down of Bastiles to wage a puny underhand war with one of King George's
red-coats! Do thou permit one of those aspiring "legislators of the
Universe," who commanded the folding doors of the Louvre to fly open at their
approach, and who scorn to yield the precedence to Princes and Emperors, to
dwindle down into a miserable marchand d'estampes! If these be thy tricks,
Goddess of French Liberty, may the devil take Peter, if ever thy bloody cap and
pike entice him to enlist under thy banners.

Mr. Moreau, to his other misfortunes, adds that most calamitous one of
thinking he can write. He is cursed with the scribbling itch, without knowing
how to scratch himself with a good grace. As this is torment enough in itself,
I do not wish to add to it by mentioning particular instances of his want of
taste and talents. The greatest punishment I wish my enemies, is, that Moreau
may be obliged to write all his lifetime, and that the rest may be obliged to
read his productions.

"THE HISTORY OF A PORCUPINE."
This pamphlet is, I am told, copied, verbatim, from a chap-book, containing
the lives of several men who were executed in Ireland some years ago Names and
dates only are changed, to give the thing an air of plausibility. -- It is said
to be published by two Scotch lads, lately arrived in the country, and who now
live in some of the alleys about Dock-Street, no matter which. -- One of their
acquaintances called on me some days after the publication appeared, and
offered to furnish me with the book from which it is taken. This offer I
declined accepting of. -- I shall only add here, as a caution to my readers,
that these are the men who are seen hawking about a work in numbers, which they
are pleased to call a History of France, and who are proposing to publish a
Monthly Magazine.

"A PILL FOR PORCUPINE."
It is a rule with book-makers, that a title should, as briefly as possible,
express the nature of the work to which it is prefixed. According to this rule,
Pill is a most excellent title to the performance now before me. A Pill is
usually a compound of several nauseous, and sometimes poisonous, drugs, and
such is the Pill for Porcupine.

Various have been the conjectures as to the author of this abusive piece. Be
he who he may, he has certainly done me a favor in grouping me along with
Messrs. Hamilton, Belknap, Morse, etc. I would cheerfully swallow my part of
his pill, and even think it an honor to be poisoned, in such company as this.

I shall take particular notice of but one part of this quack's compound of
filth. Thinking, I suppose, that I should laugh at all his abuse of myself, the
mountebank has endeavored to wound me through my wife, by artfully insinuating
that she is not married to me.

"When we behold," says he, Porcupine inveigling an innocent girl, not more
than sixteen or seventeen years, from her aged parents -- their only remaining
blossom -- and last best hope; when we consider him breaking the ties of
parental affection, and filial duty; exciting animosity between parent and
child; our wonder ceases when we find him endeavoring to excite animosity,
between the citizens of the eastern and the southern states. When we view him
giving an aged parent occasion to exclaim, in the bitterness of his heart, "If
I am bereft of my only daughter, I am bereft!" What parent of sensibility, who
has a daughter; or what brother of sensibility, who has a sister; that would
not be roused with indignation, at reflecting on such circumstances? Are the
tears and sighs of an aching heart -- a bereft parent, unworthy of our notice!
Is female happiness of no consideration amongst men, that we should pass it
over in silence? -- I am sure it is some sentimental scoundrel that writes
this. They are undeniably the greatest villains on earth. He adds, in a note:
In answer to the foregoing, we have only to observe, that it was generally
believed, by those who were intimate at the house [observe, he does not say,
those who lived at the house] where Porcupine lodged on his arrival, that he
seduced the girl who lived with him as his wife: they believed, and said so,
but upon what authority I never inquired.

I always like to let these fellows blaze away, till they have advanced some
gross absurdity, or falsehood, and then put the extinguisher upon them, as
Billy Pit (God bless him for it!) did upon the English sans-culottes. -- This
"young woman" whom the cutthroat quack insinuates I seduced from her parents;
this "only child," this "last best hope," and "only remaining blossom;" all
this put together, is one out of six children of a brave Scotchman, who served
his Majesty nearly thirty years in the First Battalion of Royal Artillery. He
fought several years against the Americans last war, and did not, like a base
and perjured traitor, desert to the enemy as many others did, under the
specious pretext of a love of liberty. When I married his daughter he had for
about fifteen or sixteen years been a sergeant, and he is now, as a reward for
his long and faithful services, Master-Gunner of Sterling Castle in Scotland.
-- May Britain never want such soldiers nor those soldiers want such reward!

From this good old man I received his daughter's hand in the parish church of
Woolwich, on the 5th of February 1792; and I trust it will give the reader no
ill impression of her merit and my constancy, when I tell him, that this
marriage took place after an absence of nearly three years, she being in
England and I in New-Brunswick, where I had the happiness of first seeing her.

Since the sentimental dastard, who has thus aimed a stab at the reputation of
a woman, published his Pill, I have shown my marriage certificate to Mr.
Abercrombie, the minister of the church opposite me. -- All you who emigrate to
the United States of America, to enjoy this unrestrained liberty of the press
that they make such a fuss about, take care (if you mean to say a word in
favor of your country) to bring your vouchers and certificates with you, or
they will stigmatize you for thieves; your wives will be called whores, and your
children bastards! -- Blessed liberty of the press!

"THE IMPOSTOR DETECTED."
This pamphlet ought, on every account, to come last: we have seen the rest
rising above each other progressively; this of Bradford's crowns the whole,
caps the climax of falsehood and villainy.

The former part of it bears the assumed name of Tickletoby, the latter, that
of Samuel F. Bradford. It is evident, however, that both are by the same
author; who he is, is not of much consequence: it is clear that he acted under
the directions of Bradford, and Bradford must and shall answer for the whole.

What every one recoils at the bare idea of, is Bradford's writing a pamphlet
against the works of Peter Porcupine. Had he confined his attack to my private
character and opinions, he would not have so completely exposed himself; but
this, I suppose, his author would not consent to; I do not know any other way
of accounting for his conduct.

Every one perceives that the letter which Bradford inserts in Tickletoby's
part of the pamphlet, is nothing but a poor and vain attempt to preserve
consistency. However, to leave no room for dispute on this score, and to
convict the shuffling Bradford on his own words, I am willing to allow him to
be neuter with respect to Tickletoby's part, and will take him up on the
contents of the letter which he signs. That I have made use," says he, "of the
British Corporal for a good purpose, I have little doubt -- Dirty water will
quench fire.

Of his making use of me I shall speak by-and-by; at present I shall confine
myself to the dirty water, which is the name he gives my writings. -- Now, how
will he reconcile this with his zeal to spread them abroad, and with the
awkward flattery he and his family used to bore my ears with? Had I believed
the half of what they told me, I should have long ago expired in an extacy of
self-conceit. When the Observations on Priestley's Emigration were published,
Bradford and his wife took great care to inform me of the praises bestowed on
them by several gentlemen, Doctor Green in particular, and to point out to me
the passages that gave the most pleasure. The first Bone to Gnaw gave universal
satisfaction, they told me: it was read in all companies, by the young and by
the old; and I remember that the sons told me, on this occasion, how delighted
their uncle, the late worthy Attorney General, was with it; and that he said he
should have (...) that it was not for the sake of the profit but the honor of
publishing my works, that made him so anxious to continue. -- My wife was
present at this interview, and can, with me, make oath to the truth of what I
have here asserted.

Nay, if my works were dirty water, why did he threaten to prosecute me for not
continuing them? Dirty water is not a thing to go to law about. Did ever any
body hear of a man's prosecuting another, because he refused to bring him dirty
water to throw on the public?

After all this praising and flattering and menacing, my poor labors are good
for nothing. The writings which had given so much pleasure to Doctor Green,
that the Attorney General would have loved me for ever for, that charmed all
sexes and all ages, that made grave Senators shake their sides with laughter,
and Congress-men want to treat and hug me; that were so highly approved of by
the officers of government, that it was an honor to publish, and that I was
threatened with a prosecution for not continuing; these writings are now become
dirty water! -- Say rather, sour grapes.

I must, however, do the Bradfords the justice to say, that they very heartily
told me, that every body could perceive a falling off, after the Congress
Gallery. How singular it was, that I should begin to sink the instant I quitted
them! Was this because they did no longer amend my works for me, or because
they no longer pocketed the cash they produced! The Bradfords are booksellers
died in grain. Heaven is with them worth nothing, unless they can get something
by it.

With respect to the motives that gave rise to my pamphlets, I have already
stated them, and as to their literary merit, though I have no very great
opinion of it, yet, after having heard them ascribed to Mr. Bond, Mr. Thornton
(not the language maker but the secretary to the English Ambassador), Dr.
Andrews, The Rev. Mr. Bisset, Mr. Lewis, Mr. Sedgewick, Dr. Smith, and, in
short, to almost every gentleman of distinguished talents among the friends of
the Federal Government, it would be mere grimace for me to pretend, that they
have no merit at all. It is something singular, that the democrats never
pitched upon any low fellow as the author; their suspicions always alighted
among gentlemen of family and gentlemen of learning. It is therefore too late
to decry my performances as tasteless and illiterate, now it is discovered that
the author was brought up at the plough tail, and was a few years ago, a
private soldier in the British army.

To return to my friend Bradford. Though I am ready to admit him as a neutral
in all that is said by Tickletoby, I cannot do this with regard to what is
ushered into the world as the performance of Samuel F. Bradford. This
hatter-turned-printer, this sooty-fisted son of ink and urine, whose heart is
as black and as foul as the liquid in which he dabbles, must have written, if
he did write, at the special instance and request of his father; for, the
Lampblack says, "a father's wish is a law with me."

After having premised this, making Bradford responsible for what is contained
in his letter and his son's, I shall proceed to remark on such parts of both as
I think worth my notice.

And first on the grand discovery of the letter to the Aurora-Man. -- This is a
letter which I wrote to the gazette, under the signature of A Correspondent,
against the second part of the Bone to Gnaw. The letter, as now printed by
Bradford, may, for ought I know, be a very correct copy. I remember the time
and all the circumstances well. Bradford, who is as eager to get money into his
hands as he is unwilling to let it out again, repeatedly asked me for a Puff to
this pamphlet. This very son came to me for it as many as half a dozen times. I
at last complied; not that I was unwilling to do it at first (for I had bored
the cunning grandchild of the cunning almanack-maker several times before),
but I could with difficulty spare time to write it.

Puffs are of several sorts. I believe the one now before us, is what is called
a Puff indirect, which means, a piece written by an author, or by his desire,
against his own performances, thereby to excite opposition, awaken the
attention of the public, and so advance the renown or sale of his labors. A
Puff indirect is, then, what I stand accused of, and as I have no argument at
hand to prove the moral fitness of the thing, I must, as pleaders do in all
knotty points, appeal to precedents. My authorities are very high, being no
other than Addison, Phillips and Pope.

No one that has read the Spectator (and who has not done that) can have failed
to observe, that he published many letters against his own writings, imitating
the style and manner of his adversaries, and containing weak arguments, which
he immediately overturns in his answer. -- Doctor Johnson tells us that, before
the acting of PHILLIPS'S Distressed Mother, a whole Spectator was devoted to
its praise, and on the first night a select audience was called together to
applaud it. The Epilogue to this play was written by Addison, who inserted a
letter against it in the Spectator, for the sake of giving it a triumphant
answer. But, Pope's famous puff is a case exactly in point. "He drew a
comparison," says Dr. Johnson, of Phillips's performance with his own, in
which, with an unexampled and unequalled artifice of irony, though he has
himself always the advantage, he gives the preference to Phillips. The design
of aggrandizing himself he disguised with such dexterity, that, though Addison
discovered it, Steel was deceived, and was afraid of displeasing Pope by
publishing his paper. -- Now, what censure does Lord Chief Justice, Johnson
(who, God knows, was far from being over lenient) pass on all this? None at
all. He calls neither of these authors "an Impostor;" nor can I think he would
have done so, had their puffs been written at his request, and for his benefit.

If a puff can ever be construed as an act of meanness, it must be, when its
motive is self-interest. This cannot be attributed to me, as I could get
nothing by promoting the sale of the work. I had a note of hand for it in my
possession; which the number of copies sold could not augment the value of.

What impudence must a man be blessed with, who can usher to the world a puff,
which he wishes should be looked upon as something horridly villainous, when he
himself requested it to be written, transcribed it himself, and carried it
himself for publication? -- But here the Bradfords play a double game. "It was
not I transcribed it," says old Goosy Tom; and "a father's wish is a law with
me," returns the young Gosling. But you hissing, webfooted animals, is it not
between you? -- The puffing for fame belongs to me; but the transcribing and
carrying to the press; all the interested part of the business, all the dirty
work, lies among yourselves, and so I leave you to waddle and dabble about in
it.

Having dismissed the Puff, we now come to the breach of confidence in
publishing it. There are many transactions which we do not look upon as
criminal, which, nevertheless, we do not wish to have made public. A lady, in
love with a handsome young fellow, may make indirect advances, by the aid of a
third person. This is certainly no crime; but should the confident preserve one
of her letters, and afterward publish it, I presume such confident would meet
with general detestation. This is a parallel case so far; but when to this we
add the aggravating circumstance of the confident being the original adviser of
the correspondence, we are at a loss for words to express our abhorrence. Yet
we must go still further with respect to Bradford. He has not only divulged
what was communicated to him under his pledged secrecy, and at his pressing
request, to serve him; but he has been guilty of this scandalous breach of
confidence toward a man, to whom he owes, perhaps, that he is not now in jail
for debt.

It is easy to perceive what drove him to this act of treachery. Revenge for
the statement I had published concerning the one shilling and seven-pence
halfpenny pamphlet. He could not help fearing that people would resent this by
avoiding his shop. He was right enough; for, though I am an Englishman, and of
course, a sort of lawful prey to the democrats, yet they, even they, cannot
help saying that he is an abominable sharper. To be revenged on me for this, he
published the letter, and has thus done what all impotent vindictive men do,
injured himself without injuring his adversary. I hinted that he had taken me
in, and in return he betrays me to the reputation of a sharper, he adds that of
a villain.

After this will any one say that I am to blame, if I expose this stupid, this
mean, this shabby, this treacherous family? Do they deserve any quarter from
me? -- Every one says -- no, Peter, no.

They say I lived in a garret when first they knew me. They found me sole
tenant and occupier of a very good house, No. 81, Callowhill. They say I was
poor; and that lump of walking tallow streaked with lampblack, that calls
itself Samuel F. Bradford, has the impudence to say that my wardrobe consisted
of my old regimentals, etc. -- At the time the Bradfords first knew me I earned
about 140 dollars pr. month, and which I continued to do for about two years
and a half. I taught English to the most respectable Frenchmen in the city, who
did not shuffle me off with notes as Bradford did. With such an income I leave
the reader to guess whether I had any occasion to go shabbily dressed. -- It
would look childish to retort here, but let the reader go and ask the women in
Callowhill street about the rent in old Bradford's yellow breeches.

The Bradfords have seen others attack me upon my sudden exaltation, as they
call it: upon my having a book-shop, and all this without any visible means of
acquiring it; whence they wish to make people believe that I am paid by the
British government. It is excessively base in the Bradfords to endeavor to
strengthen this opinion, because they know that I came by my money fairly and
honestly. They were never out of my debt, from the moment they published the
first pamphlet, which was in Aug. 1794, till the latter end of May last. At
this time they owed me 18 dollars, which had been due for near six months, and
which I was at last obliged to take out in books.
They used to put off the payment of their notes from time to time, and they
always had at their tongues end; "we know you don't want money." And these
rascals have now the impudence to say that I was their needy hireling! -- It Is
pity, as Tom Jones's Host says, but there should be a hell for such fellows.

It is hinted, and indeed said, in this vile pamphlet, that I have been
encouraged by the American government also. -- I promised the reader I would
tell him a story about Bradford's patriotism, and I will now be as good as my
word. -- In order to induce me to continue the Congress Gallery, he informed
me, that Mr. Wolcot had promised to procure him the printing of the Reports to
Congress: "So," added he, I will print off enough copies for the members, and
so many besides as will be sufficient to place at the end of each of your
numbers, and Congress will pay for printing the whole! He told me he had asked
Mr. Wolcot for this job, which I looked upon as an indirect way of asking for a
bribe, being assured that he built his hopes of succeeding, upon being the
publisher of my works. -- Now, here is a dog for you, that goes and asks for a
government job, presuming solely upon the merit of being the vender of what he,
nine months afterward, calls dirty water, and who adds to this an attempt to
fix the character of government tool on another man. If I would have continued
the Numbers, it is probable he might have printed the Reports; but this I would
not do. I wanted no Reports tacked on to the end of my pamphlets: that would
have been renewing the punishment of coupling the living to the dead.

Sooty Sam, the Gosling, tells the public that I used to call him a
sans-culotte and his father a rebel. If this be true, I am sure I can call them
nothing worse, and therefore I am by no means anxious to contradict him. --
But, pray, wise Mister Bradford of the "political [and bawdy] book-store," is
not this avowal of yours rather calculated to destroy what you say about my
being an artful and subtle hypocrite? I take it, that my calling you rebels and
sans-culottes to you faces is no proof of my hypocrisy; nor will the public
think it any proof of your putting a coat upon my back. Men are generally mean
when they are dependent; they do not, indeed they do not, call their patrons
sans-culottes and rebels; nor do people suffer themselves to be so called,
unless some weighty motive induces them to put up with it. -- This
acknowledgment of Bradford's is conclusive; it shows at once on what footing we
stood with relation to each other.

He says that I abused many of the most respectable characters, by calling them
Speculators, Landjobbers, etc. who were continually seeking to entrap and
deceive foreigners. -- If I did call those men Speculators and Landjobbers, who
are continually seeking to entrap foreigners; if I confined myself to such mild
terms, I must have been in an extremely good humor. But, young Mister
Lampblack, be candid for once and allow me that your father is a sharper. Oh!
don't go to deny that now: what every body says must be true.

How grossly," says the son, "did you frequently abuse the People of America,
by asserting that, for the greater part, they were Aristocrats and Royalists in
their hearts, and only wore the mask of hypocrisy to answer their own purposes.
-- If young Urine will but agree to leave out People of America, and supply its
place with, family of Goosy Tom, I will own the sentence for mine; and I will
tell the public into the bargain, how I came to make use of it. -- I entered
Bradford's one day, and found him poring over an old book on heraldry. I looked
at it, and we made some remarks on the orthography. In a few minutes afterward
he asked me if I knew any thing of the great Bradford family in England. I
replied, no. He then told me that he had just seen a list of new Peers (
English Peers, reader!), among which was a Lord Bradford; and that he suspected
that he was of a branch of their family! -- As the old women say, you might
have knocked me down with a feather. I did not know which way to look. The
blush that warmed my cheek for him then, renews itself as I write. -- He did
not drop it here. He dunned my ears about it half a dozen times; and even went
so far as to request me to make inquiries about it, when I wrote home. -- It
was on this most ludicrous occasion, that I burst out, Ah, d -- n you, I see
you are all Aristocrats and Royalists in your hearts yet. Your republicanism is
nothing but hypocrisy. And I dare say the reader will think I was half right.
-- I wonder what are the armorial signs of Bradford's family. The crest must be
a Goose, of course. Instead of scollops and gueules, he may take a couple of
printers balls, a keg of lampblack and a jordon. His two great bears of sons (I
except William) may serve as supporters, and his motto may be, One shilling and
seven-pence halfpenny for a pamphlet. All this will form a pretty good
republican coat of arms.

Let it be remembered here too, that my calling the Bradfords Aristocrats and
hypocrites, does not prove me to be a hypocrite, a needy hireling, or a coward.
As to this last term which young Lampblack has conferred on me, it is the
blustering noise of a poor timid trembling cock, crowing upon his own dunghill.
I hurl his coward back to his teeth, with the addition of fool and scoundrel. I
think that is interest enough for one fortnight. The father has served the
silly son, as the monkey served the cat, when he took her paw to rake the
chestnuts out of the fire with.

They accuse me of being given to scandal. -- If I had published, or made use
of, one hundredth part of the anecdotes they supplied me with. I should have
set the whole city together by the ears. The governor's share alone would fill
a volume. -- I Will just mention one or two, which will prove, that I am not the
first old acquaintance that Bradford has betrayed. -- He told me of a judge,
who, when he presented him an old account, refused to pay it, as it was setting
a bad example. -- Ah, righteous judge? A Second Daniel! -- He told me, that he
went once to breakfast with Mr. Dallas, now Secretary of the State of
Pennsylvania, and that Dallas said to him: By G -- d Tom we have no sugar, and
I have not a farthing in the world. -- "So," says my Lord Bradford, I put my
hand in my pocket, and tossed the girl a quarter of a dollar, and she went out
and got some. -- Another time, he said, Mr. Dallas's hair-dresser was going to
sue him for a few shillings, when he, like a generous friend, stepped in and
put a stop to further proceedings, by buying the debt at a great discount. -- I
forget whether he says he was repaid, or not.

These anecdotes he wanted me to make use of; but these, as well as all the
others he furnished me with, appeared to me to be brought forth by private
malice, and therefore I never made use of any of them. Though, I must confess,
that, in one instance in particular, this was a very great act of self-denial.

From Secretaries of State, Judges and Governors, let us come to Presidents. --
Don't start reader, my bookseller knew nothing against General Washington, or
he would have told it. -- No; we are now going to see a trait of Bradford's
republicanism of another kind. -- Marten's Law of Nations, a work that I
translated from the French for Bradford, is dedicated, by him, to the President
of the United States. The dedication was written by me, notwithstanding the
Bradfords were obliged to amend my writings. When a proof of it was taken off,
old Bradford proposed a fulsome addition to it; "give the old boy a little more
oil," said he. This greasing I refused to have any hand in, and notwithstanding
I did not know how to write, and was a needy hireling, my Lord and Master,
Bradford, did not think proper to make any alteration, though I could have no
reasonable objection, as it was signed with his name.

While the old man was attempting to wheedle the President and the officers of
the Federal Government, the son, Samuel, was wheedling the French Minister: the
Bradfords love a double game dearly. He spent whole evenings with him, or at
least he told me so. According to his account they were like two brothers. I
cannot blame Mr. Adet, who undoubtedly must have a curiosity to know all the
secrets of Bradford's press. For my part, as soon as I heard of this intimacy,
I looked upon myself as being as well known to the French Minister as I was to
Bradford.

But, there is a tale connected with this, which must be told, because it will
give the lie to all that young Lampblack has said about correcting and altering
my works. His design is to make people believe that I was obliged to submit to
his prunings. We shall see how this was in a moment. -- In the New Year's Gift,
speaking of the French Minister, I make use of the following words: not that I
doubt his veracity, though his not being a Christian might be a trifling
objection, with some weak minded people. -- The old Goosy wanted me to change
the word Christian for Protestant, as he was a good friend, and might be useful
to his son. He came himself with the proof sheet, to prevail on me to do this;
but if the reader looks into the New Year's Gift, he will see that I did not
yield.

Bradford never prevailed on me to leave out a single word in his life, except
a passage in the Congress Gallery. Remember" (says the son in a triumphant
manner) "Remember what was erased from the Congress Gallery. -- I do remember
it, thou compost of die-stuff, lampblack and urine, I do remember it well; and
since you have not told all about it, I will. -- The passage erased contained
some remarks on the indecent and every way unbecoming expression of Mr. Lewis,
on the trial of Randall, when he said, that gentlemen would have served his
client right, if they had kicked him out of the room. Bradford told me he had a
very particular reason for wishing this left out, and as it was not a passage
to which I attached much importance, left out it was: but, had I known that his
very particular reason was, that he had engaged Mr. Lewis as his counselor in
a suit which he had just then commenced against his deceased brother's widow
and his own sisters, the passage should not have been left out, for him nor for
Mr. Lewis neither. I fear no lawyers. -- From this fact we may form a pretty
correct idea of the independence of Bradford's press, when left to his own
conducting. Bradford pretends to detect me in a lie about my having a press. I
have two now at work for me, and the printers are always paid the instant their
work is done. Can a Bradford say as much? -- He tells me something about my
being obliged to pay my taxes. To be sure I am; but did any tax-gatherer ever
dare clap his hand on any of my goods or chattels? No; but the land of Thomas
Bradford; back-land which he got out of the old soldiers, who were fighting
last war while he was a sort of jailer; this land was sold last year by the
Sheriff, and that to pay the taxes too. -- You see* My Lord Bradford, that you
have refreshed my memory to some purpose.


I think, the further we go the deeper My Lord Bradford gets in the mire. Let
us stop the career, then. Let us dismiss him, his sons, his press and his shop,
with a remark or two on one more passage of his son's letter. You, (meaning me)
can declaim and scandalize with the greatest hero of Bilingsgate, yet, in sober
argument and chastity of manner, you are a mere nincompoop. -- The reader must
have observed, that Boileau, Roscommon and Pope, in their poetical rules,
always convey the precept in an example; so we see here, that young lampblack
gives us an example of the very manner he decries. -- But, a word more about
chastity: not quite in the same sense, though not so far from it as to render
the transition very abrupt. -- Chastity from the pen of a Bradford! Chastity, I
say, from No. 8, South Front Street! Chastity from the bawdy-book-shop! -- I
have no pretension to an overstock of modesty or squeamishness. I have served
an apprenticeship in the army; yet have I often been shocked to see what the
Bradfords sell. Not, perhaps, so much at the obscenity of the books, as at the
conduct of the venders. I do not know a traffic so completely infamous as this.
In London it is confined to the very scum of the Jews. It is ten times worse
than the trade of a bawd: it is pimping for the eyes: it creates what the punk
does but satisfy when created. These literary panders are the purveyors for the
bawdy house. -- However, as far as relates to the people in question, the sons
are not to blame: a father's wish is a law with them.

I shall conclude with observing, that though Bradford's publication was
principally intended to do away the charge of having duped me in the one and
seven pence halfpenny job, he has left it just as it was. His son, has,
indeed, attempted to bewilder the reader by a comparison between the prices of
the ensuing pamphlets; but what has this to do with the matter? His father took
the Observations, was to publish them, and give me half the profits. Long
after, many months after, every copy of the work was sold, I asked him for an
account of it, which he brought me in writing, and in which my half of the
profits was stated at one shilling and seven pence halfpenny, or, about
twenty-one cents. -- Now, nothing posterior to this could possibly diminish the
barefacedness of the transaction. I did not actually receive the twenty-one
cents; I threw the paper from me with disdain; nor did I ever receive a
farthing for the publication in question from that day to this.

I now take leave of the Bradfords, and of all those who have written against
me. People's opinions must now be made up concerning them and me. Those who
still believe the lies that have been vomited forth against me are either too
stupid or too perverse to merit further attention. I will, therefore, never
write another word in reply to any thing that is published about myself. Bark
away, hell hounds, till you are suffocated in your own foam. Your labors are
preserved, bound up together in a piece of bear-skin, with the hair on, and
nailed up to a post in my shop, where whoever pleases may read them gratis.

END OF THE CENSOR FOR SEPTEMBER.
THE HISTORY OF JACOBINISM will be published in the course of the next month,
after which, the POLITICAL CENSOR will be continued monthly, without
interruption.

IN THE PRESS, AND WILL SPEEDILY BE PUBLISHED, AN ANSWER TO PAINE's RIGHTS OF
MAN.

BY H. MAKENZIE, Esquire

WILLIAM COBBETT has just published A NEW DRAWING BOOK, from the best Masters;
price 1 D. 25 Cts.

In disposing of this work, as well as all others of his publishing, he makes a
very great allowance to those who take by the dozen or more.


