THE LAY PREACHER; OR SHORT SERMONS, FOR IDLE READERS.

"THEREFORE, SEEING WE HAVE THIS MINISTRY -- WE FAINT NOT."

ST. PAUL. Published according to ACT of CONGRESS.

PRINTED AT WALPOLE, NEW HAMPSHIRE, BY DAVID CARLISLE, JUN. And Sold at his
BOOKSTORE.

1796.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MOST of the following pages originally appeared in the FARMER'S WEEKLY MUSEUM,
a rural paper of Newhampshire. Surrounded by plain husbandmen, rather than by
polished scholars, the Author, both in the selection of his subjects, and their
vehicle, has been more studious of the useful, than the brilliant. To instruct
the villager, was his primary object. Hence, an easy and obvious style was
indispensable. To rise to the gorgeous phrase of BOLINGBROKE would have been
absurd, to sink to the vulgarity of L'ESTRANGE would have been ignominious. The
familiarity of FRANKLIN's manner, and the simplicity of STERNE's proved most
auxiliary to his design. He, therefore, adventured their union. Diffident of
success, and prepared for censure, he will not be surprised at a harsh sentence
from the critical tribunal. The vanity of authorship has already caused him to
prove the negligence of his NATAL TOWN; the same passion now urges him to try
the suffrages of the COUNTRY. Should this, like former attempts, slide rapidly
down the slope of oblivion, it will add the last item to the catalogue of
literary disappointments, and CURE

THE AUTHOR.

THE LAY PREACHER.
"TWO ARE BETTER THAN ONE."
THIS is SOLOMON's theory, and I like it; his practice was rather too
extensive, for in his luxurious palace, seven hundred wives, and three hundred
concubines were better than one. Whether the women of Jerusalem were composed
of more manageable materials, than modern females, I am at a loss, for
JOSEPHUS, whose works I have turned over to gain information on this knotty
point, says nothing of the matter. However, I am inclined to think SOLOMON made
his domestic arrangement soon after he "planted vineyards." Had he chosen a
graver moment, he would not have told the most confidential of his eunuchs,
that seven hundred expensive wives, and three hundred capricious concubines,
were better than one. Why the revenues of gold paved Jerusalem, or the bagnios
of its suburbs could not have furnished robes for the married dames, nor rakes
for the free! Men, sage like SOLOMON, are generally moderate in their
arithmetic of pleasures. But this was too bold a sum in multiplication, even
for a polygamist to work.

In all probability, SOLOMON, though the oriental writers expatiate upon his
resources, found his stock too scanty for the many and great claims, which "the
daughters of Jerusalem" must have made. For late in life, when the "pitcher"
was broken, and the "silver cord" of love loosed, and his "desires failed," we
find him gravely composing a sententious proverb, in praise of sociability, and
reducing a thousand companions to one. His reasons too, are not drawn as they
would have been, when he formed his Seraglio, from passion and pleasure, but
from utility. For he supports his opinion by arguing, in the context, that "two
are better than one," because in difficulty, or in battle, they mutually
assist, or bedded in a frosty night, they keep each other warm.

Although, in remarking upon SOLOMON's voluptuousness, I have been moved from
my natural gravity, as a preacher, yet let not the wanton reader, construe my
sermon as a satire upon the sage Prince. After animadverting upon the excess of
his practice, it is my intention to echo the benevolence and utility of his
social principle.

"Two are better than one." Dr. FRANKLIN thought so, when he recommended early
marriages. As I am of singular continence myself, I know nothing of the matter,
but St. PAUL, an apostle of experience, tells bachelor and virgin christians,
that it is better to marry than burn. If they feel this heat, therefore, let
them quench it in legal couples, and choose for the wedding ring posy, "Two are
better than one." My physician declares that in these degenerate days, when
illicit love is common, early marriage is favorable to health; the
philosophers affirm that it is to morals. The Preacher, therefore, concludes
that "two are better than one" applied to matrimony, is a precept productive of
happiness, and that a young man, who will reject all the concubines, and six
hundred and ninety nine of the wives, which SOLOMON thought necessary, may be
pronounced wiser, as it respects women, than that Prince.

In the dark ages, as they were justly styled, devotional men used to think
that St. PETER, the porter of Heaven's wicket, would not open it, but to one at
a time. Accordingly, monks and hermits would wander, or reside solitary in
deserts and caves, and insist that an error had crept into the proverbs, and
that SOLOMON certainly wrote "One is better than two." This was a vile
interpretation; and, if they had meditated their Bibles well, they would have
discovered that the founder of their religion was never so happy, as when "much
people" surrounded him, and that the Apostles chose companions in their travel;
the one sat socially at a wedding supper, and the others resorted to the
temples, the town hall, and the market place.

I grieve to see a melancholy man, moping in the chimney corner, refusing to
"eat bread," and, when the cup goes round, unwilling to pledge a bumper. --
Trust me, thou son of spleen, happiness is doubled by participation. (...), and
be, even as this publican; be social, (...) go to the door of thy tent, and if
thou (...) man of understanding pass by, entreat him with a "turn in hither, I
beseech thee" So shall the "evil spirit" flee, as of yore, from the harp of the
shepherd, and all the cares of thy heart be lulled by the pleasant communion of
a friend.

"WHEN THOU SEE A MAN OF UNDERSTANDING, GET THEE BETIMES UNTO HIM, AND LET
THY FEET WEAR THE STEPS OF HIS DOOR."
YES, in a world of weak ones, it is our duty, it will be our pleasure, and, ye
selfish generation, it will be for our interest too, to yield favors to the
wise, and bread to men of understanding. Our patronage will be but rarely
exercised, and few will be the loaves for these wise men to devour, for I
looked and lo! they are a solitary and scanty band, unobtrusive, like the
hermit of the mountains.

But, though the "man of understanding" is rarely to be seen, and, though it
would profit us much under the sun, to gather the honey of his lips, such is
our perverseness, our folly, or our fate, that, untrodden by our "feet," we
suffer the moss to gather on the "steps of his door."

My study window overlooks the house of an eminent physician; he understands
accurately, the nice movements of the human machine; he is a botanist, skilled
in the properties of plants, the cedar of Libanus, and the "hyssop on the
wall;" he has meditated the system of nature, and he has tried many of the
processes of art. I see him turning over the volumes, which contain the secrets
of medicine, and I hear him describe skilfully the various modes to blunt, or
to extract, the arrows of disease. But alas! my careless countrymen, "all this
avails him nothing." The blind, the maim and the halt, of our villages,
refuse bread to this "man of understanding," and measure their wheat in
brimming bushels, to the quack, who cannot distinguish between a fever and the
gout, who applies his nippers to a wart, and thinks he extracts a cancer, who
poisons you with mercurials, curdles your blood with calomel, drenches you with
enfeebling teas, and, as a wit once expressed it, prescribes draughts so
neutral, they declare neither for the patient nor the malady. If the Royal
Preacher, in whose writings I find my text, had seen whole villages, clamorous
at the midnight hour, for a foetid quack, and his powders, and "passing by on
the other side," when they see the regular practitioner, he would have
forgotten, for a moment, all the wisdom of the East, and, like provoked PETER,
in the Gospel, would "curse and swear" at such egregious folly.

Those of my readers, who will gladly turn out of the paths of error, when they
hear a warning voice behind them, "here is a better path, walk therein," will I
hope learn the value of "men of understanding." When their value is once known
-- the "steps of their door" will be hourly ascended. They will teach us how to
think, to speak, and to act. If Divines, they will not attempt to persuade you,
that Heaven cannot be taken, but by the violence of Scotch divinity. If
Lawyers, they will not demand exorbitant fees, to support a rotten cause. If
Physicians, you will hear them utter no words more cramp than "Temperance," and
"Regimen." If Moralists, they will mark the difference between wisdom and
cunning, they will point out the weakness as well as wickedness of those petty
frauds, those iniquitous contracts, those tricking arts of jockeyship, so
frequent and so disgraceful among a rural people, where naught but simplicity
should be found. To such divines you will cheerfully vote a more ample annual
salary, than sixty pounds, and you will receive in exchange that wisdom, which
we are assured, in a volume of the highest authority, is better than rubies.

"HOW LONG WILL THOU SLEEP, O SLUGGARD? WHEN WILL THOU ARISE OUT OF THY SLEEP?"
NOT until you have had another nap, you reply, not until there has been a
little more folding of the hands!

Various philosophers and naturalists, have attempted to define man. I never
was satisfied with their labors: Absurd to pronounce him a two legged,
unfeathered animal, when it is obvious he is a sleepy one. In this world* there
is business enough for every individual. A sparkling sky over his head, to
admire, a fertile soil under his feet to till, and innumerable objects, useful
and pleasant to chase. But, such in general is the provoking indolence of our
species, that the lives of many, if impartially journalized, might be truly
said to have consisted of a series of slumbers. Some men are infested with day
dreams, as well as by visions of the night: They travel a certain insipid
round, like the blind horse of the mill, and, as BOLINGBROKE observes, perhaps
beget others to do the like after them. They may sometimes open their eyes a
little, but they are soon dimmed by some lazy fog, they may sometimes stretch a
limb, but its effort is soon palsied by procrastination. Yawning, amid tobacco
fumes, they seem to have no hopes, except that their bed will soon be made, and
no fears, except that their slumbers shall be broken, by business clamouring at
the door.

How tender and affectionate is the reproachful question of SOLOMON, in the
text. When will thou arise out of thy sleep? The Jewish Prince, whom we know to
be an active one, from the temple which he erected, and from the books he
composed, saw, when he cast his eyes around his city, half his subjects asleep.
Though in many a wise proverb, he had warned them of the baneful effects of
indolence, they were deaf to his charming voice, and blind to his noble
example. The men servants, and the maid servants whom he hired, nodded over
their domestic duties in the royal kitchen, and when in the vineyards he had
planted, he looked for grapes, lo they brought forth wild grapes, for the
vintager was drowsy.

At the present time, few SOLOMON'S exist, to preach against pillows, and never
was there more occasion for a sermon. Our country being at peace, not a drum is
heard to rouse the slothful. But, though we are exempted from the tumult and
vicissitudes of war, we should remember there are many posts of duty, if not of
danger, and at these we should vigilantly stand. If we will stretch the hand of
exertion, means to acquire competent wealth, and honest fame abound, and when
such ends are in view, how shameful to wilfully close our eyes. He, who surveys
the paths of active life, will find them so numerous and lengthy, that he will
feel the necessity of early rising, and late taking rest, to accomplish so much
travel. He, who pants for the shade of speculation, will find that Literature
cannot flourish in the bowers of indolence and monkish gloom. Much midnight oil
must be consumed, and innumerable pages examined, by him whose object is to be
really wise. Few hours has that man to sleep, and not one to loiter who has
many coffers of wealth to fill, or many cells in his memory to store.

Among the various men, whom I see in the course of my pilgrimage through this
world, I cannot frequently find those, who are broad awake. Sloth, a powerful
magician, mutters a witching spell, and deluded mortals tamely suffer this
drowsy being to bind a fillet over their eyes. All their activity is employed,
in turning themselves like the door, on its rusty hinge, and all the noise they
make in this world is a snore. When I see one, designed by nature for noble
purposes, indolently declining the privilege, and heedless, like ESAU,
bartering the birthright, for what is of less worth than his red pottage of
lentiles, for liberty to sit still and lie quietly, I think I see, not a man,
but an oyster. The drone in society, like that fish, on our shores, might as
well be sunken in the mud and enclosed in a shell, as stretched on a couch, or
seated in a chimney corner.

The season is now approaching fast, when some of the most plausible excuses
for a little more sleep must fail. Enervated by indulgence, the slothful are of
all men most impatient of cold, and they deem it never more intense, than in
the morning. But the last bitter month February.
has rolled away, and now, could I persuade to the experiment, the sluggard
will discover that he may toss off the bed quilt, and try air of early day
without being congealed! He may be assured that sleep is a very stupid
employment, and differs little from death, except in duration. He may receive
it implicitly, upon the faith both of the physician and the Preacher, that
morning is friendly to health and the heart, and if the idler is so manacled by
the chains of habit, that he can, at first, do no more, he will do wisely and
well to inhale pure air, to watch the rising sun, and mark the magnificence of
nature.

"NEITHER GIVE PLACE TO THE DEVIL."
A CERTAIN writer, though not a Bishop, has somewhere asserted that the Devil
goes about in more pleasing shapes, than that of a roaring Lion. It is at those
seasons, my readers, when this personage is disguised, or attired in agreeable
array, that we should guard against his wiles. If he never assailed us, except
when clad in that tremendous coat of armor, given him by the Calvinistick
divines, neither St. PAUL, nor a more modern moralist, would caution, you
against giving him place. I trow, as my predecessor DANIEL BURGESS says, if
JOHN BUNYAN'S Devil alone appeared, that to saucer eyes, a cloven foot and a
dragon's tail, not even a hardened sinner would open his gate. But when Satan
chooses to walk to and fro in masquerade through the world, his deformities all
hidden, either by a broad mantle, or a flowing robe, then he allures the eye,
then he taints the heart.

Now, as we are not ignorant of his devices, and, as MOSES an old authentic
historian, has apprized us of his subtlety, it may be useful to those, who
carelessly judge of characters from appearance, to describe some of the most
common shapes, which the Tempter assumes. Hence, without a very laborious
process in reasoning, it may soon be discovered that many of the most common
and favorite objects of pursuit are the Devil.

A bag of money, for instance, if, we seek it in company with Integrity and
Industry, is not only a harmless, but useful acquisition. But when Avarice
advises to dig, Knavery to undermine, or Ambition to soar for it, the
possessor, will find a cloven foot in the sack's mouth, instead of the cup of
BENJAMIN.

A well known Poet once exclaimed, "O grant me honest fame, or grant me none."
For this kind of reputation all should be anxious. Without a good name, Man
would be poor indeed. But when, greedy of applause, we hunt after it, in
pathless ways, at the expense of morals or health: When a drunkard thinks to
gain it from an ocean of liquor, or a sensualist by keeping three hundred
concubines, when a fop imagines it attached to tawdry clothes, or a malecontent
to subversion of government, in all these cases, men are actually striving to
give place to the Devil.

When a factious partizan wishes that our liberty should corrupt to
licentiousness, when he surveys the administration, or reads the speeches of
WASHINGTON, and then has the wickedness and effrontery to pronounce him a
CAESAR, or a CROMWELL: When he defames JAY as a dupe and parasite, and HAMILTON
as a stockjobber, be assured that the moon beams have glowed intensely on the
crazy head of the railer, for he is mad, and has a Devil!

There has lately arisen a new sect in Philosophy, styled Speculators, not very
intense thinkers, but yet, contradictory as it may seem, absorbed in
speculation. Like LOCK, and other profound metaphysicians, they are more
conversant with ideas, than with reality. Like an insane beggar, who sometimes
solicits charity at my door, they are perpetually vaunting of vast possessions
in land, and muttering about titles, grants and charters. I have been inclined
to think they are allied to the noble families of gypsies and jugglers, from
the variety and adroitness of their sleights of hand. I have turned over, at
least, ten different dictionaries, to find a definition of the word
"Speculation," and after fruitless attempts, I am obliged to frame one myself,
and conclude that it means the sale of a cloud, for a valuable consideration.
Therefore, as a grave and scriptural author, declares Satan to be "the Prince
of the power of the air," we may regularly infer that all transactions of the
above nature are within his jurisdiction, and that Speculators give place to
the Devil.

The fair sex display in general, such admirable taste and judgment, in the
choice of their favorites, it is hardly credible that a being so ungracious and
sooty as Satan, could find any quarter from their delicacy. But I am assured by
a respectable character, well versed in the ways and wiles of women, that, when
they scold for hours a worthy husband, or display unreasonable caprice, and
coquetry to a deserving lover, they not only give place to the Devil, but
frequently prevent his visit, and act the part of the fiend themselves.

"FAVOR IS DECEITFUL."
UNDOUBTEDLY, though LAVATER, a Swiss clergyman, whose faith, it seems could
remove mountains, has, in a book, which treats of faces, asserted that the nose
is no cheat, and that he can see every man's character, sitting astride on his
nose.

This is a whimsical age; who would believe that a man could be found,
sufficiently bold, and readers, sufficiently credulous, to suppose that Favor
is not deceitful.

More than forty years since, when my grandmother suffered my elder brother to
lead me by the hand into company, I was pleased with all faces. You, charming
maid, says I to a smiling lass, have a benevolent countenance, you must lend a
favorable ear to my vows -- a sudden coquettish wave of her fan, and a
scorning nose proved that Favor was deceitful.

A buyer goes into a country store, and, leaning over the counter, asks the
shopkeeper for changeable silk. He holds up a piece in a favorable point of
view, and smiling plausibly, declaims an hour upon its cheapness and
durability. The silk is bought; when daughter DOLLY had worn it two sundays, it
was still changeable; spotted with bilge water, and torn by a pin, even one eye
might read on the hem that Favor is deceitful?

I recollect that, during my nonage, I rested many hopes upon the plausibility
of a simpering courtier: He had been educated by the Jesuits, noted for giant
promise, and pigmy performance. This man had a sweet smile and a silver tongue.
His smile and tongue were worth a Prince's ransom to him. He had a wonderful
knack of being agreeable; as to being useful that was of no consequence. He set
up a school for smiling, and his pupils might there learn to nod and smirk cash
away from the purse. Nothing obstructed this man; every road was a river road
to him; his neighbors called him the smoothing plane, he removed all
asperities. But all was "false and hollow." He planed away the rough planks of
life it is true, but he kept the shavings himself. The man was selfish and his
Favor was deceitful.

I saw lately a morose wretch with a book in his hand. His urchin form reminded
me of a gnarly crab apple, at once misshapen and sour; the leaves he turned over
were Sterne's and his cheeks were moistened by the death of LE FEVRE. How,
whispered I, can this man boast sensibility? I know him well, a grinder of
poverty's face -- who understands distress and sale, better than a deputy
sheriff; this is he, who drives away the cottager's cow, and plucks from under
her the widow's bed. -- I paused; and reflection convinced me, that his was a
mechanical and crocodile grief, that though he wept, he could wound, and that
his Favor was deceitful.

THOMAS PAIN, that infidel in religion, and that visionary in politics,
seduces many of you, my countrymen. You read his "Age of Reason," and think the
Bible a last years Almanac: You read his "Rights of Man," and think government
slavery, and WASHINGTON an imposter. But the man who labors to destroy the
pious hope, or to raise the serment of faction, is an enemy to your peace. Be
your devotions and your government equally undisturbed: Attendance at church,
at least, preserves your neatness and sociability. Obedience to government
causes you to sit in peace under the fig tree. Trust me, he who jeers received
truths, or who tells you that there is no distinction among men, and that all
are equally qualified to govern, is an imposter more pernicious than Mahomet
and his Favor is deceitful.

"AND HE WILL BE A WILD MAN."
IF a young fellow, at every tavern frolic, insists upon paying the piper; if
you see many hundred yards of tobacco, and gaudy vest patterns charged, and
long tails of dittos, drawn out on the trader's book, believe the Lay Preacher,
that such a hairbrained, extravagant youth, is on the high road toward a
certain public edifice, noted for its strength, "and he will be a wild man."

Many an honest American farmer, and his wife, who formerly were in constant
terror of Indians, and shut themselves in garrisons and forts, to avoid
captivity, suppose that, now these wild men of the woods are exterminated by
rum, there is room for fear no longer. But there are wild men, roaming about
yet, even in towns, which lie many a league from Indian settlements. The wild
men, whom I now describe, it is true, have neither feathers on their heads, nor
moggisons on their feet, jewels are not pendent from their noses, nor blankets
thrown round their limbs, but still they are dangerous, and wild creatures, as
much as if they traversed the woods of Huron, navigated lake Mumphramagog, or
hunted in the Tenesee.

When you hear six pair of sleigh bells jingling along the road, about two
o'clock in a winter morning, when you hear many a drunken curse from the
driver, and learn from a tavern keeper, that the owner of the aforesaid sleigh
and bells, paid twenty shillings club of the reconing, he is a wild man, broke
loose from his keeper, and will hardly be tamed.

The prediction, contained in my text, was applied to ISHMAEL, and has been
remarkably verified in his descendants, the Arabs. But this roving and lawless
people, the generality of geographers and christians, suppose confined to the
extended plains of Asia, and dream not, that any of the tribe inhabit this
continent. But Ishmaelites, wild as their ancestors, abound; and in the shape
of horse jockies, high bucks, and hard drinkers, manifest their wildness a
thousand ways.

The mention of horse jockies, "moves me from my natural moderation." As the
jockey, is a very common, and fashionable character too in most villages, his
celebrity deserves some consideration. The Lay Preacher acknowledges that he,
like most sedentary parsons, is an awkward rider, and sits too much in his easy
chair, to sit gracefully on a horse. Still, as he is pleased with beauty and
grace wherever found, he cannot but be struck with the figure of a noble
animal, distinguished for those enchanting qualities. He warmly approves
therefore, those, who exercise humanity toward the generous steed, and who to
an animal, which safely bears them a rugged journey, are liberal of hay, and
sparing of the lash. He even allows, to men of property, the indulgence of
taste and whim, in choosing a creature of so much elegance and use. But when a
man, so far forgets his dignity, as to prefer the stable to the parlour, to be
the constant companion of ostlers, to use no language but that of the turf, and
wear life away in combing a mane, one cannot avoid thinking, that the beast he
curries is the nobler animal. A more serious objection can be made to the
professed jockey. He not only devotes too much time to the stable, but
exercises too much craft, in the purchase and sale of his favorite animal. He
not only like Richard in the play, cries "a horse, a horse, a kingdom for a
horse," but deems it not only pardonable but praiseworthy, to get what is
called the advantage. This phrase means to sell an article, for treble its
worth, and to make the bargain, by falsehood and by fraud! The jockey and the
gamester, have been frequently compared, but he who sports with cards, rarely
cheats, except when his adversary is a sharper. Even the gamester has too much
honor to cajole the weak and unskilful. But the jockey professes to be a rogue,
and even glories in defrauding, so that he and his associates might, with
propriety, hang out a board inscribed, in the phrase of M'Fingal, "Beelzebub
and Co." Of all the wild characters that infest a country town, a low, and
knavish jockey is the most depraved, his hand, like that of ISHMAEL, "is
against every man." That it may prove nerveless, but that on the contrary
"every man's hand" may be successful against him, must be the wish of every
honest man in the community, and is the prayer of the Lay Preacher.

"BY THIS CRAFT WE HAVE OUR WEALTH."
DEMETRIUS, the silversmith, and "others of the like occupation," of whom such
honorable mention is made in the Acts of the Apostles, are not the only
persons, who, after playing, like sharpers, the game of interest, can turn
round and cry, "Ye know, Sirs, that by this craft we have our wealth."

All the world resorted to church, when parson Plagiary preached. The old women
^^^^elled, and the deacons groaned in unison with the "vocal nose" of the
parson. The Bucks went to hear him, for he was short, and did not kindle
hellfire in his pulpit. The Ladies praised his white hand, and vowed that he
adjusted the cushion gracefully. The Parson's reputation and salary increased.
Sometimes a reformed rake would send him a cask of wine, to animate his
divinity, and sometimes the ladies would go a shopping, to "Vanity fair," with
Madam, and purchase her a dressy cap. Thus our Parson, enjoying more than a
disciple's share of the "loaves and fishes," together with a stock of wine from
abroad -- and of oil at home, went on, from one degree of ease to another, eat
full dinners, drank wine literally, for his stomach's sake, and then, with a
book in his hand, went into his study to -- sleep. He grew lazy, copied pages
from Dr. Blair, sometimes stole a whole sermon from Stern, and by this craft,
not only had wealth, but fame. Verily, brothers of the pulpit, this was
profitable priestcroft!

But of all crafts, a Quack Doctor's craft is the most crafty. It is one of the
easiest trades in life. It is not like Jacob's apprenticeship, a seven year's
labor, but, like some chapman's books that I used to read, when a boy, is
"familiar to the meanest capacity." The receipt to make a quack is shorter,
than the shortest in his Dispensatory: Take the first blockhead you can find,
get credit for him at the apothecary's for a pound of Cortex, mount him on a
pied horse, and bid him speak guttural words. Depend on it, that my friend the
German Surgeon, who has been regularly bred at a foreign university, and who
detects by a glance, the morbid and peccant cause, will be neglected; his
lancets will rust in shagreen, while the triumphant pretender has full license
to kill, to enter houses, leading captive "silly women," and by this craft to
have his wealth.

The country Attorney, I do not mean him, who eloquently defends and generously
charges his clients, but that pettifogging scrivener, synonimous all over the
world with scoundrel. -- The country Attorney, who inflames village disputes,
who sues for nine pence, who buys notes of hand cheap and sells them dear, who
after receiving ten thousand pounds as his "wages of iniquity," still runs
about haunting Justices doors, inquiring "who will show him any good," who will
serve a precept upon the poor widow, and compel her to cast in her last mite
into his treasury, is a near relation to Demetrius, and all the silversmith
family, and by this cursed craft has his wealth.

Some of the Lay Preacher's friends reproach him for his labors, in an age,
when few read, fewer remember, and none believe sermons. Some advise him to
sell all he has, and with the merchant in the gospel, to seek "goodly pearls."
Others propose a journey to Newyork, and talk with rapture of the schemes of a
Speculator. This advice has the usual fate, it only serves to confirm prior
resolutions. Preferring Literary to Land speculations, and happy to amuse the
vacant, and inform the simple, he studies with zeal to imitate Dr. FRANKLIN,
and "The Prompter," and, indolent at his parsonage, thinks some, and smokes the
tranquil cigar more. From this humble "craft" is derived the "wealth" of the
Lay Preacher.

"IN THOSE DAYS THERE WAS NO KING IN ISRAEL; EVERY MAN DID WHAT WAS RIGHT IN
HIS OWN EYES."
AND when there is no energetick government in America, each of her subjects
will do so too. Do not be offended, my readers, because, this week, I choose to
deliniate political, rather than moral truth. You know that, from the
establishment of papacy, to the time of Archbishop Laud, the Church has always
affected an anxiety for the State. I should not be a true Preacher, were I not
sometimes to forget that our order are ministers of the Prince of Peace. The
enforcement of virtue, and the reproof of the sinner, do not always delight: We
must sometimes speculate on the decree of Caesar, that all the world should be
taxed, and sometimes inquire whence come wars and fightings among men. As the
whig Divines in "1775," were instrumental in destroying the old government,
perhaps a Federal parson may offer some reasons against subverting the new.

The studies of theology, and the labor of writing these sermons, do not
occupy the whole of each week, I have leisure to talk politics with my
neighbors, and to read many of the newspapers from the southward. From them,
and, occasionally, from an evening's chat with some traveller from Boston, I
learn that certain restless and perturbed spirits, under the plausible title of
"Democrats," are laboring anxiously to teach proselytes the soothing doctrines
of liberty and equality. Liberty, such as the Fishwomen of Paris enjoyed, when
they treated a Queen of France, like a prostitue of the stews; and Equality,
such as a LEGENDRE and SANTERRE could boast, when the butcher's stall of the
one, and brewer's dray of the other, were, in a Revolutionary government, on a
level with the throne. I have been in the habit for many years, my readers, of
turning over authors, who wrote in the earliest ages of the world, men who
understood the meaning of the word, "Liberty" as well at least as the moderns.
From these books, and they are of the highest authority, I have learned that
civil liberty consists in doing whatever does not militate with laws,
restraining individual excesses to promote the public weal. Observation has
further suggested that there are a few, and how few! upon whom the Parent of
wisdom has largely bestowed that etherial spirit, that bold and sublime genius,
which he has chosen to withhold from the majority of mankind. Yet farther, it
is obvious that in the race for riches, all run, and still but few reach the
goal, and bear the prize. It follows, therefore, that he of ample mind, or
ample purse will direct the councils, and command the service of him who is
weak or poor, and that equality is a visionary whim. God and nature having
created such eternal distinctions, how presumptuous, how unavailing for an
American bankrupt to proclaim in the market place to his deluded hearers, that
they had been amused with an old wive's fable, but that, the servant might roam
where he list, like his master, and that the plough boy, conscious of equality,
might journey to Philadelphia, and claim the Presidency from WASHINGTON.

I am persuaded that St. PAUL possessed as erect and independent a spirit, and
as much sincerity, as any leader of a club throughout the Union. The government
of his own country was a vice royalty, and probably, therefore, a capricious
and arbitrary one. He had visited Rome, felt the power of its Emperors, and
lived for years in subjection to laws, which we usually term despotick. Yet
this amiable apostle and man of the world, though bold and original in plan and
execution, was so convinced of the utility of order and due subordination,
that, in his epistle to the Romans, who, under the reign of NERO, would have
been gratified by revolutionary logic, he charges every soul to be subject
unto the higher powers. It is worthy of remark, and will show how important the
subject was considered by the apostle, that he maintains the proposition not by
political, but religious arguments, for, after declaring that all power was
derived from above, he concludes regularly that resistance to "ordained"
government was opposition to the supreme will.

I have examined very carefully this great man's epistles to various cities of
the East, a quarter of the globe coerced by the sternest laws, and cannot find
a single sentence to induce change of officers, or a popular government.
Neither Corinthians nor Ephesians are advised to club subordination away. The
funding system of Rome is tacitly approved, for PAUL enjoins a rigorous payment
of the public debt, and if an Ambassador were sent to negotiate a Treaty with
the faithless Parthians, or the hostile Medes, the Saint did not, when the
Envoy returned, call upon his god to curse him, or curse him himself.

But suppose, my countrymen, that we should consider it superfluous, to have a
King, or what is the same, good government in Israel; and that every man should
be permitted to do what was right in his own eyes. Why, at the great public
table, if each were allowed to carve for himself, what tid bits would the great
scramblers devour, and what a sorry meal would the majority make! I am
convinced that if the fantastic vision of "Equality," could be realized, and
men were to roam at large in the wilds of freedom, that many would faint by the
way, and that more would hanker after those savory herbs of Egypt they had
abjured. We should be guilty of every species of outrage and excess. We should
hear the voice of wild misrule, in darkness, and the mob that rages, at noon
day. If there was no king in Israel, not to mention what the women would play,
men would play the rogue with impunity, and neither life nor property would be
secure. That experiment in politics, we are now trying in America, if
democratick projectors, persevere in interupting the process, would fail
ridiculously and tyrants might then aver that mankind instead of being free by
nature, were doomed to be slaves.

"GIVE A SWEET SAVOR, AND A MEMORIAL OF FINE FLOUR: AND MAKE A FAT OFFERING."
YESTERDAY, as I was pondering a theme for my next discourse, with an aching
head which checked invention, our town clerk entered my study, with newspapers
in his hand. Men of his class being naturally fond of politics, and anxious
for the public weal, I therefore, when he read to me with emphasis that the
French had effected the passage of the Rhine, listened with pleasure. As he
threw perused papers carelessly down by his side, I picked them up, and, as it
behoved a Preacher, looked for the grave and the moral. The man of news and the
world will smile, when I add, that no articles so attached my attention, as the
Thanksgiving proclamations of the three neighboring states. When I saw from my
window, "our garners full of store," and "presses bursting" with the juice of
our orchards; when I heard numerous kine low, and "the voice of the turtle in
our land," I felt the propriety of devotional gratitude, and was delighted,
that public commemoration of annual favors, was the custom of our country.

In the most rude, as well as refined ages, a lively perception of benefits,
conferred by Supreme Power, has caused mankind to "give a sweet savor, and a
memorial of fine flour: and to make a fat offering." Long before Christianity
had shed its luster on the nations, we find the Jew, the Roman and the Greek,
raising the periodical hymn to the skies. Though their creeds, dictated by
superstitious ignorance were clashing and various, yet gratitude to the "giver"
was one and the same. If a general had by enterprise enlarged, or by obstinacy
had defended, empire; if the "sweet influences of the Pleiades" had operated,
and Italian granaries burst with plenty, the grateful ancients decreed the
festal day, and all orders, careless of business or pleasure, thronged the
temples, and thanked the Beneficent Power. Thanksgiving was one of the first
acts of devotion, described by the sacred Historian. In the very infancy of
time, amid the simplicity of pastoral life, we behold a striking scene, the
amiable ABEL, that blameless shepherd, selecting the fairest of the flock, and
sacrificing them on the first altar. From a social supper, with his disciples,
from crowds of penitent or applauding Jews, we find the master christian
retiring to the solitude of Mount Olivet, to render thanks, that neither the
persecuting Pharisee, nor the subtle Sadducees had abridged his life, or
invalidated his doctrine. St. PAUL, who combined in happy union, his secular
and religious duties, amid the horrors of a nocturnal shipwreck, tossing in the
Adriatic gulf, and wishing anxiously for day, did not employ the first
moments of returning light, in the cares of navigation, but " gave thanks" for
his safety, and partook of bread and meat with the mariners.

But without recurring to ancient examples to fortify a duty, in which there is
so much pleasure to animate its exercise, I will now close by assigning a few
reasons, peculiarly binding on Americans, for periodical gratitude.

While most of the nations of the elder world, are smarting under the rod of
civil or religious oppression, we are leading "quiet and peaceable lives,"
protected by a mild government. No Inquisitor summons our sectaries to the
stake, and in no cell of our mountains has the clank of religious chains yet
been heard, No Turkish Sultan abridges life by a nod, and our "exactors" derive
a revenue to the Union, neither from our windows, nor our hearths. We are
emphatically at peace, though Discord has hurled her brand among the nations.
Agonized France beholds the lights of her church extinguished, her "nursing
father" and "nursing mother" destroyed, and "her nobles in fetters of iron."
The olive has yielded its oil to illumine the lantern, and the grape has been
trodden by the faltering feet of the intoxicated soldier. Silent are the halls
of the sovereign, and a "fox looks out of the window." Contrast this shaded
picture, my countrymen, with the scenes of peace and plenty which environ you.
Commerce wafts you her wares from afar, and her merchandise from the ends of
the earth. Husbandry has turned its furrow to vivifying air, and liberal
harvests have been reaped from your fields. Your "oxen are strong to labor"
and your sheep scatter over the plains. Seeing, therefore, that you have such a
goodly heritage undisturbed; be mindful of the good bestowed. To him, who has
no father, stretch parental arms, and when the "eye" of the beggar sees, "then
let it bless you." When you have thanked the Giver, and imparted from your
store to him "that is ready to perish," then with cheerfulness "kill the fatted
calf," and "give a sweet savor, and a memorial of fine flour: and make a fat
offering."

"LITTLE CHILDREN, KEEP YOURSELVES FROM IDOLS."
THIS precept of the Evangelist, was not intended for the nursery. Infants of
the largest growth, we know have their rattles and "idols," and the "little
children," whom JOHN meant to keep safe, were men and women, who had reached
the full measure of their stature, but who, from levity, might prove too
attached to objects "earthly" or "devilish."

A learned commentator upon this passage, might here exclaim, O blind Lay
Preacher, worthy to be classed with the foolish Galatians, cannot you perceive
that your text was designed, merely as a warning against the worship of images,
set up by the superstition of Pagans, and that the Gentiles were the little
children? This is too partial and narrow an explanation. I am willing to
suppose that JOHN, like other zealous christians of that age, was anxious to
strip each Roman temple, of its false GOD. But the Evangelist well knew that
there were idols, the objects of fond adoration, besides brazen or ivory
statues, of Jupiter and Mercury. In this enlightened period, when altars are no
more, and the smoke of heathen sacrifice no longer ascends, numerous idols are
reverenced; and when the Lay Preacher enumerates their names, all his readers
will agree with him, that those, who bow the knee to these modern Baals, are
"Little children," always weak and sometimes wicked.

A number of pretty women, of my acquaintance, have and will, in spite of my
lessons, set up a certain smooth faced idol, on the top of their toilets. They
call it a looking glass, and worship it hourly. This is a most pernicious idol;
a great cheat of their time, and an artful flatterer of their beauty. They
straightway retire, and forget what manner of persons they should prove. They
forget the fond husband, and are deaf to the pathetick wailings of the child.
They become impatient of every domestic duty, and are careful alone, with much
care, to be decked in purple, and perfumed with all powders of the merchant. --
Little Misses, listen to a friend, break your idol, it is brittle I assure you,
read instructive books, and sometimes, on a Sunday, sermons, much better ones I
mean, than those of the Lay Preacher.

Another species of glass, is a more fashionable idol, than the one recently
described. Its name, ye topers, haunting the temple of excess, is drinking
glass. In devotion to this bewitching idol, I have seen whole companies so
absorbed, with elevated eyes, and outstretched hands, that, until I heard
execration, I could almost fancy them penitent and pious. Reeling, hiccupping,
and lisping, what nearer resemblance to "little children," who stammer and
sprawl, can be discovered than those sottish worshippers of wine, who have all
the imbecility of infancy, without its innocence.

The sons of Sloth might be supposed so sunken in sleep, as to be incapable of
that degree of activity, necessary for prostration to an idol. But the
ingenuity of the sluggard's mind seems to supply, in this instance, the want of
bodily exertion. Like those torpid monks, who have contrived, not to court
piety abroad, but, to preclude long journeys, keep her semblance in their cell,
the sluggard, if I may so express it, has domesticated his idol. He does not
even wake to bow himself before it, but, supine in bed, fondly hugs his pillow!
Could snorers be rouzed from this dream, and put away this strange God, how, in
the beautiful phrase of Dr. YOUNG, "would it bless mankind, and rescue me."

Popularity is a great idol, sought with more assiduity than ever Dagon was by
the Philistines. What sacrifices are daily offered it by the seekers of office,
and by the demagogues of faction. To the discontented, the desperate, the
debtor and the designing, at Boston and Philadelphia, might not a sober man,
whether clothed with the divine authority of the author of my text, or with
the crow colored coat of the Lay Preacher, exclaim, ye little patriots, keep
yourselves from this idol! With what wild vagaries does it agitate your
plotting heads, and your beating hearts. How your pretended love of your
Country, causes you to forget WASHINGTON, guardian and soldier, your first
love! How it causes care to sit on your faded cheeks! How it detains you
ingloriously in the dirty lanes and Green Draggons of sedition, scribbling
saucy toasts, and vamping rash resolves against the treaties and laws of your
land, which smiling in peace, seems to scorn your impotency. Forsake,
therefore, those French fashions, which sit so awkwardly upon the sedate
American. Be no longer the irregular sectaries of revolt, but join the
venerable and established Church of government.

"DRINK WATERS OUT OF THINE OWN CISTERN, AND RUNNING WATERS OUT OF THINE OWN
WELL."
SUCH waters will be more exhilirating to an independent spirit, than wine at
another man's board.

In our free and independent government, the habits of its citizens should
partake of its character. Happily for the dignity and well being of the
Americans, that most useful and most numerous class, the landed interest, are
signalized for deriving their wealth from their own fields, and slaking their
thirst at the peculiar spring. Even the jealousy of England has acknowledged
the unpalatable truth, and GUTHRIE, a Scottish and servile Geographer, has
recorded the American farmer's freedom. What order of knighthood can be more
noble, than yeomen, laborious and rich? Who has a better title of dominion,
than he who is prince of his own pasture, and feeds his fattening flocks,
rejoicing under his shepherd sway? The peasants of Poland, and the Turkish
slaves of a sultan or vizier may acquire, but they cannot preserve. To them
independence is a phantom at which they grasp, and find nothing but chains.
Here each man may be the artificer of his own fortune, and when the goodly
fabric is erected, no griping landlord is heard to demand a rent.

To such an exalted point, more sublime than the throne of a prince, it is the
binding duty of aspiring and manly youth, to arise. -- Independence is an
eagle's wing, which exalts to those elevations, whence we can have a bird's eye
view of all that men covet, the brilliant and the bold. But when the meanness
of dependence degrades us among LAZARUS and the dogs, to subsist on the falling
crumbs from a superior's table, we are little removed from the servile spaniel,
and like him, might be collared, and fetch and carry for a master.

He, who in earnest, seeks after independence, shall, like SOLOMON's inquirer
after wisdom, have no great travel, for he shall find her sitting at his doors.
Nor will she be coy to enter them, but will inhabit there, if honesty and
industry are of that house. Let the pilgrim, through this world, disdain to
subsist on alms, but refresh himself from his own scrip, and instead of
accepting from a great woman at Shunem, or any other lady of quality, a "bed,"
a "table," a "stool," or a "candlestick," let him rather build, with his own
scantlings, a chamber in the wall, and furnish it himself.

Hearken, ye ardent and erect spirits, who full of expectation, enter on the
stage of action, hearken to the warning voice of Prudence, and the Preacher. Be
independent in your property. -- Lean not against another man, lest you
continue not long in one stay. Trust only yourselves, and be not over much
trusted by the merchant. When you think you can afford two coats, purchase but
one. Put a small piece of silver into your purse each day, and you will feel
proud to find it swollen at the year's end. Be more willing to lend than to
borrow, and be careful, if the borrower call, to have something to lend.
Observing these easy rules, you will sleep quietly, undisturbed by the dun,
when you go singing by the wayside, not a tailor will present his bill, nor a
sheriff pluck you by the sleeve.

"REMOVE SORROW FAR FROM THEE: FOR SORROW HAS KILLED MANY, AND THERE IS NO
PROFIT THEREIN.
DRY up your eyes, then, ye mourners, for grief will not restore the friends
you have lost, nor abate the edge of misfortune, but as oil and the whetstone
to the razor, it will sharpen that which is already too acute, and the bleeding
heart will show a still deeper wound. Why will you strive to add one drop to
this "vale of tears," which* trust me, is already too full, why court the
acquaintance of grief, that sorry companion, who, sobbing and silent as he
journeys with you through the wilderness of this world, multiplies every brake,
and adds tenfold horror to the gloom. You have various and real ills to
encounter in your sore travail; the climate is vaporous, and you must be sick,
men are treacherous, and you will be deceived, poverty will sometimes start up
"like an armed man" before you, and your careful days be like those of an
hireling. But be of good cheer, and repeat not in the day of adversity, with
erring SOLOMON, that laughter is mad, nor impertinently inquire of Mirth what
does she, but believe with my predecessor STERN, that comfortable assertion,
worth a million of cold homilies, that every time we smile, and still more
every time we laugh, it adds something to the fragment of life.

No profit therein: No verily; the man of sorrow, who, with sullen AHAB,
refuses to eat bread, and changes his time for tears, is engaged in one of the
most barren and least lucrative employments, you can conceive. Sighs I have
always considered as the very canker of the heart, and sobs the grand
epitomizers of existence. Child of melancholy! If sorrow has killed many, and
there is no profit therein, banish it from thy shades, for why, in the
pathetick language of Ecclesiastes, should thou die before thy time?

But who are those fair forms, the one with folded arms, and the other with
bounding step, ministering, O kindly handmaids, at the bedside of the
Philosopher. I see his pallid cheek already flush, I hear his voice utter a
bolder tone, wrinkles are no more seen on his brow, and not a solitary tear
traces a lonely way down his cheek, for Patience and Mirth are before him. At
their salutary approach, the troop of cares, the family of pain fly
disconsolate, and free the vacant heart, from their torturing sway. Gentle and
benignant spirits, meekest Patience, and chirping Mirth, whether my cottage is
unroofed by the storm, or my couch thorned by disease, whether friends grow
lukewarm, or lovers be put far away, let your gay forms appear and the load of
life will no more be irksome. For well I know your pleasing arts, I well
remember your numerous topics of consolation, your music, your song, your
carelessness, Mirth, and Patience, your philosophy and resignation. Sorrow, as
the wise son of SIRACH tells us, may kill many, but ye can make alive: Come
then to the unfortunate, and let the adverse hour be your favorite hour of
visitation.

"WHAT AILETH THEE?"
TO what countless sick people might this question be proposed, and yet not one
of the number be really ill, in the medical sense of the word. But there
exists, in some individuals an ill habit of mind, a sickness of the heart, a
lameness of spirit, diseases more difficult to cure than cancer, fever or gout.
A good natured patient, swallowing his Physician's prescription, may become
free of a sick room, and walk at large with health's reddest roses blooming on
his cheek. But a man of morbid anxiety, fretfulness, ambition, or avarice will
send in vain for the healing drug of the Apothecary. His wounds are of so
rancorous, festering, incurable nature, they will demand much time to heal, and
many medicines to assuage. Though the whole medical society should consult,
though Turkey should yield all her poppies, and the balm of Gilead trickle from
a thousand jars, the cancer of the heart mocks the healing power; and often the
fell malady is commensurate with life.

In morning and devious rambles, through lonely pasture, or gloomy wood, far
from the clink of Industry's anvil, far from the jocund chorus of Musick's
songs, I meet a meagre and moping hypocondriack. His temples do not throb, but
they are bound, not with the chaplets of spring, but with a white handkerchief,
the flag of head ache and disease. The day is genial, for it is one of the
mildest in May, but doubled and trebled stockings on his legs, thick
waist-coats closely buttoned over the breast, and a ponderous great coat,
enveloping the man, attest the nature and magnitude of his fears. He shivers at
a blast, impregnated with flowers, and when all nature is warm, he dreads
taking cold. What a disease, and what stubborn symptoms, which acknowledge no
cause! I have a right to say "no cause," for well I know the fate and fortune
of this splenetick. The first is happy, and the other ample. Blessed with birth,
with talents, with family, with favor, have not I a privilege to inquire of him
with more than common curiosity what aileth thee, why is thy brilliant spirit
cast down, and why is thy generous soul troubled?

What aileth thee, O Lawyer, that, after having drawn ten thousand pounds from
the purses of thy cajoled clients, thou still must play thy saving and cheating
game. In thy old age, when thou see in thy coffers the rewards of thy dark
and spider like industry, can thou still be unsatisfied, and wish to make
more writs against innocent defendants? What is thy object? Is it wealth? You
have a fortune. Is it reputation? What fame is it to bellow in support of thy
declarations, which will soon be forgotten with the causes they supported.
Believe me, you had better write one page of history, couple two feeble lines
of rhyme, or utter one moment's melodious breath, than to defend right and
wrong as you do, without discrimination. For shame; is it not enough to have
the silly vanity of tickling rural jurors' ears in your youth, but you must
confound them in your middle age, and persevere in duping them in the decline
of life. Hasten and make amends; the night of repentance is coming on, and it
will be a night of thick and Egyptian darkness to thee!

"COME MY BELOVED, LET US GO FORTH INTO THE FIELD; LET US LODGE IN THE
VILLAGES."
THE hope of gain, and the love of society have now, for centuries, incited
men, to risque many inconveniences, for the sake of congregating in cities. The
simple would naturally conclude that where there was "much people" there would
be much jollity. Desperate adventurers, bringing their craft to market would
have nothing to lose, and every thing to gain in the throng. Ambition would
find in every street, a ladder lofty enough to reach the extent of many a
project; and Avarice could find no place more convenient to drive a bargain;
than a frequented coffee house or an obscure alley. Schemes of wealth and
aggrandizement, or pleasure, thus operating upon hope, the busiest and most
sanguine passion, should we wonder to mark flocks of rovers, eager and upon the
wing, expecting by a flight from the country to fly from themselves?

But wisely has the wise man said, "Better is a handful with quietness, than
both hands full, with travail and vexation of spirit." Tranquillity chooses the
country for her favorite residence, and should you inquire for the peaceable
personage in town, every cit would tell you he did not know her, and that she
must be some outlandish person. In cities I grant there are many agitations,
which are dignified by the name of pleasure, but they are a spurious brood, and
felicity would not call them her own. The streams of pleasure in cities are
like their common sewers: They are turbid, they are full of taint. He who
quaffs liberally must soon be either sick or drunk; and such morbid influence
have they on the brain, that men go from them, like the apostle's gazer in the
glass, "not knowing what manner of person, they were."

They who wish never to be cloyed, to respire with freedom, to enjoy the
pleasure of reading and reflection, and to sleep sweetly, must go forth into
the field, and lodge in villages. Allowing that there are some genuine delights
in the thronged town, yet they tread too fast on each other, and weary by
constant succession. A man will pray sometimes no less fervently for a respite
from pleasure, than in a fit of the gout, for a respite from pain. The
pleasures of the country, pure, simple, not dazzling, not boistrous, will
gently stir the stream of life: A stream which passion should not be suffered
to vex into whirlpool, nor be "creamed over and mantled" by the stagnation of
sloth. To saunter along the banks of the brook, and allure the trout from his
recess, to crop the fantastic flowers of May, or the strawberries of June, to
climb the solemn mountain, or loiter in the valley's shade, are cheap and real
pleasures, make no man a criminal, and leave no sting behind.

Such is the influence of the atmosphere upon the human body, that even robust
constitutions are sensible of the changes of the air, and invalids are
"tremblingly alive" to them. A fluid, that whether we are sheltered at home, or
exposed abroad, we are obliged perpetually to dabble in, we should attempt to
find in the utmost purity. But in great towns, on the margin of the main,
reeking with the putrefaction of its shores: In cities whose streets are
defiled with frequent feet, and scorched by the dogstar, where every tenth
house is a hospital, it is not air which the sallow inhabitants breathe, but "a
mass of offensive things." Let the chain which binds willing prisoners to the
crowd be broken, let them "go forth to the field," and if the easy play of
their lungs, and alertness of limbs; if the light slumber and the red cheek
will not convince them; whence the mighty change in their health has proceeded,
they deserve to die soon, and in some dirty lane, as a punishment for their
incredulity.

Dissipation being the characteristick of cities, to travel its round will
require so much time that none will be left to cultivate the understanding or
mend the heart. Whatever some indolent fine ladies and fine gentlemen may
suppose, we were not sent into this world merely to go to assemblies, to
saunter at shops, to purchase of milliners or undergo the three hours operation
of a barber. He, who wishes to read verses, or write them, he who means to
instruct others, or commune with himself, must seek the retirement of the
"field" and the "village." In the city, protracted dinners and midnight revel,
will murder half, and more than the day, and the long repose of the morning
will be necessary to repair the wasted spirit. In solitude, as there are few
incidents to enchain the mind, and few excesses to debase it, the student will
bring a willing intellect to the complicated talk, and from a pen put to a
rural desk, all difficulty and hindrance will vanish away. He who in city, and
broken slumbers, has a thousand times turned his pillow and himself, and, like
SHAKESPEARE's king, has muttered, "O partial sleep, how have I frighted thee,"
will find that if he would sleep soundly he must "lodge in the village." That
exercise which in the country, is usually taken in the day, will induce that
lassitude ever accompanied by delicious repose at night. He may be assured that
at the close of the day, the hamlet is still; no lumbering carts or chariots
will banish his pleasant dreams, no outcry of midnight murder chill his
palpitating heart. No noise will strike his ear, but the distant waterfall, and
no fires glitter in his eye, but the innoxious one of the lucid insect of the
meadows. At this genial period, when every June rose is broad blown, and the
garniture of the fields is of the greenest hue, the emigrant from town, may,
perhaps, find some amusement not inferior to gambling all night, tracing dusty
streets or visiting the sagacious dog. He will acknowledge the flavor of our
strawberry equal to his pine apple, and the notes of the robin, and wren "of
little quill," may sooth him as much and sound as sweet as those of the
song-stress of the theater.

"MY HEAD, MY HEAD."
THIS is an exclamation, which Authors may make with as much propriety as the
son of the Shunammite.

Bitter complaints have been uttered by Saints of yore, against that lawless
member the tongue. But it has fared with the engine of speech, as with any
other mere tool, it has frequently suffered for the faults of its principles.
The tongue is an active agent, but quite harmless, unless set in motion, or
instigated to evil by the head.

When JOB had been maltreated by some Jacobin, of Uz perhaps, who wished for a
revolution in favor of some insinuating democrat, the wish of JOB, "O that my
enemy had written a book," though apparently enigmatical, is one of the most
pertinent and least absurd wishes recorded in history.

Profound knowledge of the world, taught him not to pray that his foe, by some
sudden impulse, or some sanguinary passion, might render himself obnoxious to
justice. He knew, that in mercy's code, there was perpetually a saving clause
in favor of the errors of the heart, but that for the deliberate effusions of
the head there was no proviso. He knew, that to pronounce his enemy a knave,
though it might put the wary Jews on their guard, when he proffered a pledge,
or proposed a bargain, would among an usurious tribe, noted for the spirit of
trade, render him an object of respect, rather than of contempt. The irritated
man of Uz, therefore, with singular sagacity, implores that he might write a
book. The vanity of Authorship, JOB probably argued, will induce him to publish
ideas, crude or absurd, and criticizing Uzzites will then ridicule the fool.
His neglected volume, not even "way faring men" shall peruse; and its leaves
shall curl the hair, or cool the "crisping pins," of the oriental maidens.

From the above history of what probably passed in JOB's mind it will appear,
that it was his decided opinion nothing could be so injurious to his enemy as a
bad head, if its owner should hazard a public exposure of its thoughts. So few
heads are capable of framing useful books, that the chance was that a foolish
one would be produced by that author, who, in opposition to all the East, was
presumptuous and depraved enough to be the avowed "enemy" of a popular citizen.
Such an arrogant scribbler would either commit himself by dogmatical assertion,
or alarm others by libertine argument, his book would be too trite for the
wise, or too obscure for the simple.

THOMAS PAIN, could he survey that numerous herd, transformed from credulous
christians to infidels, by his "Age of Reason," and from good subjects to
revolters, by his "Common Sense," would sigh for the mischief he had wrought,
and even at the ninth hour, before he was drunken, would exclaim, "my head, my
head."

Were not the subject almost too serious to allow the sportive style, we might
indulge, and hint that some of the Legislators of France, sensible of the many
evils of heads, invented a summary mode of lopping those excrescencies. King,
noble and priest, have been visited by a malady, similar to that, which vexed
the Shunammite's son, and each has ascended a sanguinary scaffold, ejaculating
"my head, my head."

Daring and impudent as it may appear in this levelling age, to avow respect
for birth or talents, I confess, as a little of the aristocratical leaven has
possibly leavened the whole lump, that my notions on this subject are very old
fashioned. My own head is so weak, that I cannot help fancying some difference,
in the capacity of those of other men. I shall not, therefore, say a word to
the prejudice of the ancient and honorable families of Longheads or Wiseheads,
but shall wish them a quiet repose on their ancient foundations, and that
neither a Frenchman nor a Virginian should abridge their immunities, nor
disturb their possession. For the head of genius, whose ancestry can be traced
beyond William the Conqueror, and whose talents are so confessedly brilliant, I
feel peculiarly solicitous. I at first, thought of wishing it a place in the
museum of Cambridge, but am apprehensive lest it should sustain a rude kick
from some of the animals of the place, or have its fine features marred by the
fogginess of the atmosphere. I therefore consign it to the charge of PHILENIA,
and already behold it crowned with chaplets of immortal verdure.

"GO THY WAY, EAT THY BREAD WITH JOY, AND DRINK THY WINE WITH A MERRY HEART."
AND where is the sullen mortal, who would refuse to obey so pleasant an
injunction as this, coming too on the authority of SOLOMON?

However, as this doctrine at first view, seems to flatter the indulgence of
the passions, and therefore to proceed with an ill grace from a moral teacher,
let us look narrowly into SOLOMON's system, and endeavor that wisdom may be
justified of her children.

In one of the most interesting and amusing Journals that we find in the Bible,
SOLOMON has narrated to us the hopes and fears, which agitated his busy life.
Born a monarch he could exercise supreme power, and a courtier of the muses he
acquired the highest wisdom His city was magnificent, his subjects loyal,
commerce wafted him all that was rare from Sidon, and the decks of Tarshish
ships glittered with the pageantry of its peacocks. In a situation so favorable
to enjoyment, it was natural that he should withhold his heart from no joy, and
that the luxury of the East should excite him to refine on pleasure. From his
love of letters, his first indulgencies were of course mental. He conned the
pithy sayings of Orientals, and fatigued his faculties with the scholastic
jargon of many a Rabbi. But soon discovering that he was directing his thoughts
through a trackless maze, that if such abstruse disquisitions were too eagerly
pursued, wisdom would turn into folly and too much learning make him mad, he
resolved to descend from the pinnacle of speculation, and mix with men in the
highway of life. We then hear of his agricultural experiments, the cares of a
numerous household, and his public works. Through the dusty deserts of
Palestine, he probably conveyed distant water to thirsty subjects, and
overarched the brook Cedron with numerous bridges. But the restless Prince,
when the labors of the day were past, and he communed with his own heart in the
inner chamber of the palace found, in reflection's sober hour, that this was a
sore travail and vexation of spirit. At length, after numerous experiments on
happiness, he drew a formal comparison between the various situations in life.
After stating the account of human hope and disappointment, with clerical
accuracy, that Folly has a funeral splendid as that of the wise, that the goods
of fortune are perishable, and though attained by industry may probably descend
to an Idler, that the reign of novelty was past, and every object wore the
uniform of sameness, he concludes, I think philosophically, by arguing against
anxiety and enjoining a moderate participation of festal joys.

From various passages, interspersed throughout the volume of our belief, I am
pesuaded that christianity was designed to be a cheerful system. Miserable was
the perversion of its precepts by those in early time, who believed that none
could prove sincere votaries, but the moping and the austere. It is wonderful
that primitive Piety, who must be supposed to hold the Bible constantly in her
hand, should not discern the numerous texts enjoined to sanctify the moderate
use of the good things of this world. Not to be too anxious, and to rejoice
evermore are particular precepts of the New Testament. I hope I shall not be
accused of thinking like certain philosophers of the sect of the Epicureans,
when I frankly acknowledge that I can see no reason to forbid the straitest of
our religion, eating a dinner with sweet herbs instead of the bitter ones of
the passover. Should such a feast of joy provoke thirst, I shall not deem it an
infraction of gospel rules, to indulge him with a little wine. The vineyards of
Engedi are no more, but those of France remain, and if a Jewish lawgiver could
"tie his colt to the vine, and dip his mantle in the blood of the grape," why
may not the sober glass be tinged, and why were grapes given us, unless to be
crushed?

"HATE NOT LABORIOUS WORK, NEITHER HUSBANDRY."
THE snow beginning now In March.
to trickle fast from the hills, and spots of green sward to appear, the
provident husbandman, refreshed by the rest of winter, thinks it time to leave
the afternoon mug of cider unfinished, and prepare for the labors of spring.
But as many, attached to ease and the fireside, are unwilling to put their
hands to the plough, and wishing, in the common phrase of our country, that six
weeks sledding in March, may put off the evil day of furrowing the fields, I
will endeavor to convince them that nothing is so laborious, as having nothing
to do.

If a fretful farmer, who in some rainy day, thinks no employment is so
toilsome as that which he exercises, will cast his eyes upon the various
idlers, sauntering along, with pale cheeks and gouty limbs, from Dan to
Beersheba, he will be convinced that mowing in July, and haling wood in winter,
are less fatiguing than pleasure's race. When an inquisitive being asks why
there is so much vice and misery in this world, I conceive no answer would be
more pertinent, than because the vicious and miserable, have, at some period of
their lives, been haters of laborious work, and husbandry.

What is it but this aversion to labor, and a fantastic wish to be free from
care, that urges so many to exchange wheat for whisky, and their money for a
game of cards? Why do such numbers beg at rich men's doors? Why are so many
rheumatick limbs propped by crutches and staves? Why does the attorney commence
such frequent suits for the innkeeper? And, Why are the debtor's rooms in a
jail crowded? If the hoe, the spade and the field could speak, they would say,
because men hearken to the whispers of fancy, and forsake us, their best allies
in life's warfare.

Unless the sower goes forth to sow, he cannot expect sixty or an hundred
fold. Unless men sometimes love laborious work and husbandry, they will not
reckon much fine gold, nor be eagerly inquired after in the gate. The ages of
miracles are past, and I know not whether man has a right to expect that
Providence will interpose particularly in his favor, and give him bread, if he
will not be at the pains to leaven it.

That ancient adjudication, which sentenced Adam to eat bread in the sweat of
his brow, has been harshly denominated a curse, by unthinking christians. But
it is demonstrable that the necessity for labor is one of the highest blessings
of life, and without this necessity, other blessings would lose half their
value. The ancient poets, delighting in fiction, have amused themselves and
credulous readers, with a gorgeous description of the golden age. An age, which
according to poetical chronolgy, existed prior to the primal curse. In this
blessed period, no coulter pierced earth's surface, honey distilled from oaks,
and wine and milk gurgled spontaneously from springs. This is undoubtedly a
vision of the night. But if it had been realized, and men, like the austere
governor in the gospel, could have reaped where they had not sown, and gathered
where they had not strewed; such a state of inaction would produce an extreme
of weariness more intolerable than the drudgery of the field. A profound
observer has remarked, that if all the year were playing holidays, to sport
would be as tedious as to work; and if we mark the men of pleasure, whom the
legacy, or the partiality of parents, has enriched, we shall discover the truth
of the observation. Who is so anxious, who loses so much rest, who so works
with his hands, as the nocturnal gamester? What perils, what storms, what
fatigue the drunkard encounters, navigating the raging ocean of wine; yet it is
these, who make delight a trade, and what should be the occasional relaxation,
the business of life. For myself, I cannot help thinking, that cutting tender
grass is more easy than cutting unlucky cards; that the laborer with a corn
basket on his shoulder, is less burdened than the tipler with the load of his
stomach, and that the flaxen head ploughboy, tracing the straight and
undeviating furrow, has a lighter task to fulfill than he who bewilders himself
in the mazes of wantonness, and seeks those daughters of Zion, who walk with
stretched forth necks.

Go, then happy husbandmen, with alacrity to laborious work. Trust me, ye sleep
sounder than him who advises you, and who is destined to have no acres to till,
but who, with throbbing temples toils over the weekly sermon. I gaze with
pleasure, at your bursting barns, your well ordered cottages and your fruitful
fields. I see, that in consequence of your labor, you are healthful and happy.
While your valuable exertions continue, your country will never grieve.
Continue to venerate the plough and to feed the ox, and you will turn up gold
with the one, and draw to your dwellings most fine gold with the other.

"THERE IS A LION IN THE STREETS."
TRUST me, my readers, that there will be Lions in your houses too, if you
listen too credulously to indolence and fear.

Enterprise and action, are the sinews of success in business, and greatness in
character. The value of a man is not to be estimated by the possession of
talents, but by their use. He, who can speak or write, or labor, and is neither
an orator, nor an author, nor a husbandmam, I pity from my soul; and regret
that though he has courage, yet is afraid of the Lion.

SLOTH is one of the most timid personages I know; she haunts the pillow, and
she invites to the tavern. A young student wakes at five -- The morning is
frosty, but though Duty commands to rise, Sloth whispers "there is a Lion in
the streets."

Many sots of my acquaintance would be more sober than my Deacon, were they not
driven to drams by harsh creditors and scolding wives. Creditors that insist
upon present pay, and wives of clamorous tongue, are undoubtedly ugly and
growling Lions.

Spleen, or, as she is now generally called, Hypo, is a lady of most delicate
nerves, and trembles at the very name of Lions. Like some old women, who are
afraid that they may be shot, by a gun not loaded, Spleen, if assured that
there was no Lion existing, but in the deserts of Africa -- would be positive
that she heard one growl in the streets.

I know a melancholy man, who turns pale, if only a flock of harmless sheep
bleat as they pass his door; his terrified fancy changes them into Lions. He
inherits from healthy ancestors a robust constitution, eats roast beef with a
relish, and empties his daily decanter; but apprehensions of the gout and
apoplexy constantly haunt him in the shape of Lions.

Many honest people, who are unreasonably averse to wild beasts, are afraid
that the world they inhabit will not continue a week. About a hundred years
ago, those, who are "full of notions," declared that the globe would be burnt,
by an incendiary comet: They even felt themselves scorched by its tail; and
many a white handkerchief was soiled, by wiping anxious brows But the globe
still rolls merrily round, neither roasted nor broiled by a comet's fire; and
we may laughingly declare that the comet gazers saw a Lion in the sky, as well
as in the streets.

In the middle of July, tired of composing my sermons, I walked into the
meadows, and searched anxiously for shade. I saw a laborer with a wooden bottle
at his mouth, and but little hay made at his side; his useless scythe hung
dangling from the limb of an elm. -- He could not mow, for his arms were
relaxed by rum, and he saw a Lion in the grass.

I am, or think myself an invalid, and have a whim, the offspring of indolence,
that some seasons are more favorable to composition, than others. I had taken
it into my head that this week was too cloudy to write, with clearness, and
meant, like some ordained Parsons, to vamp an old sermon. But I felt shame
busy, with her red pencil, at my cheek, and became persuaded that there was no
Lion in the streets, which led to the office of my Printer. I applied gaily to
my task; and endeavored to convince my readers that they may work in any
street, without injury from THE LION.

"I PERCEIVE THAT IN ALL THINGS YE ARE TOO SUPERSTITIOUS."
SUPERSTITION is not confined to religious belief: The apostle Paul employed it
in its broadest sense, and the Lay Preacher well knowing the extent of its
influence, proceeds to exemplify how men of America, as well as of "Athens,"
may be in all things, too superstitious.

Having no farm, but only a small garden, I cannot be styled Husbandman, the
most honorable of titles, and therefore know but little of Agriculture. But
when I see a strip of ground, with here and there a spire of very luxuriant
grass, growing on its edge, and wheat in the middle, like JOSEPH'S seven ears
of corn, "blasted and thin," I know that the owner dares not think for himself.
Should you ask him why he sows grain, instead of planting the potatoe, he tells
you "his father and grandfather before him did so." Here my readers, is an
instance of a "superstitious" farmer; the example, even of parents, will not
justify folly, and my neighbor, Lawyer SUMMONS, will tell you that a bad custom
should be abolished. The yeoman who manages a farm erroneously, and continues
superstitiously to sow by the way side, because his father did, will soon have
nothing but an empty garner for the officer to attach.

When a country physician talks about specificks to "sweeten the blood," and
points his lancet to the collapsed vein of a coughing and consumptive patient,
whom he drenches with milk instead of beef juice, I shudder for the meagre
wretch, burnt by a hectic, and drained by a quack. I compare him to a state
criminal in England, sentenced, not only to be hanged, but drawn and quartered,
and regret that a useful member of society is murdered by a mode of practice in
all things too superstitious.

A fashionable man, as the ladies call him, is more superstitious than those
Indians who worship the Devil. A fashionable man, who wears silk hose in
winter, and a thick pudding under his chin in summer, who risques a crick in
his neck, by wearing the cape of his coat on his shoulders, and whose dangling
knee strings are social with every ragged nail they meet, is in every part and
parcel of his dress too superstitious.

A young woman, who thinks that frankness in speech is a vice of the heart, who
laboriously shuns meeting the eyes of man, as though, like a black snake, he
would first charm -- and then devour her; who never calls breeches by their
right name, and scolds two hours when a case of bastardy is mentioned, I am
certain would make a poor and profligate wife, being in all things too prudish
and superstitious.

No people under the sun enjoy such rational liberty as the Americans,
protected by a government mild and amiable. The man who acquired this fair
inheritance by his sword, now maintains it by his prudence. -- All of my
curious readers have heard something of his character, all my grateful readers
reverence it. Even the old women of my village, after reading his manly and
moral speeches, lay down their spectacles, and declare "this WASHINGTON a
clever creature." Now could credulity suppose that there could be found a
solitary grumbler, in all things so weakly superstitious and so wickedly
ungrateful, as to affirm that our government was tyrannical and its President
ambitious? But shame to the "tardy gratitude of base mankind," not only
individuals but "clubs" and "societies" of Americans, "seeing that by him we
enjoy great quietness" strive to calumniate our chief governor, to turmoil his
government and to cause us, in all political cases to be too superstitious.

"THE FASHION OF THIS WORLD PASSES AWAY."
MORE quickly in the Preacher's opinion, and in the milliner's practice than
the remembrance of a guest, that tarrieth but an hour.

Those slaves to the mode, who from leisure and fortune, are most capable of
resorting to "Vanity Fair," to learn and ape the fashions of this world, have a
harder task than the porter in town, or the haymaker in the country. A new coat
every month, and a vest, of a different pattern, every hour, are hardly
sufficient, in the opinion of a jury of beaus, to excuse a man from presentment
for high treason against the law of taste.

Customs, the lawyers affirm, to have validity, must be equally old and
certain. Customs, which I copy, says the coxcomb, must be as changeable, as the
silk gown, or the temper, of a mistress.

St. Paul, who I believe never visited Paris, appears rather hostile to
fashion's freaks* although, in most respects, he was of a very complying
character. In one of his epistles, he makes particular mention of the Ladies,
and their dress, but is so uncouth and austere, as to allow them only three
suits, which he calls by the barbarous names of shamefacedness, sobriety, and
good works. These uncourtly terms, I (...) asked a woman of fashion to define.
With the volubility of her sex, she first railed at poor PAUL, for presuming to
dictate in dress, and then told me that they meant linseywoolsey and grogram,
flimsy manufactures, fit for none but Jewish chambermaids to wear.

If one of the patriarchs could get up out of his grave, and survey the chins
of his descendants, he would not fail to conclude, that the race of man was
annihilated by another deluge, and that the daughters of EVE had the exclusive
right to the globe. The fashion of this world regulates our persons no less
than our garb. Fashion cherishes a length of hair, at one time, and snips it,
at another. An antediluvian in his tent would encourage his beard to sweep his
breast. A modern coxcomb, at his toilet, will pay a barber to keep the beard
shaven. In the days of CROMWELL, and puritanism, fashion settled the length of
countenance, as well as the width of conscience. None but long visaged
penitents could be numbered among the elect. In the merry days of CHARLES the
second, and the profligate, behold the opposite extreme; the features of levity
contracted by laughter, and all faces as short as the Spectator's. We read in
ancient British history, that King RICHARD and his courtiers chained their
shoes to their knees; whoever marks a modern fine gentleman tripping along the
street, will discern that his shoe chain is attached to the instep, and has
dwindled from ponderous silver, or gold, to airy black ribband. The history of
whiskers has been so copiously (...) by my brother parson, STERN, that I am
almost excused from another paragraph. But (...) have had their fashions, and
suddenly have they passed away. The gallants in SHAKESPEARE's days, used to
consider them as ornaments of the cheek, and "by my mustachois," has been the
courtly oath of a Spanish gentleman. Whiskers were then unaccountably worn, not
as the pink of taste, but as the insignia of valor, and degraded by German
corporals and hussars, into scarecrows to terrify the enemy. This is not the
last of whisker revolutions. Within few years, a smirking race, called, in
fashion's vocabulary, " Tippys," reassumed whiskers, and their pallied cheeks,
thus accoutred, exhibited a surprising compound of ghastliness and effeminacy.
But the scythe of the mode, at length, has nearly swept these superfluous hairs
away from the face, and what weed will next grow there, must be left to some
future scoffer against custom to record.

When I began this sermon upon the vicissitudes and vanity of fashion, I marked
down sketches of the alterations in female dress, as a distinct topic, on
which I should enlarge, as became a preacher. But this was too vast an
undertaking for a writer so concise as myself. Besides, the limits of my
discourses are too narrow for such an immeasurable theme. Far from being
compressed into a single column, the things which should be written, concerning
the shop and box of the milliner, would overflow a volume more ample than
RIDGLEY's body of divinity, or the everlasting paraphrase of GILL. For the time
would fail me, and it absolutely fatigued the long winded ISAIAH, to tell of
the changeable suits of a woman, of the "hoods," the "veils," the "mantles,"
and "wimples," the "bonnets," the "head bands" and the "round tires," which the
prophet adds, with a degree of wit, you would not expect from his character,
were "like the moon," incessantly varying like that planet. The Ladies are the
legislators of fashion, and their laws are so numerous and so often repealed,
it is presumption to attempt a digest. But instead of exercising their
ingenuity upon caps and gowns, the mode of which passes away, would they study
more durable graces, and make the white robe of neatness, candor and modesty,
fashionable, they may be assured it is of such admirable texture, that, like
certain old brocades, it will not only look, but wear well, and be in season
all the year.

"THE FASHION OF THIS WORLD PASSES AWAY."
AS I am only a Lay Preacher, it must not be expected that I should always
exhibit that accuracy of sermonizing, which characterizes the settled Pastor.
But having observed in the course of a long and regular attendance of public
worship, that Divines are in the habit of dividing their matter, and of
adjourning, sometimes, the morning exhortation till after dinner, I thought it
expedient, when I selected the fruitful theme of last week's meditation, to
reserve part of its topics till now. For, during the process of critically
examining my subject in all lights, I found that fashon regulated speculation
no less than practice, and that opinions, as well as dresses had their times
and seasons. As we are told by a profound reasoner, that as there is but one
sun in the natural, so there can be but one truth in the intellectual world, an
abstract metaphysician, in his cell, would suppose that, by this time, that one
truth was discovered, and hence necessarily induced uniformity of thinking. But
this is a mere reverie of a novice in the history of man. In theology, in the
healing art, in politics, in the fine arts, and in polite literature, in
whatever interests, in whatever amuses our species, perpetual vicissitudes
occur, and what is supposed to be settled by one party at one time, is unhinged
by different theories at another.

In the infancy of the colony at Plymouth, and at the erection of the Saybrook
platform, our emigrant forefathers, rejected, with loathing, the fat luxury of
LUTHER, and starved themselves on the mean fare of CALVIN. They were doubtful
even of scriptural truth if it had issued from the Clarendon Press, and would
not read the sermon on the mount to edification, unless imprinted in a Bible at
Geneva. WILLARD's body of divinity was their law and testimony, and reprobate
was that sinner, who would adventure to read and practice a more gentle and
generous system. But such heavy and clanking fetters of the mind, were too
irksome to be long worn patiently by fretful scepticks, and infant Catholicism
in its cradle at length ventured innovation. Good works were sometimes
associated with implicit faith, and the piety of our primitive christians was
not always horror struck at the union. In process of time the reign of rigor
declined, and now it may be said the high prerogative of superstition has
become as nugatory as kingly power in France. For, a new dictator in divinity
who knew not CALVIN arose, and CHAUNCY considering brimstone as a Scottish, or
an old wive's fable, proclaimed salvation to all men, and insisted that a
profligate should not be eternally singed for his sins. HUME and BOLINGBROKE,
with elegance and elaboration, but with the darkest sophistry, and BOULANGER,
an audacious Frenchman, in his "Christianity unveiled," have presumptuously
attempted to sap the christian's fortress, and now, to represent the son of
MARY as a mere man, and now as an imposter. These writings have induced flimsy
opinions, called, from their nature, Deistical, to predominate, and their
professors, far from consulting the editions, either of England or Geneva, will
inspect no Bible. Perhaps the accurate reader will pronounce my enumeration
incomplete, unless I notice that second edition of Tom Thumb's folio, called
"The Age of Reason." But as this, in mechanick's phrase, is but a bungling vamp
of obsolete infidelity, written by a drunken author, rarely quoted, except by
the lowest vulgar, and then in the lisping accents of intoxication, I will not
condescend to an analysis, but terminate this head of my discourse with the
warmest wishes, that, in spite of jarring opinions, gospel charity and
benevolence, may be everlastingly fashionable, and that men will not expect a
more excellent mode from the new fangled looms of PAIN and of Paris.

Physic has experiened more revolutions than Poland, or even France, since the
Capets are no more. BOERHAAVE has prescribed at Leyden, what BROWN would reject
at Edinburgh. Gout must be pampered according to one Physician, and starved by
another. The small pox, like SANCHO PANZA, is sometimes blanketed into
submission, and sometimes every wintry wind, must be invoked to blow the
infection away. Dr. CHEYNE insists that his patients shall quaff a perpetual
bowl of milk, while a more jolly physician directs as perpetual and much
ruddier draughts. LE SAGE's SANGRADO drained every vein, and now every vein
must be inflated like a bladder. CULLEN departed from BOERHAAVE, BROWN has
exposed and abjured the heresy of CULLEN, and probably by this time some
European projecter has started a new theory to the utter destruction of the old.

A Logician, considering the two subjects as equally variable, would infallibly
class weathercocks and politics together. We behold vast empires sometimes
governed by a solitary woman -- and petty states headed by a mob of rulers.
Kings, once ranked with Gods, are suddenly and capriciously degraded among
felons. Government, as a nervous writer expresses it, is sometimes scandalously
relaxed, and then violently stretched beyond its tone. The Corinthian capital
of society, laboriously erected by aristocratical artists, is prostrated by
popular fury in an hour. In our own Country, political modes are perpetually
fluctuating. Prior to the formation of French friendship, that people, their
religion, and their politics were equally detested. The Pope was Antichrist,
the French King his high Steward, the government of France was the archtype of
Turkish despotism, and the nation viewed as a motley collection of coxcombs and
slaves. Mark the instant operation of a single defeat, on the whole political
sense of America! A captured BURGOYNE could metamorphose an arbitrary LEWIS
into the friend, the patron of republicans. But the love toward LEWIS soon
waxed cold, and MARAT had his proselytes here as well as at Paris.

Very suddenly have most of our political fashions past away. Britain has been
called a mother, a hag, a sister or a fiend. Our rulers are perpetually,
wrangling concerning the garb of government. Some, from Geneva or Virginia,
affect the broad mantle of republicanism, which covers a multitude of sins.
Others prefer French manufacture of the Paris cut. A few, perhaps, wish to
import materials from England, but there is a good warm well made, easy
garment, made to fit any one, called Federalism, which the Lay Preacher
actually prefers to his canonicals, and prays may be constantly worn, and an
unchangeable mode.

"ISSACHAR IS A STRONG ASS."
-- WILLING to carry any burdens through thick and thin; the dirtiest roads the
most formidable obstructions, the "hill difficulty" or the "valley of
humiliation," are all the same to the "strong asses" of this world.

On my return from a visit to a brother parson, I stopped at an inn for
refreshment, and an African hostler held my stirrup for a weary limb to
dismount. His hat was under his arm, his body bent to more than a curve, and
his looks of cringing obsequiousness, for a moment angered me, not at him, for
I saw slave in the furrows of his cheek, but at the first gold coast navigators
who thus dared to change humanity into a "strong ass." -- Not slaves alone are
thus meanly subservient, I observed to myself. I know some in that predicament
who are free -- Is it possible? How free? Why they have the keys to their
chamber -- they go like the winds, where they list -- they are not in the
custody of the officer -- But avarice sends them on vile errands, and to fetch
or carry gold they "couch down," like Issachar the "strong ass."

I sometimes see a little mercenary attorney "couching down" at the bar, taxing
his bill of cost, and pointing to the careless client that he has forgotten
"one shilling more for this writ." I hear him argue, not with ingenuity, not
with eloquence, for then I should do him homage, but by rote; croaking
sentences from the statute book, and hesitating law from his "puddled" memory.
I hear him scold a trembling culprit, as a toothless old woman scolds a wayward
child; a culprit, for the first time, whose only offense is cutting a twig from
the wayside tree. But this urchin avenger of public wrongs, holds his dogs
eared law in one hand, and rudely pushes from him " sweet mercy" with the
other. His bray, his stupidity, his callousness are all derived from the house
of "ISSACHAR," and when I see him with his green bag, moiling for the last
dollar of the entangled client, verily I see as "strong" an "ass" as the
Patriarch did, when he gazed at the most sluggish of his children.

On some of those days, when I do not preach myself, I sit down in the body
seat of the first meeting house that I find. Occasionally, I am instructed by
an ingenious sermon, modelled by a "workman that needs not to be ashamed,"
but when the clergyman is corpulent, red faced, and a heavy leaner upon the
cushion, when he sounds divinity through his nose, when he copies the huge
pages of Dr. GILL, or FLAVEL, and reads them without emphasis, though I cannot
discern long ears rising each side of his wig, I am confident that some "strong
ass" has mistaken the pulpit for a stable.

When a candidate for Congress, instead of studying the constitution at home,
is constantly in a bar room, with a mug of flip in his hand, courting the
suffrages of the populace. When, for the sake of a vote, he resigns his best
grounded opinions, to slide easily into those of his neighbor. When, like
ABSALOM, he stands at the city gate, taking every stranger familiarly by the
hand, inquiring his grievances, and hinting that, "if I were a ruler in Israel
how soon they would be redressed," the most careless elector may anticipate
Virginia politics, hotter than the sun, battles against the funding system,
crude calumny against the President, zeal for French lanterns, and resolutions
of democratick clubs, enough to fill both panniers of "a strong ass."

Should I, in a morning's walk or ride, stop for rest at some log house or
cottage in my way, and see a scurvy looking fellow, smelling strong of nauseous
drugs, poking frequently into old saddle bags for phials, and feeling pulses,
which keep (...) with the watch, I should naturally (...) of "ISSACHAR." But
should I hear the (...) " white swelling," or " right rose cancer," (...) I was
a thousand leagues from the Cape (...) Spain, I should be positive that I heard
something bray, and that some Quack was near me in the shape of a "strong ass."

"THE HEART OF THE FOOLISH IS LIKE A CART WHEEL."
IF this be the fact, and the wise man accurate in his similitude, what myriads
of wheels, roll in this, our rolling world!

As it is the privilege of Preachers, to paraphrase their text, and extort
meanings that will slide easily into the train of their own sentiments; I shall
choose to understand the word foolish, as not only intended to indicate weak,
but giddy, and unstable men. This definition being granted, and it is not so
far fetched, as many, which my fellow laborers, JOHN FLAVEL, and MATTHEW
HENRY, have framed, what greater affinity can be found between two things,
apparently unlike, than a hypochondriack writer, and a Cart Wheel? Such a
splenetick author as the Lay Preacher, for instance, restless, and whose labors
are in regular rotation, moves through the ruts of life, creaking and
complaining of obstructions in the way, and when, the daily drudgery is done,
is left by the inattention of mankind, without a shelter, or sunk into a slough.

A very ancient moralist, who published his wisdom, in the reign of Queen
ELIZABETH, introduces, somewhere in his works, an aged fire, complaining of the
clandestine nuptials of his daughter. As the height of his misfortune, the
disappointed parent laments, that his darling should espouse a fickle
foreigner, and, as it is expressed in the quaint style of that age, "Tie her
fortunes to an extravagant, and wheeling stranger." A romantic adventurer,
continually shifting his situation, exposed to the temptations, and vices of
various regions, and, like the Dove of NOAH, perpetually seeking, and never
finding a settlement, must be grossly deficient in that uniformity of
character, necessary to the happiness of marriage. Be on your guard, therefore,
ye Parents, when your daughters are solicited to wedlock, by those, who are
commonly called unsteady men, lest happily ye find them wheeling. The heart of a
husband, that is like a Cart Wheel, will, in some of its unaccountable and wild
rotations, be turned away from its duty or affections to the wife.

Advice to women, must be supposed most disinterested in the Lay Preacher. The
reasons are obvious; he has, in a former sermon, hinted that he was full of
years, and, moreover, from the gravity, and restraint of his profession, cannot
approach, even, the female cheek, but with the salute of a Saint or the kiss of
Charity. He, therefore, entreats the daughters of the land, not to confound
prudery with virtue, not to follow, with too strict observance, the changes of
fashion, nor to be too ambitious of the artifice of coquetry, for all these
things assimilate a woman to a wheel, whirling at a prodigious rate.

There is more hope of a fool, than of that various creature, commonly called a
universal genius. Eager for novelty, and a stranger to perseverance, he goes on
from one project to another, from art to art, and from science to science,
round and round like a Cart Wheel. In the younger part of my life, I knew a
man, of the above description; I think his name was SCHEMER. If he happened to
hear a veteran Colonel, talk of the siege of Louisbourg, be would buy military
books, and dream of drums and trumpets. In the midst of these warlike
preparations, he received a letter, from his brother, a lawyer, informing,
"that he had gained his great Land cause, at the last superior court." SCHEMER
sold his cartouch box, and read Law for -- two days. Jaded with the obscurity
of this study, his restless mind demanded something new, and he listened with
delight, to the tale of an East-indian Captain, who painted the profits of
factorship, and the brilliancy of "Barbarick pearl and gold." In short, for to
recount all his labors, would tire, even the long winded JEREMY TAILOR, he
spent his life in ceaseless changes; he had, at different times, horses saddled
for journeys to every part of the continent, and the departure of many an
outward bound vessel, was delayed by this projecting passenger. I lived with
him a month, and witnessed the variety of his pursuits. He might be found in
the morning, busy to invent some short cut to the temple of science, at noon he
would be examining the wheels of a watch, and at night, making a mouse trap.
His life was the perpetual motion, and his palpitating heart, and whirligig
head, were, in very deed, like a Cart Wheel.

"WHY STAND YE HERE ALL THE DAY IDLE?"
HAVING sauntered away a whole week in parochial visitations, the habit of
indolence grew so strong, that on the morning of publication, my sermon was
untouched, and the Deacon and I were lolling with folded arms against my study
wainscoat. The Printer entered the room, asking for my copy; when he saw my
paper without a character traced on it, and my study table covered, not with
texts, but tobacco, he sarcastically exclaimed, "Why stand ye here all the day
idle?"

Truly, Deacon, I responded, this is a puzzling question, harder than knotty
arithmetic, which tormented my patience at school. Why stand we here all the
day idle? Moments of relaxation are necessary, and we have them in abundance,
but to stand, yea and to sit, and to loll whole hours and summer days idle, is
a privilege which should never be asked by mankind. Let the sloth and the
dormouse sleep, but let man be "up and doing." Each has a soldier's task to
fulfill, and if neglecting the front of day, we ignobly skulk in the rear, the
tour of duty will be unaccomplished, and we shall, sorrowing, hear the voice of
some moral sentinel crying, "The night is coming wherein no man shall work."

It is almost presumption to attempt sketching even the outlines of Indolence,
since SOLOMON, the best character painter in Jerusalem, has drawn a striking
likeness of the sluggard, and has shown what a silly figure the man makes who
"stands all the day idle." I have gazed whole hours at this pretty picture,
which the wise man exhibits, and am persuaded that it is better worth ninepence
of any man's money, than a sight of the Lion, now carrying about in a cage. But
as lazy folks will not even read little story books, much less the Bible, I
know of no better mode to teach them self knowledge, than by designing a modern
sluggard, in miniature and hanging it up in the first column of the Walpole
Paper, which, it is said, even yawners read.

DICK DRONISH lies in bed till eleven o'clock in a May morning. Slip shod, and
with one stocking wrong side out, he gapes over his breakfast, which he eats
with "unwashen hands," because he cannot afford to hire a servant to hold the
water bow!. -- As his profession requires study, it is his duty to read all the
forenoon, but be always sleeps over his book, and never displayed any vivacity
in study, except once, when he threw Dr. FRANKLIN'S works into the fire, for
saying that "Time was money." After dinner, which generally employs two hours,
he crack nuts like a squirrel, or smokes like a Dutchman, or by a certain
process, commonly called whitling, covers his hearth with shreds of pine. At
four, you see him exerting all his energies, crossing the street to a dram
shop, and loading a s(...) pistol -- with brandy. You need not enter DICK's
house to become acquainted with the proprietor. You see him through the (...),
and know that the rusty hat, (...) supplies the lost pane, belongs to the (...).

(...), but sometimes whole tribes and (...), "stand all the day idle." I (...)
through a certain town, (...) I was credibly informed, (...) the whole year in
a (...) You might hear them sno^e as (...) through the streets, and a witty
friend observed to me, that there the common forms of salutation ought to be
changed, and that two people, when they met, instead of asking each other "How
they did," should ask how they slept, or whether they had pleasant dreams! At
Clumsy College, where I had my education, Governors and Pupils stood for the
most part idle. The Heads of the College were sometimes lifted up, when some
braying dunce vociferated his declamation, but "the still small voice" of
genius rarely interrupted their learned repose. To such a drowsy education, the
candid reader of these discourses, must attribute the tediousness and
insipidity of the Lay Preacher.

"THEY MADE ME THE KEEPER OF THE VINEYARDS, BUT MINE OWN VINEYARD HAVE I NOT
KEPT."
THIS is the frank confession of SOLOMON, in one of the stanzas of his "Song of
Songs."

During some moments when he enjoyed a respite from pleasure, in his voluptuous
haram, the wise king might inquire by what strange fatality he had been raised
to a throne, and pronounced wise, when some of his appetites were so
grovelling, and some of his actions so foolish. My readers will not, I think,
require me to quote JOSEPHUS, or the Jewish Rabbis, to prove that SOLOMON,
sometimes departed from the dignity of a prince, and did not always display the
judgment of a philosopher.

As we know, from his excellent treatise, entitled. "The Preacher," and from
the three thousand proverbs, which he spoke that he was occasionally at least,
in the habit of thinking soberly, I feel assured, that although he did not
choose to encumber a song with much sentiment, the following was the soliloquy,
which occasioned the text of this sermon.

By the partiality of my subjects, and their implicit belief of the excellency
of my wisdom, I have been made keeper of the vineyard, or, in other words,
monarch of Israel. My fame has reached distant nations. I have the reputation
of possessing more knowledge, than all my contemporary philosophers; than
"ETHAN," and "HEMAN," and "CHALCOL," and "DARDA." The Botanists assure me that
I speak learnedly of "trees," and that I describe the various genera and
species of the vegetable kingdom, from the aspiring cedar to the lowly hyssop.
HIRAM extols my skill in mechanics, and affirms, that not an architect
throughout the realms of Tire, can rival the ingenuity of my designs. My
subjects praise the blessings of my administration. Foreigners and travelers
vie with each other, in making their court to me: Every man brings his present
of what is most valuable, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold; even the
caprice of a female, has, for once, been restrained, and the Queen of Sheba's
admiration of my wisdom, was the same when she left, as when she entered my
palace. But do I completely deserve these various and enthusiastic encomiums?
Have I well governed myself, as well as my kingdom? Have I noted and corrected
my own faults with the same circumspection that I remarked and punished those
of other men. Am I not obliged, conscious of the license of my own palace, to
suffer the men of Judah and Israel, to waste all their time eating and
drinking, and making merry, and is not this revelry the pernicious result of my
careless example, rather than a chastized joy, under my prudent government?
Have I consistently arbitrated with rigor the differences between two harlots,
while seven hundred are quarrelling in my seraglio, for the lawless favors of
their sovereign? No, even myself, endowed with superior powers, have often
proved weak and wicked. Placed upon wisdom's summit, I have descended;
forgetting my dignity, thoughtless of my duties, prostituting my throne, I have
been ravished with strange women, and have drunken of the wine which the sons
of riot mingled. I have been promoted to the highly responsible office of
keeper of the vineyards, but mine own vineyard I have not guarded vigilantly.

If SOLOMON could walk with so good a grace through the valley of humiliation,
which we are assured, on the faith of BUNYAN, is one of the most rugged rambles
that a christian can take, surely in these modern and degenerate days, almost
every man, who is a "keeper," either of vineyards, or any thing else, may
inquire whether he has at all times been a faithful keeper to himself. For if,
as we read, that man who has been faithful in a few things, shall be a ruler
over many things, to what office shall that man be appointed, who neglects his
own duty? Few can be found, who would not, in the hour of self abasement,
discover that such was their weakness or their wanderings, they had not
strength enough to till the vineyard, or stability enough to remain there.

One of the Poets, who did not, like the rest of the tribe, always delight in
fiction, after recounting the sage precepts of a certain Philosopher, adds,
"That strange to tell, he practiced what he preached." Notwithstanding my
absolute conviction, that a Pastor ought to be an ensample to the flock, I have
no doubt, but that I, sometimes, vary from my own doctrines, and negligently
keep my own vineyard. I warmly hope that my readers will gather grapes from my
thorns, and, when they peruse my exhortations against drowsiness, that they
will not inquire how long I court the morning pillow.

"YET NO MAN REMEMBERED THAT SAME POOR MAN."
IN the book of Ecclesiastes, we find related in a very familiar and simple
apologue, the siege of a certain city. It was little and thinly inhabited, but
it was invaded by a powerful King, and menaced by great bulwarks. Instant
capture must have ensued, had not a certain poor man, whose mind was better
stocked, than his purse, delivered, by the wisdom of his plans, the city, and
freed the inhabitants from their terrors. Here we naturally anticipate a lively
picture of the gratitude of the besieged, toward this political savior. Too
many statutes could not be erected in honor of such gallantry and enterprise,
too many shekels of silver could not be given to relieve the poverty of him who
had so well deserved. We might suppose that the wealthy citizens would pay
liberal tithes to one, by whom their all had been saved. Chaste dames and coy
virgins, exulting that their purity had not been violated, by a licentious
soldiery, would naturally crowd around their protector, and the blushes of a
thousand cheeks attest that modesty had not been injured. But he, who should
draw this conclusion, and imagine that even useful poverty must necessarily be
recompensed, would prove himself a rash and unobserving man. We might allow the
benevolence of his own heart, but what should we think of his knowledge of the
hearts of others? That men are not always grateful for signal favors, that
poverty is ever contemptible, even when accompanied by merit, may be learned in
the course of every day's experience, may be learned from the sequel of the
story, which began this sermon. Though all men natives of the besieged city,
had such occasion to recollect their benefactor, yet the mortifying conclusion
of the narrative, is, that in the words of my text, no man remembered that same
poor man!

However penury may be disdained by those selfish ones, whom legacies and
avarice have enriched, we find that the best friend of man abounds in
benedictions of the poor. In the sermon on the mount, a much more accurate and
eloquent discourse, than any of MASILLON'S, the poor in spirit are especially
named, and a kingdom promised them, surpassing all the thrones and
principalities of Europe. It was not the magnificent palace, it was not the
Usurers bank, it was the poor man's hovel, it was the recess, of the forlorn
outcast which the son of the carpenter visited. To the poor the Gospel was
preached, it was a poor widow whose two miles shone more brilliantly in the
eyes of one, not likely to be dazzled, than all the gold of those opulent
contributers, who cast in much to the Jewish treasury. The rich man querying
concerning future life, is told that a sale of his possessions, and liberal
donations to the poor are essential to salvation. While Wealth and Power and
Rank were neglected, poor Shepherds enjoyed the honor of a glorious
annunciation. The companions of the son of Mary were not the opulent* Pharisee,
and the Roman patrican, but the poor fishermen of Galilee. When dispatched to
exercise the functions of apostleship, they were forbidden purse or scrip. The
wealthiest of them was worth but thirty pieces of silver, and those JUDAS
gained by speculating upon his savior. The close of the bargain might prove
that poverty was better then riches. His title to the cash proved more rotten
than a Georgia purchase. As he was hanged for his pains, his money raised him
for a time, but then "it was fifty cubits higher than he dreamed of."

"GAD, A TROOP SHALL OVERCOME HIM, BUT HE SHALL OVERCOME AT THE LAST."
THE patriarch JACOB, in his last moments, having summoned his sons to hearken
unto his prophecy, and to receive his benediction; after characterizing their
temper, proceeds to describe their future fortunes, and emphatically observes
of GAD, that though at the first onset of numbers he would be vanquished, in
the end he would prove a victor. This singular prediction was doubtless
justified by the early habits and undaunted perseverance of the heroic son of
ISRAEL. The observing patriarch had remarked the conduct of GAD, in some scene
of adversity. When the tempest of misfortune loured, he did not, like unstable
REUBEN, run for shelter to his " father's couch." When the corn of Canaan was
blighted, and the rest of the children of JACOB looked anxiously one upon
another, he did not despair of making an easy Egyptian purchase, and of filling
their sacks from the granaries of PHARAOH. I think I can see him on the road to
Egypt, looking forward, confident and determined. Not murmuring, like his
fellow travelers, that the famine was so sore, they should certainly perish,
but cheerfully exhorting not to despond, and expressing his animated hope that
either the hospitality or avarice of the country would furnish them
subsistence. While the irritability of SIMEON and LEVI, inflamed by hunger, was
manifested by angry execration, while ISSACHAR, no more an ass couchant, brayed
loud discontent, and NAPH^ALI, careless of his wonted plausibility, forgot to
give goodly words, the perseverance of GAD was unbroken, and the philosophic
serenity of his temper unruffled. He felt the pressure of hunger, as a man, and
therefore could not whimper, like a child. "Shall I make," he might say, "the
same simple bargain, as my uncle ESAU. Shall I lose my courage, when it is most
useful, in the hour of necessity, and sell my spirit for a morsel of bread? No,
although the ovens of my country are empty, and there should be no herd in my
father's stalls, although not a lamb shall be left me to fold at Sechem, and
the fairest of our olives refuse her fruit, if I must perish, let me perish
like a brave man, and let death find me not meanly prostrate, but in an erect
posture."

Few of the youthful personages in sacred history, challenge our admiration
more than this gallant son of ZILPAH, whom the discerning prescience of his
father, saw would prove finally superior to every obstacle of ill fortune. I
confess, in my familiar style, that I love the character of this primitive lad
of spirit, I wish his example to be faithfully copied by aspiring youth, and
that when, eager to behold rising merit, I look through the lattice, I may
behold a troop coming, and of the tribe of GAD.

A Pagan philosopher, although he never heard, or read a word concerning JACOB,
or his sons, yet was so pleased with a character, similar to that, pourtrayed
in my text, that he breaks out into a most passionate exclamation of praise,
describing

"A brave man struggling with the storms of fate,
And greatly rising," --
and concludes, with the enthusiam peculiar to his age and country, that to
discern such a spectacle, the gods look down anxiously from their skies.

When I see a worthy husbandman, ministering affectionately, to the distresses
of his family, stretched on sick beds in every room of his cottage. When I hear
him tell the sheriff, attaching the last of his kine, that he hopes better
times, when he can discharge honest debts, without legal compulsion -- when I
see him persevere to labor, in spite of bad crops, and cast repining cares
behind him, I think I see a hero and a sage, and that, though a troop of
sorrows, harrass him now, he shall, he will overcome them at last.

A youth, whom I observe at work betimes, and, in the intervals of leisure,
reading books of instruction; when I remark farther, that he is not capricious
in business, but the same yesterday and to day, that he quits the beaten track
of authority, and hearkens to the suggestions of his own mind, often telling
him more than seven watchmen, sitting above in a high tower, when I hear his
neighbors say he is prudent, patient and persevering, it will not stagger my
belief, if they add that, like the angel of the Laodicean church, he is "poor
and miserable, and blind and naked," for I am positive, that he will overcome
at last.

"ON THE FIRST DAY OF THE FIRST MONTH -- SET IN ORDER THE THINGS THAT ARE TO BE
SET IN ORDER." A new years sermon.

IT has been remarked by ingenious moralists, that although the negligence of
mankind suffers minute divisions of Time, to pass unregarded away, yet at the
close of centuries or years, it is common to pause and compute in what manner
they have been employed. To justify the truth of this observation, most of my
parishioners, who have toyed with time, days and months, begin now to grieve
that another idle year is gone, and resolve that the next shall be more busy.
While all round him are repeating the compliments of the season, and with
jocund voices, wishing each other " A happy new year," the Lay Preacher, with
affectionate zeal, will suggest plans, by which these annual wishes for
felicity may be realized.

Most men are criminally idle. I confess with candor, that I loiter and slumber
much, and while I preach industry to others, am myself a castaway. But the sun,
which darts his reproachful rays through the curtain undrawn, at nine o'clock,
seems to upbraid my sluggishness, and to wish that I would announce to the lazy
of my flock, that they will not, like him, at once shine and be of use, unless,
like him, they rise seasonably. My readers are therefore vehemently exhorted,
early to extinguish their candles, and to use the Day Lamp, which neither
sputters nor flares, whose wick never burns out, and whose oil never fails. All
who wish that the year may be happy, must rigorously observe this injunction.
No complaints must be heard of the chill of winter mornings, or the shortness
of summer nights, but as soon as the above Lamp begins to glimmer, let them
rise and work. They will soon be convinced that it is so ingeniously contrived,
its radiance will not offend the eyes, nor its exhalations taint the lungs,
like the vulgar tapers of midnight. If the Lay Preacher himself, should,
contrary to his own doctrine, be found snoring in his study, while his
neighbors are walking in their vocation, he gives them full permission to call
a council, and dismiss him from his office.

Instead of employing the usual expression, of "a happy new year," it would
perhaps, be an improvement to vary the phrase, and adapt it to the character of
the person, who is addressed.

Thus should I compliment a man of feeble knees,, whose eyes are red, and whose
purse is impoverished by "tarrying late at the wine," I should wish him a sober
year. I should wish that his landlord, when the third bowl or bottle is called
for, would refuse to trust, and that the liquor he swallowed, instead of
raising, would depress his spirits, and that he might peruse seriously, that
chapter of the Prophet, which denounces "woe to the drunkards of EPHRAIM."

If I meant that a sluggard should enjoy a happy year, I should wish him an
active and laborious one. I would apply to some noisy teamster, or some
importunate client, to bellow at his window, at the dawn of day. I would even
advance a dollar from my small salary, to purchase a couple of cocks, to crow
him up to exertion. The year of the idler, would then undoubtedly be happy. You
would hear from him no complaints of spleen, or nervous disorders. He would
have no bill to pay the apothecary for pills, to cure indigestion. He would not
only "set his things in order on the first month," but habit would cause order
to appear throughout his affairs, during the year.

Suppose that I should tackle a sleigh, and go with my wife to Boston. I could
not fail, either in the market or some coffee house, of meeting that animal,
more restless than a humming bird, called a Democrat or Jacobin. If I wished
him a happy new year, he would instantly conclude that I meant a revolutionary
one. He would imagine that my wish involved the abdication of WASHINGTON, the
execution of JAY, and the introduction of the Guillotine. Now, as I am a good
subject, and perfectly well satisfied with the present order of things, nothing
could be farther from my intention. Guarding against a meaning so mischievous,
I would express my annual compliment differently, and wish him an obedient and
well governed year. I would interdict him from reading French gazettes, forbid
his pronouncing the word "RODESPIERRE," and debar him from nocturnal clubs, or
speeches. The man would infallibly become a good federalist, and his year would
be happy.

The wish for Gamblers must be expressed in a very extraordinary and
enigmatical manner. Instead of a happy new year, it would be the duty of their
real friends to pray that it might be an unlucky one. An unlucky year would be
a year of jubilee to the gamester. Such a year would operate a thorough
reformation. Should the friendly wish for ill luck be realized, and the
gamester neither hold pam flush, four by honors, nor the odd trick, what a
clear saving to his purse, his health and his time! He would soon consider
cards as the emissaries of Misfortune, he would endeavor to grow rich, by
surer calculations, he would not only discard the Knave from his hand, but from
his conduct, and be more anxious to turn the penny, than a Trump.

Finally, to use the Parson's immemorial adverb, finally, Brethren, The Lay
Preacher with the fervent kindness of St. PAUL, "sends greeting to many," and
wishes that this and every future year may prove eminently happy. That this
hope may not be deferred, he recommends the adoption of every laudable mean, to
promote so valuable an end. Due attention to order in the distribution of time,
to economy of expense, and to prudence of behavior, will occasion the present
to be like the happiest of past years, yea and much more abundant.

"FOR LO! THE WINTER IS PAST, THE RAIN IS OVER AND GONE, THE FLOWERS APPEAR ON
THE EARTH, THE TIME OF THE SINGING OF BIRDS IS COME, AND THE VOICE OF THE
TURTLE IS HEARD IN OUR LAND." Published the first of May.

MEN, who have witnessed the horrors of that tempestuous and deformed season,
which by its cold, contracts the body, and by its gloom depresses the mind,
naturally feel at the first glimpse of warmth, and vegetation an undescribable
rapture. Even in the mild climates of the East, in the sunny gardens of
Palestine, the flight, the short, and fleeting winter, was considered an enemy
to joy; and SOLOMON congratulates the arrival of SPRING, in a strain of
uncommon gaiety. In a tone, soft as the season, and animated as its pleasures,
he exhorts his "fair one" to "rise," to "come away," and in the open fields to
hear the wild music of nature, and to observe her green and tender tribes,
bursting from the sepulcher of cold. This invitation is enforced by a most
lively description of the landscape; and the appropriate metaphors, SOLOMON
employs, seem inspired by the very genius of the season, and the liquid, and
harmonious words he selects, are responsive to the turtle's notes.

If a native of Jerusalem could be thus elated, at the succession of spring,
after the mildest reign of winter, what must be the delight of him, who, under
our nothern skies, beholds, for more than half the year, a waste of snows,
hears the midnight howl of the storm, and feels the nitrous needles of a frigid
atmosphere, lacerating every pore?

But suppositions are superfluous. We need only look at the door of the
cottage, or stray into the nearest pasture, to discern the operation of spring
upon the hopes of the husbandman. Tired of the dull and sullen company of the
austere months, and disgusted with the chimney corner, which denies room and
exercise to his plough, at the whistle of the first robin, he flies, like "the
roe," or the "young heart of Bether," to furrows and fields. The genial sun
burnishes his manly cheek, the soft and voluptuous air, vivifies his sturdy
limbs, he surveys the rising blade, and anticipates the golden harvest.

But though Nature, in her various exhibitions of verdure and of flowers, and
by her chorus of singing birds, seems at first view to have no other object,
than to amuse our species, as a Painter, or Musician, yet, on reflection, we
shall find her both a provident matron, in preparing our nutriment, and a
useful monitor, urging us to toil. As I am entirely of opinion with that
Ancient, and with that Poet, who saw his duty inscribed on every leaf, and
found a tongue in trees, and books in the running brooks, I think it would not
be unprofitable for every man, who looks abroad, to remark that every
department both in the animal, and vegetable kingdom is in action. Those
countless tribes, who during winter, were fast locked in the chambers of frost,
are now each moment on the wing, and incessantly employed. No pause can be
discerned in nature's present operations, every energy is awake, and even inert
matter progressing. It seems to me impossible that an Idler should rove on our
mountains, and not be lessoned into industry. In January, when green corn could
not wave, and the violet of our valleys was unfolded, he might argue himself
into a belief, that to him a suspension of native powers was alike necessary.
But in May, there is a million incentives to exertion, and not one reasonable
excuse for supineness. Man was destined to activity, like the other parts of
our system, and they call on him to lend a helping hand to their labors. The
most minute drop of sap, rising in its tube, and the embryo germ bursting from
bark, to a contemplative listner, appear to speak and upbraid the slothful man
for not being in useful motion, like themselves.

The parellel has been so often run between the spring time of the year, and
the spring time of life, that all remarks, and doctrines upon this resemblance
must be of course trite and elementary. But, though the theme is by no means
novel to my younger readers, I wish them to permit me for once to forego all
attempts at originality, and to add a hundredth remark to the ninety nine of my
predecessors. They will gratify the Lay Preacher, if amid their rapid career of
thoughtlessness and pleasure, they will stop to make some provision for the
dreary season of old age, which will inevitably find that stores of some kind
are necessary. They will, I hope, sow the seeds of wisdom seasonably, and not,
like the fool of Lord BOLINGBROKE, plant in autumn, and expect to reap in
winter.

"AND SHE MADE HASTE, AND LET DOWN (...) FROM HER SHOULDER. AND (...), AND I
WILL GIVE THY (...)."
(...) which finds a ready way to the heart, was never more successfully
achieved, than by the Orientals. The other evening, as I was turning over,
agreeably to my usual practice, the pages o scripture, I dwelt with
undescribable pleasure upon certain passages in the life of the patriarch
ABRAHAM. I had passed the afternoon, in what is called modish company, and yet
could not avoid remarking that the extreme selfishness of men and women of the
world, led them, even at a moment when they assembled for ostentatious
civility, to behave discourteously. If such rudeness, I murmured to myself, can
be tolerated in a refined age, let me view the behavior of those of old time,
before dancing masters were discovered, and when message cards were not sent by
one Patriarch's lady to another. I found as I expected, that even herdmen and
shepherds had as much genuine politeness as Lord CHESTERFIELD, and that a
country maiden, the daughter of BETHUEL, the son of MILCAH, could behave with
as much propriety, as though she had been educated in a boarding school. The
story of this pastoral girl's conduct I wish to tell at large, and that the
delicacy of fashionable readers would allow me, on this occasion, so much
pedantry as to quote the original. But, as a whole chapter in Genesis might
appear too long, and disproportionate for a short sermon, I will attempt to
narrate in my own words.

ABRAHAM, a most affectionate parent, perceiving that his life declined, and
zealous with the anxiety of old age, for an establishment for ISAAC, entreats a
confidential steward of the household, that he would not suffer the
inexperienced heart of his son to be captivated by the Canaanitish beauties. At
the earnest request of the patriarch, the servant binds himself to solicit for
ISAAC a wife of his own rank, religion and country. After sanctioning this
promise, by one of the most tremendous oaths among the Jewish usages, he
harnesses his camels, and departs for Mesopotamia. On his arrival at the
suburbs of Nahor, a city of that country, fatigued with a tedious journey, and
tender of his drudging camels, he makes, them kneel by a well of water, to take
their necessary refreshment. In this weary moment, REBEKAH appears; and the
first accents that fell from the parched tongue of the traveller, were to
solicit a little water from the pitcher, which she carried, " And she made
haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will
give thy camels drink also."

Let us now gaze earnestly at these simple, yet beautiful features.

The female whose courtesy is thus recorded, was a woman of some distinction,
in those pastoral times. Her father was of a stock abundantly respectable, for
he was allied to ABRAHAM, and her brother was the opulent LABAN, whose cattle
strayed on a thousand hills. Engaged in domestic duty, she meets a stranger,
in the garb, probably of a hireling, for he is called, in the text, "servant,"
begrimed with dust, and having no claim to her favor. She is asked for water,
which she cheerfully gives, and the careless reader will not be aware of the
extent of the obligation, if he have not surveyed a map of Palestine, and
adverted to the sandiness and thirst of the soil. In that arid region, a brook
was a more joyous sight to a panting shepherd, than a bumper would be now to
the votary of wine, the invaluable well spring, eagerly sought, and obstinately
contended for, by different tribes, was, from the nature of the earth, at such
a distance below the surface, that to obtain water was a work both of toil and
time. But, forgetting her home, forgetting herself, and "disdaining little
delicacies," she thinks only of the sufferings of the way faring stranger; and
with that " kind charity" which the Apostle emphasizes, with that genuine,
disinterested civility, beyond the Court of Versailles, the tedious descent of
the well she repeatedly tries, and the cooling pitcher imparts, not only to the
man, but even to his unpetitioning beasts. "Drink," says the generous girl,
and, trust me that I can feel likewise for your burdened companions, "for I
will give thy camels drink also." This was benevolence, such as is not
generally found. It was eminently disinterested, prompt and diffusive. It was
disinterested; for the tongue which she cooled was not that of a youthful
gallant, trolling the oily phrases of flattery. He, who drained the pitcher,
which the assiduity of REBEKAH filled, was an old man, a servant, and a
stranger. It was prompt; for she "hasted," and she "ran" to do good; and drew
water for "all the camels," though the troop consisted of ten. It was
diffusive; for they were minutely regarded, no less than their proprietor.

I warmly wish that the manners of many, who deem themselves polished, were at
the present day, as excellent as those of this primitive well bred woman.
Frequenting no assemblies, but those of the next green, or meadow, receiving no
lessons of good breeding, but those which her own warm heart dictated, we find
her deportment graceful, though she never paid a dancing master, we find her a
maid of honor, though she never saw a Court! True Politeness, unlike that of
men of the mode, consists in actually rendering little services to our
neighbor, rather than in the ostentatious promise of great ones. Indifferent to
its own ease, it thinks much of another's, discerns the latent wish, and
supercedes the necessity of asking favors, by seasonably bestowing them.

"WATCHMAN, WHAT OF THE NIGHT?"
TO this query of ISAIAH the watchman makes, I think, but a simple reply; and
tells the prophet what, if he had the least smattering of astronomy, he must
have well known before, "That the morning comes, and also the night." Any old
Almanac could have said as much. I think that night, however sooty and
illfavoured it may be pronounced by those who were born under a day star,
merits a more particular description. I feel peculiarly disposed to arrange
some ideas in favor of this season. I know that the majority are literally
blind to its merits, they must be prominent indeed to be discerned by the
closed eyes of the snorer, who thinks that night was made for nothing but
sleep. But the student and the sage are willing to believe that it was formed
for higher purposes; and that it not only recruits exhausted spirits, but
sometimes informs inquisitive, and amends* wicked ones.

Duty, as well as inclination, urges the Lay Preacher to sermonize, while
others slumber. To read numerous volumes in the morning, and to observe various
characters at noon, will leave but little time, except the night, to digest the
one or speculate upon the other. The night, therefore, is often dedicated to
composition, and while the light of the paly planets discovers at his desk the
Preacher, more wan than they, he may be heard repeating emphatically with Dr.
YOUNG, "Darkness has much Divinity for me." He is then alone, he is then at
peace. No companions near, but the silent volumes on his shelf, no noise
abroad, but the click of the village clock, or the bark of the village dog. The
Deacon has then smoked his sixth, and last pipe, and asks not a question more,
concerning JOSEPHUS, or the Church. Stillness aids study, and the Sermon
proceeds. Such being the obligations to night, it would be ungrateful not to
acknowledge them. As my watchful eyes can discern its dim beauties, my warm
heart shall feel, and my prompt pen shall describe, the uses and the pleasures
of the nocturnal hour.

Watchman, what of the night? I can with propriety, imagine this question
addressed to myself, I am a professed Lucubrator, and who so well qualified to
delineate the sable hours, as "A meagre, muse rid mope, adust and thin."
However injuriously night is treated by the ^leepy moderns, the vigilance of
the ancients could not overlook its benefits and joys. In as early a record, as
the book of Genesis, I find that ISAAC, though he devoted his assiduous days to
action, reserved speculation till night. "He went out to meditate in the field
at the eventide." He chose that sad, that solemn hour, to reflect upon the
virtues of a beloved and departed mother. The tumult and glare of day suited
not with the sorrow of his soul. He had lost his most amiable, most genuine
friend, and his unostentatious grief was eager for privacy and shade. Sincere
sorrow rarely suffers its tears to be seen. It was natural for ISAAC to select
a season to weep in, which should resemble "the color of his fate." The
darkness, the solemnity, the stillness of eve were favorable to his melancholy
purpose. He forsook therefore the bustling tents of his father, the pleasant
"south country," and "well of Lahairoi," he went out and pensively meditated at
the eventide.

The Grecian and Roman philosophers firmly believed that "the dead of midnight
is the noon of thought." One of them is beautifully described by the Poet, as
soliciting knowledge from the skies, in private and nightly audience, and that
neither his theme, nor his nightly walks were forsaken till the sun appeared
and dimmed his "nobler intellectual beam." We undoubtedly owe to the studious
nights of the ancients most of their elaborate and immortal productions. Among
them it was necessary that every man of letters should trim the midnight lamp.
The day might be given to the Forum or the Circus, but the night was the season
for the Statesman to project his schemes, and for the Poet to pour his verse.
Night has likewise with great reason been considered in every age as the
astronomer's day. Young observers, with energy, that "an undevout astronomer is
mad." The privilege of contemplating those brilliant and numerous myriads of
planets which bedeck our skies is peculiar to night, and it is our duty, both
as lovers of moral and natural beauty, to bless that season, when we are
indulged with such a gorgeous display of glittering and useful light. It must
be confessed that the seclusion, calmness, and tranquillity of midnight, is most
friendly to serious and even airy contemplations. Milton, in one of his poems,
says fervently Let my lamp, at midnight hour,
Be seen in some high lonely tower
-- To unfold
What worlds, or what vast regions hold
The immortal mind, that has forsook
Her mansion in this fleshly nook.


The rigid Dr. JOHNSON was so convinced that late hours were auxiliary to the
feast of reason and the flow of soul, that he used to declare "no man, but a
scoundrel went to bed before midnight." This expression was perhaps too strong,
and he would not have used it, had he lived in a farm house. But his love of
the conversation of men of letters and his experience that Fancy is generally
most wakeful, when Dullness sleeps, tempted him to employ a phrase which must
startle every laborer, who, by mere lassitude of limb is compelled early to
retire.

Night being friendly to playful no less than to metaphysical, and abstract
thought, not only the author and statesman watch, but likewise the sons of
sociability and glee. Those, who "eat the bread of carefulness," go soon to
bed, to digest their meal, and leave the darkened hours to be enjoyed by men of
genius, or wasted by men of pleasure. St. PAUL avers that they that be drunken
are drunken in the night, and I know that its broad mantle is frequently
employed to cover excess from the world. Still, the arrival of night is greeted
by many, who wish neither to sleep, nor drink it away. Conversation often holds
a levee at midnight, and Wit and Sentiment and Song like the Fairies, assemble
and sport before the cock crow. I think it treason to this sable power, who
holds divided empire with day, constantly to shut our eyes at her approach. To
long sleep, I am decidedly a foe. As it is expressed by a quaint writer, we
shall all have enough of that in the grave. Those, who cannot break the silence
of night by vocal throat, or eloquent tongue, may be permitted to disturb it by
a snore. But he, among my readers, who possesses the power of fancy and strong
thought, should be vigilant as a watchman. Let him sleep abundantly for health,
but sparingly for sloth. It is better, sometimes, to consult a page of
philosophy than the pillow.

"BETTER IS THE END OF A THING, THAN THE BEGINNING THEREOF."
ASSUREDLY, says I with a desponding face, when I dipped my pen into my ink-horn,
and expected to bring up a sermon from the bottom. My little flock of readers,
expect that the Pastor will make his weekly visitation, and yet I feel too
languid to excurse far. I wish that the task was fulfilled; verily, verily,
SOLOMON, whether you muttered it, when building the temple, or thinking of your
concubines, you never muttered more wisdom, than "Better is the end of a thing,
than the beginning thereof."

Without an invocation to the sons and daughters of Indolence, for we all know
what would be the language of that family, should even the persevering and
industrious be asked the question, they would refer the querist to SOLOMON's
works for an answer.

Beginning! continued I, is like JOHN BUNYAN's hill, so difficult that it would
pose even a christian to get fairly over. Beginning! Why it is the terror of
schoolboys, and of pretty Miss in her teens; it makes lawyers stammer, and
lovers timid. I hate to begin my sermon; and, quoth my grandmother, looking at
her knitting work, through spectacles, I would rather foot ten pair of your
blue stockings, than begin one.

But of ending, how many sine sentences could I scribble, had I "the pen of a
ready writer!" How exultingly the Saint talks of " finishing the faith," how
cheerily the Labourer swings his scythe, when haying is done, and how briskly a
bridegroom ascends three chamber stairs at once, when courtship is at an end*!
I married a fond couple, last week, and, as usual, neglected the wedding
sermon, till the eager twain came blushing into my study. When I joined their
hands, I felt pulses beating high, through their white gloves, and saw eyes
sparkle expressively, when I extemporized from "Better is the end of a thing,
than the beginning thereof."

One of my parishioners, a very industrious and thriving cobbler, who supports a
wife, " nine small children, and one at the breast," by his labor of leather,
I knew, "even from his boyish days." At fourteen he sang wicked ballads to his
fellow apprentices, drank raw rum, in a frolic, out of the old shoes of the
shop, and burnt the boots of the customers. At twenty one, three benevolent
maidens complained of him to the 'squire, and he was obliged to pawn his
freedom suit, to indemnify the parish. He next commenced a roaring blade, drank
flip before breakfast, laid out his heel tap money in tobacco, and the tavern
clock struck one, when he told the last negro story. At length, he picked up
Dr. FRANKLIN'S "Poor Richard," and found that this was not "The way to Wealth."
He broke his mug, threw away his box, bought stock, earned money, kept it, and
married. I stopped at his shop, a few mornings since, at sunrise, to try on a
pair of shoes. As soon as the noise of six of his journeymen's hammers ceased,
I could not forbear comparing the past with the present. Ah, said I, looking
wistfully at his last, and the waxed thread he was twining, and thinking that
St. GREGORY, St. AUSTIN, and all the Fathers of the Church have punned, Ah, Mr.
CRISPIN, how much more profitable is your end, than your beginning.

PALEY, an Archdeacon of the Church, and, what is much better, a worthy man,
tells us, in his book of philosophy, that there is a great difference between
beginning with a thousand pounds, and ending with a hundred, and the reverse.
It is of much import, therefore, if we mean to end well, that we should begin
tolerably. I know no better beginning for a young man, than a stock of honesty,
prudence, and industry. It is better than stock in the shop, or a thousand
pounds from a rich father. If a man should take it into his head to begin with
knavery and theft, it cannot be dissembled, though the words of SOLOMON are
against me, that there are ignominious ends, and if Hemp grew in Jerusalem, he
ought to know it, if not, I proceed to inform him that a rope's end, is one of
the most pitiful terminations in life. Neither "better," not best can be
predicted of such an "end," even by the accuracy of his logic. It Is a vile
end, and, you trickish jockies, be not in such haste to put off your spavined
horses, for double their worth to the believing buyer. Lame as they are, you
may be willing to avail yourselves, even of their imperfect speed, to convey
you to the Genesee. Better that the Lake sever should be your end, than the
gallows.

When my spirits are the victims of the east ^^nd, when one of my agonizing
head aches, disturb "the palace of the soul," when my small salary, is scantily
and grudgingly paid, or, when remembrance of false friends ingratitude presses
strongly upon me, I then read the third chapter of (...), and exclaim, better
is the end of life, than the beginning. Some there are who are perpetually
crowned with rose buds of delight, before they are withered, who "eat and
drink, and enjoy the good of their labor," and then "rise up to play." To this
class existence has abundant charms, and their airy fancies, pleased with the
"beginning" of life's day, ^ut far away, the "end." But it may be made a very
serious question, whether the majority could not pronounce the words of the
text* as a creed. He who is poor or miserable, blind or naked, must certainly
wish for better accommodations, where he could be well paid, fed and enjoy
"perfect vision." To such an unfortunate, such a smoky house as he inhabits,
must be offensive; and if you convince his reason that in a "house, not made
with hands," more a^^y and gladsome apartments are prepared, his feelings will
rejoice when his mortal lease expires, and he will apply, and believe the
quoted words of SOLOMON.

"QUENCH NOT THE SPIRIT."
FOR, should you, ye insensible ones, you would, perhaps, put out a light to
lighten the nations. The luster of spirit is brilliant, and even its heat is
cherishing, let this fire from heaven, therefore, be never obscured, left
darkness overshadow the land, and thick darkness the people. Let him, who is
largely furnished with the gifts of mind, not only have his merit seen, but
rewarded; and, in obedience to the precept of PAUL, let the world fondly foster
his active spirit. For if it prove a spirit of enterprise, or invention, how
will that world rejoice, to behold it, like the hero of MILTON, shooting
upwards, a pyramid of fire.

My readers must excuse the preceding rhapsodical and glowing paragraph, so
foreign from the usual level style of the Lay Preacher. The noble nature of the
mind, naturally renders one, supposed to have the care of souls, eager for its
advancement, and grieved at its depression.

"Quench not the spirit," what an apparently superfluous caution! At first a
careless, unreflecting critic, might suppose, that the phrase was employed by
the saint of Tarsus, as a rhetorical flourish, to allure the attention of
AGRIPPA, or tickle the ear of FELIX. "Quench the Spirit," he would exclaim, why
who is there, that would put that light under a bushel? -- I will tell thee,
thou vain reasoner, and vindicate the Saint. The neglectful undiscerning world,
that suffers talents to lie in the napkin. PAUL both felt and saw the necessity
of such a serious warning as the te^t. Doubtless, while he was preaching in the
Forums of Rome, or the Churches of Thessalonica, he experienced the negligence
of some, and the ingratitude of others. He dreaded, lest even his own fervent
spirit should be damped, perhaps quenched, by the frowns of CAESAR, or the hand
of a Centurion. He felt, that the supine lethargy of Paganism, could not be
roused, even by the energy of his eloquence. He recollected that, determined by
exteriors, the hasty Corinthians caught not the spirit of his doctrines, and
undervalued his mind, because his body was weak, and his speech contemptible.
Conscious of the homage due to intellect, and sorrowing, to behold the pearls
of wisdom, trodden under foot, he pertinently advises the Thessalonians, as in
the text, not to quench the spirit, not to suffer genius to pine in obscurity.

Some years ago, in the capital of New England, a certain literary lawyer stood
up, not to tempt, but teach his townsmen. The desperate debtors of his native
State, had endeavored to interrupt the course of its justice, and crush the
wheels of its government, and he historicised the events of the insurrection.
When I was on the form of a Latin School, I recollect studying a narrative, of
a conspiracy at Rome, written with singular purity, by SALLUST. I think, and
politer scholars than a Lay Preacher, ere of similar opinion, that if SALLUST
could have been summoned to record the revolt of SHAYS, he could not have
produced a work, frugal of words, prodigal of ideas, happy in expression, like
the volume of the Lawyer. But it seems that his fellow citizens wanted a PAUL
to caution them, for they would not defray the charges, even of binding the
book* They quenched the spirit of the historian. Eager to know the cause of
such criminal lack of patronage, in my last journey to the metropolis, I
tracked many a street, and lane, in quest of genius, I looked, and lo! a modest
man, neither a French philosopher, nor a dancer on wires, nor a vaulter upon
steeds, nor a writer in the Chronicle. Ah, I muttered to myself, if the flame
of his spirit has not blazed in these directions, it is not mavelous, that
the cautious Bostonians, should cry "quench!"

"I HEAR THAT THERE BE DIVISIONS AMONG YOU, AND I PARTLY BELIEVE IT."
IN the social state, obviously framed for the promotion of the common good, a
credulous man might suppose that there would be no divisions. But this mistake,
observation, if she had only half an eye, and peered with that through a glass
darkly, would correct. Where only two or three are gathered together, some
unsocial, malevolent passion will start up, and forbid their unanimity. But in
great and political bodies, I among old and rival nations, opinions being as
numerous as the individuals, who harbor them, there the clash of faction and
the clash of swords will be so often heard, that there will be no room left to
doubt "divisions."

I believe that I have, somewhere, hinted to my readers, that a newspaper lies
occasionally on my table. But I survey that weekly map of human life, more with
the feelings of a moralist, than of a politician, and shed tears, rather than
wine at the intelligence of a victory. If the public papers recorded the happy
marriage, and not the sudden death, if they painted the tranquillity of a
Federal, and not the turbulence of a French government, every son of
sensibility would peruse them with rapture. But, especially, at this jarring
period, when our ears ring with " the world's debate," it is most painful to
turn over pages, which, crowded with recitals of battles, sieges,
assassination, and slaughter, are nothing more than the records of animosity.
The old world is rent in pieces by "divisions," Nothing but "wars" and
"fightings" can satisfy the restlessness of France, the pride of England, and
the stately ambition of Germany. In France there is jangling in the Cabinet, as
well as the shock of hostile lances in the field. How many wise and virtuous
men have felt the edge of a Revolutionary ax, because they differed in
sentiment from a Revolutionary Tribunal. How many Britons have found untimely
death in the dykes of Flanders, who might have been gathered like a shock of
corn in his season, had not "divisions" among the nations urged them far from
peace and the plough. However men may talk of universal benevolence, and the
amiableness of the charities of life, yet we hear every day, of division among
them, and we are forced fully to believe it. In our own country, though the
weapons of war are sheathed, yet "divisions," frequent and pernicious, like the
tares and thorns in the parable, arise, and mar the peace of the community.
Among the borderers of Pennsylvania, "Division" touched with a brand the head
of the whisky still, and the fiery spirits of insurgency blazed against a
government, the first and fairest on the earth. Division has been the President
of many a "club" and "self created society:" Division, a scowling monster, more
ugly than the "Green Dragon," whose den, she was wont to haunt. Division has
looked askance at the Treaty, and has even with audacious front adventured to
assail WASHINGTON, but he steadfastly smiled and she vanished away.

Men disagree and divide in minute, no less than in momentous questions. My
parishioners inform me of various divisions, and I partly believe them. Thus I
hear that two young girls of equal pretensions to wit and beauty, cannot
possibly live in friendship together, for, like the CAESAR and POMPEY of LUCAN,
one cannot bear a rival, and the other is impatient of a superior. I hear that
two neighboring shopkeepers will not even look at each other, nor go to the
same tavern, nor walk the same side of a street; all in consequence of an
unlucky division. Two Counties will contend for years, which shall enjoy the
privilege of a shire, and where the Courthouse shall stand, and thus cut out
work for lawyers, even before a place is provided for them to wrangle in.
Neighbors will squabble about an old tree, and an old horse, and expend ^00
dollars in Court fees, to determine which shall have the mighty privilege of
putting out the fire, by piling on the wood of the one, and of having a neck
broke, by riding the other. But what is a more preposterous division than any
enumerated, is what is called an ecclesiastical dispute. To such an absurd
height has this species of contention been carried that, in despite of the
opinion of the Saint, that a believing wife may convert an infidel husband,
church doors have been shut against a converted female for pairing with an
unconverted mate. Last of all, to end this disgusting catalogue of "divisions,"
christians professing to worship in concert, have pulled each other by the
beard, in ascertaining who should be their minister, and have warred furiously
to know, where the temple of peace should be erected.

"WINE AND NEW WINE TAKE AWAY THE HEART."
-- AND cloud the head, and empty the purse, and beget writs of attachment, and
an intimacy with deputy sheriffs and gaols; and -- I should become quite out of
breath and "the time would fail me" to recount all the mischiefs which wine and
new wine occasion.

But, I hear young CLOD, my neighbor's hired man, whisper to the schoolmaster
of the village, "Our grapes are sour grapes, from which we cannot press new
wine: You cannot get a drop in New England except what the traders sell, and
that comes over sea, and is mingled with molasses in the vessel, and when it
reaches us becoms new cider," rather than new wine. Now young CLOD having
ploughed our uplands, and chopped wood in our forests, and read MORSE'S
Geography, has some right to conclude that the "hearts" of Americans cannot be
taken away, because we lack wine and new wine, and experience not when the time
of the vintage of the grape is near.

But the wise prophet who sang to the men of JUDAH, many hundred years ago, the
many woes of wine, though he used that word, meant INTOXICATION in its broadest
sense. Had HOSEA lived in New England, and seen our laborers lifting a tin
measure to their mouths at five o'clock in the morning, swearing at noon, and
staggering at night, he would doubtless have prophesied that new rum; yea and
gin sling, and brandy grog "take away the heart."

Hear me, my countrymen, I am not an universalist, nor a new light, but I am a
moral preacher. Though I do not whine to you from a pulpit, and have not the
voice of the charmer, charming never so wisely, yet I have your good at heart,
and will promote it all in my power; and I ask no salary, but your reformation.

You complain that Lawyers oppress, and that Congress tax you, that you have no
money; that you must work hard; and that, though some of you wish to read
useful books and pamphlets, you have not cash to exchange with the Bookseller.
-- I will hint that mode of conduct, which escapes a bill of cost, supports
government, makes labor light, and procures you a whole Library. It will render
you in very deed that virtuous and enlightened yeomanry, which shall be the
pride and protection of our empire.

You inhabit a region which, though it has not been celebrated by the poets,
though its rivers are not so warm as those which feel a southern sun, and roll
through Italy and France, has a soil productive of all the essentials to health
and happiness. The sharp air of your hills blows away disease, and your juicy
bee^ is a better bracer than the bark. If you will plant the corn, and sow the
rye and wheat field, pay necessary debts and contract no superfluous ones, and
drink wine and new wine, and rum and brandy, with moderation; believe me you
will have property enough for your occasions; you will not be haled before the
judge, neither will the officer cast you into prison; but your barns will be
full, your kine will, like JESHERUN, "wax fat," and the shade of the prophet,
if it hovered around you, might whisper, "hearts like these, shall never be
taken away."

"ONE THING IS NEEDFUL."
ALL the readers of the Farmer's Museum, thought so lately, when they snatched
that paper from the post, and saw not my Sermon. What could induce the Lay
Preacher to forego his wonted labors, was the general exclamation. Various
were the conjectures concerning the omission of my duty; and some of them
resembled the pleasantry of the prophet, that I was either talking, or
pursuing, or on a journey, or peradventure sleeping, and would not be awaked.
My vanity being thus flattered by the inquiries and anxiety of my friends, I
will frankly inform them that in the course of last week, I read three
excellent sermons, one hundred pages in JOSEPHUS, two of the canonical books of
scripture, and a leaf or two in the volume of the human heart, but one thing
was needful; my head was clouded by care, my hands were slack to labor, and the
spirit of invention had fled away. I therefore dismissed my duty, as FELIX
dismissed the accused apostle, to a more convenient season, and devoted the
vacant hours to ease, endeavoring to compose my cough and my cares.

Although most modern authors, and some clergymen, choose to write without
thinking, I am so whimsical as to be positive that it is the one thing needful.
I shall never preach without, at least, two or three ideas in my mind, and as I
live in an obscure corner of the world, have only half a dozen books on my
shelf, and see but very few faces, my readers must not be surprised if I manage
my brain, as a prudent farmer his field; be satisfied with its produce at one
season, and allow it to remain fallow at another. The little stock of prudence
and knowledge of which I am owner, is very much at the world's service; and
when I can say any thing new or useful, I will do it cheerfully, and employ my
neighbor CARLISLE's paper, as my speaking trumpet. But when I am sick or
stupid, I am resolved not to repeat myself, or quote other men, merely for the
sake of scribbling* Always in literature and sometimes in use, originality is
the one thing needful. I always seek for it as for hidden treasure, and (...) I
fail to find this jewel of great price, miserable thoughts arise in my mind,
and muddy ink flows tardily from my pen.

But let me not wander too far in quest of apologies. I trust that my
acquaintance with my readers has been so intimate, that they feel the usual
prejudices of friendship, and are willing to excuse slight deviations,
conscious that I am generally inclined to study many sermons, and to write a
few. I hope that the spirit of indulgence abounds, and that Candor is so
constant a companion, as never to be the one thing needful.

Such is the wandering of desire, that not a mortal can be found so perfectly
satisfied with his situation as not to wish it either new modelled, or mended,
or enlarged. To this restlessness of temper, one thing is constantly needful,
and as the poet expresses it, That cruel something, unpossest,
Corrodes and leavens all the rest.
The boy is eager to be a man, and the maid a wife; the merchant must freight
another ship, and the farmer purchase more acres, to render their respective
felicity complete. But imaginary wants, the bastard progeny of inordinate
desire are not the one thing needful, which the reprover of MARTHA enjoined. To
forsake old follies, and to cherish good affections is the genuine
interpretation.

Why do you charge that simple, unsuspecting country lass two shillings and
sixpence for a piece of your faded ribbon, which would be dear at a penny, Mr
SHARP? Your answer is ready, you point to your money chest, you declare it is
not yet full, and that money is the one thing needful. This is a great mistake,
believe me; had you told me that honesty and good faith were lacking, I might
have credited your story. But what need have you of money? You have neither
generosity to impart, nor spirit to use it; it is dead matter in your hands,
your bank bills are fresh as from the press of the engraver, and your dollars
more discolored with disuse than a rusty nail. Why do you cry incessantly to
your customers, "give," "give," like the daughters of the horseleach, and
falsely insist that you are poor, and that wealth is the one thing needful.

Why do you assume that prim air, and sit with the stiff uprightness of a
maypole, quoth I to a coquet, whom I observed at church, more studious of her
shawl than of her prayer book, and gazing with more devotion at tall
striplings, than at the Parson. Oh Sir, tomorrow is my twenty seventh birth
day, I must be quickly married; a husband is a necessary piece of household
furniture; to an old maid, he is undoubtedly the one thing needful.

"GREAT IS DIANA OF THE EPHESIANS."
THE usual exclamation of prejudice, ignorance or enthusiasm in every age.

In the Acts of the Apostles, the occasion of this phrase is pleasantly
recorded. St. PAUL and his colleagues, perceiving the absurdities of the Pagan
system, ventured to expose the futility of the heathen worship, and to point
out a better "way" to the heavenly country. But the manufacturers of idols,
terribly alarmed at an innovation, which would probably abridge, if not destroy
the profits of their trade, immediately convened, though not to deliberate, but
to dogmatize. For instead of reasoning coolly upon the subject, and attempting
to prove to the populace, the celestial origin of their goddess, and the active
concern she took in the affairs of mortals, they gave a loose to their
passions, became full of wrath, and bawled out that DIANA was great, without
once showing why. Of all that hotheaded multitude, perhaps not an individual
had Geography enough to ascertain the site of Ephesus, or History enough to
inform him of the adventures, or exploits of DIANA. Craftsmen had told the
ignorant crowd a pompous tale, to allure them to the silver shrines, and they
believed, without examination.

I heartily wish, that this cry of enthusiasm had ceased with the superstition
of the ancients. But noises of this nature still tingle in our ears, and a town
clerk, at the present day, like his temperate predecessor at Ephesus, could not
walk in the market place out of hearing of "Great is DIANA," or some other
sound, equally as ridiculous.

Whether it proceeds from the warm climate in which they live, or the brisk
champagne they drink, I know not, but the French are singularly prone to
momentary fits of enthusiasm, almost bordering on convulsions. They are a very
voluble and clamorous race, and if they take it into their heads to like DIANA,
they will swear, not without gestures, that she is great, though all others
affirm she is little. MONTESQUIEU might reason, or ROUSSEAU might harrangue,
but the French would not hear, if those sanguinary craftsmen, MARAT and
ROBESPIERRE, should summon them to the Convention, or the Champ de Mars, to
assassinate a King, or to destroy a government. Trifles, like these, would be
"light as air" to a Frenchman, if an insidious desperado bawled in his ears the
greatness and the glory of liberty and equal rights. One unlucky day, they set
up a certain scowling image, denominated, in their pretty and liquid language,
the Guillotine. This to be sure had a shrine, rather of steel than silver and
bowed heads, rather than bended knees were the modes of adoration. Those
unlucky subjects, who during a life of loyalty, had been much in the habit of
crying Great is the King, were soon offered up as a Jewish sacrifice, for times
were changed, and they should have said great is "the Mountain!"

A degree conferred by a college is a DIANA, whose divinity many a dunce has
acknowledged. College honors, as they are termed by the craftsmen, often
operate like amulets and charms, and protect a pedant from the warfare of wit
and ridicule. They are a species of salt, which has saved many a weak and
decaying brain, from putrefaction. Not a graduate from Cambridge, but vaunts of
of his Alma matter, and cries, how prescient, how witty, and how wise is the
University! A sceptick might doubt the greatness of this our learned DIANA. Its
fore knowledge consists in predicting invisible eclipses of the moon, its wit
lies at the bottom of a syllogism, and its wisdom watches the weathercocks, and
compiles a bill of mortality!

Some have thought that the Cambridge DIANA, did not deserve to be worshipped
by the learned world. I was once asked by an inquisitive foreigner, in what
alcove of our University were deposited its own works. It is agreed, says he,
that a College is designed to read and write in. Doubtless many of your
Professors were Poets; among your Tutors I expect to hear of a CICERO, and the
invention of so elevated a character as a President, must certainly have
produced a Folio in every science. My unbounded affection for the College,
where I had the honor to pay some three or four hundred pounds, for instruction
in the first elements of -- nothing. My tenderness for the character of
instructors of the most bland and accommodating humor, and my zeal for the
literary renown of the most fashionable seminary in my country, urged my
silence to this query of the stranger, concerning a subject so delicate. Dear,
and learned Sir, I replied, the works of the University are not confined within
the narrow precincts of an alcove. The works of the University Sir, are, seen,
are seen -- on commencement days. They are diffused throughout -- I wish I knew
where, except in the form of stewards' bills, I muttered to myself. The
gentleman, perceiving my hesitation, and being a man of great curiosity, and
anxious to hear me quote brilliant couplets, from some University Laureat, or
whole orations of some eloquent Tutor, now insisted upon a categorical answer.
I therefore, in a suppressed voice, broken by many sobs, the tears running down
my cheeks, and with a world of apologies, was compelled to reveal to him the
nakedness of literature at Cambridge. To his astonishment, and to my sorrow, I
narrated facts, "pitiful, wondrous pitiful," like OTHELLO's sufferings. I
informed him that the Tutors, far from being eloquent, like the orators of
antiquity, were in general such raw boys, that they were obliged to spell out,
even the stated prayer, from the confused breviary of evening recollection.
That the elaborate trifling of one Professor, was protracted through five
lectures, to show his pupils what a verb was -- no^. That another, in his
divinity chair, would insult his hearers with the silly miracles of POLYCARP,
and in his public exercises purloin from LELAND, the materials of a funeral
eulogy. That Philosophy was pedlared out by the penny worth, and the streams of
learning, instead of being cheaply and easily conducted to each student, were
sold, in their muddiest state, for a higher price than mineral water. That I
never heard that any of the College Principals, were ever Poets or Painters, or
produced any work more meritorious than a Greek Grammar. That some were of such
dubious taste as to reject from the College Library, the works of STERN and
SWIFT, and to commence, at the age of fifty, the study of the British Poets as
a task reading! I informed my friend, that the best and brightest scholars from
Dr. MAYHEW, to the present time, were generally ignominiously punished for no
other crime than that of volatility. I added that if any incorrigible dunce
wished to hide his length of ear, by a square hat academical, if dray horses
sought a shelter, or the King of Spain's fourfooted and braying subjects a
dormitory, I could easily mark the place. But for a youth of lively parts and
sanguine temperament, place him between the upper and nether mill stone, rather
than on his knees before the leaden shrine of our Great DIANA of Literature.

"YET DID NOT THE CHIEF BUTLER REMEMBER JOSEPH BUT FORGOT HIM."
A MOST unlucky instance of shortness of memory, and a strange one too, for
Joseph had expressly stipulated with the imprisoned butler, that he should
recollect the favorable interpreter of his dream, and obtain from PHARAOH an
order for his enlargement.

Forgot him! Is it possible? Did the chief butler, as he filled the cup to
PHARAOH, taste the wine so often, that it made him stupid or mad? Was the vine
Juice of Egypt, ever mixed with poppy water, that it might, like the fabled
river of oblivion, drown Memory and her tribes? As I know of no ancient record,
that alludes to this practice, and in the biography with which MOSES has
indulged us, of the chief butler, not a syllable is said, concerning his
debauchery, I believe that the supposition that he was a toper, must be waved.
We must look a little deeper than the bottom of a glass, or even a bottle, to
discover the source of a courtier's ingratitude.

Let us look, therefore, once more into the book of Genesis, and I trust, that
so lucid an Historian as MOSES, will shed light upon this sombre subject.

It appears that JOSEPH, suspected of an attempt upon the virtue of POTIPHAR's
wife, was, by the instigation of that (...) of antiquity, committed to prison.
According to the sacred text, this was a State prison, a kind of Egyptian
Bastile, where, as we read, " The King's prisoners were bound," where meaner
felons were excluded, and none were admitted, but such courtiers and retainers
to the palace, as had, by their carelessness or their crimes, forfeited the
royal favor. It is no great wonder then that a couple of tradesmen, who had
such frequent temptations to cheat, as a butler and a baker, should be put in
ward. Light bread and sour wine had been vended in the palace, and the abused
palate of PHARAOH was offended. JOSEPH, who had ingratiated himself with the
chief jailer, was appointed a sort of deputy, or turnkey of the prison, and had
the charge of these very delinquents.

One morning, " Behold they were sad;" and, when interrogated, concerning the
cause of their gloom, they informed JOSEPH that they had dreamed, and there was
no interpreter. The chief butler then related, that he had seen in a vision a
clustered vine, of triple branches, whose grapes he pressed into the cup, and
gave into the hand of PHARAOH. JOSEPH, after comforting the prisoner by
familiarly explaining his dream, and promising him restoration to his post in
the household, pathetically beseeches him that he would in his prosperity
reflect on his unjustly accused friend, and mention him to his prince. "Think
on me," says the beautifully simple original, "when it shall be well with thee,
and show kindness I pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me to PHARAOH, and
bring me out of this house." This was surely an easy service; and on the third
day, when PHARAOH feasted his servants, when, amid the jollity of an
entertainment, the released butler stood at the elbow of his appeased
sovereign, what a favorable moment to suggest the propriety of loosing poor
JOSEPH, who had been so unjustly bound. But mark an obsequious, callous,
cou^tly slave. Intent alone upon his own prosperity, he is so busy in filling
the ruddy cup for his king and for himself, that not a thought of him intrudes,
who has nothing to drink, but his own tears and the waters of affliction. A
selfish and ungrateful man, though he should outlive the oldest of the
patriarchs, and allay the thirst of a lineage of Egyptian monarchs, would not
once think of his benefactor, nor call to mind that visionary vine, which he
had seen in adversity. No; a chief butler would have much more lucrative
employment than thinking upon the " Sorrowful sighing of a prisoner." A chief
butler did not remember JOSEPH, but forgot him.

Are there not a thousand worldly reasons for this forgetfulness? Prudence
might whisper to the butler as he walked through the prison gate, not to lisp
the name of JOSEPH, for possibly it might anger PHARAOH, and then his favor
would be withdrawn, and the butlership! Besides we should remember, that this
dreamer in prison, was a very courtier in the palace. Watchful enough of his
own, and "dealing out his promises as liberally as his liquor." When JOSEPH had
unravelled his entangled dreams, and foretold that he should again have the
keys of PHARAOH's beaufet and cellar, I dare affirm that the butler with
cringing complaisance, with low bows and perpetual smile, engaged upon his
honor not merely to remember, but to renumerate his deliveer. This was the
promise of a courtier -- And who is ignorant that his engagements like "your
humble servant," at the bottom of a challenge, mean, if they have any meaning,
nothing but death and destruction? -- Many are the promises of the chief
butlers, the CHESTERFIELDS, the smooth tongued men of the world. They keep them
too. But so close, that, when the day of performance arrives, not even their
owner can find them -- mislaid in some obscure corner of memory's chest!

FINIS.

