ORATION.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED AT PORTLAND, JULY 4 th, 1796.

IN COMMEMORATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY OF AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE.

BY DANIEL DAVIS.

Who Is here so base that he would be a bondsman?
If any, speak; for him have I offended.
SHAKESPEARE. PRINTED AT PORTLAND, BY THOMAS BAKER WAIT.

AN ORATION.
IT should be the employment of this day, citizens, to acknowledge the
blessings which mark our country as under the peculiar favor of the deity. But
the powers of ancient and modern eloquence, are incompetent to the full display
of these blessings. I will, therefore, claim your candor, while I briefly
speak of their origin, and glance at the most effectual means for their
preservation.

The connection between America, and its unnatural parent, had neither reason
nor policy for its basis. Our ancestors were not only the discarded children of
their country, but they were expatriated with the load of evils which are
always the companions of intollerance and persecution. They were reduced to the
hard alternative of abjuring, either their country or their religion. But
transported beyond the fears of man, or the frowns of adverse fate, they
preferred the dangers of the tempestuous ocean, and the enmity of barbarous
savages, to a sacrifice of the rights of conscience. Here, under the auspices
of approving heaven, they ended their dangerous and melancholy voyage, and
here, in the virgin soil of civil and religious freedom, they planted the seeds
of a mighty empire.

Thus, by absurd and wicked policy, driven from their native country into a
trackless wilderness, and the jaws of a barbarous enemy, nature demanded of
them, no returns of gratitude or affection; for of all the mischiefs which the
iron hand of tyranny can fabricate, that which obstructs a free and pious
intercourse between a man and his God, is the most to be execrated.

Many years had elapsed, after the arrival of our pious forefathers, before
the government of England extended either assistance or protection to their
infant settlements. Immediate and pressing wants were in some measure supplied
by individuals or private companies of adventurers; but these were stimulated
either by a thirst of freedom, or a thirst of gain. Had the exertions of the
original founders of New England, depended upon the munificence of the crown,
for success, America had still presented us with scenes of savage nature,
unpolished by the hand of art or industry.

Natural justice and policy, were equally averse to the continuence of this
connection, longer than mere necessity dictated. Planted in a new world, by an
enterprise as daring as the object of it was great and important, our renowned
fathers had purchased unlimited freedom, by the fairest and most sacred title.
Had their condition been such, as to have rendered a dissolution of this
unnatural union either prudent or safe, there is no principle in nature or
reason, that would not have justified the deed. The subject of a despotic
prince, finds himself born a slave. He escapes from the lengthened chain of
miseries which this disgraceful situation creates; and seeks for happiness in a
country unexplored, and unpossessed. He there becomes a monarch; and possesses
the right, if not the power, to trample upon the insolent invaders of his
repose.

When Great Britain perceived the rising importance of her colonies, instead of
viewing them with an eye of contempt, as she did in the first steps of their
infancy, she then beheld the prospect of a profitable commerce. Ever ready to
seize upon occasions of this kind, she anticipated the advantages of uniting
herself to those children, whom she had unnaturally expelled from her family,
and abandoned to the miseries of poverty and wretchedness. It is true she
invited them to render her the profits of their industry; but when did she
invite them to receive her parental blessing? -- If she at any time sent them
succor, they returned her an an hundred fold. When she requested aid, in such
a manner as freemen should always be treated, it was granted without a murmer.
They fought her battles, and filled her coffers by the fruits of their labor.

Thus stood the connection, when England, by a wicked and desasterous policy,
attempted to manacle her loyal sons! -- The stamp act was the first foul edict,
which stained the records of her parliament. But its almost instantaneous
death, was the triumph of justice, and the disgrace of its mercenary
projectors. This was succeeded by demands compounded of the pure essences of
tyranny and oppression; for a country which submits to the doctrines of passive
obedience and non-resistance, or, unrepresented, to be bound in all cases
whatsoever, is in a state of unqualified slavery.

We now behold America preparing for scenes, in which mankind will continue to
be interested till time shall be no more. Struggling from her infancy against a
stubborn soil, inclement skies, and enemies, savage and civilized, she now
presents herself to the world in the full pride and vigor of youth. She saw
that the authority of Great Britain over her, must sooner or later have an end;
and that if her friendship continued, it could only be the source of enmity
with other nations. Their principles, and habits of life and manners, were
different; an intercourse with their government, tedious and almost
impracticable. She saw the fruits of her industry, prostituted to the support
of useless placemen and a debauched ministry. Necessitated to sue for that
justice, which ought to have been administered promptly and without delay, at
the distance of three thousand miles, her nominal privileges, became an
intolerable burden. Nothing but the despotism of the east, can inure mankind
to the evils of a government administered in a foreign clime. The weight of the
mischief is in proportion to the distance to which it is transported; and from
a government thus foreign, we could expect to feel nothing but the pressure of
its miseries, and its vices.

Equally desirous of living in amity with our king, and abhorrent at the
dreadful necessity of defending ourselves against the unwarrantable
encroachments of his authority, America stood erect at the alarm-gun of her
insulted freedom. Too patient under the unmerited lashes of his power, she
called heaven and earth to witness the humble fortitude, with which she pleaded
for her birth right. When she was answered only by insults and reproaches, she
kneeled again, and again, at the feet of her inexorable sovereign! -- Till, by
the madness and corruption of his desperate ministers -- by the wanton
violation of our most sacred privileges -- by the mischiefs of standing armies
in time of peace -- by the massacre of our peaceful citizens in the capital --
by the devastations of his mercenary soldiers -- by the slaughters of his
remorseless savage allies -- by the flames of our conflagrated towns, ascending
in loud and awful complaints to heaven -- by our duty to posterity -- our love
of life and liberty -- and by the blood of our friends and fathers, slain in
the fields of battle -- we were compelled to break the chains of an ignominious
dependence!

This day, citizens, completes twenty years since the representatives of the
people, appealing to the sovereign judge of heaven and earth, for the rectitude
of their intentions, decreed the birth of empire! For this great and
magnanimous act, generations yet unborn, shall rise up and call them blessed.
The names of Hancock, Franklin, the elder and younger Adams, with an honored
band of their compatriots, are here transmitted to posterity as immortal. It is
a noble fabric, founded upon the rock of reason, liberty and justice; its
superstructure, is a compound of gratitude and heroism; its ornaments, are the
splendid pillars of republican virtue. -- Its aspect displays, the highest
touches of the sublime, and the exalted majesty of the people.

On that day, our climate was purified from the polluted breath of tyranny; --
our country, was then consecrated, as the favorite abode of liberty. Destitute
of the weapons necessary for self defense, their want was supplied by that
enthusiasm, which the love of freedom inspires. It was this which inspired your
hardy brothers in the field, to endure the pains of hunger, cold and nakedness.
It was this which supported them, 'till their footsteps in the paths of
glorious danger, were marked by their precious blood; -- and it was this, which
compelled the veteran soldiers, of the old hemisphere, to lay down their arms
to the husbandmen of the new! -- The faithful pen of history records, that
under God, and the magnanimous Washington, we humbled the pride, and chastised
the insolence of haughty Britain! -- that we confounded her councels --
captivated her armies -- wrested the scepter from the tyrant, and sat down
under the banners of victory and independence!

But the list of worthies who have been slain in defense of their country's
rights -- where are they! -- where are the industrious, and peaceful citizens
of Lexington, the first martyrs of American liberty -- where is the illustrious
band of heroes, who, amidst the clangor of arms and garments rolled in blood,
were led on to death and glory, by the intrepid Warren, upon the crimsoned
heights of Charlestown! -- Where was your hidden vengeance and chosen thunder
when the hallowed limbs of Montgomery, were stretched upon the walls of Quebec,
and his heroic blood flowed upon their flinty sides! -- But why do we repine at
their untimely fate? Their immortal spirits, soon winged their way to the
mansions of the blessed -- they are now seated among the stars -- and with
departed heroes of ancient and modern time, form a new constellation in the
vaulted arch of heaven, and thence, with divine extacy, survey the joys of this
auspicious day.

We had acquired independence, but the most arduous task remained unfinished.
Having triumphed in war, it remained for us to triumph in peace. The states
were confederated by a shattered and sickly frame, approaching by slow degrees
to certain dissolution. The enlightened Americans perceive the necessity of an
efficient and vigorous union. Again are assembled her liberal sons and hoary
patriots. The genius of America presides in the counsels of the federal
convention. Commerce, agriculture, science and the arts of industry are here
represented. The various political and local interest of united America are
here developed with wisdom and candor; and a Constitution, with public
happiness for its end, and the rights of man for its basis, comes forth to the
embraces of the people.

From the establishment of this sacred barrier of liberty and law, our country
has prospered beyond the calculation of her most ardent friends. If there be
any of the temporal gifts of heaven, which should engross the admiration and
affections of man, it is this constitution. Compare it with those of other
countries. -- An Englishman boasts of his constitution -- and his liberty: But
the former is invisible -- and the latter, less than the baseless fabric of a
vision. Should it be thought, that this is speaking too freely of the liberty
of an Englishman, the following anecdote may perhaps justify the expression.

It is said a gentleman who formerly resided in, and was well known at Boston,
went to England, and became a favorite among the princes and noblemen of the
realm. By this good company, he was very soon introduced to the gaming table.
He was here remarkably fortunate; and with the winnings of one night, purchased
an estate in the country, to which was attached the privilege of electing a
member of parliament. -- He was accordingly elecled by his own tenants, and
thus became one of the legislators of the nation. -- To this anecdote, so
disgraceful to the constitutional right of an English subject, it may be added,
that the towns of Manchester and Burmingham, two of the most flourishing
manufacturing towns in the kingdom, either of which contains more inhabitants
than the largest city of the United States, have no right even to vote for a
member of parliament.


His great charter was written in the languag^ of the dead, and projected in
the age of benighted ignorance. That and the collection of acts and precedents,
which he exultingly calls his birth right, may be abrogated for the convenience
of a corrupt minister, or an idiot king -- But the constitution of America,
sprung from the hearts, and intelligence of the people; and by them only can
one jot or tittle be added or diminished. -- To its wise and faithful
administration are we indebted, for that immense increase of wealth and
prosperity, unequalled in the history of nations. Before the period of its
establishment, our government wanted all the sinews of an energetic body; but
an admiring world, now turn their eyes upon us, as the distinguished favorites
of heaven.

Our station on the globe, affords us security against foreign invasion; -- our
country is extensive, and by its variety of productions, sufficient for the
purposes, not only of complete defense, but for all the conveniences of life.
Part of our soil is uncommonly prolifick, and much of that which was not so, is
reduced to cultivation, by the hand of patient industry; -- the vigorous and
manly countenance of the citizen, declares the excellence of our climate; -- we
are yet uncorrupted by the debasing luxuries of Europe; -- the division of our
property, is as equal, as the condition of a wealthy nation will admit; -- our
citizens, athletick, and brown with meridian toil, are in the habits of
republican virtue; -- the sacred rights of the people, are so clearly defined,
that he who runs may read them; -- our government is administered, by men,
proved in the day that tried men's souls; -- we have peace with Europe; and we
have buried the hatchet with our savage neighbors; -- our brethren are
returning from their dungeons in Algiers, to the embraces of their friends and
families; -- our industrious mechanics, are treasuring up riches for the
repose of age; -- our yeomenry, never saw their present prosperity equalled; --
agriculture, with her horn of plenty, walks majestically in our fields; --
while the American stripes are waving in the remotest regions of the globe.

Citizens! is this a just, or is it a delusive picture of your country? Is
there one ungrateful American who will say the coloring is too high? -- What
then should be our gratitude to the bountiful giver of these blessings? -- And
how infatuated must be those, who would risque their loss, by retarding the
operations of the government? -- Strange as it may seem, our country's
prosperity has its enemies; -- and stranger still, that some of these, are
cherished in the very bosom of the republic! -- In the language of a free
republican, let us probe this desasterous wound; -- let us use the incision
knife and the caustic, and thereby attempt an effectual and radical cure.

Its origin, was either in an unquenchable thirst for popularity, or a
deep-rooted prejudice against the federal government. -- The devotees of the
first, are generally men, without stability of character, and totally unworthy
of the public confidence. Aping the sentiments of European demagogues, our
mock-patriots adopt the absurd, and dangerous idea, that to serve the people,
they must be eternally contending with their government. -- This, in countries
of despotic sway, may indicate true patriotism: but in ours, where the
constitution is sanctioned by the voluntary consent of the people, it wears the
genuine features of sedition and treason. The people collectively, cannot judge
for themselves, so accurately as an intelligent legislature, selected
particularly for that purpose. Hence the advantages of a representative
republic, over the infuriate democracies of Greece and Rome. A man with
nothing but popularity for his helm, will steer the people wherever they
blindly direct, even to the abyss of certain destruction. It is therefore an
important duty of every good citizen to trace out and expose the hypocrisy of
these men. Most of them, are at heart the worst of tyrants; and this very sin,
which so easily besets them, originates in a lust of power.

It is a mortifying and disgraceful truth that we also have men, who cherish an
implacable enmity to Washington and the Constitution. Thanks to New England,
but few of these are numbered among her enlightened and patriotic sons. Whence
is it, that the sublime virtues of the one, or the superlative excellence of
the other, are forgotten or despised? -- But who are these men, that stain the
bright annals of their country -- who hate its peace -- who hold nothing sacred
but anarchy? -- You may see the most of them in the DOMINION of the south,
struting from their domains, with a declaration of the equal rights of man, in
their hands; and the image of their maker, bound in the accursed chains of
slavery, at their feet!!! These are the men, who impiously kneel at the shrine
of liberty, the more effectually to profane her holy rites. -- For instead of
the delicious draught, which her golden cup should contain, we may expect to
meet a deadly poison, when the libation is presented by a sacriligious hand!
These observations are applicable only to those members of Congress, who have
uniformly led, and sometimes drove the opposition to the federal government. We
are well assured that the great body of citizens in Virginia, are substantial
federalists.


Others (but thank God a few only) are stationed at the public presses, and
converting that, which should be the life of liberty, into a vehicle of
sedition. Here, we may expect to meet with few impressions, but such as are
made by impious falsehood, or the black froth of democracy. In these we
encounter a most dangerous enemy; for the people have been accustomed to give
credit to a newspaper; but they know little of the arts of a designing printer.
A press truly impartial, and ably conducted, is indeed the very soul of a free
government: but what man whose heart was ever warmed by a genuine love of his
country, can behold with indifference, their scandalous prostitutions. By some
of them we find the best men, and the best government vilified, virtue
insulted, and the people infamously debauched! But they are like all other
great privileges; if we rightly improve them, they secure to us the enjoyment
of rich blessings; but if we abuse and prostitute them, they plunge us into
ruin and disgrace.

The two great duties of a good citizen are to know his privileges, and the
means of preserving them. He may acquire the first by observations upon the
condition of man, and an accurate knowledge of the state of his country. But
would you learn the best means of national security, behold there, an
interesting and an honorable specimen! Addressed to the officers and soldiers
of Capt. Weeks' artillery company, who were present, and performed the military
honors of the day.
-- Is there an object in nature more grateful to the eye, or animating to the
heart, than the youth of our country, arrayed in the elegance of their uniform,
and the splendor of their arms? -- Honor them, ye fathers; for by their
toils, may your dearest right, be defended. Cherish them ye fair; it is for you
that a soldier's heart inspires him to deeds of valor. -- Citizens! would you
excel in the accomplishments of a soldier or a statesman -- WASHINGTON, the
friend of the people, and the idol of the world, is your illustrious pattern.
Let his examples in the cabinet and the field, animate you to the duties of a
civil and military life. And should the unhappy fate of America, hereafter call
for the test of your bravery, like him may you trample upon the enemies of your
country, and triumph in the hearts of a grateful people.

The military establishments of the government, call for the aid of every good
citizen. By these alone can we expect to be defended against a foreign enemy.
But other means must be pursued for the preservation of that immense fund of
public prosperity, which distinguishes our happy country. The task is not only
easy but delightful. It consists in teaching our children the rudiments and
principles of true republicanism; in our habits and examples of obedience to
the laws -- and in disseminating knowledge among the people. While for want of
these, unhappy France has been rent with factions -- cursed by the treachery of
her pretended friends, and stabbed to the vitals, by the poignards of terror;
we have been enjoying the felicities of an excellent government, in the
retreats of peace. May she soon find a period to her unparalled toils; and
repose, in the bosom of an efficient and free constitution; -- but may God
protect us, from the excess of her errors.

In the course of human events, the citizens of America are called upon to make
one of the greatest experiments that can occupy the minds or affections of man.
They are now to decide whether it be possible for a free government to exist
upon the face of the earth. For independent of a partiality which every man
feels for his country, it must be admitted, that the degree of information, and
the good habits of the people, will give the experiment the fairest opportunity
of success. The intrinsic excellence of the constitution, has been fully
demonstrated in its operation. If, therefore, it should be lost, either by the
follies or the vices of the people, we shall be reduced to the melancholy
conclusion, that there is not virtue enough in man, to guard the possession of
his own liberty. In this disgraceful condition, we may expect soon to be
visited by the pestilence of kings, or the scourges of Robesperre. But let us
remember, that the oppressed of all nations, are viewing our conduct with
anxious solicitude; and that our triumphs of reason, will strengthen their
exertions in the glorious cause of freedom.

Discord is our fatal foe -- its birth, was in the regions of deadly mischief
-- it was expelled the cabinet of Beelzebub, and Hell grew lighter as the
monster fled.

May we never become its devoted victims. May the spirit of genuine freedom
continue to spread; till all tyranny and despotism, shall be consumed by its
noble fires. And may the pillars of liberty, and the constitution, be as
permanent as those of creation itself.


