Believe me, Alexis. Here shall thou find happiness.


ALEXIS: OR, THE COTTAGE IN THE WOODS. A NOVEL, From the French. THE MANUSCRIPT
FOUND ON THE BANKS OF THE ISERE.

THE FIRST AMERICAN EDITION. ORNAMENTED WITH HANDSOME COPPER PLATES.

Boston: From the press of ALEXANDER MARTIN, QUAKER-LANE. FOR THOMAS AND
ANDREWS, AND W. P. AND L. BLAKE. OCTOBER, 1796.

ALEXIS: OR, THE COTTAGE IN THE WOODS. PART FIRST.
REFLECTIONS. -- ALEXIS LEAVES VALENCE. -- A SOLILOQUY. -- AN INTERRUPTION.

CHAP. I. THE DECLINE OF DAY.
WHAT constitutes the happiness or unhappiness of our life? It is our
character. It is the light in which we view things; in which we feel them, in
which they affect us. Abundance of possession does not suffice to make a man
happy -- he himself must be sensible of his happiness -- he must compare his
(...) to that of others. Education unfolds the character -- the passions
establish it: It is they that give it that energy, that violence which is
augmented by the fire of youth, but tempered with difficulty in riper years.

Passions are the inseparable companions of mankind, and in great cities they
make the greatest havoc. Obstacles, desires, self-created wants, every thing
provokes, every thing creates them. Like bitumen residing in the heart of
metals, they break forth with impetuosity, as soon as they have forced the
bands of infancy.

Behold a young man who was just now under the lash of his preceptor! Death
bereft him of his parents: He is free; he is his own master; what a happiness!
How will he enjoy it! Whole crowds of pleasures take his fancy: which of them
will he prefer? Doubtless the most turbulent, they appear so seducing? Bustle,
balls, assemblies, races by day! -- great projects for the night; by night,
great projects for the day! He is always busy about nothing; the pleasure he
tastes today is nothing compared to that he will taste tomorrow: That which he
has enjoyed yesterday is already forgotten. What pains does he take to amuse
himself! The gaming table -- the theaters -- LOVE! Why do I call it love? Can I
thus prostitute this word? Can I give the title of love to the inordinate
appetites of the senses, which incessantly pervade his heart; that insatiable
desire, gratified with brutality and without choice, that inconstant phrenzy,
which makes him rove from belle to belle? Nay, he sacrifices all, enjoys before
he thinks, and thinks at the age of enjoyment. Unfortunate he! a burden to
society, to himself; at the age of thirty he may renounce life!

These, these are the fatal consequences of passions, in great cities. Let us
now consider those of the hamlets -- let us examine the countrymen, I mean not
the countrymen in the environs of Paris. Unfortunately the contagion has spread
beyond the suburbs; but him that inhabits the remote provinces of Beauce or
Bearn. Behold the lad at work -- in his father's eyes, his age is eighteen, yet
he appears to be twenty five: His nervous limbs control the ploughshare; his
callous hands thrust the spade into the bosom of the earth, dragging the
harrow, or lifting the flail: They thresh the corn, and each stroke is
accompanied by a hardy hah! which springs from his vigorous breast. By day he
lays up a copious store of pavots for the night -- by night, nothing puts him
in mind of his existence, not even the slightest dream, except sometimes
certain sweet illusions, which point, in a pleasing manner, the labor of the
approaching day. He also thinks on his pleasures (for they are great objects to
all men) but how innocent are they? A party at bowls, a dance in the environs
of the village. The greatest part of the Sunday he devotes to the service of
his God. He goes to church, not by constraint, or for the sake of decorum, but
by habit and duty. There he sits with his hands joined, and his eyes fixed upon
his priest, who in a decayed and rough chair, at the foot of the altar,
preaches maxims, which, although they be not embellished by the captious
beauties of oratory, are however true, and adapted to the understandings of the
auditors, who listen to them with keen attention, and during the whole week
make them the object of their reflections.

In this picture, which will perhaps appear flattering. I paint the countrymen
at large. I am convinced that there are vicious people in the country, as well
as in town; but how rare are they among rustics? They have in other respects
two excellent remedies against irksomeness and disease -- labor and sleep.
Among us, irksomeness is productive of vices, and vices beget infirmities --
Among them, labor procures rest, and rest fosters health.

It is, therefore, education, which, added to our calling, or profession, forms
the character, the affections and passions of men: A college education leads
often to ambition, to jealousy, to turbulence, and points out what conduct a
man ought to observe, in order to maintain his place in the stormy society of
cities. The pupil of nature, in her rural abode, is taught by her temperance,
virtue and religion.

Oh! who has not felt that tranquillity of mind, that admiration of a Supreme
Being, when erring solitary through the rustic path? who has not stopped with
astonishment, before a horizon, covered with vines, woods, meadows, hamlets,
and cottages? The joyful lapse of a cascade throws him into a sweet reverie!
The regular noise of a neighboring mill entertains his melancholy -- a
religious calm reigns all around him -- the sun sets, he sees laborers pass by,
laden with tools, women and children carrying long faggots upon their backs; he
hears at a distance the sound of the shepherd's horn, who calls back his flocks
to their folds; slow and confused sounds strike his ears; a little harsh and
discordant pipe is heard at intervals -- he descries amidst the darkness the
scintillating flame of a limekiln; he looks at it without seeing it^ he thinks
without reflecting: His spirits are in a state of suspense: He feels too much
to give a detail of his sensations. Roused at last, from his extacy, every
thing recalls him to his hermitage: He enters joyfully to see his little
mansion and garden; he makes a tour round it, and remembers with delight the
pleasures of the day. Nay, how would it be possible he should forget his walk;
He has seen nature: He has meditated: He has enjoyed!

What a striking contrast between the silence of the country and the bustle of
cities!

Let the proud citizen of Paris leave the capital and walk only to the distance
of half a league; let him ascend one of these surrounding mounts, and cast his
eyes upon the turbulent city: What will he see? A thick blackish fog
encompassing the whole mass of its superb edifice, a mephitic horizon, which
seems too heavy to emit its exhalations! Let him hear the confused tumult of
carriages, of dogs and horses; let his ears tingle with the shrill voices of so
many people who overrun the spacious districts -- what will he then feel? He
will fetch a sigh: Philosophical reflections will occupy his mind: He will cast
a longing look upon the rustic seats which surround him. After having prolonged
his excursion, he will reenter Paris with a kind of sadness, which he does not
account for, and which nothing can dissipate but the hope of seeing again those
peaceful scenes.

Such were the thoughts of Alexis, when he left the gates of Valence. Alone, on
foot, with his little baggage under his arm, he turned round, and made several
stops, to have another view of the walls and edifices of this fine capital of
the province of Valentinoise, where he had just left the dearest and perhaps
the most perfidious friend. He continued his road, and at last nothing remained
to his view, but the summits of the capital, and the aspiring towers of an
abbey. Not knowing whither to repair, he arrives on the spot where the river
Isere, coming from mount Isserano, in Savoy, pours into the Rhone the waters
which made it swell in Dauphiny. There he turns to the left of Romano, and
enters a vast plain, where fatigue engages him to take repose. He drops down at
the foot of a beach, and with sighs reflects upon the motives which could
induce his father to abandon him.

The day was upon the decline; nothing but the faint streaks of decreasing
light twinkled from the west: Curtains of purple seemed to hide the father of
day from the sight of mortals: He already cast his last rays upon the brow of
the mountains -- all ushered in the gloom of night -- all united to rest.

Alexis, supporting his languishing head with his hand, let the evening gale
sport with the floating ringlets of his hair; his blue eyes, covered with the
brine of woe, were lifted toward heaven: his mouth uttered moans and prayer to
the Supreme Being! Alexis, though only fifteen, was unfortunate and distressed.

Oh! father! father! cried he, what have I done? What can thou upbraid me
with? Why reject me from thy bosom? What crime have I committed? O my father! I
do not know -- they are not voluntary, if they exist. They are surely the work
of fate. I am the cause of thy misfortunes. Alas! could thou but know the
heart of thy son; yes, thy poor Alexis, he would fain offer up his life to
preserve thine. How did thou love and cherish him! How often did thou press
him to thy paternal breast! How often did thy tears shower upon him, tears
whose source was latent and unknown to him! It was in those delicious moments
thou calledst him thy son; thy little Alexis. "Dear child," thou would say,
"no, thou shall never leave me; thou shall know thy father, know his
misfortunes, and administer his comfort." Yet I am banished and cursed by thee.
Have I deserved it? Must I see thee no more? No more thy arms will open to
receive me; thy mouth will smile no more; thy eyes no more meet with mine. I am
cursed by a father, and left alone to myself in nature. And you, Dumont, you my
worthy friend, you too have abandoned and betrayed Alexis: You have deceived me
-- Ah! it was well to tell me there was neither friendship nor probity on
earth. All men are false, wicked and unjust: The strongest oppress the weakest,
who must not look for support. Well, I will fly from mankind -- I detest and
abhor them. O could heaven lead me to some forest, where I may linger out this
wretched existence. The wild beasts that inhabit it, are less dangerous than
the perfidious serpents which lurk in society. Yes, I yield to this misanthropy
-- it pleases me, I shall sway my heart forever with sovereign control. This
city which nature erected in the form of an amphitheatre, Romans,
does also enclose men. Passions, cares, devouring ambition, all these scourges
are tenants there. Now is the time when the rich shuts himself up in his
closet, covetousness follows him, she opens his coffers, she spreads before him
the treasures, which she made him amass, and points out fresh means of
increasing them. Leaving him, this cunning foe passes by the beggar's hut,
shows him for a moment her splendour, and then takes flight, with an insulting
sneer, at the insatiable thirst of the former, and the vain cravings of the
latter Delivered from her importunities, the lot of a man is not in the least
more enviable; perfidious lust, gloomy jealousy, come to interrupt and disturb
his ease. Daylight, after all, recalls him to the work, which he follows till
night, then returns again to give him up to the same enemies; and thus he
sustains, within the short space of twenty-four hours, all the passions with
which he is obliged to struggle for life.

What do I see in the world? How vain, foolish, and ridiculous it appears!
Shall I live in it? No, I will pass my days in a retreat separated from all
other mortals; there will I bewail my disastrous fate; there will I invoke the
Supreme Being, and prayers may perhaps restore the calm of my soul; there
solitude at least will have nothing to interrupt it, but the remembrance of a
father's curse, and a friend's treachery. --

Thus spoke Alexis. -- Left to himself at fifteen, brought up by a man who saw
every thing in a dark light, banished and cursed by a father he had scarcely
known, and whose very name he had never heard; his ideas became gloomy, his
mind exalted, and his soul a prey to grief. Little was he acquainted with men.
and shunned and detested them as monsters! His soul was never made to be
conquered by that black misanthropy, the only result of education and
misfortunes. Soon shall we see him acquire ideas more sound, more worthy of a
true philosopher -- We are to see him in distress, but from his own fault, from
an excessive sensibility; and he will be convinced, at last, that since we are
obliged to live amongst our fellow creatures, we must bear their failings as
they do ours.

No sooner had Alexis finished his over strained complaints, than a soft noise,
which he heard behind him, made him turn his head. What does he see? Ah!
doubtless it was heaven, touched by his bitter moans, which had sent him
comfort in his sufferings.

CHAP. II.
ALEXIS MEETS A FRIEND OF CONGENIAL SENTIMENTS. -- AN INTERVIEW. -- PASSAGE
TOWARD THE COTTAGE.

THE APPROACH TO THE COTTAGE.
A YOUTH of an interesting countenance was with his head and hands leaning
against the tree, beneath which Alexis had taken rest. A little farther his
horse, unbridled, was browsing the vernal pasture of the plain; near him was an
old man, who carefully watched all his motions.

Alexis, surprised that an unknown youth should testify concern at his fate,
was going to ask him the nature of a curiosity which rather offended him; but
the young stranger prevented him by these words, -- "You are distressed?" --
"Distressed, you say -- what has befallen you? what can it be to you?" -- "Nay,
be not angry -- if you knew me!" -- "Who are you?" -- Well, he will know my
secret, though he conceals his own. -- "Why it is rather -- how do you find me?
-- Such a question is natural. As for me, I cannot help telling you that I look
upon you as very amiable." -- "Amiable!" -- "Yes, charming." This confession --
"but pray who are you?" -- "Cannot you guess?" -- "No," -- "'It Is my dress which
causes your mistake; know me then: My name is Clara, I live with my father, in
a forest, two leagues from hence." -- "In a forest?" -- "Yes, we are very happy
there." -- "I believe you." "The old man who stands yonder, is Germain, our
trusty servant."

But, fair Clara, what could induce your father to banish himself thus?" -- "I
don't know, it is his own secret, but he will tell it you." "Tell it me?" --
"Certainly, will not you come and stay with us?" -- "Why do you ask me?" -- "Have
not I overheard all you said, Oh, would heaven lead me to some forest, where I
might linger out this wretched existence. -- Is not that plain enough?" --
"Aye, it is so, I find town life is detestable." -- "You well may, my father
says so every day." -- "What a singular adventure! your father?" -- "Yes, he
has been distressed too, come and live in his hermitage, you will console him,
and I will console you." -- "Clara, you begin already to make me forget my
sorrows; the tone of your voice is so soothing," -- "So is your own." -- "Well,
you have been brought up in the woods?" -- "Yes, my father has been living
there these six years." -- "And how old are you?" -- "About fifteen." -- "What
a beautiful, what an interesting maid!" -- "Yes, my father and Germain often
told me I was handsome, and I am pleased that you think as they do." -- What
innocence! what simplicity! Oh, I have never been taught to hide my way of
thinking, have I then met with an ingenuous and honest soul? Yes, she has been
brought up in the woods! "Oh! you talk like my father; how he will like you!
Come, give me your hand; rise, and we will go." -- "But do you know whether
your father will please to receive me?" -- "Oh! he will be glad to see you, I
am certain; I know him; he loves the unfortunate, he has been unfortunate
himself." -- "That is no reason; but what an impression your discourse makes on
me!" -- "Well, there is but one thing in you that displeases me." -- "What is
that?" -- "Are you not sometimes a little proud? I love familiarity, but come
then, come along."

When Alexis was first accosted by the young stranger, he had been quite struck
dumb, and even on account of his mistrust, would not believe what Clara said in
the beginning, but she was so charming! candor and innocence, the smile of
truth, all indicated the frankness of her soul; and her features, how beautiful
were they; her hair, of an ash-colored fair, was negligently tied behind; a
little round hat, with a ribbon only, discovered two large blue eyes, whose
languor penetrated to the heart; her mouth, with a smile, formed on each side
two pretty dimples which love is said to have intended to soften the most
obdurate heart; her cheeks glowing with health and ingenuousness, had only
received the kisses of an affectionate father. A handkerchief passed slightly
round her neck, and falling upon her bosom, left the eye to guess the beauties
hid beneath. Her shape, veiled with a modest blue habit, was pressed closer by
a broad girdle, whose ends hung negligently down her side. Clara, to so many
charms, added the age of love, and her heart, attracted by nature, had made her
fly, against her consent, toward a youth whom she had found sighing and melted
into tears at the foot of a tree.

Alexis surveyed her, and struck with so many beauties, his eye overran them
with rapture. He opens his mouth to express his surprise, but his tongue denies
its office, and he utters only wild exclamations. He holds out his hand to the
object he admires, a sudden blush diffuses itself over his face, a burning fire
glides through his veins, he is unable to speak, but his heart beats high, it
comes upon his lips; it animates his looks, which only interpret his meaning.

He recovers, however, from his rapture, his timidity still gets the better; he
turns his sight from the fair object, stammers a few words, and hangs down his
head with such bashful confusion as if conscious he had committed a crime. Oh!
how pure are the first emotions of an honest love! What candor and modesty
displays that heart which feels them.

Clara's quiet was disturbed in the same manner. Brought up in the woods,
accustomed to see nobody but her father and Germain, the sight of this
interesting youth had made an impression on her senses, to which she gave
herself up entirely, without inquiring into the cause. She looked at Alexis,
and said within herself -- How well made is he! what beautiful hair! how pretty
it curls! his sweet and rolling eye examines me! he finds me pretty! Oh, dear
pleasure! and his mouth, it opens to speak to me; -- it remains dumb -- why? --
but his heart. --

The two children remained for some time gazing on each other. At length Clara,
inviting Alexis to come with her, by a significant look, and a slight motion of
her head, folded her arm round his neck, and thus they walked, without uttering
a word, toward the place where Germain stood waiting for them. Waiting for
them, do I say? He could not think that his young mistress would present a
stranger to him. What reception will he give him? This was all that perplexed
Clara. Eager to make Alexis live in the cottage, she had not pondered the
difficulties her design was likely to encounter, not with regard to her father,
for she was sure of the reception he would give to an unfortunate youth; but
Germain was mistrustful, hard, insensible, and unfortunately enjoyed the entire
confidence of his master. A young man banished, cursed by his parents,
friendless, without shelter, all this excited suspicion. Poor Clara felt it,
and was ^ore afraid lest the old servant should treat her young friend rudely,
and send him away.

Her uneasiness increased the more she advanced toward this austere Mentor. At
last she comes up to him, she must accost and apprise him. What an
embarrassment! "Germain," says she, "You love my father, you know how
unfortunate he has been! you comforted him, and diverted his tedious moments.
Let us render the same service to this poor youth; he is as virtuous and
innocent as any one; and, alas! fate pursues him as it pursued my father;" --
"How do you know him, Clara?" said Germain. -- "He was weeping and sighing
beneath yon tree; I approached, he related to me his misfortunes, and I was
happy to wipe away his tears." -- "Young man, who art thou?" -- "Good old man,
I am nothing, unless you reckon it something to be a fellow creature." -- "Of
what country?" -- "I cannot tell." -- "Your father's name?" -- "I know not." --
"What is his profession?" -- "Alas! I cannot tell." -- "You cannot tell?" --
"No, he cursed and banished me, and never let me know my crime."

Whilst Alexis was saying this Clara whispered him quite low, "Hush, why do you
tell him that?" but Alexis proceeded --

"Till now he had me educated at a college, at Paris. He once loved me."

"Your answers," said Germain, "are so many enigmas; and you, Clara, what makes
you bring this stranger to me? What is your design? What would you have me do,
what does he want of me?"

Alexis, foreseeing a refusal in this question of the old man, could not
restrain his indignation. "I want nothing," answered he, angrily, and sprung
from them, casting a look of melancholy toward Clara, who felt its full force.
"Only see," said she to Germain, "see, he goes away; the poor youth; you will
not prevent him. Alexis, Alexis!"

But Alexis would not hear her, and running like a man who has committed a
crime, he considered what had happened as a great insult, which ought forever
to cover him with shame. "What, said he, sobbing, I believed I had found a
generous heart; I condescended to solicit shelter and have been refused; I
ought to have expected it. The man who is prosperous in all, sees the sorrow of
the wretched as he who has dined views the poor starved with hunger. Nobody
will descend into the heart of the unfortunate. One always finds fault with the
distressed to exempt one's self from alleviating his sorrows. I will follow my
fate, I will forget this adventure; but, Clara, I shall see thee no more! Thy
soul had judged mine; thy pity was sincere. One only being shares in my
sufferings, and I cannot live near her! O God, O God!"

He could proceed no further: His heart was oppressed with renewed grief, tears
flowed from his eyes, and he gave himself up to despair.

He pursued his way, not daring to look back, lest he might meet Germain's eye,
and wandered thus two hours, without knowing whither, when the prospect of a
little wood offered itself to his view, and here he resolved to pass the night.

It was in the month of June; the moon shone in her full luster; a light breeze
refreshed the air, and twenty green sods presented a commodious bed to the
straying traveller. Alexis did not hesitate: He addresses, as usual, a prayer
to the Supreme Being, and throws himself upon a rising turf at the entrance of
a little wood.

There, stretched upon the grass, which he bedewed with his tears, lay poor
Alexis, who, but the night before, was with his friend Dumont, received from
him the most affectionate marks of the liveliest friendship, and flattered
himself with the hope of embracing his father at the rising dawn. He had indeed
seen that cruel father, but far from being caressed, suffered his angriest
looks, and his malediction. Lo! what a change in his fate! Behold him alone,
left to himself; fatherless, friendless, destitute; life an odious burden to
him; he yields it up to the mercy of ferocious animals, of robbers, and already
blesses the hand of the cruel being that will take it from him.

He had just closed his reflections, and the salutary balm of sleep was
beginning to lull his senses, and make him lose the remembrance of his ills,
when he was alarmed by loud shrieks, and could distinguish a voice, crying, "O
heavens! will you kill me? Have pity on my tender years." Alexis jumps up, the
voice affects him, he thinks he knows it, and flies to the spot from which the
moans proceed. Horrible sight! Will his heart be able to bear it? A youth,
covered with blood, whom a ruffian dragged by the hair, implored his
assistance, It Is Clara, cried Alexis -- rushing upon the barbarian, he rescues
her. The wretch* foaming with rage, draws a pistol from his pocket, and is
about to fire it, when Alexis, springing upon him, wrested the weapon from his
hand, and shoots him dead.

Clara, who had fainted, no sooner opened her eyes than she recognized her
deliverer. "Is it you? you to whom I owe my life? O unexpected happiness!" --
"But, Clara," said Alexis, "where is Germain?" -- "About twenty yards farther,
and dangerously wounded." -- "Let us fly to him."

They found the old man upon the ground weltering in his blood. "Is it you,"
said he, "is it you, my Clara? what deity restores you to my wishes?" -- "Here
he is Germain I know my defender; it is Alexis!" -- "What, that young man?" --
"The same." -- "O generous stranger! how great are my obligations to you! I
shall restore a daughter to a father; through you I shall die contented." --
"You die!" replied Alexis, "let me not lose the benefit of the service I have
been so fortunate to render you." -- "Give me your hand then," said Germain,
"and deign to crown this heroic seat, by accompanying us to the virtuous
Candor, to whom we are equally dear."

Alexis and Clara helped Germain to rise, and stopped his blood with their
handkerchiefs. His wound was not dangerous; he had only a slight contusion upon
his shoulder, and a great loss of blood alone had weakened him. The two young
people, with some difficulty, assisted him to mount his horse; Clara got up
behind him, and thus, followed by Alexis, they proceeded to the next village,
which they reached by daybreak.

Upon the road, Clara informed her young deliverer, that she and Germain,
having lost their way, and being sensible they had rode farther than the
distance from Romans to their cottage, they fell in, about twenty yards from
the little wood, with a robber, who demanded their money, or their lives; that
the wretch had fired a pistol at Germain, and she having told him that she was
a woman, he dragged her to the place where he received the punishment due to
his crimes. She added that if any thing could comfort her in this cruel
accident, it was to have met with a friend so high in her esteem, and who
hereafter would be the friend of her father and his old servant.

Alexis returned thanks for her concern, and our three travelers reached St.
Marcellin, a pretty little town, where Germain remembered he had been many a
time. They would have done better had they gone straight to La Perriere, a
village on this side the town; but quite unacquainted with the road, they
strayed so much from the high way, that having gained the right shore of the
Iser they were obliged to travel two leagues farther in order to reach St.
Marcellin.

It was there Germain had his wound dressed, and finding he had strength
sufficient to ride farther, he engaged his young companions to repair instantly
with him to the cottage, where Candor would probably be alarmed at their
absence. Clara longed to see him. Alexis seared his presence, from his
invincible timidity, for he was still dismayed at the cold reception which
Germain had given him: He was afraid lest Clara's father should treat him in
the same manner, and could not help appearing trembling before him; but
Candor's daughter cheered his spirits; and having set out all three, they came
in sight of a dark forest, situated between St. Marcellin, St. Etienne, and
Romans. This forest, which is about ten leagues in extent, and is renowned for
robbers, and the precipices dispersed throughout it, seemed to be the marked
spot of celestial vengeance. Its dense and lofty trees were continually
shivered by the lightning, and blasting winds spent their rage upon it without
intermission. Every appearance denoted horror and dread.

It was, however, in the center of this dismal place, where Candor and his
daughter had chosen their abode. It was there they had erected their cottage,
and fortified it against surprise; but I ought not to anticipate a description
which will be given hereafter. Let us, for a moment, follow our three
travelers, who will soon reach their mansion, and receive the embraces of a
father who will become the father of my hero.

Clara, always behind the old man, held Alexis by the hand, who, like a
faithful squire, walked on foot by her side. They had by this time traveled
about four leagues through the bushes and hedges of the vast forest, when they
descried in a dale a little fortress which Alexis surveyed with astonishment.
Here Clara, gently pressing the youth's hand, with a smile, said to him --
"There, do you see the cottage?"

CHAP. III.
ALEXIS IS RECEIVED IN THE COTTAGE. -- THE LATTER DESCRIBED. -- CHARACTER OF
ITS INHABITANTS. -- ALEXIS RELATES HIS ADVENTURES.

THE COTTAGE.
"THERE, do you see the cottage?" it is there we live, and there it will depend
on yourself to live with us." -- "Ah! Clara," said Alexis, "What a delicious
abode! how blessed would be my lot if your father, if Germain -- "

"Doubt it not, my lovely deliverer," answered Germain, "doubt it not, but
before you settle there, ponder well what you are about to do; to renounce the
world is the question, and at your age -- "

"It is the very time I should renounce it," cried Alexis, "had I done it
before, I would not have suffered so much now."

"But have mankind already given you so much reason to detest them?" "Those who
were dear to me have betrayed me; what can I expect from strangers?"

"You perhaps consider them in a prejudiced light."

"Oh! I have but too much experience."

"But if you detest the men, do you also include in your hatred that noble half
of society, which assuages our sorrows, and which, by love, allays the grief
caused by friendship! women! will you fly them at eighteen?"

"Ah! I see them all in Clara."

"That Is right," replied she with vivacity; "as for me, I see all men in my
father, my good friend, and Alexis."

"Young people," pursued Germain, "be on your guard, beware of your hearts;
love in the midst of woods?"

"What do you mean," interrupted Clara, "what, should I love him? No, I am
concerned at his fate because he is unfortunate, and I owe him the gratitude
due to a deliverer."

"And I," said Alexis, "should be much wanting in duty, were I insensible of
her generous offer, and the manner she consoled me in my afflictions."

"Without doubt!" continued the old man, shaking his head; "friendship,
gratitude, they are all fine pretenses; come, come, march on." Such was their
conversation, when the cottage appeared before them; a fosse full of water
guarded its dominion all round to the bottom of a high and strong wall, which
encompassed a spacious yard, in the middle of which the little edifice stood. A
draw bridge that could be let down upon the fosse, defended the entrance
against the robbers who made the forest their abode.

Candor, alarmed at the long absence of his two tenants, had mounted the walls
at day break, and cast his wishful eyes upon the dreary expanse of the woods,
in which he feared same accident might have befallen them. Clara's father was
old and infirm, and scarce able to walk; but he no sooner descried his dear
guests from a distance, than he descended from the wall, leaned upon his staff,
and his heart leaping for joy, he let down the draw bridge, the levers of which
were made lighter by a counterpoise. He, however, expected his friends alone:
He saw three approach. He did not know the stranger who led Clara by the hand,
and to whom Germain spoke in so affectionate a manner. They had no
acquaintance; he himself in his solitude where he lived unknown had forgot all
mankind, who had also forgot him. Who then was the youth they brought? His
modest exterior, his sweet countenance, prepossessed him in his favor; but
after all, he could by no means recollect him.

The good Candor, in the midst of those reflections, saw our two cavaliers
alight before the premises. "O my father," said Clara, throwing herself into
his arms; "we have been on the point of never seeing you again!" -- "How, my
dear daughter?" -- "A villain," continued Clara, "has wounded Germain, and
would have taken away my life, but for the bravery of this traveller, who
delived me out of his clutches, and inflicted that punishment upon him, which
he so well deserved." -- "O my child: What! Germain?"

"Indeed," answered he, "we would both have been lost, without the poor Alexis,
this courageous youth: He is very unfortunate, my dear master; give me leave to
tell you how we met with him; and it will convince you of his virtuous
disposition, and his delicacy."

Here Germain gave Clara's father a minute account of all that had happened; he
mentioned first the conversation with Alexis in the valley of Romans, and
related every subsequent particular to the moment when they alighted before the
draw bridge of the cottage, dwelling chiefly upon the abrupt manner in which
Alexis had left them the night before, which he said, in his opinion, proceeded
from a sense of conviction that he would not take him with him; this he
mentioned as a proof of his sensibility and his nice feelings.

Our young hero was much embarrassed during this conversation: His head hung
down, his eyes were fixed upon the ground; he dared not lift them upon the old
man, whose reverend appearance increased his shyness; his heart was depressed
and he appeared as if ready to swoon. On the other hand, Clara made comments on
every thing that Germain said, in order to add to the praise, the eagerly
consulted her father's eyes to watch what impression the narrative would make
upon him.

When Germain had done speaking, Candor paused a moment, and then, addressing
Alexis, who now trembled more than ever, "Young man," said he, "what is your
age?" -- "I shall soon be eighteen." -- "Eighteen, and so much virtue, such
misfortunes, and such courage! Do you wish to live with us? come, you are too
timid, speak, I love the unfortunate; they have a claim upon my heart."

"Generous man!" cried Alexis, "what concern he gives me!"

"Will you then renounce society and fly all social intercourse?"

"Why, are not all men false, wicked, and treacherous?"

How well he knows them! "But, my young friend, I cannot receive you into my
house, unless you give me an open and candid account of your misfortunes and
situation: I wish also to know if your reasons for quitting society are solid
and consistent?"

"They are, and shall be forever!"

"Well, people at your age are generally of a different way of thinking: But at
mine they are prudent and consistent. The man who would leave me at the first
opportunity, shall have no access to my house."

"I will never leave you, my father, no, never."

Father! how he moves me! alas, my son would now have been as old as he! his
frankness! I saw him expire before my eyes; unfortunate child!

Here, Candor wiped the tears which trickled from his eyes, and, resuming his
former firmness -- "Come, Alexis, come, accept a shelter offered by friendship,
but remember that this gate which is going to be shut will never open for you
again."

Alexis kissed the hand of his benefactor, and Clara was transported with joy,
and all four passed over the draw bridge, which flew up suddenly behind them.
Now our hero had a distinct view of the cottage, which the high walls that were
its defense, had hitherto concealed from him.

The building was square, consisted of freestone, and was but one story high,
without ornaments, without the beauties of architecture, it contained every
domestic convenience. Below was a kitchen, and an oven to bake the bread, etc.
The first floor contained two commodious apartments, the one inhabited by
Candor, the other by Clara. Above it were two little rooms occupied by Germain,
and the remainder supplied the place of a granary, where grains and pulses were
drying in summer, to be the family provision in the winter. The apartments
contained no other furniture than a bed, a table, and some chairs. -- In that
belonging to Clara, stood a very fine harpsichord, on which she had learned to
play, as we shall find hereafter, and which diverted her leisure, and served to
dissipate Candor's melancholy thoughts.

On the left hand, in the yard, was a stable for their horse, and a large box
containing all the implements required for husbandry and gardening: On the
right, rain water was let in from the fosse into a pond, which supplied the
drink of our hermits, after they had clarified it.

Behind the building, all within the enclosure was a kitchen garden, cultivated
by Germain and Clara, in which they sowed all kinds of vegetables and other
garden stuff, which they purchased at St. Marcellin. They had plenty of peace,
beans, potatoes, etc. which was provision for them all the year round, for they
eat no other meat than fowls, which they had in plenty in their little yard,
situated toward the left wing of the building. These particulars show us that
they did not want for necessaries, and from the account Candor shall give of
his misfortunes, we shall see how he could procure them. Let us now return to
Alexis.

When Clara and Candor had shown him the cottage, the old man made him step
into a parlor, and requested him, previous to his assigning him a room, to
relate the story of his infancy. "My son," said he, "be true, hide nothing, nor
even palliate your faults; you have undoubtedly committed some, especially at
your age; you would not else be human; I shall excuse them if they do not
spring from the heart. Speak and be candid."

Alexis complied, and Germain, who unsaddled the horse while they were walking
round the premises, having joined them again, our young hero thus commenced the
story of his misfortunes, which will prove, especially to fathers of families,
how careful they should be in the choice of a PRECEPTOR FOR THEIR CHILDREN.

"I cannot tell you," began Alexis, "the place of my birth, nor my father's
name, as both have always been a secret to me. As far as I am able to
recollect, I was in my tender infancy, in the arms of a good old woman, whom I
used to call (...), but who, I was informed afterward, was nowise related to
me, yet she did not tell me who were my real parents. That good woman had the
care of my education till I was ten, and received punctually every month, by an
unknown hand, a considerable sum for my board. Under her care I learned to
read, to write, to cast accounts, and the first elements of dancing and music,
studies which I continued at college, where she told me one day, she had orders
to conduct me; we then lived at Paris, in rus de la Chasse.

"Mrs. Delys (this was the name of my good governess) was in affluent
circumstances; she had been left a widow for upwards of sixteen years, by her
husband, an officer of the horse, who had bequeathed to her an annual income of
two thousand crowns: She had resolved to spend her life in a solitary part of
the metropolis, far from company, which had become baleful to her, since the
death of a beloved son, who fell in a duel, by the hands of a friend, in
consequence of a quarrel. Though ten years had elapsed since his death, his
mother still bewailed him daily, would receive no kind of visit, and spent her
time in talking to me about the virtues of her poor Delys, the treachery of his
friend, and the falsity of men. Thus she talked to me, a child incapable of
understanding, and still less of comforting her. How she would weep! I wept
with her without knowing why, and we mingled our tears. You see that the first
dawn of my life spent in sadness, has not a little contribued to give me a
gloomy, fretful, and anxious disposition.

"I asked her many times with regard to my parents, and blamed her for her
obstinacy in concealing them from me; her answer was that she herself did not
know them; that she educated me to oblige her husband's brother, who knew them,
and kept it a secret; that all she knew was, that I ought to look upon my
existence as fatality, and that the history of my birth, should it ever come to
my knowledge, would inspi^e me with horror, and make me wretched for life. To
be sure, all this was not very pleasing; on the other hand, Mrs. Delys spoke
with such warmth on the subject, that I might well suppose I was related to her.

"I never went any where but to church. Thither I was always conveyed in a
carriage, the glasses of which Mrs. Delys took great care to shut every time.
In a word, being so much hidden from the world, and shut up as it were in a
box, that nobody should see me, I conceived the whole in an ominous light, and
according to my little way of arguing, I could foresee nothing but fatality on
account of such a conduct.

"One day, Mrs. Delys took me privately into her apartment, telling me, with
tears in her eyes, "My dear friend, you are to leave me! we must part, my sweet
child." -- "Must we part, madam?" -- "You cry, you are sorry to part, so am I;
but it must be: But I am not sufficient to complete your education. You are
born, should the decrees of fate relent in your favor, to hold, some day, an
important rank in society." -- "I am told so," answered I, "I must yield to
necessity." -- "You are to go," continued Mrs. Delys, "to a college, to receive
a complete university education; then, I know not how fate will dispose of you
-- but, come, my lovely child, submit and never forget, in your new abode, the
virtuous principles which I have endeavored to inculcate in your breast; have
never too intimate a connection with your colleagues, and mistrust their
caresses as you would their hatred: Alas! he that bereft me of my son, was his
fellow student -- adieu! they are coming to fetch you. Mr. Dumont, as abbe of a
respectable character, is chosen by your parents to have you under his care; he
is to live with you; in a word, consider him as your preceptor, but as a
faithful friend; make him your confidant; he is, I believe, a worthy man."

"I remained motionless at this discourse, and when Mrs. Delys had done, I let
flow my tears, in freedom; I threw myself at her feet, and solicited to remain
with her, when my new mentor entered, and by his appearance, chilled me with
terror.

"Mr. Dumont was about forty, tall, slender, and lean; but his countenance,
which bore the stamp of brobity and frankness, dispelled my fear, and made me
approach him by degrees.

"This, sir, is he," said Mrs. Delys, "the poor child! you see how he regrets
me!" -- "That he ought, madam," answered Mr. Dumont, politely, "but will you
not sometimes come and see him?" -- Oh! very often." -- "Well, you should both
seek comfort in reason; come, my little friend, come with me: I frighten you,
don't I? You may say so freely, but be assured, there is nothing dismal about
me, but my dress; you inspire me with too much concern that I should not love
you; I will be your friend, and believe me, should you unfortunately be kept
from your father, you will find a father in me."

This speech somewhat allayed my terrors: I stammered some thanks, and having
once more thrown myself into Mrs. Delys's arms, I followed Mr. Dumont who
affectionately laid hold of my hand, squeezed it, and conducted me to the
carriage. A servant whom I had never seen, put up and fastened my trunk on
behind, and my tutor gave me to understand that the same man was to wait upon
us at college.

The coachman drove fast, and set us down at the college of Navarre, a porter
came to open the gate and shut in immediately after us. It was then I felt my
heart beat, my knees tottered, and I felt indisposed. The abbe and my servant
carried me to the master's apartment, where I recovered, and saw myself
surrounded by pedants in black gowns, who with a supercilious mein, and
declamatory voice, said among themselves -- "This is the way of all the
children; how idleness and indolence work them; and then, you see, they are
spoiled by their parents at home, but that will not do here; the ferula must
cure them -- Well, my little master, are you better now? Never mind, never
mind. Today he shall have a holiday; he shall not study; is not that very
pretty? But tomorrow he must go to books, and show himself very docile, very
studious; will not you, my little man?"

"I made no answer; this black tribe almost frightened me out of my wits, and
but for Mr. Dumont, who seemed less ill natured than these, I think I should
have run away. I came thither like a lamb conducted to the slaughter house,
without knowing what was wanted of me, I let them talk and prepared myself for
all events.

My preceptor staid for a few minutes with the master, in another apartment,
and I was left alone trembling before three abbes, who asked me several
questions, which I did not answer. Soon they rose, and muttering among
themselves, I heard them say, "What a blockhead of a boy! Nay, he is bashful.
Bashful, no, it is stupidity: He will give us some trouble! But we will manage
him," etc.

Mr. Dumont shortly after returned to the apartment, and the master conducted
us to a spacious room, which he said was to be ours; he then retired, patting
me upon the cheek, and commanding me to be a very good boy. I had longed to see
him gone, in order to give vent to my sorrow; Mr. Dumont consoled me; dinner
was served, but I could not eat, and remained sad all day long.

Next morning Mr. Dumont put a Rudiments into my ^and, informed me that I was
to be received into a class. I performed what he bid me, although I did not
well understand what he said. At one o'clock Mrs. Delys came to see me,
exhorting me to assume that firmness which my new way of life would exact. Her
appearance recalled my sorrow, but at last she left me, and I took a resolution
to be steady.

"I began to accustom myself to Mr. Dumont's company; he was, in other
respects, gloomy and serious, and his temper bore the strictest conformity to
mine. I asked him one day if he knew my father, and if it was he who had placed
me under his care? He answered me with all the frankness which I had many
opportunities to remark in him afterward, that he was entirely ignorant of my
parents; that a man, supposed about thirty-five years old, who he saw
frequently at the house of a lady of his acquaintance, and who seemed to
entertain the liveliest concern for me, had asked him whether he would
undertake the education of the son of a friend of his, and having been answered
in the affirmative, he, Mr. Dumont, had been directed by the stranger to the
college of Navarre, and received the sum of twenty-five louis, with an
assurance that the expenses of board, etc. should be punctually paid. -- "Be it
as it will," added Mr. Dumont, "I am much induced to believe that man to be
your father, because you are a perfect likeness of him." -- I begged him to ask
of that lady, the first time he should see her again, the name and quality of
the person whom he supposed to be my father. He promised to comply with my
request, but unfortunately that woman, who alone could give us information, set
out that very day for a long journey, from which it appears she is not yet
returned, for I never heard of her afterward.

"In a little time I made amazing progress under so worthy a preceptor, who
found out the way to gain my entire confidence; but what ingratiated him most
with me, was the conversation we had frequently together on subjects of
morality. It is to him I owe the faculty of thinking, reflecting, and
reasoning. How valuable were his lessons! I shall remember them forever.

"Men had so much deceived him that he placed no trust in them, and he gave me
on that head the most wholesome advice, which I have since learned to put in
practice. -- Thus would he argue, pray be attentive and I have no doubt but you
will agree with me, that he was not mistaken.

"There is no medium," he would say, "in society. You must deceive; you must be
deceived, or cringe. To dazzle others, to give one's self titles, estates,
qualities, or virtues which one has not, to flatter the ways of another, this I
call to deceive. If you desire to gain the favor of the great, you must imitate
their vices, or at least feign to imitate them. If they are libertines, you
must be a libertine too; if they gamble, you must gamble; if they drink, you
must drink, else you are insupportable high minded, infected with prejudice,
unengaging, unsociable, etc.

"You must be deceived, when listening to the big talk of those who have done
all, seen all, and are capable of all! You are allured by the bark, without
examining whether the heart of the tree is not worm-eaten. You confide in them,
you open your heart to them: They abuse your confidence on purpose to undo you,
on purpose to draw you into their snares, from which you will frequently have
to extricate yourself at the expense of your honor, your fortune, and your
health.

"You find yourself obliged to cringe, when not being the dupe of the sottish
pride of some, and the vices of others, you conform to a certain degree with
their manner of living. It is then you create yourself a system of your own,
when you regulate your conduct, and adopt sweet and polite manners, and cease
to be their confidant. It is then people will observe you, for your wit, your
abilities, or your fortune, and will say, Mr. such-a one is no doubt amiable,
but he is a poor soul, that has no energy, no passions; it is a good thing, you
may make of him what you please, else he would be insufferable in spite of all
his probity.

"Necessity, pride, or indolence alone make the world cultivate your
friendship. Are you above it? It will flatter you. Are you beneath it? It will
protect you, as we call it. All you can expect from it is meanness and
humiliation. I shall say nothing of treachery, slanders, calumny, things which
make havoc in society. You must expect them, as soon as you set out in the
world. What interest, therefore, can make you desire it? None. The inference is
plain -- fly from it."

"Thus spoke Mr. Dumont, and his principles became engraven on my mind with
indelible force. Fond of solitude, and without acquaintance, we never went out.
On holidays only we took a walk in the fields, for he did not like those gaudy
places of resort, where luxury parades in idle expense, and attracts the vain
admiration of some, and the foolish desires others. We always took a book with
us, a book of morality, of the very serious, of the very sombre kind, which we
got by heart, and often spent whole hours in reflecting and commenting upon a
single phrase.

"How pleasing were those rural excursions! Happy times! I think I am still
upon these favorite spots; often we sat on the top of a hill to see the setting
sun, and struck with the sublimity of that august scene, we would say within
ourselves -- that almighty BEING that thus extinguishes the bright glory of the
day! how great must he be! Then casting our eyes upon the capital, we only
perceived the faint glimpses of the lamps that lighted it, and ruminated upon
the disorders committed there by the indolent and profligate. We were charmed
-- though we sighed -- with the happy quiet arising from the simplicity and
innocence of our pleasures.

CHAP. IV.
ALEXIS CONTINUES HIS ADVENTURES. -- CHARACTER OF DUMONT. -- ALEXIS FINDS HIS
FATHER. -- AN INTERVIEW.

THE MAN IN A MASK.
BY this time I had been three months at the college of Navarre, and received
no other visit than that of Mrs. Delys, who came to see us sometimes. She
became very intimate with Mr. Dumont, and we made a mutual exchange of books,
which were our only pleasure. Uncertein if I should ever discover my parents, I
armed myself with patience, and was contented with my lot, when one day my man
Vincent informed Mr. Dumont, that a gentleman in an elegant carriage had just
alighted, and wished to speak to him in private. My preceptor goes to meet him
-- both enter another apartment, and wait together about an hour. So long an
interview began to make me uneasy, but Mr. Dumont joined me, and said in a
whisper, with great appearance of joy, "This is the person who entrusted me
with your education, and whom I suppose to be your father. He was just given me
fifty more louis d'ors for your second quarter, and desires you to take a
dancing, a drawing, and music-master. Oh! he will bring you up a little prince!"

"Ah, sir," interrupted I, "cannot I see him?" -- "This is what I asked,"
answered he, "but he much objected against that favor; at last he complied, on
condition of his putting on a mask before he enters: No doubt he does it to
hide that striking resemblance, which, as I have already observed, there is
between you."

"Oh!" cried I, "let him appear as he likes -- let me but see him! Let me bathe
his feet with my tears."

"Stop, stop," said Dumont, "be moderate, and save appearances."

Mr. Dumont left me, and returned a moment after with the stranger, who had
actually masked his face.

"You must grant, my amiable friends, that I was much disconcerted at such a
moment. What countenance could I keep! No doubt I was to wait till he should
speak to me first. Nevertheless, I could hardly forbear throwing myself into
his arms -- and you shall hear the whole account of a scene so interesting to
me, and which, as long as I live, shall be engraved on my memory. I saluted the
unknown person with respect, and he beckoned me to be seated. Vincent gave us
chairs, and left the apartment, I perceived that the man in a mask was
tottering, and agitated by a trouble, which it was in vain for him to conceal.
At last he sat down, and began to examine me; I could collect from the heaving
of his breast that his heart was beating, and that he could scarcely fetch
breath. All these tokens served to confirm my doubts, but, far more trembling
and moved than he, I dared not to look at him, or make the smallest gesture.
This dumb scene had lasted long, when Mr. Dumont, sensible that it affected us
too much, hastened to interrupt it with addressing himself to me.

"Alexis," said he, "this is the gentleman who is so good as to supply your
wants, and to have you educated." -- "Ah! sir, how kind in you." -- "Deserve it
by your docility and a close attention to Mr. Dumont's lessons." -- "Yes, sir,
nothing could have been a more convincing proof of the kindness of my parents
than a choice of so worthy a preceptor,' -- "Who told you," said the stranger,
"that Mr. Dumont has been chosen by your parents!" -- "Why, sir, have I no
parents?" -- "Unfortunate boy! may thou never know them!" -- "O heaven! you
know them well, you know them, sir?" -- "No questions, if you please." -- "Ah!
should you see my father, tell him -- tell him that his little Alexis cannot
live without embracing him, without falling at his feet! he seeks him through
nature ever since he was born; he calls aloud to him; he scrutinizes every eye,
every face -- but, alas! nobody has heard his cries." -- "unreasonable boy!
what would thou have?" -- "I Will see my father! I Will press him to my heart!"
-- "He cannot show himself to you, he cannot indeed!" -- "Is he, then,
barbarous, hard-hearted, inflexible? Ah, does not the voice of nature appeal to
his paternal breast? He is obliged to stifle her voice; nay, can he who loves
so well do it?" -- "You move me!" -- "You shed tears; ah, let me see them from
your respectable face. Throw away, pray throw away this deceitful mask; it does
not become the man of feeling; sir, here I lie at your feet; in pity no longer
conceal my father; I conjure you by your own, if he yet be living; I can see
your perplexity! Well, if you love him, if he is dear to you, you cannot
reprove my filial emotions! Alas, behold my tears, they fall; they overflow
your hand! you push my hand away; cruel, sir, what have I done to you? O my
God! all forsake me: Ah, all forsake me!"

Here I dropped upon the floor in an agony of grief. Mr. Dumont, moved by my
appearance, exhorted and entreated the stranger to put an end to my sufferings,
whilst the latter, who, with the liveliest emotions, was struggling, sobbing,
and looking at me, li^ted up his hands to heaven, and exclaimed, in a piercing
^one, "Oh! it is my fault! I would not -- Why have I seen him? Unfortunate
child!"

"But he relapsed again into silence, and when I saw that nothing could move
him, I became furious; in a moment my eyes were dry, and with a noble firmness
I made an effort to triumph over myself. In a tone of respect and assurance, I
said -- "Well, sir, I see you are fully bent on my despair. I know what
resolution is left for me. Since I have no parents who love me, I have nothing
to tie me to nature. What should I do? what fate awaits me? Shame, misfortune,
and ignominy. But I am resolved to die, and rid my family of a burden, which I
am sorry to see they find too heavy for them. Farewell, sir, farewell Dumont, an
everlasting farewell.

"Whither would you?" cried the stranger, holding out his hand to me, "Do you
know that your death would cause the death of your father? -- "Ah! it is you,"
I exclaimed, throwing myself into his arms. "What does he say?" -- "It is you,
yes, it is you, I am sure: Nature has spoke, you are my father." -- "Leave me,
my son -- O! how could I utter this word?" -- "My son! Welcome, charming name,
that for the first time salutes my ears, how sweet art thou to my heart!"

Here my father took off his mask, presenting to me a noble, interesting
countenance, overflowing with tears. He takes me into his arms, presses his
ardent lips to mine, and retains me in his embrace for some minutes. Sweet
pressure of paternal tenderness! I had never ^elt you before! how dear were
these embraces! I wept, laughed, and committed a thousand extravagances, and we
were all three like distracted persons. I say all three, for Mr. Dumont, whom
this scene had moved to tears, who shared our sadness, now shared out joy; in a
word, we were in a manner electrified at the same instant by various
sentiments, which glided through our frame with the greatest rapidity.

After my father had given vent to his sensibility, he made us again sit down,
and addressed me thus: "My son, I have had the strongest motives to remain
unknown to you, and still preserve them. You have just torn from me a secret
which ought to have died with me. But I shall not repent if you promise to obey
the laws I am now to prescribe to you. In the first place, I forbid you to ask
me the least question respecting my name and quality. It may suffice you to
know that you are born a nobleman, in order to prevent you from committing an
action unworthy of your descent: But I cannot tell you who I am -- my life and
your own would soon be at stake. In the second place, I forbid you to follow
me, or express the smallest curiosity to know me farther. Should I find you
guilty of this. I shall abandon and never see you again. These laws astonish
you, I can believe; but I am compelled to prescribe them. Alas! you have made
my life the summit of human wretchedness. It is your birth that has made me
commit a crime the most -- do not urge me to proceed; you would punish my
imprudence! I will visit you -- I will write to you, but never, never, shall
you know my name! As for you, Mr. Dumont, I need not exact of you the same
circumspection of conduct. You are an honest man: I am sure of it. The person
at whose house I became acquainted with you has given me an account of your
misfortunes. They do you credit. Adieu, my son; be assured that I shall never
forsake you, and shall ever watch over you and your education."

Mr. Dumont and I gazed on this astonishing man, who laid upon us such singular
injunctions; and, unacquainted with his misfortunes which inspired us with the
most lively concern, we judged them to be of the most afflicting kind, as he
had deprived himself so long of the sight of a son, who seemed to engross his
tenderness, and to whom, even when caressing him, he dared not to reveal either
his name or his rank.

At length he rose to leave us, and after bestowing upon me fresh caresses and
tokens of tenderness, he pulled out of his fob a most valuable watch,
ornamented with diamonds; "Here," said he, "my Alexis, let this put you in mind
of our first interview," -- "O heaven! what do you propose? I do not want so
rich a gift." -- "Take it, I say, think on me when the clock strikes ten!" --
"What do you mean?" -- "Tremble to hear one day the explanation of this
mystery."

With these words he left us, struck dumb with this second trait of his
character; but at last the pleasure of having found my father made me forget
every thing else, and I only wished to prove my submission to him, by making
rapid advances in the path of knowledge under the auspices of Mr. Dumont. It
was lucky Vincent had not seen this scene; we were resolved to conceal it from
him, to prevent his making such inquiries to know my father, as we would not
have attempted ourselves, so much did we wish to comply with the orders he had
given me.

Mr. Dumont was not mistaken in having been told that I was so much like my
father: I was indeed his very portrait, and upon recollection, I remember to
have seen him many times next me when I went to church with Mrs. Delys. There
being always a great number of people in our seat, I took no particular notice
of him, though undoubtedly he came there on purpose to see me. Mrs. Delys did
not, or feigned not to know him, for I never saw her speak to him.

The notion he had to enter my apartment in a mask was not very fit to remove
all suspicions from my mind; for supposing the scene had not terminated as it
did, it is plain I would have asked him why he appeared before me in disguise.
Perhaps he then would have been much at a loss for an answer; but in my
confusion I did not think of it.

The valuable jewel which I had received from my father, as a present, was so
fine, so new to me, that I spent the whole day in examining and making my
repeater sound; Mr. Dumont all the while chiding me for my puerile conduct,
though he could not help admiring the size and brilliance of the diamonds,
which were very large. This confirmed us more and more in the idea that my
father was a great lord. When I opened the case to examine the work, we were
much surprised to find these words on the back plate -- THE GIFT OF LOVE, A. D.
1730. But what increased our astonishment was, to see that the words had been
scratched out on purpose, so that it was rather difficult to read them. I did
not know what to make of it then, but Mr. Dumout drew some very probable
inferences from it, which may probably occur to your minds, if you are pleased
to reflect.

Winding up my watch at night, I observed in was ten. That very moment my
father's words returned to my mind; Think on me when the clock strikes ten! I
felt a cold sweat all over my body; my heart was depressed, I knew not why; I
went to bed, my eyes swimming in tears. During the night, I was tormented by
ominous dreams. I saw my father pierced with stabs, stretching out his hand to
me, etc. All these phantoms, the creatures of the suspicions I entertained when
I went to bed, vanished when I awoke. I informed my tutor of them, who railed
at my credulity, and wholly dissipated my terrors. Nevertheless, every night
when I wound up my watch, if unluckily I perceived the hour of ten, I felt an
involuntary emotion which I could not account for. These mysterious expressions
of my father had indeed some meaning. The manner in which he dwelt upon them
when he uttered them, his tone of voice, in short, every thing proved it; but I
never could comprehend their meaning, and am still ignorant of it. Perhaps one
day if I am able to unravel my adventures. I may comprehend them and the
misfortune I have to dread.

In compliance with my father's desire, next day I hired proper masters to
teach me drawing, music, and dancing, and cultivated these arts, I may say,
with some success.

Three months elapsed before my father returned to see me. What joy did I feel
when Mr. Dumont brought me the news! I flew to meet him, and pressed him in my
arms. He embraced me closely, called me his dear, his little Alexis; then made
me repeat the lessons I had received since his absence, and was charmed with my
progress. Every moment he would say -- He will resemble his mother, he will
inherit all her accomplishments. I had too much respect to ask him any
questions about his secret, questions which might have grieved him, and I saw
with pleasure that he judged me worthy of the care he took of my education.

He made another payment of fifty louis d'ors to Mr. Dumont, requesting him to
entertain me with theatrical performances, to bring me into the world, and
above all never to speak of the secret of my birth. He also made me several
useful and valuable presents, for which I returned him my sincerest thanks. He
was about to leave me, when I pulled out my watch, to tell him it was not late,
and persuaded him to stay a little longer; on this he took my hand, and said to
me, in a tender voice, "My dear son, you cannot think too much upon me when the
clock strikes ten." For this time I could hardly refrain my curiosity. I was
bold enough to ask him, what happened to him at that hour? -- "I work for thee,
my dear Alexis -- alas, what was I going to say? -- My son, I once begged of
you -- Let this be your last question."

I made a thousand apologies for my imprudence. My good father forgave me,
pressed me to his heart, and promised to come and see me again in three months'
time.

What a singular character! Are you not surprised, my worthy friends, at so
extraordinary a conduct? It surprised Mr. Dumont and me highly, but we were
obliged to keep silence. It was enough of happiness for me to see my father,
and receive his tender caresses.

Five years elapsed, during which I made considerable improvement in my
classics, and in the fine arts. My father came regularly to the college every
three months, and always left us money and presents; being himself an excellent
scholar, he sometimes would condescend to examine me upon the sciences, and
seemed always charmed with my answers. He would then congratulate Mr. Dumo^t,
and entreat him to persevere in his zeal. He, however, never omitted exhorting
him to procure me amusement, and to introduce me to the polite world: He found
in me, he said, a gloomy temper, an awkward air, and little of the fine
manners. My tutor promised to do every thing, but he performed little or
nothing at all. Pleasures and company were quite averse to his character, and
he was scrupulous in meddling with them. I shall soon relate the history of my
setting out for the circles of the fine world. I have now to impart to you an
odd prediction, to which I gave no credit, though it would much astonish me,
were it to turn out a true one. My father had so often told me to think on him
when the clock struck ten, that one day I was resolved to try to find out, if
possible, the sense of this enigma.

There was at the college gate a poor beggar, about forty years of age, all in
rags, but with a handsome face, who passed for a conjurer. All the students had
consulted him, and all had left him, surprised at his talents of divining the
past, and foretelling the future. The master of the college had ordered him to
be driven away twenty times, but he always returned, and found a livelihood in
the presents made to him by the curious. While Mr. Dumont was walking one day
in the yard with some of the professors, I seized this occasion to bring the
pauper into my room. The great iron gate was open; and the porter, busy with
something or other, had not seen him come in; every thing crowned my wishes.

Having closeted myself with him, I began to ask him, "what countryman are
you?" -- "From Bourgen Bresse." -- "What business did you follow?" -- "A very
dangerous and ungrateful one, that of a soldier." -- "Have you served?" --
"Yes, and honorably, my good gentleman; I have here eight wounds, which will
prove it." -- "And you must now go a begging?" -- "Why, it is not the man who
fights for his country that grows rich; it is he that keeps it down." -- "Very
true." -- "Don't you see that the little ones have the greatest trouble, and
the great earn the largest benefits." -- "Thou art a clever, judicious fellow."
-- "Good sense is a gift of nature, and judgment the result of experience." --
"Very good! pray how did you learn to tell fortunes?" -- "This is our business
in garrisons; there we find people who have been all over the world, who have
seen all nations on earth, and one picks up instruction by another." -- "Well,
a person dear to me, when he gave me this watch, said, and has repeated the
same words since, Think on me when the clock strikes ten! Could you now tell me
what he does at that hour?" -- "To be sure, my kind gentleman; lend me this
jewel."

"I trusted the watch into his hands. He suddenly began to be pensive, to
write, to make calculations, and at the expiration of one hour, with a
prophetic voice, which upon any other occasion would have made me laugh, said
to me, "This watch you have received from a man, who received it from a woman,
and that man is in confinement every night at ten o'clock, in a prison, which
he does not quit till next morning."

Though similar divinations received no great belief from me, I could not help
trembling at these dreadful words; and such was my rage that I was very near
ill treating the beggar, for having pronounced a sentence so unwelcome to me. I
composed myself, however, and entreated him to discover how he had been able to
guess that? The man, anxious to find an opportunity of making a brilliant
display of his knowledge, made the following harangue:

"To us every thing is cabalistical: A watch, a pocket book, a ring, every
thing has signs which are always the same, and upon which we lay various and
different constructions, according to the circumstances. A watch is the symbol
of life. One o'clock is the instant of birth, and always implies blindness,
suffering, joy mixed with pains, insensibility, fickleness, etc. Two o'clock
marks the age of six. It is carelessness, levity, caprice, contempt of the
great, oblivion of troubles, and content. Three o'clock refers to the age of
nine. It means thinking, troubles, tears, uneasiness, labor, etc. I could thus
explain all the hours, one after another, but I should confine myself to the
sign of ten o'clock, which is the age of three score and three. It signifies
heaviness, ice, prison, fetters, etc. Or, every hour has another wherewith it
forms a contrast. The opposite to ten is six, which is the age of eighteen, the
age when we break the bands of childhood, and where the passions appear with
impetuosity. That signifies elopement, delivery, transitory happiness, lively
pleasure, but of short duration, and poisoned by remorse or the fear of
futurity.

"From this explanation, you may collect, that had you known my secret, you
would have guessed this enigma as well as myself. Divide the hours into three
years each, and thus proceed to midnight, which is the period, or death. Make
them refer to the moral actions of every epoch of life, and you will guess all.
Your man is in affliction at ten at night: I mean, he is restrained, fettered,
imprisoned: And as every crisis has a period, and every hour a contrast, thus
he leaves his confinement at six in the morning."

I could not help laughing at this strange fustian of my prophet, and seeing me
so merry, he was on the point of being angry, and would give me another
specimen of his abilities. He made some grimaces, examined my hands, my eyes,
my features, and finished with telling me, that I should one day become very
rich, very powerful, very happy, etc. that I should be married to a fine woman
whom I had loved a very long time, but that all this was not to come to pass
before I had undergone a great deal of adversity. -- "Well, my friend,"
answered I, "I receive your prediction; go, and if ever I am happy, thou shall
be happy too." -- "You think I am in joke," pursued the diviner, "but be sure
if I am so fortunate as to discover the truth of my augury, you shall see me at
your door."

I sent him away laughing, and upbraiding myself for my foolish curiosity.

CHAP. V.
ALEXIS CONTINUES TO RELATE HIS ADVENTURES. -- HIS SETTING OUT IN THE WORLD.

SENTIMENTAL WALKS.
IN the mean time I grew up, and every day added something to my
accomplishments; but of what use were they to me? Music, in which I was a
tolerable adept, far from having those charms which every other person finds in
it tired and wearied me. I had no opportunity to display it. I went to no
concert, not even to a play, and was reduced to sing such solitary airs as Mr.
Dumont chose to place before me.

He painted society in such odious colors, that I was far from begging him to
introduce me any where; our sole amusement was to walk in the country. We
always reaped some advantage from these excursions; nothing to us was an object
of indifference, and we made comments upon every little incident that presented
itself.

One day we returned from Belleville, by a path leading through the fields; the
sun was sunk beneath the horizon, and the disk of the moon proclaimed the
empire of night. We perceived a young man behind a bush at some distance from
our path, sighing and uttering such loud complaints as reached our ears. We
could plainly see him hold a pistol, which he loaded with apparent haste, and
applied it repeatedly to his mouth. At first we were apprehensive for
ourselves, but finding that the stranger did not perceive us, and was
apparently struggling in deep despair, we yielded to compassion. We approached
the hedge slowly, and could hear him utter these words, in a distracted manner,
with a low voice, interrupted with sighs -- "Let me finish! Let this moment
terminate my sufferings! I have lost my all! Death is but a slumber, I will
sleep then, and suffer no more."

These expressions roused the indignation of my Mentor: He plainly saw that the
man was a materialist, and he detested that impious sect. Yet pity, and a
desire of reclaiming him to reason, determined him to convince him of his
error, if possible, and save his life. "Ah! sir, what are you doing?" cried he,
discovering himself; can you entertain so bad an opinion of yourself and of the
Being that made you?"

The stranger, surprised at the sudden apparition of a priest and a young man,
was struck, but composing himself, answered Mr. Dumont -- "What is my way of
thinking to you? Are you, sir, to answer for me? Let us be short, I have no
time to dispute with you, I must get rid of my life, I must." "What prompts you
to so rash a deed?" -- Every thing; distress and a total want of resources." --
"At your age do you despair of providence." -- "Mere words." -- "Very
efficacious words. But what impels you to a deed so unworthy of a man of
courage? Your exterior shows that it is not distress?" -- "It is nothing else,
I assure you." -- "Young man, be calm, disclose your heart. My profession shall
be the pledge of my discretion and probity. Relate your misfortunes."

"What can it avail?" -- "I may, perhaps, be of some service to you; hear me,
you are unfortunate, I have been the same, and the boy whom you see here has
been unfortunate, and his situation perhaps is worse than yours! Come, my dear
friend, give me the pistol, and take my hand: Sit down by your two friends upon
this rising turf! I am concerned for you; how happy should I be if I could --
but -- this is the murdering weapon. Away with the instrument of celestial
wrath, I will have you to live."

Dumont, with this, threw away the pistol which the young man had given him,
and both sat down on the turf: I followed them shivering, and within myself
taxed my preceptor with imprudence. Acquainted as I was with his mistrustful
disposition, he now surprised me, and his humanity alone pleaded for him."

The stranger related a series of adverse incidents, which I shall not
recapitulate, and concluded, that having been secretary to one count
D'Ereville, he had been dismissed in a disgraceful way through the treachery of
a friend, and was of course without shelter or resources. Mr. Dumont, quite
moved at his story, consoled him, made a tender of his services, and gave him
from his purse a louis d'or. The stranger thanked him in the warmest manner.
This gratitude touched me, and I was preparing to bestow the same favor upon
him: But, judge my surprise! At the sight of the gold, which seemed to dazzle
his eyes, the villain turned quite pale, and in the rudest manner cried, "What,
do you confine your liberality to so trifling a gift? Why, have you not more
money? I insist upon having all." -- "O heavens, thou wretch!" -- "I am a
wretch, and capable of -- this instant give me what you have, or your life!"

Fear, surprise, and indignation overwhelmed our senses. We rose and looked
around, if any person could assist us; but the darkness of the place prevented
our seeing any thing, and we were defenseless. The wretch produced another
pistol, which he had no doubt provided for the purpose. What a situation was
ours! After having loaded him with reproaches we consented to give him our all,
but the ruffian seeing our watch chains demanded them also. Mine was too dear
for me to consent to lose it. This enraged me, I pulled out my knife, and
stepping backwards, "Traitor!" cried I, "thou shall not have it, without my
life." Mr. Dumont, encouraged by my behavior, rushed upon the robber, wrested
from his hands the pistol with which he threatened to blow out my brains. But I
know not how the matter would have ended, but for the unforeseen assistance
which heaven sent us in that extremity. A waggoner's whip, and the distant
rattling of a carriage suddenly struck our ears. This, which revived hope in
our breasts, gave such terror and dismay to our enemy, that he flew from us
across the plain, and thus delivered us from the danger we were in.

We now looked at one another for some time unable to utter a word; and in this
situation the waggoner found us. He looked at us, and, frightened at the ^ight
of the pistol which Mr. Dumont still held in his hand, asked us what we were
doing? "Ah, my friend," cried my tutor, "to you we owe our lives; a wretch had
just robbed us; I was strong enough to attack him and he made off on your
approach." The waggoner asked for the pistol, and endeavored to fire it in the
air, but to the surprise of us all it was not loaded. We then told him our
adventure, and entreated his company and protection until we should reach the
port St. Antoine. This he readily complied with, and we set out together, but
not without a mixture of uneasiness; for we were so disconcerted by the
treachery of the stranger, as every now and then to look around us, believing
him at our heels.

Having reached the port St. Antoine, we had it not in ^ur power to reward our
guide as we could have wished, having now not a farthing lest. Mr. Dumont gave
him our address, and desired him to come and see us next day; but whether from
modesty or disinterestedness, he never came, nor did we over afterward hear of
him.

When arrived at the college, Dumont said, "What a lesson! what a sad lesson,
my dear disciple! Such are men! Such are those traitors, those monsters of
ingratitude; they plunge a dagger in your breast the very moment you give them
assistance. After such conduct, oblige them! be humane, feeling, generous! You
see how they acknowledge our kindness!" -- "But, sir, are they all of that
disposition" -- "All, my dear youth; they do not positively attack you, pistol
in hand, as this ruffian has done, but they will slander you, they will asperse
your character, and defame you privately. One will without pity assassinate you
in one sense. This has no principle, no character, and of course no gratitude.
That is all warmth, all zeal, all heart: But by due inference, he has passions
which will break the tie that unites them to you.

"There are some who love you sincerely, who profess a real attachment to your
interest; with your friends they are your friends, but with your enemies they
will act as enemies. In company with the latter, they, by a motive of zeal will
defend you, but they gradually yield, and at length grant all that your enemies
have to say against you.

"Such is the return for obligations conferred. I am, however, of opinion, that
the generous heart should not be dismayed, if it meets with ingratitude; and
should make an effort of noble perseverance, and be an its guard. As for my own
part I ought not to have confided in the traitor who has thus (...) deceived
us. The first words I heard him utter were blasphemous. I ought to have
foreseen his villainy, for men without religion are not susceptible of virtuous
sentiments." -- "The pistol with which he threatened us was, however, not
loaded: He surely must have known that; it must have been the sight of our gold
alone that made him break through all bounds,"

"This is another fatal vice: The sordid passion hatched in an abject,
indelicate heart." -- "But, sir, extreme want? may it not sometimes -- " --
"Extreme want! No, my dear friend, never. An honest man suffers, sighs, and is
satisfied with the casual relief afforded by humanity and generosity. We may
also speak of society in regard to this vice. Be you ever so rich, ever so
liberal to the indigent who surround you they are never satisfied. They will
have you to strip yourself to serve them, or at least wish to be your equal.
Covetousness, ambition and avarice prey upon them; they become insatiable by
fresh favors conferred. You can scarcely expect from them the least gratitude."

All the advice given me by Mr. Dumont, was, like this, wise and tempered by
reflection. It crept into my mind and strengthened my resolution of shunning
all mankind, whom I considered in the worst possible light.

Here Alexis suspended his narrative in order to partake of the nourishment so
much wanted by the three travelers. Clara served up some boiled vegetables,
fruit, and a little milk, and the four sat down to a meal which health and
appetite rendered exquisite. When the meal was over Candor begged his young
guest to proceed with his story, which seemed great^y to interest him. They all
resumed their former places, and Alexis, after signifying that his adventures
were drawing to a conclusion, continued with such a grace and winning address,
as totally conquered the hearts of those who made him so kindly welcome.

Mr. Dumont conceived a project which he communicated to me. He was determined
to obtain every particular respecting the character of the man who frightened
us in the plains of Belleville; and his end for doing it, he said, was to
illustrate the better by example the moral lessons he had given me.

The stranger, in relating his history, had discovered that he had been
formerly secretary to count Ereville. This count had then his son at college,
and of all my fellow students, the young count was the only one with whom I was
intimate. I remarked in him no essential qualities, but he appeared less
degenerate than the rest. As I was a proficient in music, he had repeatedly
invited me to his father's house to hear his sister, who, he said, was a
capital performer on the piano forte. Mr. Dumont, feeling averse to my going
into company, had always rejected the polite offer of my young friend, but
curious to dive into our adventure at Belleville, he finally yielded to young
Ereville's solicitations, and we engaged ourselves for the first holiday: I
took with me some pieces of music, and with Mr. Dumont set out from the college.

It was about four o'clock when we arrived at the count's house. The servant
gave in our names, and introduced us to a hall sumptuously furnished, where, in
a circle of eight or ten cavaliers, we found it difficult to distinguish the
master of the house. The young count, however, presented us to his father and
mother, and the reception they gave us was certainly flattering. Soon after my
friend having informed them that I was a performer, they expressed a curiosity
to hear me. I objected for some time, and begged Miss D'Ereville to give us a
display of her talents, but as she refused I was obliged to comply. I sat down
and sung to my own accompaniment a kind of song, the words and music of which I
had composed. At the end of my song, the whole company bestowed on me such
compliments as I certainly did not deserve, and begged for a copy of my song,
which I promised. Miss D'Ereville, in her turn, performed, with a most
ungraceful air, a sonata of my master's composition, which the badness of her
performance could hardly make me distinguish. Notwithstanding, the whole
company clapped their hands, feigned great rapture, and bestowed the most
exaggerated praise on Miss D'Ereville; the little creature received them with
an air of self sufficiency, always preceding from those vain and high notions
which people conceive of their own merit.

The instruments were now laid aside, the visitors formed a circle, and the
conversation became general. "Is it not long," madame D'Ereville asked a young
officer, with a mean and haughty countenance, "Is it not long since you have
seen the chevalier D'A***?" "Long indeed," answered the officer, "I do not know
what becomes of him. He forsakes all his friends, which is shameful." "Love
decoys him from the bosom of friendship," replied a person who appeared the
president of the circle. "Well," answered a lusty abbe, "has he left his fille
D'Opera?" "O no!" continues an old baroness, quite loaded with diamonds: "they
live still together,. Is it not a most degenerate taste? He should at least
have paid his addresses to some woman of quality." -- "By the bye," says the
abbe "he is fit for the best company. "We know him better," answered the
officer. -- "How do you make that out?" asked madame D'Ereville. "How, do you
not know it," "No, I don't, pray tell me." -- "He is a bastard, he is, indeed,
he is the son of count D'A*** and a woman whose name has never been known." --
"What, are you sure of this, abbe?" -- "Very sure, he imparted it in confidence
to me." -- "How then came he by the title of chevalier?" -- O! his is a title
one may easily take." "Softly, abbe" replied the sparkling baroness, "he is
legitimated, his father took care of that." -- "He says so, perhaps." -- "O!
this is very true, I have been intimate for six months with the chevalier D'A
*** and have seen his diploma more than once." -- "Why, diplomas may be now got
easily." -- I cannot believe it, pursued madame D'Ereville! "The chevalier a
bastard! how could such a man be admitted into company! "Never mind that,"
answered the Dowager, "the ladies like him." -- "To be sure," answered the
countess, with a malicious sneer, "Those ladies that are plenty," -- "Why, he
makes his choice: that is something, however." -- "He does not take the
loveliest." -- "Oh, said the president, with a bitter smile, "He always takes
care that Plutus indemnifies him for the ill favor of nature." At this vulgar
bon mot, the whole company burst into laughter. The baroness only seemed to be
enraged, she rose, saluted the company, and departed. One after another left
the room in the same manner, and ill natured reflections were passed at the
expense of every one of them.

We carried away from this house ample matter for reflection, and began to
philosophize as soon as we reached the college.

"My dear disciple" said Mr. Dumont, "you have now seen company, and how do you
like it? -- "It appears so odious to me that I never wish to see it again." "I
shall forbear advising you on that head. The example which chance has furnished
you with, ought to make a sufficient impression upon your mind. I shall only
reflect upon the conduct of the young man, who used us so perfidiously on the
road to Belville, what do you think of him?" When I gave him my opinion, he
added a number of reflections on the subject, and advised me against keeping
company with young D' Ereville, of whom he had reasons now to form a very bad
opinion.

CHAP. VI.
A NOTE THE PRESAGE OF TROUBLE. -- ALEXIS QUITS THE COLLEGE. -- NEW SCENES. --
DUMONT IMPRISONED -- AFFECTING DISCLOSURE. -- ALEXIS MEETS HIS FATHER, WHO,
WITH DUMONT, LEAVES HIM.

LUXEMBOURG GARDENS, AND THE DUNGEON.
THUS the sage lessons of my master took firm root in my heart, and I, no doubt
for my welfare, acquired a reserved gloomy temper, which gave him the highest
satisfaction. He conceived so strong an attachment for me, as to promise to be
for life the companion of his dear Alexis, if irresistible fate should not
dispose otherwise.

My father came to see us regularly every three months, and let us want for
nothing. Mrs. Delys died several years before: I gave tears to her memory, but
at last regretted her no farther than a respectable friend, who had served me
as a mother in my infancy.

I was as happy as man can be, and hoped to enjoy my good fortune much longer,
when fate, jealous of my peaceful days, begun the series of my misfortunes, by
an event whose consequences seemed at first less terrible to me, than they
really proved afterward.

I was fifteen, and had soon to study philosophy, when one day Mr. Dumont
received a note, which, to my terror, he read to me:

SIR,
Please to come to night to the gardens of Luxembourg palace, and wait in the
All des Carmes, where something of a very urgent nature shall be communicated
to you Alone if you please, by eight o'clock.

Sept. 12, 1746.

Judge of my surprise! What could they want (...) Mr. Dumont? He had no
acquaintance. Who could be the writer of the note? What could be the urgent
business to be communicated to him? Was it my father, who -- but he could come
himself! What uneasiness! What cruel perplexity!

We waited with the greatest impatience for the end of the day, and although
the unknown person required Mr. Dumont to come by himself, I begged the latter
to permit me to accompany him, promising, to walk upon the terrace during the
time of their interview* but he was so delicate, so scrupulous, that he could
not consent to my proposal. In consequence, I let him depart, and waited for
his return, in an agitation which I could not suppress, and like a man that
waits for his doom.

He returned about nine o'clock, and the change I perceived in his countenance
made me utter a piercing cry. The tears he endeavored to withhold rolled down
his eyes, whose redness indicated that he had shed more; his voice was altered,
he fixed his eyes upon me with an emotion of tenderness, was going to speak,
but his tongue denied its office, and he could only press me in his arms.
"Well, sir," said I, "what tidings do you bring for me." "None that will vex
you," answered he, striving to conceal his grief. "Be of good cheer, if I shed
tears, it is only because your father is absent, and we must miss him for some
time." "What, my father?" -- "It was he; I have seen him! Mr. Dumont, said he,
I am obliged to go upon a very long journey -- take care of my poor Alexis! I
entrust him to you: Restore him to me at my return. Let me find him prudent,
modest, clever, and grateful! I set out, I tell you, upon a journey that will
last perhaps -- I cannot fix the period. I shall provide for you and him, but^^
insist upon his giving up his studies; let him quit the college of Navarre, and
keep yourself concealed in some obscure quarter of Paris, until I return. And
here your father could go no farther; he gave me this large sum, and departed,
recommending me the precious deposit with which he entrusted me."

Thus spoke Mr. Dumont, and I could not perceive in his countenance that air of
assurance so peculiar to him, which was always a sure token of truth. "You
deceive me," said I, "my dear preceptor, you conceal my misfortune! My father
abandons me forever!" -- "There again, always extreme, and never confiding, a
characteristic trait of yours! Why should he abandon you, have you deserved it?
-- Alas! -- Well, my Alexis, believe a friend who speaks to you, a friend who
cherishes and will never suffer to be parted from you -- no -- never!"

He uttered these last words with such an emotion of sensibility, that I threw
myself into his arms, and bedewed his breast with my tears. I could however
see, that he hid something from me, but I would importune him no farther,
persuaded that all his views tended to my happiness, and it required powerful
motives to make him feign.

The very next day we left the college, which I quitted without regret, and
rented an apartment in a house near the royal botanical garden. That lodging
was neither fine nor convenient; and Mr. Dumont observed that we ought to be
frugal, as my father, when at a distance, would not always find such easy means
to send us remittances. I asked if he had promised to write. No doubt, answered
he, can a father deny himself that comfort?

Mr. Dumont seemed always to dissemble, while my uneasiness became greater
still. Nevertheless I kept silence, and was determined to yield to the power of
fate.

From that very instant we changed our way of living: Vincent got his
discharge, and we hired a female servant who was to look after our domestic
concerns, and to dress our victuals. I also paid off and thanked my master; so
great, in short, was the change, that I firmly believed my father had abandoned
me. I made often this observation to Mr. Dumont, who would then be angry, and
always showed me certain sums of money, which he said were brought him by some
unknown person

This a whole year elapsed, during which I continued my studies under Mr.
Dumont, who was an excellent scholar. I begun to be a little easier; I had the
same occupation and the same pleasures as before; that is to say, we took
frequent wal^s in the fields, and visited almost daily the royal botanical
garden in our neighborhood, which we sound very pleasant. The little wood in
the center and the marshes which encompass the walls, reaching as far as the
river, gave it such a rural and solitary aspect, as made it, in my opinion, the
finest garden in Paris.

During the second year of our residence in the same lodgings, Mr. Dumont began
to cause me a most cruel uneasiness. He went out for the whole day, and only
came to see me at meal hours, and at night, which time he employed to correct
my exercises. He still continued tender and friendly, but his confidence and
assiduity were much lessened; for my own part, I did not know where he went, as
he seemed to make it a mystery, I dared not to venture the least question.

I perceived that his means were very low, that our domestic parsimony
augmented, and that our expenditure diminished from day to day. I was very well
dressed, when his clothes were in a shabby condition, and he almost denied
himself the common necessaries. I received no intelligence from my father. All
this threw me into a state of langour, which brought on a very serious malady,
of which I had like to have died.

It was then I had an opportunity to see all the affection and attachment Mr.
Dumont professed for me: He would not leave the room, for a minute, and sat up
by me night and day, for the long space of three weeks, during which my illness
lasted. How often did I entreat him to explain himself! He always answered I
was much in the wrong, for creating myself a chimerical misery. All affairs had
taken a much better turn; in short, I was upon the point of receiving a letter
from my father; his wise counsels, his consolations, instilled, as it were, a
precious (...) into my senses, and I recovered completely.

I was scarcely out of danger, but he continued his late odd way of living. He
even became less sedentary, and at last I missed him for whole days together.
In order to increase my alarm, the servant maid thought to ingratiate herself
with me, by informing me that my preceptor left the house regularly every
night, that as soon as he saw me asleep he would rise, and leave the house and
not return until five in the morning, and then go to bed.

Matters being come to such a crisis, I could no longer forbear my inquietude,
and one day determined to bring him to an account for a conduct, as unnatural
as irregular. Having fixed a day to make the overture of so delicate an affair,
I waited for his return, when the same servant came to me, quite frightened,
and addressed me in these dreadful words: "Ah! -- sir! -- your preceptor! --
pray run after him! -- he has been arrested -- he is in prison!" -- "Heaven!
and what has he done?" -- "I don't know, people say it is for debt." -- "For
debt! ah, my God!"

I hastily waited upon the commissaire, or justice of the district, and by him
was informed, that the unfortunate Dumont had been dragged into a black dungeon
for a note of hand of five louis d'ors, which he had not been able to pay.

Judge of my grief at these sad tidings. I went immediately to the prison, and
requested the jailor to open the dungeon in which my friend had been thrown,
perhaps for my own sake.

What felt I at this sight! pale, bewildered, stretched over a mat, with no
other light than that of a small spiracle! -- O God! I cannot retrace the
picture without horror.

I flew to his arms, and we mixed our tears -- "Well," said I, sobbing, "cruel
man, I see at last the fatal secret unravelled! We have lost all assistance,
and you have involved yourself in ruin for me!"

"Ah! my worthy Alexis," exclaimed he, clasping me in his arms, "I endeavored
to conceal it long; but adverse fate has baffled my design. I will have you
hear, and know the whole affair, but your lot is more to be pitied than mine.

The day I received the anonymous note, I repaired to the garden of Luxembourg,
to the appointed spot. I had no sooner arrived, than a man, in great haste,
came up to me. I knew him, it was your father; Mr. Dumont, said he, in a time
of grief, it is all over! -- I am forced to it -- I must abandon him." "Whom.
sir, that child, yoor son?" -- "He is not my son! he causes all my misfortunes,
and those of the most amiable, and most perfidious woman! In short, I will see
him no more, neither ought, nor can I! My dear Mr. Dumont, I know you are his
friend, make him take the resolution to learn some trade; make him leave this
country; in short, put him in a v^^y of getting his livelihood, which to me
would be the heaviest of burdens! Farewell, you shall see me no more! Never
speak of me. Let him keep the secret of his birth; for a word may nigh cost him
his life!" -- "What, my dear sir," cried I, prostrating myself, "can you be so
hard hearted? Unfortunate boy! -- Will you then have him die? He will die, he
will surely die! Be his father, for he deems it his happiness to be your son!
-- Assist him -- protect him. -- Alas! -- he is so amiable, so virtuous! -- Ah,
sir, I embrace your knees, I bedew them with my tears; listen to compassion, to
tenderness, and stifle not in your heart the cries of nature!" -- "Dumont, you
touch me, but I cannot -- he is not my son! Did you but know! -- Oh! how I am
to be pitied! Farewell! Let him take care of his life, and do you the same; for
my destiny is so dreadful as to make me the ruin of all those who come near me!"

These words made me shudder; I was going to answer; but he quickly put a purse
into my hand, and vanished like a flash of lightning.

Judge of my astonishment and grief. I ruminated most seriously upon what
resolution I should take, and determined to conceal this cruel event, and live
with you as long as possible, on the savings of your father's kindness, and the
fruits of my own industry. Fifty louis d'ors contained in the purse, and nearly
that sum which we had saved, helped me to pay your quarter at college, to rent
an apartment, to furnish it decently. I discharged Vincent, hired a maid, and
prevailed upon you to pay off and quit your masters. Alas! in spite of all my
parsimony, I found that, after a twelvemonth, I could only command twelve louis
d'ors.

Foreseeing that we should soon be reduced to want, I resolved to give lessons
in town, in writing and Latin; but of what service could it be? I had but a few
pupils, and even those did not pay me! When you are on the brink of an abyss,
every one takes delight in pushing you into it. Your disorder and the care
which it demanded of me, made me lose all my scholars, and I was obliged to
borrow the sum of five louis d'ors, which I obtained upon my note of hand;
since that time I had done all in my power to discharge that obligation, but
the necessity of a subsistence, hindered me from accomplishing my good purpose.
I was, however, more industrious than before, for I worked night and day at a
printer's, but earned so little, as would hardly fetch the common necessaries
of life and hinder you from being aware of my miserable condition.

Now, my amiable Alexis, now I am deprived of liberty for a long time to come,
what will become of you? Who is to take care of you? Who is to give you bread?
Oh, lovely child, who has neither parents nor friends in this world, what will
become of you?"

"O thou most worthy pattern of friendship," exclaimed I. "O thou boast of men!
do you think I shall suffer you to remain in irons, with which I myself have
loaded the best of friends? -- No, think not that I shall have recourse to the
vain pity of mankind! I am humbled by their generosity; and their favors,
courted by baseness, would make me blush. Still, I have one resource left, a
dear, a precious resource, but it will become still dearer and more precious,
as it is to atone for the injuries I have done to you. -- O my worthy tutor, I
shall only quit you, to return and take you from this abode of horror."

Dumont, who understood that I meant the gold repeater enriched with diamonds,
which my father had given me, strove though in vain, to detain me. I hastened
to a watchmaker's, who after much talk, paid me twenty-five louis d'ors for a
watch, that ought to have fetched twice that sum, and I came back to discharge
my friend's debt, and to break his irons! Think of the joy I felt when we
returned to our apartment! I was almost out of my senses; I took Dumont in my
arms, and thanked heaven for the resource it left me in such an exigency.

Nevertheless my joy was followed by uneasiness, there was left no more than
fifteen louis d'ors. What could we do with a sum so moderate? How could we
subsist much longer? My Dumont would not make me any proposal to work, for fear
of hurting my delicacy. I was sensible of his generous reserve. I intimated to
him my having conceived a project of teaching music in town, which he sealed
with his approbation. Music, said he, is an art one may teach without
derogating; but my dear Alexis, how unpleasant will you find it! you must
prepare to put up with the caprice, haughtiness, and ill humors of a thousand
people, who, destitute of every shadow of genius or parts, always blame their
masters for their own stupidity: Since they pay, they fancy that science and
dexterity must be acquired without either trouble or application. Often they
will tell you: But, sir, I have now learned so many months, and know nothing,
while Mrs. N -- is already a complete musician! -- It will be in vain for you
to tell them Mrs. N -- has stuck closer to the art, and that her utmost
attention and docility have been always concerted to do honor to the lessons of
her master. Ah! my Alexis, what a patience, what a politeness, what a
gentleness is required of those who are desirous of instructing mankind in what
science or art soever! I pity you for being reduced to recur to a similar
expedient; but still, it is decent, genteel, and not unworthy of your
education, make therefore the best use of it you can.

I promised to profit by his lessons, and we looked out on all sides for
pupils; but our searches were fruitless; we both had not the least
acquaintance; we had always avoided society, and it was in the bosom of it
alone, we could have found the object of our eager pursuit.

Our money being gone, we saw ourselves brought to the most dreadful misery. It
was then, the most sad and distrasting ideas seized our mind. Death seemed to
be the only remedy to our ills, we called it loudly, and it would finally have
come to relieve us, had not a cruel event extricated us from our forlorn
condition to plunge us in a state, a thousand times more deplorable.

In one of our morning walks in the royal botanical garden, a venerable gray
head rushed by us, attended by a young man of about thirty, in whose
countenance were painted gloominess and sorrow. The latter cast his eyes on me,
and exclaimed with an irre^stible transport: "It is he; my father! there he is!
oh, it is he! these are the marquis's features." -- "You don't say so," replied
the old man. -- "I would lay any thing," said the other, adding in a whisper,
"there, we have him at last, that wretch whom we sought so long! He shall
perish."

Hereupon the two strangers lest us quite stupefied at this adventure, and so
singular a retreat. "Dear Dumont," exclaimed I, shedding a torrent of tears, "I
am lost, now my fate is determinated!" "Softly Alexis, despair not, my dear
child; astonishing as this adventure is, it ought not to alarm you so much;
people will not be killed in that manner. Never ^ear, they will not cut your
throat at home"

"But sir what have I done to those cruel men? O heaven! who will apprize me of
my crimes?"

Mr. Dumont was as much terrified as I. These strangers must therefore, have
been some secret enemies who have conspired my ruin. It was from them I was to
hide myself, but why? What a cruel enigma.

We went home, where Mr. Dumont was of opinion that it would be necessary to
decamp immediately from our lodgings, lest we should be discovered: But there
was one difficulty: We had neither money nor means to procure us wherewithal to
pay our rent. Only judge of our anxiety.

We spent the day in deadly fright; we projected twenty different expedients,
rejected them successively, and night surprised us without having taken any
resolution.

About midnight we heard several hard knocks against our street door: how our
hearts beat then! -- I fell senseless in Mr. Dumont's arms who was himself no
less afraid. A lodger opened the street-door, and informed us through the key
hole of our apartment that we were wanted.

Shall we open? shall we answer? What is to be done? At last Dumout shows a
noble resoluteness, and is determined either to stand or fall in my cause, if
any violence should be offered to me. He opens to let in the stranger: It was a
servant, who, in a humble and respectful manner, begged us to be of good cheer,
and said to us in a whisper: Quick, gentlemen, peruse this, and follow me.

O happiness! O unexpected favor! It is my father's, I know his hand writing.

"Imprudent Alexis! your father is still inclined to save your life, perhaps at
this very moment you have disposed of his own. Follow this sturdy servant! --
Come, you will find me at Valence; and you, Mr. Dumont, leave not your pupil: I
am in great want of you.

"A way with scruples, depart instantly, or you are both undone."

This was no snare; we plainly knew my father's writing. -- "Whether shall we,"
asked I of the servant. -- "You shall soon see, only follow me."

This man having delivered a considerable sum with his message, we paid our
landlord, and set out that very moment; a post chaise was waiting for us at a
little distance, we got into it, and took the road to Valence.

Judge of the thoughts which revolved in our minds! My father waited for us at
Valence. We were going to see him again: His letter denoted either anger or
hatred (...) Complete happiness sparkled in our eyes; -- what a change, what a
good fortune! But what could he mean by the epithet imprudent? He said I had
perhaps just been disposing of his own life. Alas! if I did, how can he accuse
me?

This was the uneasiness which perplexed us all the way to Valence. We were
suspended between fear and hope. Our guide was silent, nor could we get from
him the least idea of what we wanted to know.

We reached the city of Valence about eight o'clock in the evening* after a
journey of three days. Our guide conducted us to a fine inn, where he inquired
whether or not a gentleman of such a description was arrived. A post boy then
present, answered in the negative, adding, that, to all appearance, it was the
same gentleman whom he had left at Lions, and as he could be but one post
farther, he would arrive either that night or in the morning.

Hearing this we resolved to go to supper, and then rest ourselves, till Aurora
should return with my father, and crown all my wishes. I don't know what a
happy presentment agitated our breasts. My. Dumont embraced me, and took me in
his arms, saying continually, "Courage, my Alexis, we shall see him again."
What a seducing picture offered itself to my senses, "We shall be all one
heart, one family! O my Alexis, receive my most sacred oath, I will never
abandon you. Grant me always your confidence; and may I be equally fortunate to
deserve that of your father."

I pressed him to my heart without giving any answer. Such were the flattering
images which amused us until four o'clock in the morning, when the sudden
rattling of a post chaise, which stopped before the inn, roused us from our
sweet reverie.

"It is he," exclaimed I, and we both ran down stairs to receive him; but O
surprise! the moment I wa^ flying to his arms, my father -- O heaven! my father
frowns at me most terribly, pushes me from him, bids us walk up stairs to a
remote apartment of the house, and addressed me with the following horrible
speech, which shall remain in my memory, to the last breath of my wretched
being.

"You are not my son, sir, I told you so. I was weak enough to entertain that
flattering error; but the blind is thrown off. To my misfortune you are born;
and as such you have answered your end. Get thee far from me, unhappy lad -- I
reject thee from my bosom -- I disclaim, I forsake, and curse thee forever."

I trembled at these words, my spirits fled, and I dropped down senseless upon
the floor. Far from giving me the smallest succor, the barbarous men -- shall I
proceed in this dismal story? O amiable hosts, you will be as much surprised as
I was in that cruel moment! Suffer me, ah! suffer me to dry my tears: I feel
they hinder me from going farther.

I remained in that condition for an hour; judge of my surprise, when I
recovered my senses! My father and Dumont have left me; I see them not -- where
be they?

A woman, to whom I was indebted for the misfortune of opening again my eyes to
light, stands by me; she endeavors to comfort me. "Where are they, where are
they?" "Alas, my dear child, they set out about three quarters of an hour ago."
-- "And gone! good God! and Dumont, Dumont too."

I shall not attempt to describe (...) situation: You may easily conceive it if
your hearts are feeling and humane. -- "Dumont! what he! traitor! has he
forsaken me?"

I run down stairs, and made the whole house reecho with my woeful lamentations.
Every body assures me that Dumont and my father set out together in the same
chaise, which had stopped with the latter before the inn. What a blow -- a
terrible blow!

Soon my grief ceded to a sullen and settled despair; fits of rage succeeded to
it, and, in spite of the assiduous care and consolation of those who surrounded
me, I dropped down upon the floor, and rolled myself upon it; I swallowed the
dust, and put forth the most dismal cries; cries that would have moved the most
flinty heart.

In this cruel state I remained until three o'clock in the afternoon; bereft of
my senses, I could hardly see what was doing about me. "The poor lad," said
they, "don't you see that it was his father and his preceptor; they have
forsaken him. Oh, had we known it, they should not have got off so easy -- But
no, they go: Take care of him! they may come back. How barbarous! What a pity
at such an age, etc."

My situation seemed to touch every body, and all offered to relieve me, but I
was far from accepting any succor. The master of the inn invited me to stay at
his house: I will give you some employment, my good friend; you shall not want
for what is necessary. To be sure you wont be so well off as you was at your
father's, for there is nothing like home, after all, etc. etc." Every word he
said thrust daggers into my heart. I resolved to rid myself of his
importunities, and taking my baggage upon my back took leave of them all.

I left Valence, perplexed with the most dreadful thoughts, but making God and
religion my shield, I soon repulsed those enemies which preyed upon all my
senses, and I saw myself before the town of Romans at the decline of day.

Thus Alexis ended the history of his misfortunes, and Candor, Germain, and
Clara, embraced and show him every token of the most exquisite sensibility. A
frugal repast was served up, and the remaining part of the day past in visiting
the cottage and its premises, of which we shall give a more ample detail
hereafter.

PART SECOND.
CHAP. I.
PARTICULAR DESCRIPTION OF THE COTTAGE. -- MYSTERIOUS CAVE. -- DREADFUL
EMBARRASSMENT.

A NIGHT SCENE.
THE narrative of our hero's misfortunes operated, in a singular manner, upon
Candor, Germain, and Clara. Candor, above all could not be tired on looking at
him for the whole time the supper lasted. He had placed Alexis next to him, and
from time to time would exclaim, "What, my son -- so young and such a knowledge
of mankind; -- How, you know them well; -- Your philosophy, your courage, all
in thee interest me to a point. O my Alexis, I depend upon your steadiness with
the most consolatory expectations. I will disclose them some day, you shall
help me. But stay, I will try you for a twelvemonth. Be my son, you have no
father; let me supply his place. Alexis, promise me as much submission and
docility as you would for a father!" -- "Yes, father, I promise every thing."
"Upon your honor?" "Heaven be my witness." "Give me thy hand, and remember one
day the sacred engagement you have entered into with Candor." Your favors will
never make me forget it." "I was happy and powerful in the world, my closest
bosom friends have thrown me into the abyss of ills; Germain alone stood by me,
Germain, my good and honest friend, love him as I do: what a treasure is a
trusty, faithful servant. Behold Clara; my only daughter, my every thing -- be
her tutor; teach her all the sciences, all the accomplishments you are master
of: May she profit by your lessons, and above all may she take your sage
advice, that prudence, that mistrust in mankind, qualities so requisite for a
being destined to live some day in the bosom of society. For I am old and
hoary, my good children, I cannot always be with you, and when I am once gone,
perhaps you may have the most ardent desire of living in towns, of launching
into the whirlpool." "Ah, never, never," answered Alexis and Clara, in
conjunction with each other.

Alexis was transported with joy. Clara squeezed his hand, embraced her father
and Germain, and enraptured with the happy prospect that glowed in her
beauteous eyes, she could not conceal her satisfaction.

They soon arose from their frugal repast, and Candor would have Alexis to take
an exact view of the hermitage, in which the old man thought he would remain
for life.

Clara laid hold immediately of the youth's arm, Candor, supported himself on
Germain's shoulder, and all four went to visit the several parts of this
retreat. Let us follow their traces, and get acquainted with an abode where we
shall, for some time, dwell with them.

They first entered a yard, ninety feet square, its center is occupied by the
cottage. The lateral extent of the edifice is thirty, and the height fifty feet.

They ascend four steps, enter a small vestibule; where Alexis perceives at the
bottom of the stairs, two doors, the one on the right and the other on the
left. The first conducts to the kitchen, and the second to a hall fifteen feet
high, furnished with a chimney, a table, chairs, and a considerable library.

He leaves the hall, and goes up some winding stairs to the first floor; on
this side is Candor's bed chamber. A bed, a large chest of drawers, two
portraits, half a dozen of fowling pieces, and some chairs are the only
furniture he sees in it.

Clara's chamber is not better decorated, excepting a fine harpsicord which
takes up the greatest part of the room.

In the second story he enters two little rooms, without a chimney, but very
snug and decent.

Above them is a large garret, which supplies the place of a hay loft, and
granary.

Every ceiling is vaulted, and built of stone: Every window of the apartments
is grated with iron bars, and does not exceed six feet in height. Below stairs
is a door leading to a cellar, to which no body but Candor and Germain, had
access. This cave or cellar contains neither wine nor liquors, (our hermits had
long since left off to make use of them) there is nothing pent in it but --
This is a mystery we shall certainly discover hereafter, but now it must remain
concealed. Let us therefore follow our hero to the garden.

It is an enclosure of about an acre and an half, the third part planted with
peace, beans, potatoes, oats, etc. etc. and the remainder a meadow yielding hay
for the horse. There were also several fruit trees, and at the garden's end, a
very lofty poplar, which appeared to have been left since the ground was first
cleared to build the cottage and its premises. At the foot of the poplar, a
limpid rivulet springing from a remote part of the woods, streams over a layer
of pebbles, and eases itself in a frightful precipice, at the distance of two
leagues from the cottage.

The rivulet, crossing the little garden, is hemmed in its career by a dike of
shell work, which it surmounts, and forms a cascade, whose waters, fall into a
basin near the meadow, hewn, as it were, by the hand of nature, in the heart of
a rock.

A little bridge leading to a grove, the work of Candor, invites the
philosopher to taste the sweets of the evening, and rest from the toils of the
day: the whole of this rural and tranquil residence breathes calm though it and
solitude.

Alexis surveying with admiration those wonders of art and nature, lifted up
his hand to heaven, to return thanks to the sublime Author, for having brought
him to this delightful abode, where he can at least enjoy repose in the arms of
the only beings, in whose hearts he had found generosity, sympathy and virtue.

Clara, who was leading him before her father, eager to show him all the
beauties of her garden, did not fail to expatiate upon its charms. "Do you
see," said she, "yonder that field? I alone have cultivate it; but now, as you
are my partner, my labor will be changed into mere pleasure: It is in this
rivulet we shall quench our thirst; you will offer me this limped water, and I
will receive it at your hands: here you will smile; there you will seek shelter
from the heat of day: I will press one of those fruits upon your burning lips,
and its nectar will refresh your blood. Oh! how often shall we at the decline
of day, go to take rest in the grove. It is there, unknown to all the world far
from the bustling and noise of cities, we shall bless and endear our being. The
sun goes down, the moon plays, here and there, her silver beams through the
foliage of the thicket. The bosom of the earth opens and and exhales a thousand
perfumes. We fit by one another; the gentle purling of this rivulet, which
glides beneath our feet, throws us into the sweets of thought; you press my
hand to your heart, it beats, we give up all thinking; yet we gaze and enjoy! O
Alexis, Alexis, belive thy Clara, "HERE SHALL THOU FIND HAPPINESS."

In vain Alexis endeavored to reply, his feelings would not suffer him to
express his thoughts; he contented himself with squeezing Clara's hand, and
holding her with that expression of sentiment which is more obvious to the
pencil than to the eloquence. "O yes," said he, with a low voice, "yes I am
already as happy as mortal can be."

Candor and Germain who came soon after, found the young couple in the extacy
of delight. Germain shook his head, Candor smiled, and his children were put to
the blush.

By this time the night began to lower upon nature. The birds perched in the
wood, waited the retreat of the (...), to suspend their warbling, and to rest
upon the hospitable branch. The nightingale alone enchanted the woods with her
sweet melodies, and the moping owl, in deferrence to her, forebore her funeral
howlings. All invited our anchorets to return to the cottage, to enjoy a
repose, claimed by the emotions which they felt that day, and the fatigue the
preceding night.

They had no convenience to substitute artificial light to that of day; the sun
shut their eyes, and aurora reopened them. Thus they retired to their
respective apartments, not to meet till day break.

Alexis, having received the tender embrace of the three hosts went up stairs
to his room situated on the second floor; he was determined to reject the calls
of sleep, to reflect freely upon his present situation, and upon what conduct
he should observe toward his new friends, so as to convince them of his
gratitude and tenderness.

He had already forgot his misanthropy and mistrust, when a very particular
event revived them, bolted in his mind, and perplexed his senses.

He had hardly commenced his meditations, than he heard a noise at the door: He
listens, hears the rattling of keys, one is put in the lock of his door, he
asks who is there? no answer, in a moment the door is locked, and the jailor
disappears! What means this unexpected precaution? why will they shut him up?
what do they want of him? O heaven! should it be treachery? the house where he
was received with open arms, should it be a den of ruffians? what, Candor,
Germain, Clara, Clara! it is impossible. Perfidiousness cannot conceal itself
so well under the mask of virtue: A look a gesture, the least motions detect
it. They are not traitors, but why is he locked up? they have not apprised him
of this detention; nor even did his jailor give him an answer. Ah! they surely
will undo him! he has been too confident, too indiscreet: He should not have
exposed himself; In a word, people, that inhabit a fortified retreat, in a
forest notorious for its robbers and banditti. All becomes suspicion to him: he
recollects the conversation of the day, an expression of Candor's chills him
with terror; O my Alexis! I depend upon your steadiness with the most
consolatory expectation. I will disclose them some day; you shall help me.
Great God! will they constrain a virtuous and well principled youth to become a
robber! after all, what do they mean by this? should not the cellar which they
would not let him see, conceal the murdered victims and the spoil? surely this
discourse, and mysterious cellar conceal crimes. Alexis doubts no longer, his
head becomes light, his imagination works, ghastly specter appear to him,
horrid phantoms, from all sides cross his chamber, his hair stands at an end,
his tongue becomes heavy, he remains motionless, and resolves upon some violent
measure.

The window of his room was on the garden side, he runs to it, he will elope
from the fatal house where the most dreadful omens trouble his reason. But an
unforeseen obstacle is in his way, and sanctions his suspicions by certainty.
Large iron bars oppose his design: It is all over, he is imprisoned, betrayed,
undone.

As the timid bird who falls into the net, and is afterward put in a cage,
beats the hostile wire with its wings, and passing his bill across, pants for
the tree, which he perceives, and on which he was perched a little before; thus
our hero applies his mouth to the fatal bars, beholding across the garden, and
the vast extent of the forest, whose gloomy abode appears to him preferable to
the odious prison, where he presumes he will be obliged to remain all his life
time.

In spite of all this, his sensible soul was still to undergo another shock.
Will he have strength sufficient to bear the frightful spectacle that will
present itself to his fight? At first he hears somebody shut the door of the
cellar, that object of his terror, with a terrible noise, soon after Candor,
and Germain come forth, carrying each a lighted flambeaux in their hands. A
kind of a coffin covered with a pall, is seen on their shoulders: They silently
cross the garden, and advance to the foot of the poplar tree, near the borders
of the limpid rivulet: Here they take off their burden, and the distance only
hinders Alexis from hearing or seeing what they do.

Meanwhile Candor appears to open the coffin: He lays down upon it, he rises
again, a fire is kindled, the flame blazes, rises, and on a sudden becomes
extinct: the tree is glanced, the leaves tremble, and the birds sitting on its
branches flee with dismal shrieks: the flambeaux are exstinguished, all
vanishes.

It is an illusion? is it a phantom? the moon rendered obscure by the pale
light of the torches spread alone her mystic beams: the birds return to their
wonted tree, Candor and Germain appear again, they cross the garden, return to
set by the coffin in the secret cave, the door is shut, the rattling of keys,
and the hollow sound of bolts are heard again.

Let now the reader place himself in the situation of my Alexis. He knows his
fearful, suspicions, and mistrusting temper! Let him have an idea of his
embarrassment, his apprehensions, his shuddering! How agitated his mind! That
coffin, that flame! what can have been that ceremony he could not distinguish:
It is perhaps the body of some strayed traveller, which they burnt, after
having stripped it. He doubts no more: To morrow the same fate awaits him: But
where are his riches? why should they kill him? his spoil is not brilliant
enough: No matter, he has all to fear. Perhaps Candor, deceived by the world,
has sworn to sacrifice all such as will fall in his hands, to gratify his
vengeance. Alexis is perhaps to augment the number of his victims: all confirm
him in that idea. Alas! what has he done, that fate should have brought him to
this detestable den! He regrets not life, it is a burden to him! but to fall by
so base a treachery, after having trusted to the good faith and humanity of his
butchers. This, this alone, causes his despair, and makes him wish for the
approach of day, in order to take a resolution: He will not suffer himself to
be slaughtered thus patiently; he will sell his life as dear as he can. Tremble
assassins, you shall not give him the mortal blow without having stood most
vigorous in his own defense against Candor, Germain, and -- Clara! what, is
Clara guilty too?

CHAP. II.
RETURN OF MORNING. -- FEARS DISPELLED* -- MUSICAL INSTRUCTION.

THE LESSON OF MUSIC.
AURORA had dispelled night, and the sun began to gild the tops of the trees, a
cloudless azure sky proclaimed a serene day, and soon the balmy freshness,
instilled by Zephyr in the brilliant pearls of the dew, was going to yield to
the ardent ^^res of the meridian; all nature was beauteous and tranquil; but
the heart of Alexis was not.

Pale, trembling, bewildered, he waited the fatal doom of death; already had he
recommended himself to the mercy of the supreme Being* Prayer, in some manner,
restored the calm of his senses; he just rose from his knees, when a gentle
voice call him; "Alexis, are you awake?" -- "Yes," exclaimed he, "yes, I am,
and prepared for all events!" -- "It is Candor," replied the voice, "he comes
to open your door and to embrace you!"

To embrace you! -- Alexis was quite astonished: Was this a new snare? Did his
judgment deceive him? he made a thousand conjectures, when Candor opens the
door, enters, and is struck with the perplexity of his friend. He looks at him,
lays hold of his hand, and, with such an air of penetration and truth, that
Alexis cannot help listening to him, and makes him blush at his errors; he
says, "What have you, my son -- what means the trouble in which I see you? --
Is it because I have kept you last night in a kind of captivity? -- My friend,
you would have wronged me, not to confide in your Candor? -- I cannot believe
it: -- I would be ashamed to think -- compose yourself, hear your father, and
conquer that childish fear which cannot but grieve me.

"You were looked up last night, and every future night I must observe the same
precaution, which is more essential to me than you imagine. It ought not to
alarm you, because, the whole day I shall give you a thousand proofs of my
sincere, friendship; but I insist upon your not endeavoring to penetrate into
that fatal secret. It is all I cherish, it is all I possess, do not tear it
from me! My Alexis, did you but know! -- Deserve my confidence, be always
submissive, tender, and regardful; and soon I will disclose you my condition
and misfortunes. Make yourself worthy of that confession! -- I will not conceal
it from you; nay, I expect of you a most signal service -- but a service
^ounded upon justice and gratitude, which, if you love me, will never affect
your delicacy. I am old. Alexis, I have been inhumanly betrayed; I was deprived
of what I held most dear on earth. You shall be mine avenger. -- You shall
deserve the charming recompense, which I have de^lined for you; the charming
recompense which will be dear to your heart! -- Urge me not to say more -- I
conjure you, let me keep my secret for a while -- one day I will deposit it in
your bosom -- you will know me then; but as yet, I am compelled to restrain
your curiosity; I do not construe it into a crime, it is natural to your age.
Every night permit me to look you up, I beg it as a favor! On these terms live
with us, dispel all cares and anxiety, and be truly persuaded that your
innocence is in no kind of danger in this solitary abode; we all cherish
religion, wisdom and virtue!"

This discourse, and the venerable appearance of the old man, rid Alexis of all
perplexity. The balm of consolation descended into his heart, and serenity
enlivened again his countenance. His soul was frank and honest; he communicated
his foolish panic to Candor, smiled and embraced him. Clara's father was some
time confused when he heard that Alexis had seen his nocturnal ceremony; but
soon he recovered himself, laid hold of his arm, and both went below to Clara,
who had just risen, and had as bad a night as her young friend, but from a
cause of a quite opposite nature. Love, which began to enter her heart, the
happiness which awaited her, and her own flattering notions, had kept her awake
all night long; but it only served to add new energy to her charms; her eyes
betrayed an air of langor, for which her father chid her, and she blushed with
so much grace, as made Alexis quite contrite for having doubted a single minute
the sincerity of that lovely child.

Soon after, Germain joined them, and they all three requested their new guest
to give them a specimen of his abilities on the harpsichord. Alexis, with eager
compliance, sung his romance, and the audience could not forbear shedding tears.

Clara performed after him, and though her skill was not equal in point of
perfection to that of Alexis, he was enraptured with her performance,
especially with a song she added to it. She had composed it during night, and
the music was so sweet and melodious, as to leave Candor much in doubt of its
being of her own composing.

A SONG.
PEOPLE say that at my tender age,
The smart of love no tongue can tell,
I know it well,
And will as well
Elude his snares, and scorn his rage:
A man by fate is hither drove,
I guess he is a lovely lad,
To him I m kind -- and what of that?
Sure, sure, it is no such thing as love!
His presence always gladdens me,
His smiles for crowns I would not sell,
I know it well.
And foresee well,
His heart will prove as true to me.
In his eyes, with joy, I see move
The flame which within him does burn,
To me he is kind in his turn;
Sure, sure, it is no such thing as love!
When Cupid's dart does wound the breast,
The heart is sore, and never well;
I ^eel it well,
And roundly tell,
His malice never shall steal my rest.
All f^elings in me sweetness prove,
Instead of gloom I feel despair,
I am blythe like May, and light like air
Then sure it is no such thing as love!
Thus the day was spent in pleasing amusement. At night Alexis was locked up,
but felt no uneasiness, and enjoyed a sound sleep.

It had been determined that Alexis should begin his lessons with Clara on the
day following; he of course went to her apartment. Candor and Germain went to
cultivate their garden, and did what was necessary to be done in the house,
while our young master was left (...) with his pupil. The reader will judge,
from a sketch I shall give of this lesson, all those* which Candor's daughter
received afterward. Let us enter the music room, and hear without interrupting.

Alexis. Clara, I find the song you sung yesterday very pretty; have you
composed it for me?


Clara. For whom else? Is there more than one Alexis in the world?


Alexis. You are just like me: I have seen many women, yet never but one Clara.


Clara. You joke. I have no charms, no dress!


Alexis. Dress is the result of art, charms are the gift of nature; you possess
those, and join to them a soul, a heart!


Clara. (...) I have a heart, I have only perceived it two days since; when I
saw you, it is quite natural.


Alexis. What, did it never beat for your father?


Clara. Yes, it did, but that is a quite different sensation! Now I will ask
him to explain me those two sentiments.


Alexis Will you ask your father?


Clara. Yes, I will. Why should I conceal from him what I feel? I want no other
confidant than (...) Now mind, Alexis, we walk or repose together in the grove,
or say a hundred times a day, we love one another, I Will tell him our
conversation every night.


Alexis. Ah heaven! take care!


Clara. What makes you be so much surprised? my father is very glad to see me
content; if I am pleased with you, why should he be angry?


Alexis. Did he never enter into any discourse with you about love?


Clara. Yes, that he did, and very often too! He told me a hundred times that
love is a fatal passion, which confounds reason and sense, and makes people
jealous, uneasy, raving! Oh! you cannot imagine how he forbade me to give way
to that cruel sentiment.


Alexis. Well, Clara, do you think he will approve of ours?


Clara. Of ours! -- you are mistaken: it is not love I feel for you. I feel
nothing of what my father has told me! Oh! I should be very sorry if ever I
did.


Alexis. What innocence! O my Clara, preserve then that pure sentiment, and
always be upon your guard (...) not falling in love, or at least if you do,
don't discover it to Candor!


Clara. Nay, Alexis, I shall like you no more, if you hinder me from placing my
confidence in so respectable a father. He shall always know not only the most
secret thoughts of my heart, but I will even communicate them to his old friend
Germain.


Alexis. Oh, oh, to all the world if you please. Clara, Clara, how unhappy
should I be, if --


Clara Only see, you take the alarm at every thing Well, let us drop that
subject, and take a lesson.


Alexis. You do not understand me. Did you but know people --


Clara. People! my father is not people:


Alexis. He certainly is so kind. so generous -- But pray do you know his
misfortunes?


Clara. No, but Germain does.


Alexis. Have you known your mother?


Clara. Yes; oh how she loved me -- how I loved her.


Alexis. What is become of her?


Clara. I cannot tell. I was brought up in a convent till I was eight years old;
my mother came often to see me. During the latter part of my stay, I could hear
no more of her, and my father made me come hither, where he since told me a
hundred times, that his spouse and son (my brot^er whom I never saw) were both
near us; that he saw them every day, and I should see and embrace them too when
I should be a few years older. They must be very unfortunate too, because
Candor and Germain never speak of them without tears.


Alexis. Did you never ask any farther questions?


Clara. It is my a here is secret, and I respected it too much, to force it from
him, ye I know that he goes every night into the cave below, and takes Germain
with him: There they remain about an hour, and then return to their apartment.

They fix, every year, a certain day, in which they perform a kind of ceremony,
quite strange to me, at the bottom of the great poplar, in the garden. I could
never follow them, because every night I am locked up, like you.


Alexis. This very ceremony frightened me much the other night. I can guess
part of his misfortunes. Alas his son, his spouse fell victims to treachery.


Clara. Do you believe they are dead?


Alexis. Can you doubt it?


Clara. Why, I am to see them one day -- what can that be?


Alexis. In me he will find an avenger! I will espouse his cause, he shall know
his Alexis,


Clara. Ah, my sweet friend! he loves you.


Alexis. He is a wonderful father.


Clara. He told me already: My daughter, if your heart is to feel, if you are
to love, place your affections in Alexis, who I believe is worthy of you: But
let him deserve you first. Be you the recompense of the great service I expect
him to do me. If he loves you he will accompish all my wishes.


Alexis. O heaven! did he say this?


Clara. They are his very words? Don't you think it would be horrible to betray
his confidence.


Alexis. Ah, what a man! -- Let us love each other, my dear creature, let us
love, and may a father, by his blessing, (...), bands as sacred as those in
which we might be joined at the altar, did our mansion not deny us that sacred
ceremony.

The whole time allotted for the lesson was almost spent in amorous topics and
confidences. But Alexis, anxious for the progress of his pupil, was more ready
afterward, and Clara, in a litte time became a real adept in music, and
drawing; she got even proficient in the abstract sciences, such as the
mathematics, physic, and astronomy.


CHAP. III.
FELICITIES OF A COTTAGE LIFE. -- INSCRIPTION ON THE POPLAR -- LETTER -- ALEXIS
DETERMINES TO LEAVE THE COTTAGE.

(Some part of the Manuscript is wanting.)
THE VOICE IN THE FOREST.
ALEXIS, happy and cherished in the cottage, had forgot his misfortunes. Music,
agriculture, and sometimes the sport of the chase in the forest took up all his
time, and left him no leisure to be disgusted.

How sweet and innocent we^e the pleasures of our sour hermits! They had every
thing they wanted; desired no more, and all nature seemed to respect their
retreat, and to cooperate in their happiness. The thunder which struck
incessantly the loftiest trees of the forest, had never descended on their
premises; the robbers, who were heard all day long, crying and shouting about
its walls, had never formed the design, perhaps impracticable, to scale them.
Germain le^t the cottage only once a year to go to St. Marcellin, to buy corn,
and doubtless by a visible protection of heaven, he had never been attacked,
except the last time, when he was relieved by Alexis* Candor had expressly
enjoined Clara not to tell her young friend where she had been on the day she
had met with him in the valley of Romans, because he himself intended to give
one day every detail of it to Alexis, and exact from his hand a most terrible
revenge, which he wished to take of his enemies before he should go down to the
grave.

In consequence of this intent, he studied daily the character and temper of
Alexis, and flattered himself to see him always steady and courageous; he
thanked heaven, for having sent him in his ills a being perhaps the only one on
earth, capable to execute his projects. It was with complacency he beheld the
love subsisting between the young couple; he protected* and ^ven strengthened
it, in (...) it would one day turn ^o ^is advantage. His daughter kept no (...)
from ^im; he calculated the progress of this passion, and waited till it had
reached its highest pitch, to disclose his secrets to Alexis. In the mean time
he commanded Clara not to suffer her lover to take the smallest liberty with
her: He followed them wheresoever they went* watched them carefully, and
apprehending their innocence might be in danger in the little grove, he always
joined them there, brought them back to the cottage, and, not sufficiently
confident of his own vigilance, he made choice of Germain to assist him.

All these precautions were to no purpose; Alexis was too delicate, too
virtuous to infringe upon the laws of hospitality* and Clara endowed with too
much prudence and respect to disobey her father, and commit a fault, which she
would never have been able to own. On the other hand, their passion was
protected, and they had the promise to be united. They were at liberty to love
and declare their mutual passion before Candor. This freedom banished the very
idea of crime; and if love sometimes ventured to put the blind upon their eyes,
the light of truth soon shook it off, with offering to their sight the abyss in
which they would plu^^ge themselves, and a sense of shame and remorse ever
ready to assail them upon leaving the grove.

Thus the two children loved one another; but their love was pure, decent,
grounded upon virtue, upon self-esteem, and the voluntary consent of a father.

Sweet sympathy of the soul, unsullied by the mean impulse of sensuality,
satisfied with calm sentiment and reflection, a stranger to sore remorse, to
guilty secresy, to guilty diffidence, and sanctioned by paternal authority --
ah! how few are the hearts destined to feel thy delights!

Alexis, who by this time perceived the scrupulous vigilance of Candor and
Germain, deemed it an affront upon his principles. The sole idea of being
suspected of treachery, sapped the happiness he enjoyed. Often when returned
from a walk, where Candor had interrupted a delicious tete-a-tete, he would go
to his room, regardless of the tokens of love and affection which the old man
continually lavished upon him* shed a torrent of tears. What should, would he
exclaim, I be capable of? and can they think it? -- I am dogged and watched as
if there was any occasion to apprehend that I could so far forget myself, as to
betray the confidence I enjoy, and to seduce an innocent child! It seems they
cannot read in my heart! no, they will never know it; that feeling heart,
fraught with gratitude and delicacy, is torn by the most outrageous suspicion!
-- Alas! will men never do me justice! O Candor, Candor* how you grieve me!

Candor often surprised him in these accesses of a gloomy temper; he inquired
for the cause of his trouble, but Alexis remained silent; the remembrance of
his misfortunes was his excuse; and the old man, who knew him to be candid and
sincere, believed, comforted and engaged him to a walk in the garden, and,
partly by his caresses, partly by dint of argument, dissipated the melancholy
of his young friend.

[ Here a matter of twenty pages is wanting in the original manuscript. Some
leaves half torn prove, however, that this deficiency, in other respects,
little interesting, was fill^d with the pleasures and occupations of our sour
hermits, in the cottage; also, with an account of the increasing passion
between the young couple I thought it useless to make suppliments of my own, as
thos^ passages which are w^^nting lessen by no means the merit of the work. I
will therefore simply begin where the narrative is continued in a successive
and regular order.]

In this manner, Candor, Clara, Alexis and Germain, passed their life at the
Cottage. They always terminated the business of the day by a rural walk; they
all four sat down in the right grove on the borders of the limpid rivulet, they
returned, enjoyed a frugal meal* and tasted the sweets of a quiet sleep, from
which nothing could rouse them but the rising of Aurora, and the concerts of
birds.

At the expiration of a twelvemonth, our young couple loved no more, but adored
each other. It was a violent passion which nothing could keep within bounds but
the hope of a speedy union. They were determined to speak of it to Candor, and
to crave upon their knees his parental blessing, as a tie as sacred in their
eyes, as the august ceremony of wedlock, which they had no opportunity to
obtain; but the old man; equally cunning and vindictive, had waited for that
instant, to lay open his projects to Alexis. He had himself fostered in his
breast the flames of love, and suffered the passion of Alexis to attain the
very pitch of violence, only with a view to be convinced of his fidelity to
serve him. He was, however, unacquainted with the firmness and spirit of our
young hero; he intended putting them to trial, in order to be sure of his
inviolable attachment, as to defer, a little longer, the story of his
misfortunes, which he had promised to re^ate.

Alexis, for his own part, always mistrusting and susceptible, was alarmed at
the delays of Candor. He had repeatedly entreated him (...) unite with him the
object of his love, and the old man would a ways answer, "My son, is it not
enough for me, that you love my daughter, and have her welfare at heart; but it
is also necessary that your friendship for her father be equal to your love to
her. Clara can therefore, not be yours, unless I have real proofs of your
attachment. -- Alexis, with tears in his eyes, asked which were those proofs
that would be required of him. Candor made no reply, squeezed his hand, and
left him, with a sigh and a woeful countenance.

Wh^t a situatio^ for our hero; It was then that his first misfortunes retraced
themselves in his mind, and he sighed.

One day, going to fell some wood at the entrance of the forest, he was struck
with astonishment, upon perceiving his name engraven on the bark of a lofty
tree. He approaches, he discovers some other characters, and trembling, reads
these few lines: Alexis, fly from Candor, fly from the perfidy of the cottage,
where the most enormous crime is expected of you.

Cruel wretch! exclaimed he, with indignation, whoever thou be, thou art an
impostor! -- Candor is virtuous; Candor is the most respectable of men; and
this is the value I set on thy infamous calumny! so say^ng, he lays hold of his
are and with several blows effaces the odious inscription. Though he gave it
not the least credit, a sensation of sadness remained in his soul he strives to
dissipate it, but without success.

What hand inimical to my rest, said he to himself; what traitor could give me
such insidious advice! Unknown as I am to all the world, I am known to live in
this forest. -- Why should I leave it? Why destroy my peace by unjust
suspicion? What do I say? I have no suspicion. Avaunt, guilty mistrust! O my
father! O my father! should thou design me to be criminal, thou the most
wise, the most generous of men! O! why is it not in my power to extirpate the
base accuser who dared to outrage a virtuous man! but who is he? what interest
can he find to give me such dangerous advice? Does he know me? Is it my father,
or Dumont? who -- O God! I have not well enough examined the characters! I
might perhaps have discovered -- could it be you, unfortunate beings, whom I
cherished so much? Could your tenderness reclaim Alexis, and wish him back to
your arms? Yes, I know the characters; how unreasonable was I to efface them so
soon! My father! Dumont! could it be you? But what appearance is there? Where
strays my reason? -- No, I reject this too flattering idea! It is a stranger, I
doubt not; I must not doubt, it is is even a wretch, a ruffian, who seeks to
ensnare me. Ah! I will shun him, and never leave this dear abode -- I will love
and respect my generous hosts, and deem a crime, the cruel calumny which I
discovered upon this tree. Blush, Alexis, thou art become an accessory to
guilt, in having re^d it.

Alexis returned to the cottage, where Candor, who saw his trouble, chid him
for his melancholy: the youth stammered, and excused himself as well as he
could, his soul longed for solitude, and he took a walk by himself in the
remotest part of the garden, on the borders of the rivulet. Quite lost in
thought, he approached the wall, which separated the premises from the forest;
he thought he heard a sweet voice uttering his name. He looks, he listens, and
soon a person in the wood, on the brink of the ditch of the habitation,
addresses him in these words; "Alexis, thy sufferings are at an end. Turn thy
eyes upon the rivulet which streams at thy feet, and read."

Alexis, quite motionless, looks into the stream, and his astonishment
increases upon seeing, tied to a branch of a bush, a letter which the unknown
person had thrown on his side, and which past through the opening that was made
in the wall. He seizes the branch, ^nties the letter, and eagerly reads the
following lines, which moved him to the highest degree:

"Heaven, my dear Alexis, is finally appeased: your father acknowledges you for
his son. Leave the cottage and the woods of Chamborau: Come to meet him at St.
Etienna, where he, with your friend Dumont, is waiting for you. To receive you,
his arms are open. When tomorrow's sun shall hide itself in the water, come,
alone, to the spot where the forest forms a star marked with six martlets. It
is there you will find a faithful guide, who is to conduct you to the most
unfortunate and most tender of fathers."

What a perusal for Alexis! He questions the stranger, but is not answered. To
all appearance he is gone. His father waits for him, his father acknowledges
him for his son! Heaven, in what moment does he hear tidings, which, at other
times, he would have considered as the greatest of blessings! But how is he to
act now? shall he renounce love for nature? Shall he betray gratitude for
filial tenderness? shall he fly from the arms of a generous friend to those of
a father? What an embarrassment! what a cruel embarrassment!

Clara's lover remains some time in the deepest gloom of reflection: He takes
this adventure for an illusion; he cannot believe that what he s^es and reads
is real! -- His father calls him; how could he find out his retreat? who could
have directed him here? As he knows it, why does not he himself come to fetch
him, in order to see and thank the good old man who received his son in his
house? Why does he fear to appear before Candor? Justice, gratitude, all, makes
it his duty! But does he know of the passion of Alexis for Clara? does he fear
the effects of that passion? Well, if he does, the greater reason has he to
prevent them by his presence. But the letter he has received is not of his
father's writing: he might well have wrote himself. That mysteriousness, the
stranger, the guide who waits for him, all looks very suspicious. Should it be
a contrivance of the calumniator, of whom he received once a perfidious advice,
engraved on the bark of the tree? Yes, yes, it must be some stratagem: He has
certain secret enemies who conspired his ruin, who will tear him from this
abode of peace, to devote him to destruction! All mankind is against him, and
were he at the extremity of the pole, still there would be traitors, bent to
persecute him? -- But, after all, if it were true! -- If his father and Dumont
were waiting for him in the village of St* Etienne! -- Who knows! -- They
indeed lest him at Valence; but they may have discovered which way he went;
people may have been set to follow him even as far as the cottage. -- All this
is possible. What shall he do? What resolution ought he to take? -- Here nature
chides him: Can you fly the caresses of thy father? Here love and gratitude are
combined to detain him. Which of either shall he obey? Which of either is the
most imperative voice that appeals to his heart? Which of either will prove
victorious? -- O Alexis, Alexis, what will thou do! unfortunate youth, what
will thou do!

CHAP. IV.
ALEXIS LEAVES THE COTTAGE. -- RETURNS BY A SINGULAR ADVENTURE.

THE SUBTERRANEOUS TEMPLE.
THE dawn of gay morning had risen from the east, the feathered tribe saluted
it with the most melodious concert; all nature brilliant and displayed, seemed
to rejoice at the beneficent rays of the sun. Alexis, who used every morning to
contemplate and adore this magnificent scene, paid not the smallest attention
to it. All night a prey to the most painful reflections, he no sooner perceived
Aurora, than, running to the window, he surveyed, with a countenance expressive
of grief, the vast expanse of the forest. Sighs heaved his bosom, his vein,
beat precipitately; his overburdened heart seemed to be willing to force its
way through his breast, to repair to the spot where he knew his father waited
for him. Alexis could not see the village of St. Etienne, but he guessed its
situation, and said to himself: Romans lies to the south; St. Marcellin on this
side; and St. Etienne facing the mountain covered with woods. Yes, St. Etienne
lies there, my father and Dumont are near me! O why cannot my eyes pierce
through the obstacles which part us! Why not see and examine them! -- What do I
say? Their image is in my soul. -- There they are, sitting by one another: They
sigh, and say, Will Alexis come to join us? -- Will Alexis prefer his father to
his mistress? -- Will nature have greater command over his heart than love?
Will it be in vain for me to hold out my arms to him and to call him aloud! --
Ah! my son! come, come, my mouth smiles at you; my eyes only wait for your
bosom, to pour in it a flood of tears; my heart longs to feel the beating of
yours. Will you come my Alexis, will you come? -- Yes, I will, my father; yes
I Will embrace your knees; my soul shall be united with yours -- O Alexis! O
most ungrateful of all men! Could thou hesitate, could thou waver?
descend into your heart, it will prescribe your duty, and tell you what is a
lover, what is a benefactor. Are they above a father? Can friendship, can
gratitude, equal paternal fondness! O sacred names of a father, of a son, are
you not holier than those of a lover and a friend! -- I am resolved; this
evening, I will leave the cottage, I will quit forever Candor and Clara. -- For
ever! -- great God! -- for ever! -- beings so generous, so virtuous! -- O my
father, what a sacrifice do you exact of me! -- it is above my power; yes, I
feel it will be impossible for me to consummate it. -- But cruel parent, why
did not you come yourself? Why did you write by a hand not your own? That
letter, that stranger, that guide, who is to conduct me -- yet, that guide! --
should it be yourself -- yes, my father, it is you -- I shall meet you in the
forest: My heart tells me so; it cannot deceive me! O sun, hasten thy career,
behold what happiness awaits me when it is completed! restore a son to his
father, and thy setting will be more beautiful for Alexis than thy meridian
glory.

Alexis, enlivened by the idea of meeting his father (...) the guide of the
forest, was shedding tears of joy. Soon calm cheered his soul, and serenity
animated his countenance. He went down to Clara, gave her a (...) of music;
they repaired to Candor, of whom he begged leave to go a hunting in the
afternoon; the latter granted it, embraced him closely, and called him his dear
son, which entirely disconcerted our hero* His firmness failed him, his
resolution vanished, his heart was distressed, and he fell into his former
state of irresolution.

Clara, whom he joined* finished putting him into the most anxious perplexity
an^ confusion: Alexis, said she, rejoice, my father is going to grant thee thy
wishes; he said to me just n^w, tonight you and I shall know his se^rets. O my
God! how I long for that blessed moment! -- But what ails you? It seems as if
you was sorry at these tidings? -- Don't you love my father? Don't you love --
me? how often have you declared and sworn you did? -- In faith, Alexis, could I
but think you ungrateful, I would esteem you no more. -- Oh, how you look at
me! -- you weep now -- No, sir, no, be not sorry, I believe there is nothing
bad in what I told you --

Alexis endeavored to answer, but his grief would not permit him: He only
pressed her hand and then retired. Clara, who had never seen him so downcast,
saw him go; her beautiful eyes were filled with tears: She mechanically,
followed as it were, the traces of her young friend, and stopping on the banks
of the rivulet, near the bridge that leads to the grove, she was highly amazed
to see Alexis write some characters upon the bark of the great ^^plar. She hid
herself behind an antique willow, and watched attentively every motion of her
lover, intending, as soon as he should be gone, to read the inscription he made
on the tree. Alexis, at certain times interrupted his task, lifted his hands
toward heaven, and uttered the most woeful moans. Soon after, he kissed the
characters which he had traced, and with a slow pace returned to the cottage,
not without turning round, and coming back upon his footsteps.

No sooner Clara saw him at too great a distance to be perceived by him, than
she ran trembling to the great poplar. What became of her, when upon it she
read these words?

"O you tender friends, objects of my thoughts, that ought to expect a more
grateful return, accuse not my heart of a forcible flight! one day you will see
me again."

Clara attempts to read the fatal lines again; but her eyes cannot see; a cloud
of darkness covers them; her tongue denies its office, she drops down senseless
upon the turf and remains in that condition, which nobody could guess, without
the smallest succor. She however gradually recovered her senses, and her
unfaithful remembrance hides from her the cause of her perturbation; she rises,
sees herself, with astonishment, open her eyes again to light: Soon the happy
darkness which covered her soul vanished; she repents not having followed the
traces of her lover, and quickly enters the cottage, where she cries with a
loud voice, Alexis! Alexis! ungrateful man, it is Clara who calls you! answer
me, oh, answer me! -- Alexis could hear no more, in consequence of Candor's
having given him leave to go a hunting; he had just left the cottage; he was in
the forest, he looked at the drawbridge which had just shut itself behind him,
and doubting whether he should have it let down again, he could neither
advance, nor return. What a situation for his feeling heart! What, exclaimed
he, Candor, the respectable Candor, who does not suspect my project, and has
just given me tokens of the most tender friendship -- should I leave him! -- Oh
God! how ungrateful! -- And Clara, poor Clara! what will she become, if she
reads my last farewell upon the great poplar? She will see that I was forced to
go, she will see that I am to return one day. -- Yes, I will return, my
generous friends, you will see me again; and will tomorrow hinder me from
coming here with my father and Dumont? -- Oh! they will not be able to
disapprove of my project; they will follow me; tomorrow I shall embrace
Candor, he will pardon me; I will go, I will proceed on my journey, embrace my
father who waits for me at a little distance* Heaven be praised for this favor,
it baffles all expression!

Alexis turned his face toward the cottage, he shed tears, then took his road
as he was directed by the letter: He had now walked half a league in the
forest, when the sky was imperceptibly overcast with clouds, the lightning
rent the air, the thunder roared, whole cataracts of water poured down from the
irritated elements, and the blackest darkness covered all nature. Alexis, moved
at the dreadful scene, felt his knees tottering; terror seized his soul he was
almost convinced that heaven, provoked at his ingratitude, would shiver him
into atoms, he had almost succumbed under the weight of his grief, when a
spacious cavern presents itself to his sight. He enters, to avoid the heavenly
wrath; he ventures to step a little forward; all of a sudden an involuntary
horror makes him tremble; his hair stands at an end, he thinks to see specter
that pursue and stop him; he believes he hears the voice of Clara and Candor;
it is they, it is their voice; they load him with reproaches and curses.
Heavens where is he to seek refuge? The phantoms pursue him wherever he goes;
on all sides sighs and shrieks resound in his ears. Let us for a moment leave
him in this critical situation, and see what passes in the cottage.

Clara, after she had read the words, written on the great poplar, ran back to
the cottage in hopes to find Alexis; but what was her surprise when her father
informs her that he is not there, but went a hunting in the sorest -- "A
hunting!" cried Clara; "ah, my father, he flies from you, he leaves you
forever!" -- "What do you say, my daughter?" -- "Yes, the ungrateful Alexis is
gone! -- We shall see him no more." -- "But how do you know this?" -- "Listen,
my father, listen to me and know all his treachery."

Here Clara told Candor and Germain the adventure of the poplar tree, and
begged her father to send Germain after him, not to bring him back, but to
upbraid him in the blackest terms, for his ingratitude. -- Candor heard
patiently Clara's report, and showed her that the project she had conceived was
quite impracticable. Which way indeed could he send in pursuit of him? Which
way did he go? A whole hour at least had elapsed since his departure. --
Besides, in such weather! would it be worth while to brave the tempest and
lightning to run after a traitor? No, my dear Clara, continued he, it is
useless to give ourselves any trouble, you shall see your Alexis, you shall see
him again: but he shall pay dear for the torments he causes Clara! -- Withdraw
for a while to your apartment, and leave me to consult with Germain upon what
can be done.

Clara kissed her father's hand, and repaired to her apartment where she wept
bitterly. Thus she spent the best part of the evening and night, without seeing
either Candor or Germain! The latter came finally to open her prison (for she
had been under key;) "Clara, (said he) follow me, you will see him again." --
"Who? Alexis?" -- "Himself, he is here." -- "O heaven! shall I -- yes, I will
-- let us go, Germain, conduct me to the traitor! -- will he be able to stand
in my presence?"

Thus she spoke -- Germain immediately laid hold of her hand, and made her go
down to the place where she had never been before; but let us not dwell on a
description of it, which we shall give hereafter; but let us see how Alexis was
conducted to it.

We left him in a cavern of the forest, haunted by remorse and fantastic
apparitions. He was now an hour in it, when he thought he heard a voice at the
bottom of the subterranean; He listens, the voice utters his name; it is no
vision, a feeble light glimmers at a distance before him. Is it a snare? shall
he go and follow that voice which may make him tumble into some abyss? Yes,
Alexis, promoted by a supernatural courage; risks the adventure. Whosoever you
be, (calls he out to the man who carried the light, whose features he could not
distinguish) whosoever you be, I will follow you boldly; but what do you want
of me? No answer is given. He advances, and the light disappears before him.
What intrepidity in a young man of eighteen; to be sure so extraordinary an
adventure was worth his notice: Alexis thought he saw specter -- he trembled
-- now he followed a man, and his firmness returned: frightful illusions often
deceive more than credulity.

He therefore walked before his guide, and distance always hindered him from
recognizing his face. His passage took up about another hour; he remarked a
thousand beauties in this grotto; now a supurb petrifaction offered itself to
his sight, then a little rivulet running over layers of pebbles presented
Itself to him, and all on a sudden lest him to lose itself in the hollow of a
rock. In short, this vast grotto appeared rather the work of nature than of art.

At the end of the cavern the guide opened a door, and disappeared. Alexis, by
the light which he perceived across the door, pursued his way, and his
astonishment became so great as not to permit him to think. At last he saw
himself in a splendid temple, whose door shut itself after him. The floor and
columns were of black marble, and on the ceiling hung a lamp which cast a
deadly gleam. In the center of the temple, several steps led to a magnificent
tomb; above it he saw a picture representing a woman with a child in her lap.
Alexis, struck with all these things, had no doubt of the portraits being those
of the persons laid in the tomb. But what place could it be? Who was he that
conducted him to it? His guide had disappeared, he was alone, shut up, and
nobody came to let him out. -- Alexis began to repent of his too great
confidence, when, lo, a door opens -- a venerable old man appears -- Heaven!
can he believes his own eyes? -- it is Candor -- Candor himself! O earth open,
and let the unhappy Alexis hide his remorse in thy bosom!

Ungrateful, said the old man to him, ungrateful Alexis! where are your
promises? Where are your oaths? you was to have lived and died with us, and you
fly, you forsake us! -- I see but too well the trial was above your strength! I
suspected the instability of your resolutions. -- You look at me; I can read in
your eyes the surprise which my discourse causes. Let your astonishment cease:
Know, that the inscription upon the trees of the forest, the stranger, the
letter the guide, in short, the whole intelligence you received, was an ar^ful
contrivance of mine to sound your sentiments, and to measure what degree of
confidence I should repose in you. Now I am ready to fulfill your wishes; I know
you, I know how much your friendship may be depended on. O treacherous Alexis!
you have opened my eyes but too much! -- I see I have lost all in this world,
as there is not one single friend left to me. -- Ah! my father, cried Alexis,
throwing himself at his feet, ah! my generous benefactor! yes, you speak the
truth, it was a trial too hard for my heart. -- But did you know what conflicts
and torments I endured! Ah! pardon me, and be persuaded that it wanted nothing
less than filial tenderness that could balance that you have inspired me with.

Candor was going to reply, when a door opened -- it is Germain, it is Clara,
who came to load the unfortunate Alexis with their reproaches, already
mortified with those of the old man. The youth, sensible of his error, embraces
their knees, bedews them with his tears, detests his faults, and expresses his
repentance with such a sense of contrite feeling, that the father and daughter
are forced to pity, to indulge and to do him justice; for be it as it will,
they were sensible that Alexis had done but his duty in following the instinct
of nature, that he lest them in hopes to see his father again. An excess of
virtue had made him guilty of ingratitude, and nature was his apology, Candor
could not tell him his real way of thinking, sensible that the trial he had put
him to was too arduous, and that his very transgression made his eulogium; he
embraced him therefore, and promised to forget all. He then bade him to be
seated on the steps of the tomb, and gave the same order to his daughter and
Germain, and began the following discourse, which was an introduction to relate
his adventures:

"Alexis, if I sent Germain to fetch you into the cavern of the forest; if he
has been your guide hither without your being able to know him; in short, if I
receive you for the first time in this dismal place, it is merely to disclose a
great design which I have conceived, and to exact from your arm a vengeance,
which my own, withered by age, cannot take upon the cruel enemy who has caused
all my misfortunes. Behold this mysterious cave, which I have concealed from
you* till now, and in which lays deposited what makes both my despair and the
treasure of my heart! Here lies my spouse -- ^he was guilty, but -- my poor
son! permit me to let slow my tears! Here you see his image; this is his
portrait* alas! a barbarous monster has murdered them both -- would you believe
it my son, that monster stands before you? I am the monster! -- yes, I am he
who sacrificed them! O shame! O remorse! O despair! must my old age be haunted
by the remembrance of so attrocious a crime? -- No, I will have no comfort, my
children; my tears will never wash off the blood with which I have sullied my
hands!"

The old man wept for a while, became calm by degrees, and commenced the
history of his misfortunes, which Clara herself heard now for the first time.

CHAP. V.
SOTRY OF DORANCE.

THE HUSBAND A CONFIDANT OF HIS RIVAL.
MY name is Dorance: my father was president of the Parliament of Grenoble, a
sacred body, a most honorable body, which has at all times given proof of
firmness and justice. An infant yet he sent me to Paris, to make my studies
under the tuition of a governor, as prudent as enlightened. It was in the
collage of Bea^vais, where I unfortunately made the acquaintance of a traitor,
the chevalier Duverly. Like me, young, brisk, and fiery, his temper bore so
much resemblance to mine, that, in a little time, we became so intimate, that
we could hardly be separated for one moment. He was an orphan, and his
education entrusted to the care of a guardian, who was to restore him his whole
property when he should come to be of age.

I shall not expatiate upon the particulars of our intimacy, nor the
circumstances which cemented it: it will be sufficient for you to know, that
upon leaving the college, where we had studied the humanities together, I
requested him to come and spend some time with me at Grenoble at my father's
house, to whom I had many times wrote in a very flattering manner, about my
friend's conduct, and also expressed a desire of getting more particular
knowledge of him. Duverly at that time complied with an invitation, that quite
charmed him: he loved me, or I had at least no reason to think to the contrary:
but his passions were soon to operate a change in his perfidious heart, and to
infect it with the sperm of all vices.

My father, who was kind and generous, received Duverly with great cordiality,
and made him the offer to make his house his home as long as he pleased.
Duverly gratefully accepted his proposal, and I returned thanks to my father.
The latter soon became so fond of my friend as to blazen forth his merits
without reserve, and to make him, in every thing, the pattern of my conduct: we
both studied the profession of the law, for which Duverly manifested more
disposition and taste than myself. He became also daily more grave and serious.
He had no more for me that confidence, nor made those friendly effusions which
I so often experienced from him in his youth; in a word, I found him more
reserved and deliberate. Whatever alarmed me in his conduct; whatever I
considered as an evident change in his friendship to me, my father looked upon
as an energy of mind, and a discretion of character entitled to his admiration.
Behold, said he, often to me, behold your friend! he shows not that levity so
conspicuous in your character; he is grave, reasonable, thinking, and solid.
Endeavor to preserve always his friendship, and to follow his advice, for I am
certain he wishes you well. I listened to my father, and it being congenial to
me, that he could not mislead me with regard to Duverly my esteem for the
latter heightened, and I tried every thing in my power to re-obtain his
confidence, which I thought I had forfeited by my sailings.

My father was very intimate with an old baroness, whose name was Myrsange: she
was the widow of an officer of horse, and a few years since came to live at
Grenoble with her only child, an adorable charming young lady, whom I could not
see without emotion. My father, my friend and I, were used to spend the evening
at the baroness's house, and the too lovely Adela made every day so great a
progress in my affections, that I soon was able to discern the nature of my
sentiments. I made this confidence to Duverly, who, surprised and astonished,
received my avowal with such a kind of indignation as intimidated me from
making further confidence. What, said he, do you love Miss Myrsange? You --
only think, Dorance? Think that she is but a sort of adventurer, whose family
and property are equally unknown to every body. She and her mother, I grant
you, make a tolerable figure in this town; but whence come they? Who are they?
it is three years since they have resided here; is that enough to know well
persons, who perhaps have been banished or expudiated? Open your eyes, Dorance,
acknowledge your folly; your father will never consent to it, believe me. No,
he will never consent: I know him. He will, I suppose, make enquiries, and
should they not prove satisfactory, you know yourself the consequence; in other
respects he reposes great trust in me: and if he asks my advice, in faith, I
will be candid with you, re^ent it if you choose, yet, I shall never give my
opinion in favor of such a match. O heaven, what, Duverly -- no; depend upon
it: I profess too much attachment to your well being, not to suffer you to
throw yourself blindly and headlong into a precipice; the day would come, when
you would reproach me with having promoted your ruin. My ruin, by all means;
have not you dived into the character of that little body? Oh, I know her
better than you, I can swear; first of all I believe she is a haughty,
imperious, slandering coquet. She has wit, I will not deny her that; but a
deceitful, malicious, and sarcastic wit, you yourself know it. My dear Dorance
is it possible; ah, did you know how painful this confession* of yours is to
me, painful on your account; for were you not my friend, it would be very
indifferent to me, whether you have her or another. Come, promise me to follow
my advice, and to conquer a foolish passion, which should never have rose in
your heart.

The discourse of Duverly astonished me to such a degree that I was at a loss
to make a reply -- I remained motionless, my heart was heavy; I was going, I
believe, to shed tears, when my father by his entering the apartment,
interrupted our conversation, and took us with him to the court, where a cause
highly interesting was to be pleaded; it was a couple who had married by
inclination and without the consent of their parents: six months having past,
they became equally odious to one another, and sued for a divorce. They made
use of as many invectives as they formerly had made of tender and pious
expressions, and adduced in their behalf facts so attrocious, as would have
provoked the most indelicate ear.

This suit struck me with horror, and Duverly, who perceived it, was pleased to
add to my confusion, by pushing me at every quotation made by the counselors,
and expatiating with a low voice, upon the dangers of an ill-concerted
marriage, which each of the couple depicted with equal energy.

Upon my return, I made the most cruel reflections I did not suspect my friend
of any secret motive to oppose my passion: moreover, my father esteemed him
much, and entertained the most flattering notions of his spirit and judgment:
this was a sufficient reason for me to respect him blindly.

Of all the fears Duverly had caused me, none seemed to me well founded; they
were confined to vague suspicions, without proofs, and of no alarming nature.
What could I think of Duverly; He had appeared much moved at the confidence I
made him of my passion: was it his concern for me, which -- Oh yes, it was
doubtless his concern, his friendship alone, which made him speak to me. He was
perhaps too timid, too prying into futurity; but all this reflects honor upon
his heart; he was attached to me: he loved and respected my father, and was
afraid lest he should see unfortunate, some day, the family he cherished.

I did abide by these reflections, and intended to study Miss Myrsange's
character, and to renounce her hand, if ever I should discover in it the faults
he had pointed out.

My father, however, frequently asked what I thought of Adela? I dared not to
disclose to him my real sentiments on that head, lest they should kindle his
wrath. One day he explained h^mself to me in a more distinct manner. Dorance,
said he, I perceive the daughter of the baroness is not indifferent to you;
answer me, my son; open your heart, and thou will perhaps not repent. -- My
father -- you love her; come, out with the word -- Yes, my father, I do love
the charming Adela; yes, I do adore her, were you even to load me with all the
weight of -- O load you! -- what means that, my son? You accomplish my wishes,
and those of her mother; -- know that we both desire to see love rise in your
breast! -- how! -- Adelia is yours, Adelia shall be your spouse upon
condition. What condition? speak father. What condition? That you go to Paris
to study law, to receive instructions, and enable yourself to take the function
of my charge, which I shall not resign but in favor of that marriage. To go to
Paris, my father! Could not I study here as well as in Paris? Undoubtedly, but
there is no place like Paris for young people to get instructed. Besides, I
will recommend you to my best friend, Mr. de Calenzieux; he is a counselor of
parliament, and will perhaps take better care of your education than I can do;
he is an old senator, replete with genius and knowledge: go to him, my son, go
to draw from him his advice, that prudence and wisdom so necessary to him who
is to be the judge of his equals: and as you are to succeed in office, give me
the satisfaction to think, when I descend to ^he grave, that I leave my fellow
citizens a virtuous and equitable magistrate. You shall set off tomorrow with
Duverly, who, I have no doubt (for Mr. de Calenzieux will receive you both with
equal pleasure, and he tells me so in his answer) will accompany you; then
return in a twelve month; yes, in a twelve month you shall possess, Adela, and
fulfill the hopes of my old age!

I embraced my father, and retired with the greatest joy. I was however
determined not to mention any thing about the project of my marriage to
Duverly, fearing he may try to alter my father's mind, and I only informed him
of our intended journey to Paris. I perceived that this news was highly
vexatious to him; he turned pale, opposed the measure for some time, and when
he made me perceive (...) he began to feel the weight of the links of our
friendship, my father, much occupied that day, had only time to say a few words
to him* he requested him to accompany me to Paris, and to be my Mentor. My dear
Duverly, said he* you are a man of sound and solid parts, be vigilant over my
son, grant him always your friendship and your advice, which I command him to
follow and to respect as mine own. Let him pay attention to you, and he will
accomplish all my wishes. Duverly answered only stammering; I observed him to
be downcast that whole day. At night we went to take our leaves of the baroness
and her daughter: the latter gave me a very cold reception, cast down her eyes,
and I thought she had been weeping. I paid her a compliment which she did not
return: I pressed her hand without her seeming to be moved. Her coldness
affected me; I could easily discover that she did not love me; an involuntary
blush diffused itself over my face, and I let drop some tears. The mother, who
perceived my perplexity, endeavored to allay it: she opened her arms, and
called me her son. I obtained leave of her to embrace her daughter; but seeing
the latter averse to grant the parting kiss, she was ordered to comply. Well!
my daughter said the baroness, well! that may be granted to a person who takes
his leave -- come, comfort him, that poor traveller: he is, you see, sorry to
leave us! Adela obeyed with seeming reluctance, and I embraced her trembling.
With regard to Duverly, the baroness was much more reserved; but the perfidious
Adela had not the least objection to embrace him; she made half the advance
(...) it: I was not surprised: shyness might have made her more moderate with
me and having suffere^ me to take that liberty, it would have been the grossest
ins^lt to my friend, not to grant him the same indulgence. We set out early on
the next morning, and, during the who^e journey, Duverly was sad, uneasy,
grieved, and even snappish; he sometimes sighed, looked up to heaven, and
exclaimed, I am very unfortunate! What is the matter, dear friend, asked I? Why
nothing, answered he, my health, which I see decline daily, gives me some
uneasiness -- I feel such depressions and palpitations of heart, which robs me
of rest both day and night. Aye, it is the vapors. The vapors, sir! you (...)
it the vapors, you are very inhuman, very hard. -- I beg your pardon my
friend, I did not with (...) -- you are happy* every body smiles at you! you
are always successful* what, you! you are as hardy as Hercules! you enjoy the
caresses of a father! of a most excellent father! but I, who have no parents,
nobody in the world. I am left alone to myself! -- Alone -- to yourself -- when
you have friends!

Duverly made no answer to this: he had a relapse of his melancholy, and I was
sorry to see him in such a situation; as for his health, having been worse for
some time, it was true he had no sleep, he could not eat, and fell into a state
of languor, which would bring on a dangerous disorder.

It was not long before it happened. We had now been two months at the house of
the counselor, when Duverly was taken ill. The physicians who were consulted
upon this case gave it as their opinion, that the young man had some inward
grief which preyed upon him, and if it was possible to remedy its influence,
his life might easily be saved. Judge what impression this report made upon me.
I who loved Duverly, believed to possess his confidence! he concealed his grief
from me. Ah! my feeling heart could not bear that idea; I was determined to try
all possible means to get from him that fatal secret, and to restore him to
health, even at the risk of my life. As I sat up by him regularly every night,
I took the opportunity of a moment when he was calm and settled, to address him
as follows. Duverly, you will die; you will conceal from me the cause of your
death -- ah! what an outrage to my heart could you pry into it: could you but
see! entrust me with your sorrrows, my dear Duverly; entrust me with them -- if
it was in my power to redeem your life, doubt no^ I will do every thing! yes,
Dorance, it is in your power: yet -- speak, in the name of heaven, speak --
your friend does conjure you! I am afraid the service which I require of you
will hurt your feelings. -- No matter: if I can do it without trespassing the
laws of honor, cost what it will I am prepared for all. O my friend! were I
sure of you; but -- Duverly! Duverly! how can you thus grieve me? Well, I will
make an entire confession -- but how can I? Ah! hear me, and pardon if I
conceal certain particulars, which -- You must disguise nothing! I should not
for my own sake, but for -- the person I love. -- You love! you! O heaven! do
you really love? -- Yes I do love! I do burn! attend to me; pray, attend*

Duverly upon this, prepared to digest in his head the little fable he was
going to relate. Alas, my friends, had he then unravelled to me the truth, all
would have been over: I would have made him welcome to Adela's hand; I would
have made that effort, and not have suffered a series of misfortunes, of which
he was the sole author, and which never will cease but with my death.

Know then, said he, that the first day of our arrival at Grenoble, I paid a
visit to a relation of the name of Mrs. des Roches. I never mentioned that lady
before, because she is the only source of my unfortunate adventure, and I --
hesitated to let you into any fatal secret. I met at her house with a
respectable old man, who came there upon a visit wi^h his daughter, a girl of
about sixteen: no, my friend, thou have never seen so much allurement, brown
(observe, my children, that Adela was fair) brown, sprightly, replete with wit,
graces, and accomplishments; I could not see her without falling desperately in
love. When she had left the house, I made bold to tell my relation what
impression ^he young lady had made upon my heart. Beware, Duverly, answered
she, of harbo^ing such a passion. Ro^^na's sole dependence is on a wealthy and
very amiable father. A young colonel, now in town, has solicited her hand, and
promise was made on both sides. -- O heaven! and does Rosina love him? Alas!
no, the poor child has fits quite the reverse to that marriage; but the will of
a father is a law! How soon is her marriage to take place? -- I don't know: the
colonel expects the consent of his family may arrive tomorrow.

Mrs. des Roches made me also the confidant of many other circumstances: the
most pleasing to me was to hear that Rosina came every day quite alone to see
her, and staid for whole hours. The father, pursued she, has every possible
friendship for me, and is never more pleased than when he knows his daughter is
at my house.

I begged leave of Mrs. des Roches to permit me to see beautiful Rosina at her
house, to which she at first though it proper to refuse: but when she saw that I
persisted in my entreaties, and dropping down on my knees, and a torrent of
tears gushed from mine eyes, she was at last finally prevailed upon to comply.
Thus I had the good fortune to see fair Rosina every day, to declare my passion
to her, and to find her soon moved with pity for her distracted lover. What a
difference (continued the traitorous Duverly) what a difference between my
Rosina and your Adela! -- Ah! If I were as free as you, I would marry her
without delay? If her mother, her father, I say, would give their consent, as
the baroness does you her daughter! but, no -- the father, a hard and cruel
father, is so over fond of this colonel, that will make Rosina a sacrifice to
interest and rank! Oh! my friend, you see my disastrous fate! I must renounce
the most beauteous, the most amiable young lady! -- Oh! how I am to be pitied!

CHAP. VI.
THE STORY OF DORANCE CONTINUED.

ON the night previous to our departure from Grenoble, a departure, which you
will easily conceive, has grieved me much -- I saw her. "My dear Duverly," said
she, melting in tears, "all is over, we are wretched for ever! -- My father has
given me formal notice, that I must resolve to be the colonel's in a
twelvemonth -- that very man whom I detest, whom I abhor!" -- "In a
twelvemonth!" "Yes, because the young man is gone to make a campaign, and is to
be married to me upon his return." "Ah my Rosina, what a blow!" -- "Cruel
indeed, Duverly, but I am under the control of a mother, and she must be
obeyed." She must be obeyed! Conceive Dorance, only conceive my grief! Your
father then requested me to accompany you to Paris: I could not resist his
desire; I set out, but I leave you to think, whether I would not have preferred
staying at Grenoble! my rival was not there; I might have been a whole year
with my charming Rosina, I would have been at liberty to see her every day at
Mrs. des Roches'; Ah how happy would have been my lot!" Duverly was silent for
a moment, though the confidence he had just made, really wounded my feelings,
and made me consider Mrs. des Roches as a vile, despicable woman. I I would
not, by delivering my true sentiments, aggravate my friend's suffering
condition. He then continued as follows:

"At my departure from Grenoble, Rosina promised to write to me and I have
actually received a letter of here is a fortnight ago. It is this letter, Dorance
which has given me a mortal blow. Here it is: I shall read it to you* and from
it you will judge all the extent of my misery."

I did not, my children, know Adela's hand writing. Duverly who was sure of
that, risked nothing to show it me: but he took care not to let me peruse it,
as he had a mind to change some expressions, which would have otherwise
undeceived me. The expressions which Duverly changed in reading Adela's letter,
are printed in italics.
He began, therefore, to peruse it very slowly, for fear of making a blunder:

"Pardon me, my dear Duverly, for not having written sooner. My father is
teazing me continually; and since the Colonel's departure, he does hardly give
me a minute's time to see Mrs. des Roches. But, O fresh misfortune! did you
only know what sacrifice is exacted from poor Rosina! My father is absolutely
determined to put me into a convent, till the return of the Colonel! Alas, I
have put off, as long as I could, the moment of that fatal captivity -- but he
plagues, he persecutes me, and I shall at last be forced into compliance. Oh,
let me often hear of you, my gentle friend, there is no other comfort on earth
for Rosina."

"This letter, (continued Duverly) this cruel letter, which informs me that my
dear Rosina is to be shut up, for a twelvemonth in an obscure retreat, where I
find it will be impossible for me, if the event takes place, to write to her;
this fatal letter has troubled my senses, the ague has inflamed my blood, and a
furious phrensy quite shook my brains; this, Dorance, this is the real cause of
my disease."

When he had done speaking, I remarked such fire in his eyes, as made me
sensible that it was not seasonable then to give him advice. Nevertheless he
stood in need of the best of advice; for, what could be the aim of his passion
for an object which was unknown to me? and that Mrs. des Roches, who made
themselves subservient to so shameful an intrigue; Oh, that character was
odious and indignant to me. Nay, had I known that my Adela was the object in
question; that the letter which had been read to me was from Adela; that the
colonel and pretended rival was myself -- great God, what would have become of
me! but his fable was so well conceived, so well disguised; and as yet, he had
spoke so ill of Miss Myrsange, that I thought she could not be the person. I
had even not the least idea of it in my mind; and, had I not explained it, my
children, you would not have guessed better than I did then. As to Mrs. des
Roches, she was no relation of Duverly, as he gave out, but one of these
v^olent go betweens, whose only pleasure is to hatch plots, and with whom we
meet with every where to promote disorder. And yet, I will not have you believe
that her house was a place of debauchery, but ^nly a place most convenient for
lovers whose business is short. Mrs. des Roches was a woman of second hand
principles, willing to serve in all intrigues the intent of which did not, to a
certain point affect her delicacy. My father and the baroness were perfectly
ignorant of ^he acquaintance Adela had contracted with that woman. It was
Duverly who had appointed her that rendezvous, whither she made it convenient
to repair, to enjoy the company of her gallant.

All these particulars, my children, I unluckily heard but long afterward; but
I was obliged to expose them to you, in order to show how much I have been
deceived. Grant me your whole attention, you shall see the most perfidious, and
as well framed a plot as ever entered the head of man, to betray the good faith
of his equals.

"My friend," said I to Duverly, "your situation is very cruel! you are now
sensible that love is not easily controuled, and you can no longer blame me for
harboring that passion, for adoring, I say, the charming Adela, in spite of
your wife persuasions, and the faults you find in her." "Do you love her
still?" said he, with a kind of emphasis -- "Yes, you do, I feel it but too
well! and, although this objection of your affection would never have made any
impression upon me, yet, as you observe, love knows no control! My dear
friend, you see I am not in a condition to write; will you favor me to write
the answer to this letter? I will dictate it: take pen and ink -- oblige me in
this! you cannot refuse a dying friend!" I hesitated for some time how I was to
act: but his entreaties -- he was dying -- what could I do? I placed a table
close to his bedside, and he dictated to me the following letter:

"Oh! how much has your letter affected me. my sweetest love! You in a convent
-- you in a twelvemonth in the arms of a rival! What a rival! how dangerous is
he! -- Did you know! but no matter; as we love one another death alone can part
us! The obstacles, however, which I find in my way have been very likely to
cost me my life. I was, a few cays ago; at the very brink of the grave; but a
sincere friend, a friend whose heart is excellent, has with^eld me. I entrusted
him with the secret of our correspondence: he is another myself; he shares my
sufferings and your own, yet he does not know you! It is he who traces these
characters, which fell sickness denies my debil^ hand. Yes, when you receive
this letter, O my loved think on me; think on him, and behold the expressions
of love written by the hand of friendship.

"When the term of my suffering shall be past, when heaven shall have restored
my health, I intend going directly to Grenoble, I -- "

Here I interrupted him to ask what he meant by this, but he begged me to go
on, and he would explain afterward the phrase that made me stop.

"I shall go to Mrs. des Roches, in whose house I mean to hide myself for some
time. There I shall see you, there I shall swear a thousand times, the most
constant attachment. O my charming love! -- This hope gives me a new life. My
sufferings vanish! -- I think on you, I suffer no more!"


Duverly used his utmost endeavors to sign his name in a legible manner: I then
folded up and sealed the letter, when he desired me to put upon it the
following direction:

"A Madame, Madam des Roches, Rue Perrierre, Grenoble."

One might have said the balm of comfort had been poured into his breast: his
eyes became a little serene, his cheeks flushed with the blooming tokens of
health, and he pressed my hand in a manner expressive of sentiment. "My
friend," said he, "This is not the only favor I have to beg of you. It is in
your power to restore me to life; but you must pledge your word of honor to
perform what I shall require. Suffer me to return to Grenoble: I shall hide
myself; I shall see my Rosina and be happy! You will therefore write to your
father, to let him know that I am much better; that we will always do business
as usual, etc. etc. I will even send letters for him, and which you will
enclose in your own. My friend, restore me to life, as it will cost so little.

This project excited my indignation, which I expressed by a plain refusal. Had
you but seen the traitor weep sigh and supplicate! he even fainted; and I was
afraid it would be his last. "Wretch!" said I within myself, what a passion!
what a phrenzy! Alas! he is a madman who must be taken care of against his own
self! But were my father to discover him at Grenoble! were he to detect me as
an impostor! -- I expose myself to his anger! well, I will fall down at his
feet, and describe the condition my friend was in: I shall confess my weakness,
and he will grant me his pardon. Besides, Duverly is not my slave, he has a
right to act as he pleases! -- And what right have I to hinder him? Well,
imprudent as it will be of me, my imprudence will save his life, it will
restore my friend! Yes, Duverly," exclaimed I "Yes, I will do all to serve you;
only live, and let this be my reward."

Here the patient embraced me; he wept, laughed, was moved, and fell asleep. I
left him at day break, and jealous of keeping my word, went immediately to
carry the letter to the post office.

Don't you admire my complaisance? Oh! we are not come to the point yet; you
will see me act a part -- a part that will make me blush all my life time: it
proves my imprudence and my foolishness: -- but I must go on.

The chevalier got well in about a week. It is useless for me to tell you how
often, during that time he talked of his love, and the pleasures he was going
to enjoy at Grenoble! At last, impatient to wait for his full and perfect
recovery, he embraced me and departed, informing the counselor, that he was to
take possession of a considerable estate in Auvergne, to which he had succeeded
by a legal right of inheritance; and that his absence should not exceed two
months at furthest.

"It would be to no purpose," said he "for you to inform Mr. Dorance, the
father, of my departure; for he, having entrusted me with the conduct of his
son, might be offended at my losing sight of him for some time; but he is no
longer a child; and moreover, in what house, sir, -- in what house more
respectible than yours could he be? Are you not a real father to him? -- Ah!
with you he wants no Mentor?"

The counsell^r, whose self-love was interested, promised not to write to my
father; and Duverly set out promising to let me frequently know his sufferings
or his success, and requesting me to answer his letters under cover, and direct
them to Mrs. des Roches.

A long period of time passed, before I heard of him; I received at last the
following letter two months after his departure:

"Can you believe it, my friend! I am the happiest of mortals! Rosina loves me
still! she has shown so much repugnance to the convent, that her father would
not persist any longer in his former decree. Yet, there is another old
Cerberus, the colonel's father, ^ho follows her like his own shadow -- Cupid,
however, discomfits secretly the Arguses of Minerva -- Rosina comes
occasionally to visit Mrs. des Roches, where I have been lodged ^ver since my
arrival. Not a soul has seen me yet in this town; the house of my relation is a
real hermitage, and is richly provided with all the sweets of life. -- Here I
may enjoy the pleasure of a walk, in a delightful garden adorned with little
woods, and most delicious groves. -- Groves; can I utter this word without
retracing to my mind the happiness I enjoyed yesterday! -- Durst I make this
avowal to my friend? will his delicacy not be offended? O no, he loves, he must
excuse the errors which love makes one apt to commit! Yesterday, Rosina and I
being in one of those groves -- they are so dangerous! -- Love put his blind
over the eyes of reason; it vanquished the resistance of Rosina, and I obtained
a victory -- alas! a cruel victory, as it cost her tears, and me regret! O my
friend! lend me all your eloquence to console the fair I have seduced! Restore
me my innocence to bring back the alarmed modesty which I have dispelled and to
re plant a flower which I have nipt in her first bloom, in her first freshness;
Alas! Rosina accuses me of her misfortune! -- How will she dare to offer her
hand to a husband! with what countenance will she kindle the torch of Hymen,
having yielded her all to love! This causes her despair, this brings upon me,
on her part, the keenest reproaches! -- Dorance, my dear Dorance, oh! pity me,
write, I crave your advice! --

"I cannot conclude this without speaking of your Adela. They say she changes
every day in the most singular manner; and is torn by a grief whose source is
unknown. Her physical parts are as much affected as her moral ones. She becomes
sluttish, pouting, even ill-natured: she scolds at every body. There are such
scenes passing between her and her mother! My friend! I cannot blame you for
being in love; but if you were not to meet with equal return, oh! how
unfortunate would you be! Adieu, -- reflect."

The perusal of this epistle put me to the blush, for the part I had acted in
this intrigue. "Yes," said I "it is I who am the author of that crime! it is I;
had I not consented to Duverly's secret departure, would he have seen Rosina,
would he have been able to seduce her youth and virtue? O imprudent! What have
I done? -- Would to God, I knew the colonel who is to be her husband! -- I
would confess my fault, discover the blow which his honor has received; in
short hinder an honest man from being so basely deceived! I shall know him; I
shall tell him; he shall hear all, I will have nothing to reproach myself with,
as having been the instrument of the misery of his life. -- What do I say! --
Vile agent of the most shameful intrigue, I had rather be silent. It behooves me
to bury it in the deepest oblivion, and repent all my life of a conduct equally
disgraceful to the dictates of honor and virtue."

I answered Duverly's letter, but in the most serious manner; I made him
sensible of his wrongs, and the baseness of the part he had made me act. I
desired him to look out for another confidant, and concluded with conjuring him
never to mention again an intrigue in which I was ashamed to have been
instrumental.

What effect this severe letter had upon him I shall not decide. During four
months I never heard of him, and at the expiration of that time, I had the
misfortune to receive a letter from the baroness, bringing the bad tidings of
my father's death.

I made the utmost dispatch to Grenoble, where I found every body belonging to
my father's family in mourning and consternation.

I had only some very distant relations in that town, and was resolved to leave
it, as soon as I should have obtained Adela's hand, which her mother, jealous
of the promise she had made my father, was always disposed to grant me.

I hoped to find Duverly prepared to console me, and to share my grief! Judge
of my astonishment when I could not get the least intelligence of him. I went
to Rue Perrierre, to that Mrs. des Roches, where I knew he lodged, and to my
utmost surprise, was informed that Mrs. des Roches had left town a week ago,
and that the place she had chosen for her residence was unknown. I had not the
least doubt of Duverly and his infamous accomplices having carried off the
unfortunate Rosina, and that the former would not let me know the matter, for
fear of incurring my father's displeasure. But, what often puzzled me was, that
nobody at Grenoble had known Rosina or her father. Indeed, not knowing the old
man's name, I could not make proper inquiries about the family.

Thus my friend was gone: he had forsaken me; he had broken the first ties of
our friendship! I for some time regretted him, but soon after considering his
perverse morals, I made an effort to forget him, and succeeded; so true is it
that vice must be hateful to honest and virtuous hearts, and that with them it
outweighs all other considerations.

In the mean while, I saw every day my Adela, who was faithful to the portrait
Duverly had drawn of her in his last; her mother, however, before whom she
constrained herself, insisted on her giving me her hand; it was my father's
last will; I was determined to receive it; yet without -- love! This passion
weakened in me every day, and I acted barely with passive obedience to the
baroness, because I foresaw the abyss which threatened my ruin. I often
attempted to try Adela's sentiments toward me, and I found, that though she
had no liking to me, she was not against accepting my hand. At last, being
persuaded to marriage on all sides, when the fatal day fixed for the ceremony
was come, I conducted miss to the alter, and brought her back without joy as
without sadness; but with a sentiment of inquietude which I could not account
for. Arrived at home, my spouse demanded to speak in private with me and her
mother; we complied with her request, and saw her with surprise throw herself
at our feet, and make the following singular speech: "Mother, you have forced
me to marry this gentleman! you know the struggles I went through, and how
often you have rejected me from your bosom; give me, for heaven sake, time to
know him, to acknowledge his real merit, and to render myself worthy of the
tenderness he condescends to have for me! I only beg leave for two months to
retire to Mrs. Reigny's, my aunt, at St. Marcellin. There I shall have leisure
to deliberate better; there I will do every endeavor to deserve the affection
and love of the man who merits to find more gratitude in me; Oh, my mother, and
you, sir, grant me this favor! I beg it on my knees! Alas, can you deny me?"

The baroness was going to load her daughter with reproaches and threats; but I
was so moved, the voice of candor appealed so loud to my heart, that I thought
it would be cruelty to refuse so singular a demand, which was nigh to have
affected the life of the unfortunate Adela. Joining therefore my entreaties to
her own, we at last obtained the mother's consent. At the same time, she loaded
her with curses and imprecations, and swore never to see her again. "Sir,"
added she, "I have no farther rights upon her: do with her what you advise
best: for my own part, I will no more hear of her; no, no more: -- She is the
scourge of my old age.

The baroness suddenly left the room, and would not even so much as give her a
letter for Mrs. Reigny. I was as much perplexed as my spouse: I sent a trusty
servant with her, she stepped quickly into the carriage with her woman, and
arrived that very day at St. Marcellin. My servant returned the next day, with
a letter from Adela, in which she thanked me for the permission I had granted
her, assuring me that a trait so generous would never be erased from her
memory, and that she could already promise me the possession of her heart.

CHAP. VII.
THE STORY OF DORANCE CONTINUED:

THUS left a widower on the first day of my marriage, I staid another month at
Grenoble, where I had the misfortune to lose the baroness my mother in law. Her
daughter's conduct, whose notoriety was partly known to her, and perhaps the
regret of having forced her to a compliance against her inclination, brought
upon her a violent illness of which she died; neither permitting my spouse to
see her, nor forgiving her in her last moments. Being then tired of Grenoble, I
determined to go to settle in Paris; but would first go to St. Marcellin to see
my spouse, and to persuade her if possible to accompany me. In consequence of
this, I informed her by a letter of her mother's death, of the design I had
formed, and concluded with begging her kindly to receive my visit and to give
me her consent to accompany me to Paris

Having sent this letter, I settled some affairs at Grenoble, and set out for
St. Marcellin. It is time, my children, to make you acquainted with the conduct
of my spouse, and the perfidious Duversy.

He had no sooner heard of my return to Grenoble, than he determined to leave
the town that very instant, lest he should excite my suspicion. Moreover, my
presence was a check to the frequent visits he paid to the culpable Adela. Much
would he have been at a loss also to convince me of his intrigue with the
pretended Rosina. Adela, therefore, with Mrs. des Roches and Duverly, having
conjointly taken their measures, it was agreed that the latter should go to
reside at St. Marcellin, near Mrs. Reigny, a sister of the the baroness, and
that Adela should adopt the above conduct with her mother and me. Mrs. des
Roches an insinuating artful woman, having, at her arrival at St. Marcelin,
changed her name, and gave out Duverly for her son, and both of them became so
connected with Mrs. Reigny, that they spent whole days in company of each
other, and almost slept under the same roof. Adela came to increase that
company, and told her aunt how her mother had forced her to marry a man she did
not like, and our tempers being of a contradictory nature, and in opposition to
each other, she had obtained leave to spend some time at her house till her
repugnance should be removed, and she be decided to return to her husband. The
good old aunt, easy and credulous, yielded to all their artifices, and
introduced her niece to Mrs. de Ramond (the fictitious name adopted by Mrs. des
Roches and her son,) as to friends to whom she professed the highest regard.
Thus these contemptible wretches carried on their debauchery, even in the eye
of a respectable aunt, who, far from guessing the plot, granted them every
liberty of meeting and conversing with one another.

In spite of all this, my letter created some confusion among the criminal
triumvirate. Duverly made a precipitate retreat, and my spouse (must I tell
it!) was in a very advanced state of pregnancy, betook herself to bed, and
feigned all the symptoms of a violent disorder. I arrived at this juncture, and
found the old aunt and the perfidious des Roches by her bed side. Alas,
exclaimed the latter, whose face I did not know, alas! the poor little woman,
when she heard of her mother's death, she was seized with a fever and phrenzy.
My mother is dead, said she, and she died loading me with curses and
imprecations! Oh heaven! can one be more unfortunate! In vain her aunt, my son,
and I endeavored to console her: nothing, sir, nothing could avail, but the
news of your arrival. Shall I see my spouse again! said she, Ah! may he forgive
me, and I shall die contented.

At this discourse of the perfidious des Roches, I approached the bed: dear
Adela, said I to my spouse, you know I never intended to tyranize over you! You
wished to spend some time at your aunts, I gave you my hearty consent. Now,
since you have no mother, there remains only a husband, a tender, a faithful
husband -- deign to accompany him to Paris, where he intends to fix his
residence, and be sure that the care of consulting your happiness shall
henceforth be his sole and constant ambition.

Adela, affecting a feeble tone of voice, answered, that she was highly
sensible of her wrongs, that she intended to make amends for them, but
entreated my kindness to give her three months to indulge her grief at the loss
of the dearest of mothers, that she asked so much time to surrender herself to
my wish. It is no mere indifference which dictates that language! No, no, my
dear Dorance, your behavior, your generosity, impresses the most forcible
conviction of my wrongs; They are great, and will I ever forgive them! Depart,
dear husband, depart; in three months you shall see again Adela, not the
unjust, ungrateful Adela, who received your hand with dread; but a submissive,
tender, sensible spouse, who will think her life too short, to expiate the
wrongs done to you.

You, my children, will perhaps think, that Adela did not speak the language of
her heart: yes, she was sincere. My gentleness, my politeness had moved her,
she repented of her crimes, and intended to live with me, according to the most
rigorous precept of decency and probity. It was now the eighth month of her
pregnancy, she longed to see me gone, she feared to publish her shame, and my
dishonor! Alas! how she wept! had you seen it, my children, she would have
excited your pity. I who was ignorant of her motive, was moved to such a
degree, that I advanced to console and to embrace her. No, exclaimed she,
pushing me back, no, my too respectable husband, I am not worthy! my conduct
toward you! Ah! preserve those tender caresses for happier times.

Des Roches, quite motionless at this spectacle, did not know if Adela had
spoken sincerely, acted the part of a stage player; the old aunt dropped some
tears, and was muttering quite low: Hum, poor couple! how loving! how moving
they are! my dear nephew! My dear niece! -- If Raymond was here! -- With this
cursed journey he lost the spectacle, a best example! -- He is a good young
man; he will, I believe, have the same feelings for his wife: for I will see
him married, etc. etc. Des Roches beckoned her repeatedly to be silent; and
would with all her heart have wished her to all the devils. Although I did not
know this Raymond, yet she was afraid I should guess him. The guilty are always
fearful and trembling lest the least sign should discover their crimes. They
will often show by their anxiety what they are so careful to keep concealed.

I staid two days longer at St. Marcellin: my spouse, who had her disorder at
her control, made haste to recover, and having left her in good health, I set
out for Paris, where I arrived and took lodgings in the Rue Grenoble, St.
Honor. A month after my arrival, I received the following letter from Duverly,
which to me was no small object of surprise.

"Will you excuse so long a silence, my dear Dorance, when I shall have
enumerated to you all the causes that have occasioned it? A few days before
your father's death. Rosina's father discovered my intrigue with his daughter.
After having loaded her with the severest reproaches, he resolved to leave
Grenoble, and to take lodgings at Bourg-d'Oysans, a place which you know is
adjacent to this town. Mrs. des Roches brought me the news: I was
thunderstruck! -- The father threatened to kill me wherever he would find me.
What could I do? Despair almost overpowered my faculties, I proposed to my
relation to travel, she consented, and we set off. I did not let you know it at
that time, I was so perplexed! You had forbidden me to mention any thing
farther of my amors! Your severity -- a series of misfortunes! pardon, I pray,
my silence: I break it off to conjure you to receive in your house a wretched
friend, who is soon to go Paris to die -- to break his heart. My Rosina is to
marry the colonel in question; but at this time -- she is -- dare I tell it you
-- she is pregnant, -- the poor child! I don't know how to act, that her father
may not find it out -- indeed it drives me mad. Assist me with your advice, it
is the last favor of an unhappy friend, who does acknowledge his faults, and
swears never to be guilty again, if you suffer him to live near you, before
your eyes, and fortified by your example.

"Direct under cover, at Mr. Pirlet's, Bourg d'Oysans."

I perused this letter several times, and pity resumed her empire in my heart.
I was going to let him know that he was welcome to my lodging, but I received a
letter from my wife, purporting that her health was perfectly re-established,
and that the three months she had fixed, appeared too long a period to be
absent from me -- that she would come to Paris in six weeks, and would make it
her duty to see me happy.

This letter filled me with joy, and my transport had made me forget to send
Duverly an answer. One day when I had just thought on him, my servant came to
inform me that some peasant desired to speak to me instantly. I made him come
in, and asked what he wanted. The stranger, without answering, delivered me a
letter, which I knew to come from Duverly. --

"Dear Dorance, how will you receive the request of a favor I have to ask of
you! will you render me so essential a service? Now -- I am a father -- Rosina
is brought to bed of a most beautiful little girl! Mr. Pirlet, my friend, went
into the country with the old man: He left Rosina to the care of Mrs. Pirlet --
During this I shall say no more -- but, after all, that child, it must be
concealed from the vigilant eye of its grandfather and the colonel, who is
expected. -- I have but one friend, to him I send it -- receive it, Dorance,
receive the pledge of the most tender love! -- Give it a name, or if your
heart, if your delicacy deny me what I request of your humanity, consign the
babe to those assylums open to those victims of its age, whom indigence or
jealousy leave destitute! Alas! how happy should I be could you but take care
of it till I arrive: which will not be long. O Dorance! remember the sweet
intimacy of our youthful days! Do all for your friend -- may he owe you more
than his life -- his happiness!"

This singular proposal quite affected me. "Where is that poor child?" -- "Why,
Measter, we bring it in an our mare; it is below in that there yard." -- "In my
yard! good God, what will he have me do with it? Impudent man!" -- "Poh! Poh!
you need but say a word, good measter, I Will soon see it snug in the Foundling
Hospital; I will not be long about it, I warrant ye." "Stop!" What a situation,
what an embarrassment!

I knew not what to do; when a woman entered my apartment; she had a child,
which she rudely put into my arms. "There, good gemman, there it is, poor
little thing -- Can you be so barbarous not to take it!" "What, I take it? it
is not mine; it is nothing to me." Poor little chicken! it wept, it looked at
me; (it was then a fortnight old.) I was touched with pity; I embraced the
child. I looked at it. The woman that brought it was a nurse; I kept her too.
-- "Measter," said she, "'it is a little girl; she ar'nt been christened though."
"Well," answered I, "we shall give her a name; I will stand her godfather, and
you shall be godmother; but how must I go about all this? -- what will people
think?" -- "Nay, answered the rustic nurse, "never mind; only take care of a
poor forsak'd baby." I followed this advice, and went to the rector of the
parish, to whom I communicated my adventure, such as it had happened. That
worthy priest received my avowal with a high degree of sensibility; and the
child was christene^ that same night. I gave her the name of Clara Adela
Duverly, and had her brought up in my own sight, because of the treacherous
Duverly, who had caused me all this trouble. I heard no farther for very near
six years.

Here Candor's narrative was interrupted by Clara, who threw herself in his
arms, and, melting into tears, exclaimed, "Ah my father -- Ah Sir -- I know not
what name to give you -- I see but too well, I am that unfortunate child -- O
my God! -- why did not you reject me -- O heaven, what kindness, what
generosity." "Yes Clara," replied Candor, "yes, you are the fruit of the most
shameful plot. -- You see how despicable he is, to whom you owe your life; but
why should you suffer for it? -- Alas, your birth is your only crime; how have
you expiated it by your sweetness and tenderness to a bar arian who deserved
them not; Oh, hear, hear, and tremble before hand at what I am going to
disclose.

"I ought first to explain to you the motive which made Duverly and my spouse
send me the fruit of their guilty loves. Adela^ moved at my proceedings, had
repented: remorse knawed her breast. After my departure from St. Marcellin, she
loaded des Roches with the most bitter reproaches. "Yes," said she, "yes,
perfidious friend, it is you who precipitated me into this abyss; who is to
save me now? who will make me worthy of a two generous husband? O wretched
Adela, what ^ast thou done? Thou art following a declivity strewed with
flowers, and fallen into the most shameful disorderliness, whence thou must
extricate thyself by passing over a path all spread with thorns! -- infamous
Duverly -- thou have seduced me, thou have betrayed a friend: O heaven! could I
but hide myself from mine own conscience!" --

Des Roches, quite astonished, informed Duverly of this change: the latter
flattered himself to regain Adela's heart; but it was in vain: my spouse, quite
inflexible, threatened to kill him if he ever should attempt to appear before
her. The only favor she begged of him was to send the child to her husband at
Paris. "I shall see it," said she, "that unfortunate offspring of my guilt; I
shall bring it up, and its presence will always remind me of my error; and
point out the conduct I ought to adopt toward the most respectable and most
generous of men." Duverly consented; but he could never prevail on Adela to
permit him to come and live with us. That woman, whose affection to this wretch
was changed into hatred, forbad him preromptorily, threatening to disclose all
to her husband, should he ever be so imprudent as to disturb the peace of their
house. Duverly, in consequence having made choice of a nurse, and a trusty
confidante, sent me the infant as mentioned above; and too much persuaded of
Adela's carrying her project into execution, he voluntarily exiled himself
without writing to me.

There was but one thing that puzzled me at Paris; I knew not how to present
the child to my spouse without exciting on her part, some injurious suspicions
against me. What could she think of the care I took of it? -- In this anxiety
of scruple, I resolved to send her with the nurse to a village adjacent, when a
carriage stopped before my door; -- a woman comes up -- it is Adela herself!
she f^^^s to my arms; sheds a flood of tears; calls me her dear, her too
generous husband! -- we sighed in concert -- she begs me humbly to receive her,
and to forget her wrongs. "They are very aggravating" cried she, "but how
little did I know you! how unjust have I been to you! alas! this will be my
only torment! yes, my strange, inconceivable conduct will be the torment of my
life." -- "Forget it, Madam; let us both bury in oblivion our past failings. --
Ah! did you know my imprudence!" -- "Your imprudence, Dorance! no! I know all;
I know your proceedings toward a friend too culpable! -- How durst he send you
the fruit of an illegitimate comm^^erce with one Rosina? Do you know that
wretch? -- My aunt knows her, and she told me the whole affair." -- "Madam, I
will send the child far from your eyes; it is neither just nor decent." --
"What! my dear husband! should I exact this of you: -- Let not love be an
obstacle to the favors of friendship; -- you received the child: you obliged
your friend: suffer me to be as generous as you." -- "Oh! this extreme delicacy
would be enough to discard the suspicions I might have entertained about this
child, did I not know, as well you, the spinning of that intrigue. Let us be
short, don't deprive yourself on account of me of this sacred (...). I declare
it wants no less than all the affections you have inspired me with. But, after
all, have that satisfaction; and by it, let me prove to you all my submission:
keep it! keep it I desire it." -- "But, madam, is it just to bestow upon a
strange child those necessary cares which perhaps it will be necessary for us
to keep in reserve? for -- " -- "I understand you, my dear, -- Well, we are
rich; and can afford it: her father has forsaken her." -- "I know it; he is not
in France; his Rosina is married; he can see her no more; such is her will --
Oh! had you seen the repentance of that woman; my aunt and Mrs. des Roches
described it to me in such lively colors, as makes the scene still present to
my view -- Let us do all for an unfortunate mother; who will perhaps one day
embrace and cherish the little innocent; and thank ^s for its preservation? --
"Dare I expect this, my lovely Adela!" "Ah Sir! I could sacrifice my life to
prove you my regret! -- May the tenderness and gratitude of the little innocent
put us in mind that she was the cause of our reconciliation."

Thus spoke Adela; and moved as she was, she feigned to put so much zeal and
dissinterestedness in the favor she granted, that, seduced by her adroitness
and sensibility, I embraced her. I was, however, not much inclined to keep the
child in the house; but so well did she take her measures, that I resolved to
the contrary. How captious were her expressions! when she remarked my coolness
for her daughter; she knew how to move me by a picture of the situation of a
forsaken child; and, when she had excited my feelings to the highest pitch, she
expatiated upon the great service I was rendering Duverly: and the desire to
anticipate the smallest of my wishes. She then would call for her little Clara,
and taking her in her arms, "Behold, she would say, "that poor little innocent
creature? How she resembles her mother: she is the very portrait of her --
Imprudent Rosina! -- I knew her well. Who would ever have believed she could
place her affections in a seducer! -- The whole town of Grenoble respected her.
-- My mother often proposed her as a pattern for me to imitate. -- Yes, these
are her eyes -- her mouth! -- poor little creature! thou shall not fall into
the excesses of thy parents!" -- "Excuse me my dear Adela," said I, "I never
knew that Rosina was in Grenoble." -- What, sir! did not you know the name of
her family; did not you know her father? -- Oh! were I to tell you his name you
would soon see! -- but no! heaven would not have you to discover it yourself,
permit me to conceal the name of that illustrious family, which such a dishonor
would blast for ever!"

I was, I declare, surprised at such an air of mystery; but, attributing this
reserve to an excess of delicacy, I only admired the more the upright and
virtuous heart of my spouse. -- You my children, will perhaps find me too
credulous, but had you been as ignorant of the bottom of the adventure, you
would have yourself been deceived. And what a stranger to mistrust is an open
and honest heart! I was, in a word, doomed by fate to be ensnared in every
thing, to all intents and purposes! -- had I even discovered the truth at that
time, what could it have availed me? the mischief was done; it was too late to
open mine eyes. I would to God I had never seen since!

CHAP. VIII.
THE STORY OF DORANCE CONCLUDED. -- ALEXIS LEAVES THE COTTAGE.

THUS I lived twelve months with my spouse in the sweetest intimacy. Little
Clara was growing apace; Adela loved her dearly, and gave her leave to call her
mama, and often called her daughter. For my own part, I made use of the same
expressions to the child, who was beloved by every one. She gave tokens of
bright parts, and a good heart; we resolved to begin her education and to put
her in a convent. At that time my wife presented me with a son. A son, forgive
me if my heart sighs at this name -- Alas, it (...) my wounds. Here begins the
career of my attrocities: O my children, how you will detest me.

I had no profession, and was a father: this sacred title rouzed my emulation.
I was informed that the person who had purchased my father's charge had since
died, and that the precedence was again vacant. Ambitious of occupying a post
in which my ancestors had distinguished themselves, I imparted my design to my
spouse. She would not, at first, give her consent; undoubtedly because she
would not live in a town which would always call to her remembrance her
transgressions. Yet, after all, she consented, and we set out. My spouse nursed
her son, we took him with us, and went to settle at Grenoble; but it was
decreed that it should not remain long my abode.

We had now been a week at Grenoble; I was busy in courting the head
magistrates for the object of my ambition, when I received one day a large
parcel in form of a letter. A cold sweat came forth from my pores, and set all
my body on a tremble; a fatal presentiment seemed to forewarn me not to open
the papers. I was alone: judge of my despair, upon reading these words.

" Paris, etc. etc.
"Sir, (for no longer, must I call you friend). I am at the period when mortal
man is to give his account before the supreme judge of all the actions of his
life! There is in me but a spark of life, which is to extinguish as soon as my
heart has made you a confession both of my guilt and my remorse. These moments
are precious, attend to me! I have betrayed deceived, and insulted you -- You
gave me your confidence, now judge if I deserved it! That pretended Rosina who
loved me, and whom I adored, was no other than your Adela! -- Yes, it is your
spouse herself whom I have seduced! O heaven! I can foresee your indignation! I
have deserved it, O yes, well have deserved it! Little Clara is the daughter of
your spouse and your perfidious friend. -- Even your son himself is not yours!
I was secretly at Paris; we could have met every day at -- but I cannot say
more -- remorse bids me forbear. This confession, far from giving me ease,
depresses my heart. Adieu, divine justice ^alls me! -- I hear her voice -- she
thunders she strikes me! -- Adela's letters and my own, which I have enclosed
together will but too much unravel that guilty intrigue. -- The person to whom
I dictate my last words, will enclose this parcel, and when it will reach you,
the treacherous, the criminal Duverly shall be no more!"


I read with sudden and eager curiosity the letters of my per^iduous spouse,
whose hand writing I recognized. Imagine to yourselves my rage, my anguish, my
despair! Adela had deceived me! -- these too children Clara and Julius -- were
Duverly's: I had been duped! -- I shall not attempt to paint to you my
transports. -- I ran with pre^ipation up stairs into my spouse's apartment -- O
new terror -- she is gone! she his fled! -- she took the young child with her!
I find a paper on a table; I open it and read:

"Fly, unfortunate Adela; your husband knows all! -- Fly, and know the ancient
friend Des Roches by the service she renders you."

And lower down, with Adela's own hand:

"Farewell, dear Dorance, farewell! you will never see again a too culpable
spouse!"

I left the room quite furious! -- I made enquiries: some persons pointed out
to me as nearly as they could, the road which the carriage had pursued; I
mounted on horseback, and fled with the greatest rapidity. At twilight I
reached the entrance of the forest. A countryman supposing I looked for
something, calls out: "Is it not a carriage you want, sir: look, it went that
way." -- I clapped spurs to my horse, and perceived at some distance in the
middle of the road, a carriage which seemed to stop; the more I approached, the
more I could distinguish it: it is my own, my worthless spouse is in it,
Germain whom I always thought so faithful! He betrays me, he drives Adela --
whither? -- no doubt to her lover. -- I approach closer to the carriage, which
had overturned. Adela had left it, she knows me, she falls at my feet, she
presents her son -- O scene of horror! -- Dare I proceed? -- No, perfidious
woman, cried I, no pardon to a wretch! -- I unsheathed my sword, and plunged it
several times into the body of the unhappy woman and her infant! -- Great God!
-- who inspired me with such fury! Hell! yes, hell alone guided my arm. Germain
runs, he has not time to disarm me. -- Tremble too for thy own safety, thou
wretch: O! my dear master, she is not guilty. -- But too much, replies Adela,
with a dying voice weltering in her blood -- yes, I deserve my fate; but cruel
man, what has thy son done? -- He is thy son, and thou becomest his
executioner! -- Is this my son! dare thou say it? -- Alas! heaven be my
witness, I never saw Duverly since I first joined you at Paris! he has been in
America ever since! -- O heaven! can it be true: -- Gracious God! let my
innocence be known to him, and may he one day drop a tear upon the tomb of the
unhappiest of mothers!


She ^^pires! -- Her son is in her arms lifeless! -- Germain embraces the two
corpses, and bather them in his (...) He sees me attempt to thrust the same
sword, ^^king with gore, into my breast. -- O unjustest of men, exclaimed he,
wresting the fatal weapon from my hands. O most cruel of husbands, of fathers!
detest now your cruelty! -- Know all -- Adela, this morning came to me,
Germain, said she, save my life save thy master. -- I have committed a horrid
crime before I married him. He has just been informed of it, the conduct which
I have since adopted, will not suffice to shelter me from his just resentment.
-- Oh conduct me to some sacred asylum: give me time to disarm his anger? -- In
vain did I represent to her the dangers this proceeding would expose me to, her
tears, her entreaties, (she was almost at my feet;) and having heard that you
was in pursuit of us made me comply. I drove her as far as this forest, to
conceal ourselves for some hours: but believe me she was virtuous with you! Oh!
I swear, I swear she was virtuous.

Despair succeeded the most poignant sorrow, I wept bitterly: Dear victims,
said I, leaning on the poplar beneath which these two deplorable victims were
laying; ah, could you hear my voice; could I restore you to life at the expense
of my own! -- Just God, could you permit a deed so black, so attrocious? Alas
what cruelty, what infernal cruelty.

Favored by the shades of night, Germain and I dragged the two corpses to a
neighboring cavern. There I sat down by them, and swore not to leave them to my
last breath. In vain Germain attempted to make me return to Grenoble; I was
deaf to all his entreaties, and had it not been for the zeal of this faithful
servant, I would have made away with a life, stained by the most abominable of
crimes. Germain, said I, in a moment of calm, men have betrayed me; I will fly
from them, I will inhabit this forest; here I shall be with my wife and son;
here, far from all social intercourse, I will deplore my crime and family.
Germain consented, he pledged himself to keep the strictest secrecy about this
dreadful accident, and it was agreed, that, next day I should go to Grenoble,
to settle all my affairs, and to engage a clever and discreet artist to erect
this cottage, of which I myself had drawn the plan.

This hope circulated in my veins like the most precious balm: we spent that
night in the forest, and, after having set by the remains of two beings so dear
to me, we set out for town, in the same post chaise, which had, the preceding
day, carried my spouse and son. I waited immediately upon the Duke de --, then
governor of Dauphiny, who was at that time at Grenoble: I informed him, that
certain misfortunes, which I could not explain, had determined me to retire
from the world, and for that reason I humbly supplicated his permission and
leave to build a retreat in the forest of Chamborane. This nobleman, who had
known me from my infancy, and loved me much, made use of all his rhetoric to
dissuade me from so singular a project; but finding his advice would be to no
purpose, he readily granted my request and added to it another architect, a man
of abilities and tried fidelity, who seconded my project with the highest
discretion, so that the town, and all other adjacent places knew nothing of my
undertaking. I ordered the fatal poplar, a witness to my barbarity, to be
transplanted into my garden, and you, my children, know it well; it is to this
hour stained with blood. Let us now turn our eyes, if possible from this
dreadful picture!

While the cottage and its premises were building, I remained in the cavern,
which contained the bodies of Adela and Julius. I had them embalmed, and put in
a coffin, made of a very hard sort of wood, lined on the inside with a kind of
pitch, which kept out the air and humidity. It is the very same cavern in which
Alexis to day sheltered himself from the storm. A subterranean passage leading
from this cave conducts to it, and every night I visit it to shed tears! When
the cottage was finished, I procured all the necessary furniture which you so
often see, and came to conclude my life within its walls. -- I was but too sure
of Adela's innocence: among her papers I found a letter from Duverly dated some
weeks before the perpetration of my crime, purporting that he had settled five
years since, in the province of North Carolina in America, and wished constant
happiness might attend her, me, and his little Clara, whom he recommended to
her maternal care: from this it appears, that Adela had not seen him since our
reunion at Paris: thus I immolated my own son on the bosom of his mother! -- O
inexhaustible source of remorse!

It is nevertheless a plain fact that the perfidious Duverly intended to
disturb the peace of our family. Why did he send Adela's letters, and unveil
her crime? -- Why would he blacken that unfortunate woman with the most odious
calumny; why feign to be on his death bed, while it was a mere fiction (as Mrs.
Des Roches, by a note, has informed me since, that I had no occasion to trouble
myself about Duverly, he being settled in North Carolina) although it be true
that the fatal letter was not of his own writing, yet he dictated it -- it was
a trait of blackness in that infernal villain to destroy my peace and the honor
of my spouse. He did it seemingly, to be revenged on her, because she had
entirely banished him from her presence. What light could I draw from this
chaos of thought! -- All my fury, all my resentment, were kindled against
Duverly -- I conceived the most barbarous project; he has a daughter, said I,
she is in my power. She believes I am her father: let her grow in this belief
-- I will go to seek Duverly in every part of the globe, I will restore him his
daughter, but when I restore her, my dagger shall pierce her a thousand times
in his own sight! -- Yes, my wife, yes, my son; this is the vegeance decreed to
your bloody manes. Duverly, who made me commit the greatest outrage against
nature, I will punish with the same blow.

I fetched Clara immediately from the convent, to live in the cottage with
Germain and me. You have trembled, my children, at the phrenzy which misled my
reason. Ah, I blush and will be ashamed of it, all the days of my wretched
life: Yes, Clara, behold your benefactor, he only brought you up to be his
victim; but now much has your sweetness, your lovely temper, discomfited his
bloody design; -- ah forgive him! Your father is the cause of all my ills; him
alone I do charge with all the weight of my hatred; but you shall forever be
the dearest object of my tenderness.

Alexis, you have now heard the story of my misfortunes; they seemed to excite
your pity, prove it, then, in revenging my crime? -- "Upon whom?" -- "How can
you ask!" -- "O heaven, upon Clara's father!" "has he ever proved himself her
father? "O God, what a demand! The hand of Clara is the destined reward!" --
"What do I hear," interrupted the latter. -- "What, sir, are you so cruel as to
promise my hand to the wretch who murders my father? -- Clara must deserve to
expect of you such sentiments." -- "Who is your father? is it a base seducer
who dishonored your mother, or is it her true and generous husband, who
received you as his child, who brought you up, and of whose misfortunes your
birth is the only cause?" -- "Where am I," replied Clara, "O God! what an abyss
of crimes does surround me! am I then born for crimes?" -- "Germain," continues
Dorance, "this is the period to execute our design. Let us spill those drops of
a blood devoted to my hatred, sprung from the veins of the most inveterate of
enemies!" -- "Away, barbarous ruffians, how dare you?" "Clara," replied
Dorance, "be docile, second my wishes, ah! I will not have thy life; thou art
too dear to me, but leave me my vengeance, leave it me, it is my only treasure."

Clara, sinking under the weight of grief, remained motionless, her lovely head
hung over her woe-fraught bosom; she was a prey to sighs and sobs. The
vindictive old man laid hold of the hand of Alexis, and said to him: Go, my
son, and seek Duverly all over the world. Tomorrow, when dawn ushers in the
fresh morn, thou shall set out, and never return to this mansion, but with the
traitor's head -- his head in hand -- mark me: this is my command, this is the
will of a friend, who has by his generosity proved a father to thee!

Alexis, trembling with indignation, could not utter a word: Dorance and
Germain rise, they take the coffin on their shoulders, and having given each of
the young people a flambeau, they ascend the stairs of the cave, cross the
garden, and let down their noble burden under the great poplar.

Night, with the thickest sable array, governed the forest. The light of the
flambeaus having roused the birds perching on the neighboring trees, they
suddenly cleave the air with anxious wings, fluttering a thousand sinistrous
shrieks, which were re-echoed incessantly by the bird of night.

Our four hermits having arrived at the great poplar tree; Dorance addresses
them: Here, said he, here is the place where a desperate hand plunged a dagger
into the heart of a spouse and a son! -- Here is that bloody steel still
stained with blood; the most precious, the most innocent blood! O my wife! thy
head was leaning here, against the bark of this tree, here thou have fallen,
thy eyes looked tenderly on me, thou pressedst my hand and expired! Will thou
forgive thy butcher? And thou, unhappy creature, that had scarce a vital spark:
Julius, my poor little Julius, what have thou done! Here they are, Clara;
behold them, Alexis, in this coffin! They groan, I hear their voice! it calls
for vengeance! You shall be revenged, sacred ashes! God speaks to the heart of
Alexis: he arms his hand! Clara herself will encounter him to avenge the cause
of a mother, of a brother, and a generous benefactor! no, it is not thy
seducer, O most unfornate Adelia; it is not thy seducer who gave her life! it
is thee, it is from thy bosom she received life! Oh! let her see thee! let her
hear thy voice from the hollow bier! -- Be appeased unhappy family! Ah! you
break my heart!

The old man threw himself upon the coffin. Clara falls down prostrate, and
both utter cries as would have moved the most flinty heart! but what became of
our young couple, when Dorance, opening the coffin, exposed to their sight two
embalmed mummies, covered with wounds? Clara reels and drops senseless to the
ground: the old man burns some incense, covers again the frightful corpses, and
taking Alexis by the hand: every year, said he, we bring hither these sad
remains and mourn over them! O Alexis, Alexis, will you disappoint the hopes of
my old age? Take this steel, take it: make it pierce the perfidious Duverly:
go, my son, the dawn is nigh, take this gold; it will keep you from want, and
come back to the cottage. If I am gone, you will find your Clara, you will find
her, she is to give you her hand, it is my will. -- Am I? exclaimed Clara, no,
never, never! -- Alexis, whither will you, my dear Alexis? -- To die far from
you, replies the latter! Yes, I quit forever an odious abode! O Dorance, it is
thus you will ensnare my innocence? -- If we punish crimes do we cease to be
virtuous? -- Sigh no more, my dear Clara: never shall my hand attempt thy
father's life! -- Take this my promise: young man, interrupted Dorance, where
are your oaths? have you already forgot that you pledged your honor? -- Ah!
give me enemies more entitled to be the objects of my prowess. -- What? should
I be a base assassin? Who desires it! Challenge him to a single bombat, and
gain the victory.

Dorance added a thousand other persuasives, each specious than the other, in
order to determine Alexis to espouse his cause; but he could not succeed. Our
young hero had too high a sense of feeling and delicacy to become an instrument
of crime. Meanwhile Dorance and Germain lowered the drawbridge, and Alexis
left the cottage in spite of the cries and tears of Clara, whom the two men
detained and carried to her apartment. Alexis still hears her voice, which made
his heart bleed. We shall leave her for a moment, and see what becomes of our
hero upon leaving the cottage.

He first felt an emotion of joy, at seeing himself thus restored to freedom;
he surveyed, for some time the walls of the place, which had, during a
twelvemonth, been his abode! A little uneasy about Clara's fate, he sat down
upon the brink of the fosse and gave vent to his tears. At different intervals,
he heard the sound of her voice; words unconnected reached his ears -- Tyrants,
let me die! Is he then going to murder him? Alexis, thy heart is not capable of
it! Shall I then set him (...)? etc. etc. Alexis, quite in emotion, rises of a
sudden; some subtle thought had entered his mind: If the drawbridge was to be
lowered again! Were they to compel me to return! -- Love yielded to fear; and
the horrors which surrounded him. His heart was depressed, he takes to his
heels and runs till he quite lost ^ight of the baleful mansion which he quitted
with a such a deal of pleasure. What a cruel man, said he, is that Dorance!
What service did he exact of me! O my God, I still tremble. But Clara, poor
Clara, is confined there for life! Would to God I could deliver and take her
with me! She is not his daughter, nay, what say I, a man who has a design on
her father's life, has forfeited all claims to so virtuous a heart.

Alexis hastened over hedges and bushes, he knew not whither to direct his
road, and reflected upon what he should do, when a singular noise was heard
near him under ground. The trees shook their tops, an abyss opens its jaws --
heaven, what is he to see? What new adventure is he run, to encounter?

END OF PART SECOND.
PART THIRD.
CHAP. I.
ADVENTURES INCIDENT TO ALEXIS AFTER HIS LEAVING THE COTTAGE.

O Singular instability of things -- O wonderful variety of human vicissitudes!
-- who can explain your nature -- who can flatter himself to elude your power?
-- Thus it was not enough of the scourges and evils that infest the globe; must
also the passions of men be added to them? The difference of characters, as
visible as physiognomy, are the only sources of the troubles and discord which
divide society. The wicked undo the good, and drag them into the precipice with
themselves. -- Thus my neighbor sets fire to his house and it consumes mine: so
must I, who am good natured, humane, sensible, generous, become the victim of
the vices which infect the heart of my friends, my parents, or those on whom I
depend. -- Dependence is the source of a thousand disorders. Such a one, born
honest and virtuous, is hurried into perverseness, because he was compelled, in
the course of his life, to flatter the vanity of sots, to be subservient to the
passions of the great, and to knock at ^he temple of fortune, and at every door
which the hazard of circumstances had placed in his way. -- A close tie unites
society so strongly, that no individual can form a true resolution without the
concurrence of the others. Is it not the combination of circumstances which
determine that profession? -- It requires only a single word, a single step, a
single glance of beauty to overturn all your projects, and make you often take
a resolution quite opposite to that which once was the favorite object of your
ambition. What an instability! -- What a subordination to the laws of events!

Alexis, whilst living in the cottage, thought he should never leave it, and
flattered himself to spend a life of peace and tranquillity. He who detested a
residence in towns, sound nothing that could engage him to return and inhabit
them a second time. Yet a stranger compels him to it; a stranger of a jealous,
violent and vindictive habit: -- He bids Alexis imitate his vices -- he will
have him to share one half of the venom which infects his heart; he puts the
dagger of crimes in his hand, and covers the atrocity to be committed with the
cloak of unspotted justice, and heaven born gratitude. Thus to men subordinate,
what should be most sacred to them, to the purpose of gratifying their
passions! -- Hear the covetous -- he finds always lawful reasons to pursue with
jealousy the objects of his boundless appetite -- the ambitious exclaim how
merit and equity ought to elevate him to the pitch of grandeur -- the libertine
excuses himself with the violence of his senses -- the flatterer pretends the
necessity of making friends: they are never in the wrong! -- virtue and justice
are always the language of their mouths, but how far are they from their hearts!

Thus Alexis is forced to leave all that is dear to him -- a mistress, a place
of refuge -- in short, he abandons all! -- forces his inclination, and runs to
the world for adventures. -- Now behold him alone and solitary in the woods; he
is dressed in his former decent clothes; in one hand a knapsack with provisions,
the gift of Germain; in the other a knotty stick; his little round hat shelters
his face from the ardor of the sun; his brown hair, floating in natural
ringlets, hangs about his shoulders. He has, indeed, the gold of Dorance, but
it is a treasure which flatters him but little. -- How much would he prefer
simplicity and rest! -- he slowly continues his way; sometimes he turns toward
the cottage, now out of view. -- His eyes, wet with tears, are lifted toward
heaven -- It is of heaven he now expects all -- it is heaven that will be his
guide, and will preserve his youth from striking upon the shoals of
inexperience.

Let us accompany Alexis in all his travels -- let us mark for his fate every
concern which a befriended, shelterless orphan of eighteen must necessarily
excite in sensible souls!

Alexis had now left the cottage one league behind him; uncertain what way to
take, he strayed at random, (...) Save me (...) me
when hearing a singular noise near him under ground, it attracted his
attention, and chilled his soul with terror. He stops -- the earth shakes --
the bushes, which hide the entrance to a subterranean abode, are seen to move
-- a cavern opens -- out of it comes a man, pale and bewildered, his eyes sunk
in his head, and covered with thick brows, seem extinguished by languor and
disease -- in short, it is not an animate being -- it is a ghost! a phantom! --
^ast up from the innermost recesses of the earth to frighten Alexis. The latter
was hesitating whether he should stay or fly, when the stranger, throwing
himself at his feet, cried, with a tone of voice that would have melted a
cannibal's heart, "Ah! Signior! Signior! save me! help me" -- "Who are you?" --
"A poor harmless creature! an infelice cavaliere! An unfortunate gentleman.
who expects of you either life or death." -- "Speak! be explicit!" -- "First,
Signior, let us leave this cursed place; we might be overheard and pursued."
"By whom?" "By the ruffians I leave! Oh! let me follow you, and above all, be
not afraid: my exterior frightens you; Lo v^do; I see it.
but if you once knew my heart, you will know lo pove^o Carlo Sciocco. The poor
Carlo Sciocco.
. You will pity him, assist him and love him!

Alexis did not know how to believe the stranger's words. -- A man of a ghastly
aspect, coming out of a cavern in the middle of a forest, alarmed his natural
mistrust. And, setting aside mistrust, what traveller is bold enough not to
apprehend something at so particular a meeting? -- Yet, the man was alone,
unarmed, prostrate, his voice was sweet, and even effeminate; he was shedding
tears, and imploring our hero's assistance. -- What could make him to be
feared? -- Alexis was good, sensible, generous; he raised the stranger from the
ground, and permitted him to follow him. "Come," said he, "come with me,
unhappy stranger; but, before you expect my confidence, first give me your own
and, with the most scrupulous fidelity, give me a recital of your misfortunes,
and what you have been doing in this forest" --." O Santa Maria! Divino Giesu!
O St. Mary! O divine Jesus!
" exclaims Carlo, lea^ing for (...), "What blessing! What unexpected joy! --
Yes, Signor, you shall know it all; my history is not long -- hear it, and make
me the happiest of mortals, in permitting me to follow vestra fortuna Your
fortune.
, and to prove you my gratitude to the last of my life." "We shall see that,
when you have told me who you are." -- "I am Italiano, Signior, Italiano di
Napoli. Italian, Sir, Italian of Naples.
-- Let us march -- be all attention."

(Our two itinerants, at these words, got into a path which led them to the
highway, and, whilst they were thus proceeding, Carlo related his adventures to
young Alexis, who did not lose a single word.)

My father was a great musician at Naples. He married, and had a son; but a few
years after, having a quarrel with a bad cansonier Singer
, his neighbor, who pretended to be on a level with him in point of merit, they
fought a duel in which my father's antagonist fell. From that moment my father
was forced to quit Naples, to lose his place, and to take refuge with his
family, at Santa Croce, a little adjacent village, where he shifted, and was at
the greatest pains in getting a livelihood. I was five years old, and he
intended to make me an Orpheus of the first eminence, deprived me of what is
more than life to give my voice the power and sound of a woman's. I lost my
parents at an early period of life, and, after having long traveled through
Italy, I settled at last at Frascati, where I instructed a great number of the
inhabitants in music and composing. At sixteen, I was independent, and left
wholly to myself with a fine competency. There are many fine palaces in
Frascati belonging to persons of the first eminence; I sung in their
assemblies, and was universally courted; but I disliked my profession; born
with a feeling heart, and a gloomy mind, whose only delight was the study of
philosophy, I became tired of being the buffoon of every body, and longed for
calm and solitude. Any situation in life, by which I might have gained these
advantages, had it even been beneath my own, would have appeared to me the
completest happiness on earth; I found it one day by the greatest hazard in the
world.

A French nobleman, whose name was Mandeville, was upon his travels through
Italy, and passed through Frascati. He had heard so much of this Tusculum
(...), which is built upon the declivity of a moutain, on the very spot of the
ancient Tusculum, that he resolved to spend some time in it. As he lived (...)
the same house where I kept lodgings, we soon became acquainted. This young,
rich, and handsome chevalier, was passionately fond of music, and was highly
delighted to hear me sing. He came every night into my apartment, and I
rehearsed before him the best songs of our great masters, accompanying them on
the harpsicord, I then taught music to Signiora Lauretta Mazarelli, the eldest
daughter of Signior Mazarelli, descended of a noble and wealthy family.
Mazarelli one day gave a concert at his house, where I introduced the chevalier
Mandeville. -- How much had I to repent of my complaisance! The chevalier had
no sooner seen Lauretta, than he fell desperately in love with her. He made me
the confidante of his passion, and by dint of entreaties and presents devoted
me so much to his service, that I became the slave of his commands. Lauretta,
who was also dying for the chevalier, having made me the same proposals, I was,
in spite of myself, involved in the intrigue, without either daring or being
able to keep out of it, for Signora Lauretta, a woman of an impetuous, sier^
and revengeful temper, threatened to (...) through like a sieve if I dared to
unravel the secret to her father. Mazarelli expected hourly a Venetian
nobleman, his intimate friend, to whom he had promised his daughter. The
Venetian arrived at this critical moment. The young Signora hated Alfo^o (the
name of her future spouse) to the utmost degree. She was the first who proposed
to the chevalier to elope with her to France. Mandeville had no sort of
objection. They both were in need of my services to succeed in their
enterprise, and my imprudence complied with their desire. You shall see,
Signior, the issue of the whole business, and the circumstances which resulted
from it. Lauretta, since the arrival of her intended spouse, who was of a more
jealous disposition, never left the house. She was closely watched, and I was
the only person who had access to her apartment to give her the usual lesson. I
contrived, in order to get her out of it, a peculiar stratagem, which might
have turned out very bad for me, had not I made use of all the prudence and
skill I was master of.

Lauretta, by my advice, laid down, and feigned an indisposition. I came to her
father's house, about six in the evening, and, having covered my face with a
handkerchief, under pretense of a violent toothache, went up to her apartment.
Half an hour after, I went out and told her women, who were in an adjoining
room, that their mistress was fast asleep, and desired nobody would enter her
apartment, and, condemning myself for neglecting to bring an interesting piece
of music, I returned, and instantly gave my clothes to Lauretta, and went to
bed in her place. Lauretta, in this disguise, put her handkerchief over her
face, passed through the middle of her women, who did not know her again, left
the house, and stepped into a post chaise, which waited, with the chevalier, in
some adjacent little street. Been, Signor, been Well, sir, well.
! Signora was gone, but I was left in the lurch, and to get out of it put me at
no small loss. Half an hour after her elopement, a woman entered the apartment,
approached my bed, and asked if I wanted any thing. I had put on the night cap
of Lauretta, and, for one who was ignorant of the stratagem, it was impossible
to discover the cheat. Alarmed a^ this sudden intrusion, I hid my face in the
pillow, and feigned, in this state to be fast asleep, not sonno ronfatore, ma
d'un sonno dolce et tranquillo Not in a snoring, but in a sweet and tranquil
sleep.
. The donna did not disturb me in my rest, but retired, and shut the door after
her.

Being anxious, as you may suppose, to leave a place where my life was in
danger. I put on a pair of trowsers, and a brown jacket, which I had taken car^
to bring with me; then climbing up the chimney. I worked so hard, both with my
knees and elbows, that I reached the top in a little time. It was dark; I went
down the roof, and finding the window of a neighboring house open. I ventured
in without knowing how I should get out of it. The door which communicated to
the house was actually shut, but being easy to open it from within, I did it,
and went, in the dark down stairs, and passed through a garden, whose gate
happened to be open, into the street.

You must admire, Signior, the propitiousness of all the circumstances. If
yourself had been in the same jeopardy, you would, perhaps, not have got off so
well; because of destiny and predestination! -- "How predestination?" said
Alexis. -- Si, signor, si, signor! Yes, sir; Yes, sir.
do but listen, and you will soon see what I mean by this word Nay, I am a
philosopher -- a downright philosopher.

Alexis, judging Carlo to be an eccentric character, could not help laughing;
but his companion, who was not aware of it, continued his tale with a
seriousness really comical.

CHAP. II.
IN SIGNOR CARLO SCIOCCO EXPLAINS TO ALEXIS HIS SYSTEM OF PHILOSOPHY.

I LEFT Frascati almost instantly, and traveling by night, in my light dress,
I met, by daybreak the chevalier, and la cara Lauretta The dear Lauretta.
, who were waiting for me at the gates of the little town of Agania, in the
Campagna of Rome. We immediately pursued our road, and at two in the afternoon
were near Verolia, on the frontiers of the kingdom of Naples, on the enchanting
banks of the river Cosa. We admired this beautiful district, and the proud
Apennie, the foot of which we had reached, Enraptured with the freedom they
were about to enjoy, both lovers embraced me, and in the most flattering terms
commended me for my stratagem. Soon after, a post chaise, much lighter than
ours came up with us. A man, quite furious, came out -- it is Alforo!
"Traitor," cried he to the chevalier, "infamous ravisher! surrender thy prey,
or thy life!"

The chevalier alighted, and began a bloody combat with Alforo. During the
engagement, four men whom he had brought with him, seized Lauretta, who had
swooned away dragging her with them, and put her into their chaise. I flew to
her assistance; Mandeville's servants followed my example, and our dexterity
had such an effect on our antagonists, as to hinder them from accomplishing
their design.

Alforo received a mortal wound from the chevalier, who, while the former
endeavored to join his accomplices, came to defend us, and we put them to
flight; but the barbarous Alforo, before his strength left him, plunged his
dagger into the heart of the unfortunate Lauretta. "Die with me, perfidious
woman!" said he, "Thou shall not be my rival's"

The chevalier saw the blow, and flew to his mistress; she looked at him, and
died!

"O gods!" exclaimed Mandeville, "O gods! could you permit this?" at these
words he ran his sword repeatedly through Alforo's body; but to what purpose?
to mutilate a cold and ghastly corpse.

Oh! what was my situation at this dreadful spectacle! The very idea still
shakes my frame! I fell upon my friend who was going to make away with himself,
and having wrested the fatal weapon from his hands, I, with the assistance of
his servants, put him into our chaise, and drove, with the greatest dispatch,
from the bloody spot. The chevalier was bereft of all his senses: having
recovered them, he blamed us for leaving the body of his dear Lauretta; but we
represented to him the dangers which would have attended a similar proceeding,
as we might have been caught in ipso facto, carrying off two dead bodies, whose
assination would be laid to our charge. Mandeville yielded rather to our
arguments; but, during the whole journey he did nothing but weep.

The road we had taken, could certainly not conduct us to France; we therefore
changed it, and finally entered Provence, where we took the road to Paris.
After the chevalier had settled his affairs in that capital, he resolved,
always fretting at his past misfortune, to retire for life, to a castle,
situated in the environs of Lions. left him by his father. It was in that
delightful retreat we both studied philosophy, and brought it about by dint of
study and application, to convince ourselves of these two maxims, which ought
always to live with their fellow citizens in society.

All men -- But, signior, before I enter any discourse with you upon moral
subjects, I ought to give you an account of my last adventures, to remove all
suspicions about the manner in which you met with me, and the better to gain
your confidence.

You will please to remark, that the chevalier Mandeville, mio tenero amico My
tender friend.
died a few years after, partly consumed by his grief, and partly by his own
fault.

His first principle was that all the events of life are pred^stined and
decided before our birth by the supreme Being: a sage, well ordained, well
thought maxim, which he, however followed too literally. One day, walking alone
in his garden, and reflecting upon his past misfortune, he found, by chance, a
pistol in his pocket. This pistol had been put in by a stupid valet de chamber,
who believed he had heard his master give him orders to do it. What does it
signify? said the chevalier to himself; -- I think on the misfortunes which
cross our life, and now find a pistol in my pocket -- It is perhaps a decree of
heaven! -- Yes, without doubt, heaven will have me die by this pistol, it is
evident!

The chevalier was on the point of blowing out his brains, but the idea of not
having made a just distribution of his property, made him return to his closet:
he made his will, went out, hid himself in a wood of his park and lodged the
fatal contents of the pistol in his mouth.

We heard the explosion at the castle; but thinking the Chevalier was hunting,
we minded it no farther. A ^ew hours after, the gardener came in, quite
frightened with the report, that he had seen his master lying on the ground in
the wood. We went out in haste, and found the body of the unfortunate
Mandeville weltering in his blood.

I cannot express what I felt in that cruel moment. I lost the use of my reason
for a whole month.

The chevalier had left me a considerable share of property by his legacy; I
received it, and went to Paris to banish from my imagination the terrible
phantoms which continually tormented it.

In the metropolis I saw company, and in a little time, spent my whole fortune.
You will think signior, that I squandered it away in balls, feasts, and parties
of pleasure. No, I did not! -- I obliged friends, who afterward proved
ungrateful to me; because it was apparently to be so. I lent, I gave away to
every body, and soon found myself without resource. I did not, however, regret
the use I had made of my property, I said to myself, all men are born with
wants; my equals expose them to me, I bestow, they take; all this is very
natural, but they think themselves under no obligation to me; I did not assist
them with that motive.

Woe to the interested man who only serves people to render them grateful! but I
am myself reduced to necessity, and they whom I obliged will not assist me.
Well! they are of another way of thinking; it must apparently be so. Moreover,
they hinder me from doing as they have done. I need but beg for relief, and
there is no doubt but I may find some feeling souls who will open their purse
to assist me. Oh! such persons are very rare! and why should there be none? I
am born indeed with that sensibility; I am the only being of my kind in nature;
I will hope, I will wait; I may perhaps find some friend.

Thus I reasoned; though experience had taught me that I should not have too
firm a reliance on human favor. So much the worse for them, thought I, if they
will not oblige their needy brother, of course they deprive themselves of a
most exquisite pleasure; and should I be sorry for them? heaven has thus
organized them, but to me, it gave a different character; such is the order of
things; all is intended, all is arranged, all is premeditated in nature. We are
not the masters of events, but should take them such as they happen.

After all, signior. I helped myself out as well as I could; I sung, I gained
money, and resolved to make the tour of France, to gain wherewith to return to
my country. It was in this wood where I was stopped and robbed by ruffians.
Having told them I was an Italian musician, and what were the causes of the
particular sound of my voice, they resolved to make me their buffoon, and to
take me to their cavern to amuse them, and to divert their wives, with whom
they could safely trust me without danger. It is now a week, since I have been
in that cursed cavern, signior; I did every thing to make my escape, but never
could find an opportunity till this day.

My hosts stripped last night a rich Jew, and in order to make merry upon the
occasion, began to drink brandy and spirituous liquors ever since the morning.
I had the good fortune to put into every one's glass a pinch of opium, which I
found last night in the Jew's pocket, and seeing them all asleep, I lifted the
trap of bushes, which covers the entrance of that horrid frightful den. I saw
you, signior, and your features then youth, in a word, your whole appearance
inspired (...) a with confidence and make me determine to (...) to your
assistance. Per Dio, In the name of God.
if it be possible, let (...) low you every where, let me accompany you; I
(...) be your guide, your servant, your every thing; do no^ deny me that grace,
and depend per lavita, For life.
upon the sentiments and friendship of the unfortunate Carlo Sciocco.

The language and adventures of the Italian had given Alexis no small concern.
Above all, the history of that mad Chevalier, Mandeville, who blew his brains
out, because he thought himself destined to be shot, appeared so strange to our
hero, as to make him curious to learn thoroughly the precepts of a philosophy
so contrary to his own. He did not know what judgment to form of the character
of Sciocco, who given away his whole fortune, now to one, then to another, who
trusts every body, and after all accuse no one of the misfortunes that befall
him. Predestination was a word he had never heard of from Dumont, but of which
he nevertheless conceived the sense; it astonished him so much, as to make him
consider it as an error of some crackbrained individual. In consequence, he
determined to examine Carlo on the road, and to refute his erroneous opinion.

Your misfortunes, said Alexis to Sciocco; and the critical situation in which
I now find you, can but make me subscribe to your request, and not leave you in
the middle of this forest; but what can you expect from a man as wretched and
miserable as I? -- I cannot forbear telling you I have neither parents,
friends, no^ property, fortune nor refuge; in a word, I have nothing. Fate,
pleased in harrassing me, made me meet with a beneficent ho^^t. That good man
is now in my eyes, a bare monster, a cruel tyrant. I fly from him, and forever:
may heaven never bring me into his presence, sullied with that odious crime
which he ordered me to commit! -- I loved, I adored Clara! -- what say I? -- I
love and adore her still; but fate parts us; I can never be here is nor can she
ever be mine! to re^^ort, I do not know where to linger out a wretched
necessi^^nce and you, will you share it? -- No, rather fly Well! -- let me
steer alone my fatal course. Sant^ Croce Holy Cross
! appare^ should I leave you, (replies Carlo with vivacity,)(...) it is
providence that made us meet: it was orthe^^ained in the order of things, that
at such an hour you, (...) should pass on such a road of this forest; that, in
the mean time, I should leave the cavern and should fall down on my knees
before you: that you would hear me; that I should give you upon the road an
account of my misfortunes, and that we should agree never to leave one another.
-- What! was all this ordained thus? -- Certamente! Certainly.
we could not miss the minute in meeting together. -- You joke; it is a mere
hazard! -- Hazard! there is no hazard in the world, all happens by decree; and
all human wisdom can neither foresee nor prevent it. Suppose, for instance,
there is a little path if I have a mind to walk upon it, robbers, lay waiting
for me, and will take my life away; but, on the contrary, if I continue my
road, nothing disastrous will befall me: Am I not free to follow my own will in
either case? -- No, if your life is to be taken away by assassination,
something will excite you internally to follow the little path! your steps will
bring you to it as it were mechanically; every thing will conduct you to it. --
What a singular system! -- But you, signior, you, who believe not, I see, in
predestination, can you explain me the meaning of fate, destiny, fatality, all
high words, which are ^n every body's mouth? -- Destiny, in my opinion, is the
imperious law which orders the march of human vicissitudes, but it makes them
result from circumstances spontaneously, and according to the character,
passions and conduct of the being, which it curbs under its iron scepter. --
Your explanation is not quite just; for this reason destiny torments the good,
as the wicked, oppresses the weak as the strong, and makes herself sole
mistress of the circumstances. Thus destiny and fatality are absolutely the
same thing as predestination.

If a man should exclaim buoni Dei! Good Gods?
for what have you reserved me? How cruel are my stars; It would be all one for
him to say, Buoui Dei! have you then decreed before I was born, that I should
sustain such a misfortune! was it then in vain for all my prudence to resist
the doom! No, I cannot resist your sovereign, will; I must obey your laws;
believe, me, signior, every body shares my opinion, though nobody ever sound it
out like me. -- Do not you know it is a very dangerous one? Perch Why?
-- According to your doctrine, the unjust, the cruel, who persecutes his
fellow creatures, is not criminal; he only obeys an invisible hand, which leads
and involves him into a bad crime; he is only the iron rod, or the instrument
of heaven to punish mankind; and why should heaven punish mankind? What are
their wrongs? what harm can they do, since they cannot act freely? -- Oh! your
system overturns all moral and divine laws! -- Moderate this servore signor;
ascolta mi; This ardor, sir; hear me
the question proposed by me is a point of theology, which would take up too
much time to be discussed at present, and we shall resume it some other time.
Know, only, that I pity the wicked, that I pity them greatly. Moreover, all men
are not born wicked; God has made them good, humane, generous, and endowed
their hearts with sensibility. If they degenerate, it is because they are
imperceptibly hurried away by the violence of their passions, the shock of
contraries, real and self created wants, and (those letter are more imperious
than the rest) in a word, by exaltation and the power of doing mischief -- I do
not tax heaven with their degeneracy, but are not all the evils of Pandora's
box diffused over the earth? Well; these are as many venomous insects swarming
about every created being. Woe is to him whom they pitch upon to be wounded by
their stings, for it will never be in his power to keep them off. -- My dear
Carlo, your system is so ill established, that you are much at a loss how to
consolidate it. -- Why, signor: -- I maintain that all men are good -- O heaven
what a gross mistake! -- Good they are, yes, and very good! -- But they have
ruined you -- It is my own fault; why did I give them my property? They have
now betrayed me? -- Why did you believe them imprudently? Because it was to be
-- Oh! I cannot stand this. How did the being that formed me, intend to render
me miserable? -- I shall never injure it by insinuating such a notion in my
mind. -- If you are innocent you cannot be miserable; the guilty alone feels
real misery, because he is gnawed by remorse. Now signor, amabile Lovely sir.
, let us drop a conversation which displeases you. Give me time to unfold
truths of my opinion, and to reclaim you from your unjust prejudices Yes, I
will prove, that if it is impossible to elude the laws of events, necessary in
the equilibrium of things, we might at least, mitigate our ills by confidence,
submission and docility. We become wretched, through our own fault, when we
seek for those events, when we give them rise, when, in a giddy manner, we
throw ourselves headlong into the abyss. We cautiously avoid all occasions
which cause such a fall, we feel only what are more entitled to our pity than
to our censure, we shall be able to enjoy that sweet consolation, the sole
privilege of innocence, which renders the oppressed happier than the oppressor.

CHAP. III.
ADVENTURES INCIDENT TO ALEXIS AFTER HIS LEAVING THE COTTAGE.

ALEXIS could plainly collect from this conversation, that Carlo was a madman,
whose head was stocked with systems, one more erroneous than another. His way
of thinking was even destitute of steadiness and solidity: what he said this
moment would be destroyed by what he said the next; his opinions were so
confused, that none of them were established. He seemed, however, to be endowed
with an upright heart. He prayed Alexis so humbly to be allowed to keep him
company, he promised so firmly to follow him every where, and to join in
mutually working for their subsistence, that, in spite of the remembrance of
Dumont's perfidy, the lover of Clara conquered his mistrust, and consented to
Carlo's request. It was then he had an opportunity to see all the madness of
the Italian. "Santa Maria!" cried he, falling down upon his knees, " Divina
croce di Giesu, vi ringrazio! Divine cross of Jesus, I thank you!
O good and generous cavalier! -- be my friend; be my master! -- I will forget
all my misfortunes. -- If you should one day marry, a sweetness of which a
father's cruelty has deprived me, if you should become a father, I will bring
up your children, I will carry them in my arms. O carissimi figliovoli O
dearest little sons.
I see them, they put forth their little hands, they call me their good friend
-- Yes, I will be their friend, I will love them as much as their tenero padre
Tender father.
, and to live with them and you shall be my greatest happiness."

This broken compound of languages made Alexis smile, while his companion
continually lifted up his hands toward heaven, and distorted himself into a
hundred different postures.

Having passed a winding of the road, our two travelers descried several men
advancing straight toward them. Alexis could not help trembling, but Siocco,
who was very sharp-sighted, begged him not to be uneasy, that it was only a
detachment of the cavaliers de marechaussee, A very considerable body of ^orse,
dispersed through every province of France, on purpose to clear the highways
of (...), etc.
of whom they had no occasion to be afraid.

By this time the detachment was rather near, and Sciocco, who had been looking
all this time, began to cry out, "O Dio! whom do I see in the middle o^ them?
-- an accomplice of the ruffians of the cavern -- He was taken a ^ew days ago;
he comes at the head of these guards to the cavern of his companions -- Let us
change sides, signor; I am afraid he will know me."

Alexis at this discourse began to be sensible of the danger he was in. They
betook themselves from the highway, but the guards, to whom the ruffian had
denounced Siocco, clap spurs to their horses, overtake them, and seize them in
the king's name.

Let the reader judge of our hero's grief: he declares his innocence; but the
guards are inflexible; they load them with chains. The robber, who had betrayed
them, insulted them in the most approbrious manner. "Hah! hah! Sciocco;" said
he, "the pretty buffoon of our charming company; so you find at last a comrade?
-- He is quite a child: he began the business too soon."

Alexis, overwhelmed with grief, could not utter a single word; tears rolled
down his cheeks -- he moaned -- his eyes were directed toward heaven, and
seemed to beg for some miraculous token of his innocence. Sciocco muttered, and
swore solemnly, that neither his master nor he was guilty; he related to the
(...) guards his adventures, but they would not hear him. He then endeavored to
console Alexis, saying to him, "Mio caro maestro, My dear master.
heaven will have it, it was apparantley to be so."

Meantime four of the horsemen leave the main body of their comrades, who
continue their march, and lady hold of the two unfortunate friends without
mercy, and drag them to the town of St. Marcellin, which they reached toward
sunset.

They were, without any formality, committed to prison, with the consolatory
notice, to hold themselves ready for the next day, to undergo an examination,
and to be put to the rack.

Behold Alexis alone, shut up in a narrow dungeon next to Sciocco's! Behold
him, that unfortunate youth, accused of the basest of crimes, confounded with
the most infamous wretches -- What has he done? What fate awaits him? -- Ah! it
is much to be feared he will soon be inclined to believe in predestination.

Alexis, stretched out upon the straw, melting in tears, revolved all his
former adventures in his mind, accused his father, Candor, Sciocco, nay, heaven
itself! Thus he spent more than half the night, when a sweet voice abated his
despair, and restored a little clam to his soul. "Alexis," cried the voice,
"are you here? Is this your dungeon?" -- "Alas, whosoever you be, save me, make
my innocence known!" -- "A woman who has seen you, and pities your youth, has
it in her power to deliver you if you promise to be grateful." -- "Ay, all my
life, all my life!" -- "Stop then, be of good cheer," The voice is silent.

Alexis, surprised at this event, did not know whether he ought to accept of
liberty thus offered him. "I may be thought guilty," said he to himself, "if I
fly dastardly. O my God! what am I to do? I^ I remain i^ this infamous dungeon,
if I expect justice from my prepossessed judges, who are deaf to the voice of
innocence, implicable cruel, what will become of me? the very idea makes me
start with horror! -- Ah! what need I care for what the world will say! I will
go. But that woman! what is her motive to deliver me whom she does not know?
What interest can she have? -- Suppose it is a snare! Ought I to trust her?"

Alexis was now more tranquil, and waited patiently for the angel of
consolation, who had made his sorrow subside, when he heard the door of his
dungeon open. A young, handsome, and well-drest woman, provided with a dark
lanthorn, approached him, and laying hold of his hand, said, "Come, follow me,
unfortunate young man; I cannot believe you guilty; my heart scorns such a
supposition -- Oh! did you but know what an impression you have made upon it;
but don't let us lose time." "Oh, most generous of women! "cried Alexis, "my
friend is as innocent as I." -- "Save him; let me be under that double
obligation to you!" -- "I will, with all my heart; but remember, young man,
what I do for you."

The sensible deliverer opens the next dungeon. Alexis called to Sciocco with a
low voice, Dear Carlo, come, we are set free." -- Santa Maria! who can -- " --
"Hold your tongue, fool; you undo us."

Alexis was forced to stop the Italian's mouth with his hand, as his mad
declaration might easily have frustrated their design by a discovery. They both
followed their benefactress, who went up several stairs, opened different
doors, and conducted them to an apartment decently furnished, where she ordered
them to be seated. "Alexis, I will save you," said she "and accompany you in
your flight: hear only a few words; I am the wife of the keeper of this prison.
My husband disliked and ill treated me. I saw you yesterday, and you made a
very strong impression upon me. -- Let me fly from the man I abhor; and permit
me to follow one I -- I pity. But promise never to leave me."

Alexis was at a loss how to answer; but Sciocco, whose joy was extreme, gave
way to his rapture. -- Should we leave you, generosa dona! Generous woman.
we! Oh! my master and I swear forever to show the most perfect gratitude, the
most -- " -- "That is enough!" broke in the mistress of the jail; "but let
(...) be gone."

Alexis had now lost all his joy. The woman who would leave a husband to follow
him, appeared in his eyes, contemptible: and if he did not express his
indignation, it was because the great danger into which he saw himself
involved, kept him in sullen apathy. The woman, who considered his silence the
common effect of natural shyness, and was satisfied with Sciocco's answer, had
risen to set off, but Alexis trembled and repented already of his proceedings:
he regretted his dungeon, and would fain have returned to it. He reluctantly
followed his guilty deliverer, quite lost in thought, and deaf to the
ejaculations of Sciocco, who whispered, "Well, heaven is just, mio cara amico!
My dear friend.
-- The order of things was in confusion, but now all is set to rights. -- What
a change! What a happiness!"

Our three fugitives descended the private stairs, which led them into a little
lane. A carriage waited for them, they got into it, and drove away. Having
traveled two nights and one day, they reached Avignon, where they alighted at
an inn, and resolved to rest themselves for a few hours.

During the journey this inamorata had asked Alexis a thousand questions, which
he answered with the utmost sincerity; but Sciocco in order to save Alexis the
trouble of a tedious recital, related our young hero's adventures, and how he
had met with him in the forest of Chambarou. The woman, little satisfied with
his account, begged Alexis to recount his misfortunes himself; he complied,
omitting certain particulars, and above all expatiated upon his residence in
the cottage, and his passion for the fair Clara; a passion which he said death
alone could extinguish.

The keeper's wife, surprised at this avowal, persuaded him, by the most
forcible arguments to renounce that passion, which in all appearance, could
never be crowned with success; and in order to affect a change in his mind, she
made a plain declaration of her own.

Alexis could no longer restrain his indignation: "What, madam," said he, "you
are married, and you dare think of loving me?" -- "What of that, my dear? I
have always been remarkable for my levity in all the circumstances of my life.
My husband courted me for a week, and tired of being a virgin I married him --
I took a dislike to him a month after, and left him -- He came sometimes to see
me in a convent to which I had retired, and with persuasions I returned to his
house. His conduct to me was very censurable and scandalous -- A fortnight
after I set off with a young man, as lovely as can be, who, in his turn, left
me at Paris, where he had brought me. Thus unable to do better, I returned to
St. Marcellin, and condescended to forgive my husband, who received me again.
We have now lived together for six long months; and he has vexed me in a
thousand different ways; It was too much for me to bear, to live six months
with a husband I hate! -- I saw you, you took my fancy, and I have set you at
large."

"No madame," answered he, "if my heart is the reward of the kindness you have
done for me, I shall be ungrateful; I judge so by my feelings; you may claim my
friendship and gratitude, but my love, never." "Traitor, remember your promise,
and the sacrifice I made for you! You shall love me, or die by my hands!" --
"What a fine way of ingratiating one's self! What a woman!" -- "You don't know
me yet;" answered the jailor's wife, "I am capable of every thing -- I shall
devote you the victim of my rage, not as a traitor, by poison, or pistols, but
by facing you in fair combat. Dare to resist a woman! -- If you will not
requite me, take sword or pistol, because I care not for either, and take the
field with me!" -- "Oh madam, are you in good earnest?" -- "Coward, thou
tremblest! Know that I have been educated to be the ornament of my sex! -- I
can as well mount a horse as fight a duel -- I can handle the sword as clever
as any Frenchman. But Alexis, Alexis, give me your heart, lovely youth! give it
me, and do not leave me to despair."

Alexis, astonished to the highest degree, was struck dumb. Sciocco alone kept
up the conversation with the intrepid amazon; he undertook, by phylosophical
argument, to convince her, that she interrupted the order, and destroyed the
balance of nature; that a woman ought to keep within the bounds prescribed to
her sex; and that only by a most supernatural predestination she should act the
part of a Hect^r in petticoats.

It was during this conversation that our fugitives entered one of the
Foxbourgs of Avignon, and alighted at an inn.

The jail keeper's wife, quite in a furious fit of amorous transport, proposed
that Alexis should either yield to her desires, or accept a challenge to fight
a duel. Sciocco offers to stand ground for his master. "No!" answers the
termagant, "No, signor, if I fight, it is always with a man."

This scene, in fact comical, appeared in quite a different light to Alexis.
His virtuous heart rejected so disgraceful a connection.

But let us return to Clara, the unfortunate Clara, who, upon losing her lover,
is acquainted with the secret of her birth, and obliged to live with the enemy
of her father! -- let us enter her very apartment, and sympathise with her.

CHAP. IV.
CLARA LEAVES THE COTTAGE. -- ADVENTURE OF THE TWO ROBBERS.

CLARA had seen her lover depart. Clara, leaning with her eyes and mouth
against the irongrated window of her apartment, had seen let down and drawn up
the fatal bridge which parted her, perhaps for ever, from her dear Alexis! --
She is left alone to grief, to fury, and despair. "Oh!" cried she, "he flies
from me to plunge the dagger in the breast of him who gave me life! -- O cruel
Candor! It is you who requires that horrid sacrifice by the hand of he sweetest
and lovliest of men! -- It makes me tremble still! -- The raitor has brought me
up with no other design than to devote me some day to his fury, to revenge in
me my father's wrongs! -- O Candor, thee I loved, but Dorance I hate, I detest.
Candor is my benefactor -- Dorance my most implacable enemy. Good God! what
horrors await me! Candor, if he finds that Alexis does not return, will not he
spill my blood? O heaven, I will prevent it, I will leave this cottage which
has, till now, been dear to me. But how can I escape?"

Clara, determined to leave Candor, and to go every where in pursuit of her
lover, invented a thousand expedients to effect her elopement, which reason
destroyed by degrees. There was but one that seemed practicable.

After having well deliberated on it, she began, with great trouble, to take
off the staple of the lock of her apartment. She then waited till night, which
was the most favorable time to carry her project into execution. All day long,
Candor and Germain endeavored to console her, and to prove that she would soon
see her Alexis again. At night Germain came, as usual, to lock the door; but in
vain did he give himself that trouble; he turned the bolt of the lock, which
having nothing to receive it, could answer no purpose.

Clara went down stairs, and staid till the two old men had descended into the
subterraneous temple. She recollected that Alexis had been led almost to the
center of it through a cavern, whose entrance was from the forest. She had also
remarked, on the preceding night, the door which led to this subterraneous
temple. She intended to hide herself in the cellar till the two old men should
have left it, and to escape through that same door.

She descended quietly into the temple, the door of which had been left open,
and hid herself behind a pillar, and was witness to all the extravagancies of
Candor and his old servant. After having offered their complaints to the ashes
of Adela and her son, they both retired. No sooner Clara saw them depart, than
she opened the door of the subterraneous cavern, which she could easily effect
from within, but, groping in the dark, soon found herself obliged to stop,
seized with horror and fright.

She recollected there was in the temple a lamp always burning before the tomb;
she returned with a design a fetch it away; but, all on a sudden, the silence
of the place, the horror she felt before the dead, brought a thousand
tremendous phantoms to her imagination. She stopped, and kneeled down upon the
steps of the monument; she thought she heard a voice break through the marble
which covered the coffin. "Oh! my mother!" cried she, "is it you I hear? -- Are
these the woeful moans of my unhappy mother? Speak, what will you have me do?
Do your sacred manes rise against the project of an imprudent daughter? What do
you foretell me? What must I do?"

Clara could scarce respire; her chilled heart beat no longer. A sword stained
with gore, a parcel of papers offer themselves to her sight. "It is the sword
that flew Adela!" she cried, "and these papers say, " Adieu my dear Duverly,
come soon to join your Adela."

Clara put the bloody sword and the parcel of letters into the sepulchral urn
from whence she had taken them. But discovering an empty tomb in the corner, it
attracted her sad curiosity upon it she sees the words: Unfortunate family!
thou shall be revenged. -- This tomb is destined for the daughter of my enemy.

Though persuaded that this tomb was erected when the cottage was first built,
her terrors and apprehensions were revived again. She took her mother's
letters, seized the lamp, and entered the cavern, through which she pursued her
way.

Thus alone, bewildered 'midst the shades of night, she goes, like
Hypermnestra, in search of her lover. She now leaves the cavern, and enters the
forest which surrounds it.

Profound darkness still maintained the empire of night; the forest was all in
awful silence. The trembling Clara strayed in this wilderness, with her
thoughts on the dangers that threatened her in a place full of robbers and
precipices. She reflected that the light of her lamp might attract some of
those ruffians, and expose her to their cruelty; she extinguished it, and set
it on the ground. She was determined to return to the cavern to pass the night,
when she perceived, at a great distance, a light which the lamp had hindered
her from seeing before. She turned pale and stopped. The light advanced
straight toward her, Luckily her presence of mind did not forsake her; used to
most bodily exercises, perceiving a tree, she climed up and sat down upon a
bough.

Two men drew near, one holding a lantern, the other a parcel. "Well,
Handofdeath," said one, "we have walked pretty well; we are now near the
cavern." "I think it is time, Mr. Breakpate, to end our journey; it begins to
tire my old legs. These two thousand louis d'ors are d -- d heavy! Sit down
under this tree." "Mr. Handofdeath, now tell me a little of the story about
that man; how the devil, my boy, could you alone rob him of such a load of
money?" "Hark'ye and I Will tell ye. I came back last night from the discovery on
which my comrades had sent me, and there was a man riding full gallop upon the
highway, with a portmanteau behind him. I felt such a ^ow of spirits and
courage, that I hid myself behind a tree, determined to have a go at him. The
moment he passed me. I fired my pistol, his horse fell, the rider very
naturally followed, and I fell upon him. Come, my friend, said I, give me what
you have got in that bag, and don't be long. "Pray, Mr. Highwayman," said he,
"I hope you will not rob another thief!" What do you mean by another? said I. "Why
I was a banker," said he, "and am now a bankrupt for a very large sum. I have
about eight hundred thousand livres in bank notes, and about two thousand louis
d'ors in cash. I can assure you, upon my honor, I stole it all! One wolf should
not devour another. Pray have pity on your comrade." I could not help laughing
at the fellow's speech. "Mr. Banker, said I, you ought to be very thankful for
being a thief like me; if you was an honest man, I would murder you -- but, as
I find you are a partner in trade, I have some regard for you, by the bye
though, you must give me a bit of your luck -- I want the cash, and you may
keep the papers." -- "O heaven!" said he, "what the whole sum?" Aye, aye,
replied I, and be thankful for your good fortune, or I Will -- As soon as my man
found me clap a pistol to his head, he was in a terrible hurry to unpack the
parcel to give it me. I put up with that submission, and gave him the watch
word for the other robbers, and away I came. He thanked me very civilly, and
made his way on foot. I would not, do you see, take advantage of the man; is not
that conscience? Now, Mr. Breakpate, I met you coming along, you asked me what
I had got? I owned it all; but we must keep the secret between us. Zounds! have
we any business to divide the money among our comrades? Have they helped to the
glory of the day? No! So let us hide the cash some where, go back to the cavern,
and when we want it, we know where it is." "That Is your ^ort, my brave boy!"
"Well, where shall we hide it." "The best way I should think, would be beneath
some tree, and mark it properly. "Stop, do you know this spot well?" "Yes, that
I do; there are four highways all around, and a path that leads to the old
madman's cottage." "O yes, you are right; I have heard say the old dunny has
got a very pretty daughter!" "Who knows that? as yet we never saw any body come
out of the place; -- Don't you think there would be some way to get into their
quarters to make booty?" "The devil a booty you would make; the old fellow lives as
a hermit; ar'n't there walls, ditches, and every thing to keep us out?" "So it
is quite a strong hold?" "Aye, and a good one, "I Will warrant you, -- come don't
let us forget our yellow boys; -- This is a fine tree; will not it do to protect
the cash?" "To be sure!" "Come then, bear a hand steady to work."

Handofdeath and Breakpate tore a branch from the tree on which poor Clara sat.
They made a kind of stake of the branch, and dug a hole large and deep enough
to contain the bag. They accordingly deposited the money, and covered it with
earth; after which they marked the tree with four or five notches, and
withdrew, not without having well examined the place and its environs.

What Clara felt during the conversation and proceeding of these two villains,
may easily be judged. What they said about the cottage, had above all,
frightened her to an extreme. She was afraid le^t they should discover her, and
in spite of her dress easily distinguish her sex by her features and tone of
voice. When they were out of sight, she leaped from the tree, and feeling, for
the first time, the want of gold to an adventure^, she determined to rob the
thief who had robbed another.

She dug out the treasure with the same stake they had interred it with; but
finding the precious burden too heavy, necessity taught her an expedient. She
fancied to make it lighter by dividing it. In consequence of this notion, she
put a certain sum into her shoes, her bosom, and all her pockets. Thus provided
she commenced her march. She took her way from certain hints, dropped by the
robbers, and her imagination was pregnant with pleasing thoughts, and the hope
of again meeting with Alexis.

CHAP. V.
ADVENTURES INCIDENT TO CLARA AFTER HER LEAVING THE COTTAGE.

THE curtain of night was drawn, and Aurora, in bright array, pursuing darkness
from the gates of the east, ushered in the bright god: all was awakening all
reviving in nature. From all parts the birds tuned their melodies to celebrate
the return of day.

Clara continued cheerfully her road to St. Marcellin, in order to proceed from
that city to Valence, where she (...) to enquire for Alexis. She arrived at St.
Marcellin the morning, and stopped at the first (...). Here she found the whole
town in an uproar concerning the elopement of the jailor's wife with two
prisoners. This news was communicated to Clara, who thought it scarcely worth
her hearing. All her eagerness, all her wishes, tend to inform herself of
Alexis. Alexis! answered the people. Alexis! yes, you are right, he is one of
the thieves. -- Is not he a young man, of such an age, of such an appearance?
He -- He must certainly be the man? -- the jailor's wife fell in love with him,
and they went off together.

This was more terrible than a thunder stroke to poor Clara. She dropped down;
her landlady, who related the story, came to her assistance. -- Pray, my dear
creature, do you know that Alexis? -- If you do, I would advise you to get out
of the way. -- You might be taken up, and get yourself into trouble. -- Well,
madam, I will be gone, not to elude the unjust pursuits of justice, but to quit
the fatal place where my friend has betrayed me.

The landlady could not comprehend her meaning, Clara, forbearing all farther
elucidation on the subject, le^t, that very instant, the town of St. Marcellin,
where every thing she had heard struck her with astonishment. She took the road
of Aubervive, and ruminated upon all the circumstances of the report made to
her with respect to Alexis. -- Alexis taken up for a thief -- is it credible?
-- I doubt not but he has been mistaken for another: but his having eloped with
another woman, his having yielded to the proposals of that woman, whom he could
know only a few hours -- this is astonishing. -- Could he so soon forget his
Clara? -- Deceitful man! I will renounce, I will forget him, and seek some
corner of the world, where, far from the cottage, I may languish out a
miserable existence.

Clara, though well persuaded of her lover's infidelity, persists in her design
of directing her journey to the capital, where she thought to find her fickle
swain with his new conquest.

Having slept that night at Aubervive, she proceeded the day following, to
Vienna. In the course of her march, she entered a little remote hermitage upon
her right. It consisted of a chapel, committed to the care of three capuchins,
who were so very poor as to be obliged sometimes to ring the bells as a signal
of their distress, and to receive alms from the adjacent villages.

Clara fell on her knees before the altar, where a priest was officiating, and
addressed her most fervent prayers to the maker of all. Soon her pious
ejaculations were disturbed by the remembrance of her misfortunes; -- she
sighed, while tears flowed plenteously from her lovely eyes.

A lady of a middling age, and very well dressed, approached her -- O, Good
God, my child! what is the matter? -- you weep! -- Have you met with some
misfortune? -- you have perhaps committed a sin that causes remorse -- Yes,
madam, I have committed one -- a very great one! -- Alas, at your age* -- but
there is forgiveness for all sins, my little friend; you must obtain it by a
sincere penitence. -- I have a spiritual director, father Stephen, an upright
and virtuous man, open your heart to him, make a confession of all your sins,
and let him, by his holy absolution, reconcile you to the grace of almighty God
whom you have offended -- You anticipate my wishes, madam -- Where is that
father Stephen? -- my burdened soul pa^^s to unload itself. Alas! my little
man, how happy I am! You shall see him directly! but stop here a moment.

The old lady returned with father Stephen, who ogled much our young traveller.
Come, my dear heart, be faithful and sincere, said she -- Father Stephen, you
will come to dine with me to morrow, wo'n't you? -- Bring with you that child.
-- You cannot continue your road to day, my angel; devout this whole day to
piety -- Let me not hinder you. -- What a pretty lad! -- what a pity that so
lovely a sheep should have strayed from the flock of the faithful. Well, do
what is to be done; I will not bid you farewell; come back as soon as you have
finished; I shall wait.

Clara took the capuchin aside, and began to acquaint him with her being a
woman, A woman! cried the director of consciences, a woman! pray what is your
name? -- Clara. -- A pretty name! -- go on.

The beloved of Alexis made a general confession of the particulars of her
education, her flight, and the perfidy of her friend. The father conducted her
from church to the lady's house, and gave her on the road the most salutary
advice. My child, you must renounce that giddy youth, you must give him up; so
lovely a creature deserves better sentiments. Do you know where to go to? -- I
care not where; it is indifferent to me. -- Well, stay for a while with the old
baroness d'Yrace, that is the lady's name who directed you to me, she is a very
sensible and charitable woman; it will give her pleasure to accommodate you at
her own house; stay there: but do by no means reveal your sex to her; beware
telling her that you are a woman in disguise; she is so scrupulous in point of
decency, that it would be much against you. -- Follow my advice, I am your
friend.

Clara promised not to disclose her sex to the baroness, and thus discoursing,
they both arrived at her castle. The baroness was at the gate, and waited for
them with the greatest impatience. Well, my reverend father, have you purged
his soul of the sins which infected it? has it acquired the snowy whiteness of
the lily, and the fragrancy of the rose? -- What is your name, my dear?

Clara was confused; father Stephen answered for her. His name is Alexis --
and, as the poor orphan is without friends, without shelter, I prevailed on him
to stay for some time in your house, if you, madam, deign, to receive him. --
With all my heart; it gives me great satisfaction -- Ah! father Stephen, what a
concern I feel for this poor youth!

The baroness seized her hand, and conducted her to see her park, her castle,
and the apartment which she destined for her use.

My dear, said she, you may stay with me for life, if you like, it only rests
with you; I shall take care to make every thing pleasing and comfortable; but
if your fancy is for the beau monde, you will not find it with me, for I see no
other company than father Stephen, he is my intimate friend; we have been
acquainted with one another so long -- You will be highly benefited by his
conversation. -- Yes, madam, replied the friar, I will do whatever lies in my
power to divert him, but you will not keep him shut up all day long? you will
send him sometimes to me, I hope; there is a fine fish pond in our hermitage;
if he loves angling, he is welcome to amuse himself; and besides, my numerous
collection of books are at his service too; we shall read together in my little
cell -- what do you say to that, Alexis? Clara thanked them with unfeigned
pleasure, for condescending to comfort her in her wretched situation.

The baroness conducted Clara to the Castle; the dinner was served up, and the
young pilgrim was placed between the old lady and the friar, both showed her
the greatest attention, both felt the same interest though excited by different
motives.

At night, father Stephen, who was obliged to return to the hermitage, retired
with a kind of sorrow, yet not before he made Clara promise to come next
morning to see him in his little cell.

The baroness, who was now alone with the supposed Alexis, asked him many
questions, which he answered as well as he could. He was very sorry to see
himself under the necessity of deviating from the truth, and had not the
father, when taking leave, expressly desired it, Clara would not have retained
the secret, and borne a name which at once put her in mind of a lover, and his
infidelity.

Next morning she waited on father Stephen, who longed to see her; he ventured
to squeeze her hand, and to make some little advances with regard to the
tenderness he had conceived for her.

Clara, who thought no farther, left him full of esteem and gratitude. She
returned to the castle, where the baroness addressed her pretty near in the
same terms, yet, with a little more candor and less captiousness. She asked her
if she had ever been in love? Clara, surprised at this question, answered in
the negative. At these words, the baroness seemed to be out of her senses --
She sighed seemed enraptured, embraced her, and painted the happiness which two
sympathetic hearts should enjoy in a retreat so delightful as hers. The passion
of the old fool rose to such a degree, that Clara, simple and innocent as she
was, perceived it, and was much alarmed. She was twenty times upon the point of
making herself known; but submissive to father Stephen's command, had
determined to consult him upon what conduct he would advise her to adopt in so
delicate a juncture.

She returned next morning to the hermitage, and recounted every thing that had
happened. The father, who had never thought his old friend capable of such
folly, and who was desirous of accomplishing his own design upon Clara, ordered
her again to conceal her sex, and to make the most vigorous resistance against
the old woman's proposals. He then touched upon his own feelings, and
endeavored to be more explicit in his language. Clara, still more surprised at
the capuchin, than at the old baroness, returned, quite in confusion, to her
temporary abode.

The baroness pushed the business much farther that day. The friar came to
dinner, took aside Clara, and made a plain declaration of his love. Clara,
being thus teased by these two hypocrites, took the wise resolution of quitting
that dangerous asylum, and its baneful tyranny.

She was so imprudent as to mention her design to father Stephen. The capuchin
was struck dumb for some time, but recollecting himself afterward, he feigned
to approve of Clara's project. Yes, my daughter, said he, you do well; your
age, your charms, in a word, every thing in you, had for a time alienated my
reason, and made me regardless of my duty; but now, restore me to myself, and
to my sacred function! fly, and let me forget you, if possible! Beware of
letting the baroness know what you are about to do; who knows but that violent
passionate woman might detain you against your consent. When she shall be
taking her nap after dinner, take your things, and set out. Mind you do not
leave the high road; you are only two small leagues from Lions; you will be
there to night; there you can take post, and go wherever you please. Adieu! my
dear Clara! You see that I resign all; the baroness would not be so reasonable.
Adieu. Alas! how sorry I am.

Clara was overjoyed to find the father willing not to interrupt her project;
she returned to the castle, and dined quietly with the baroness. After dinner,
the latter, according to custom, laid down on her couch to take a nap; Clara no
sooner saw her asleep, than she walked off with her things, and pursued her
read to Lions. Passing through a delightful meadow, she resolved to rest
herself at the end of it, and reflect upon what she should do. The baroness,
said she, when she discovers that I am gone, will tax me with ingratitude, and
not give herself any trouble to run in pursuit of me.

The sun began to visit the western hemisphere, a gentle coolness pervaded the
air, the earth opened her bosom to receive the evening dew, and the all
fragrant flowers exhaled a thousand perfumes, when Clara, seated on a rising
turf, supported her head with one hand, reflecting what to do. She sat there
some time, and heard not the rattling of a carriage which stopped before her;
this put an end to her reverie. A man dressed in black came out; it is father
Stephen. Clara, said he, behold the power of love! I could not resist the
desire of following you wherever you went; I have thrown off my sacred habit;
it is no longer father Stephen, but a man enraptured with your charms, and who
only wishes to live at your feet; let us not tarry: step into this carriage
with me; come, another minute will undo us. Oh, heaven, should (...) fly with
you, with a man who deserts the most sacred duty and profession, to -- Clara,
we shall talk of this in the carriage; come, or I Will die before you.

He immediately pulled a pistol from his pocket, and applied it to his
forehead. Clara seized his arm. She was moved, and knew no longer how to behave.

Whilst they were in this wavering situation, they descried a carriage amidst
clouds of dust; it drew near and the baroness alighted; she approached, and
upbraided them with the keenest reproaches. Cruel, treacherous, faithless man,
cried she, what harm have I done thee, that thou should carry off my Alexis?
he forsakes me, and thou art the cause: My Alexis, return with me, return, and
bring me not to despair.

The friar looked very foolish; Clara blushed; and the baroness laying hold of
one of her arms, attempted to make her get into her carriage. Stephen, ^laying
hold of the other, exclaimed, no, madam, he shall not go with you; you would be
the ruin of that innocent young man; you would hinder him from completing the
work of salvation: he told me all; I will save him. Oh, that will not do,
replied the baroness, pulling Clara to her side, he shall come with me;
answered the monk, pulling her toward him, we shall see who is to be conqueror.

Long would this dispute have lasted, had not an unforseen event most
propitious to Clara, saved her from the rapacity of these two vultures, and
discomfited their criminal intentions. Thus heaven, which she invoked, came to
relieve her; and sent, in her trouble, a deliverer, a comforter, a man who will
be forthwith most dear to her. Let us make a moment's digression from this
scene of strife, and return to the identical Alexis, whom we have left at an
inn, with his friend Carlo, and the wife of the jail keeper of St. Marcellin,
who proposed either a criminal intrigue, or a duel.

The reader may see that the hero and heroine of our history are equally
unfortunate, and that both must struggle with vicious individuals who make
attempts upon their virtue and innocence.

CHAP. VI.
ALEXIS LEAVES HIS INAMORATA. -- HE AND SCIOCCO PURSUE THEIR ADVENTURES TO
MARSEILLES.

ALEXIS, quite at a loss how to get rid of the female tormentor, received from
Sciocco, whose fancy was so fertile in expedients and advice, a plan, by the
observance of which he might easily, and with speed, disincumber himself:
Signor, said the Italian, it is only by flight you will be able to put yourself
out of the reach of that bad woman, and per lo fare To do i^.
, heaven furnishes me with an admirable suggestion -- it is similar to that
which freed me from the robbers in the forest. -- I have a remnant of opium --
let us lull our Argus into sleep, then take post, and retire to some place
where it will not be easy for her to find us. -- O you wicked wretch! is not
opium the same as poison? -- No, signor, it is not -- I shall take it upon me
to give her a dose strong enough to keep her a sleep till tomorrow morning --
Can you have any objection to this? is it not an advice from heaven? -- For,
after all, perch Why.
have I kept this opium? -- I did not want it; twenty times I thought of
throwing it away on the road, and I don't know what hand retained mine -- It
has been reserved for the use I shall make of it to day -- Had you rather fight
with her? -- She will fall in the combat I tell you -- Odds! would it not be
better to avoid the accident -- is it not in the order of things; -- Come,
lasciami fare Leave it to me.
, and rely on vostro humiliss^^o servo. Your most humble servant.
Alexis laughed at this strange expedient, and left the conducting of the
business to Sciocco. The latter found means, during breakfast, to administer
the remedy to our Dulcinea with such success, that she soon after complained of
a violent head ach, and fell into a profound sleep. Alexis and his companion,
without loss of time, repaired immediately to the royal postoffice. -- They are
asked to what place they wish to go -- Where you please, answered they -- To
Marseilles? -- Yes, to Marseilles.

A chaise is got ready for them, and they depart* we will not disturb the
sleeping inamorata, but follow our two travelers.

Next morning, they arrived at Marseilles, and hired lodgings at an hotel
situated at the entrance of the new town. They were, however, highly
embarrassed for want of cash. The treasure of Dorance, which was in the
possession of Alexis, had been taken from him by the officers of justice, when
he was committed to jail at St. Marcellin. He was left destitute, and his
comrade labored under the same predicament.

Sciocco advised his friend to make the best of his abilities in music --
Alexis accepted his proposal. In consequence, they advertise themselves as
musicians desirous to perform in a public concert. -- There request is granted,
a day appointed, two amateurs announced, and the house very full -- Alexis
performed a concerto on the harpsichord, Carlo sung a rondeau in Italian, both
were applauded, courted, and well paid.

This debut made them bold, and they intended to engage for a second appearance
in public, but a favorable event furnished them with another kind of resource.

Whilst they were one morning performing some musical morceaux, a person about
forty years of age, and of a wealthy appearance, entered their appartment. --
Let me not disturb you gentlemen; go on, go on, said he -- I should be very
sorry to interrupt you. -- Sir, we are too desirous to know what procures us
the honor of seeing you. -- Well, gentleman, we will sit down, and talk about
it -- but mind it must be kept a secret; for the matter I am going to inform
you of must not be known. -- Sir, we promise secrecy; please to speak.

I am the receiver-general of the farms of this city, and it is in my power to
give places to those I wish to serve -- You seem to be masters of your
profession -- Tomorrow each of you shall have a place in my office -- You may
take your function upon you; and as to the salary, I pledge my word you shall
be well satisfied -- but I expect a mutual favor of you* I am in love with a
very amiable young lady; you will be so good as to instruct her in music,
history, geography, and all the sciences you are versed in; and then you will
lose no opportunity of making her sensible of my tenderness; for I have a
rival, a formidable rival -- I have taken care of the young lady from her
infancy to this very day, and my intention is to marry her, if her affection
and sentiments make her worthy of my choice -- You see the whole of my proposal
has a lawful tendency, and cannot hurt your delicacy -- Whilst, for one month,
you endeavor to obtain her good graces in my favor, I shall not appear at the
house -- If she consent to be my spouse, the nuptials shall be celebrated at
the expiration of that term -- If she rejects my offer with obstinacy, give her
this little coffer, locked up as it is now, and signify to her that I renounce
her forever -- I have chosen you, gentlemen, for conducting this affair,
because your landlord has spoke in the highest terms of your prudence and
honesty; besides, I am your neighbor; I live in the court before you -- this
vicinity will enable me to see you daily, to know what impressions you have
made on her heart and mind -- Well, gentlemen, will you subscribe to my offers
and proposals?

Alexis, who would not trust the stranger, did not know how to answer his
question; but Sciocco was already speaking, Si signor; Yes, sir.
we accept of your offer with the greatest pleasure. -- Well, gentlemen,
replied the stranger, I shall be back to fetch you in an instant, and we will
pay a visit to the lovely Sophia, who is to be your pupil.

The receiver general then withdrew. Alexis upbraided Carlo with a thousand
reproaches for having acquiesced in proposals of so singular a nature. What,
said he, can you, Sciocco decide so freely and without my concurrence? Come,
answer me, (...) you know that man or his mistress? -- It is, indeed, a pretty
function he lays on us; but -- it is a matter of marriage, replied Carlo --

Sciocco was running on, but Alexis took no notice of his foolish arguments; he
was thinking in what light he should consider an adventure, which gave rise to
his suspicions, and foreboded nothing good.

While Alexis made these reflections, and Sciocco continued his arguments, the
receiver general entered the apartment. Come, gentlemen, said he, let us go --
let us see the insensible Sophia, and may I be indebted to you for the conquest
of her heart, my gratitude shall be boundless -- But mind, I leave you the
little coffer, which you will deliver to her, if she persists in her cruelty --
But let us not mention it before the time is come -- I desire either her hatred
or her hand. But sir, said Alexis, why don't you keep the coffer at your own
house? -- you can give it us in due time as well as now. I insist on your
having it here, replied the receiver -- I intend going upon a journey which
will last five weeks; of course, I shall not be able to give it you -- My
friends, I think it is as safe in your hands as in my own.

Alexis would not venture any farther questions. They all three left the house,
entered a spacious street, where the dwelling was situated. A governess made
her appearance, and conducted them to the parlour, where the fair Sophia was
amusing herself with performing on the harpsichord. Sophia, said the receiver,
you know that I must go to Paris; my business will detain me there for some
time -- As I don't wish you to be without occupation, I beg you would be docile
to the lessons which these gentlemen will give you; I sincerely hope to
perceive, after my return, that they have operated some change in you.

Sophia made no reply; it is thus you mind what I say? cried the receiver --
Come, hold up your head, and thank these gentlemen -- What, are you going to
cry? I am tired of your little airs, miss; and I assure you, they shall not
deceive me any longer -- come, give us a song, and let us see what you can do?

Sophia, after much begging, and entreating, sung the following air, and
accompanied it on the harpsichord: Of a swain sadly mourning his doom,
My eyes the last anguish did see!
Cruel sufferings had faded his bloom: --
He died -- he died for me!
Live happy, he cried, beauteous maid!
Think on Hylas, and banish alarms;
In death there is nothing I dread,
Since I Have lived to expire in thy arms!


When Sophia had done, the receive^ and her again. What means this song, miss?
-- you sing none but languishing ditties -- I do not like it -- I love gay,
merry, and pleasant airs -- Come, come, these gentlemen will change all that --
will you be attentive to them, Sophia? will you follow their advice? I love
you, you know it well -- I hope therefore you will make me some trifling amends
for the pains I have bestowed on your education -- Who would have taken care of
you Sophia, had not I pitied your fate? -- you that was born poor, and bereft
of your parents when a helpless infant in the cradle? you had no friend but me;
Ah, Sophia, why not add to this title another more sacred and dearer still; a
title which would accomplish my every wish? Sophia remained dumb still; but
that silence, and a motion of her head proved plainly how far she was from
granting him that title.

Alexis and Sciocco were quite lost in amazement; the receiver almost put
himself in a passion and all three retired. You see, said the latter, how she
hates me. It is because you treat her a little too rudely, replied Sciocco.
Nay, rudely! that little fly creature has took a liking to a giddy young spark,
by whom I have been nearly knocked down an hundred times. Have you a rival!
Indeed I have! he formerly had the impudence to visit her, but since I
threatened Sophia to send her to a convent if he should renew his addresses, he
has kept out of the way; I doubt not, however, of their meeting privately, and
keeping up a correspondence, in spite of the vigilance of the governess, who is
much devoted to my interest. Since she has a lover, answered Sciocco, were I in
your place, and did find him with her, I would give him a sound drubbing. This
is just what I mean to do; but let us change the conversation: you promise,
gentlemen, to use your best efforts in my behalf, and to ^often her heart if
possible. We certainly shall, answered Alexis; but it seems to me an arduous
task. What of that, if it be impossible to bring her about, I am determined to
abandon her; the money which is in the little coffer will help her to take some
resolution, and I will do my best to forget her.

Sciocco spent the day in convincing his friend that he (...) the whole of the
matter as highly advantageous to himself; but Alexis would not believe him.
Next morning the receiver came to fetch and instal them in his office. In the
afternoon they gave a lesson to Sophia, which she took with great carelessness,
and seeming tokens of disgust.

A few days after Alexis perceived that the young lady had cast some
sentimental glances upon him; he thought it a favorable opportunity to gain her
confidence, and to turn the conversation upon the receiver. Sophia, who had
thus distinguished our hero from his companion, squeezed his hand, whispering
in his ear, Did you but know him, sir, as I do! he is a very dangerous man!
These expressions alarmed poor Alexis; he perceived that the discreet Sophia
dared not to come to an explanation before Sciocco, and changed the subject of
their discourse.

The day following, while Sciocco was amusing himself with singing, and
preludi^g on Sophia's harpsichord, Alexis took her in private: Miss, said he,
what you told me the other day, gives me some ^^easiness: is it possible the
receiver is a deceitful and wicked man? Wicked, sir, ay, that he knows better
than I! How would I bless the succouring hand that would free me from his
tyranny! I have more confidence in you than in your friend; Come to night
alone; the governess, who is much attached to me, will let you in. Come, I
pray; I will tell you all; you shall know what the man who sends you hither^^
capable of; and when you are persuaded of his treachery and blackness, you will
repent having known him.

This discourse alarmed Alexis to the highest degree; he was all compliance. At
night, wishing to get rid of Sciocco, he feigned indisposition, and a want of
rest. Carlo wished him a good night, and retired to his own apartment. But
Alexis, instead of going to bed, put on a cloak, ran hastily down the private
stairs, and repaired immediately to Sophia, of whom he expected such
elucidations as would enable him to take proper measures of conduct with the
receiver.

The governess was waiting for him at the door. Sophia and he lock themselves
up in a room, where the perfidious pupil made a thousand false reports to her
young master, to injure the character of her protector. To explain this, it is
necessary to add, that Sophia, whose disposition was the most false and
ungrateful, detested the man who had always treated her with fatherly regard
and affection, and to whose generosity she owed numberless obligations: carried
her perverseness to a still higher degree of censure, and assisted by a set of
mercinary domestics, gave daily proofs of the most scandalous and revolting
conduct. She had been in love with a young spark, but Alexis had now made a
more lively impression upon her heart. She hoped, by tracing a touching picture
of her own situation, and of the pretended vice of her protector, to soften our
hero, and engage him so far as to elope with her.

Whilst Clara's lover, locked up with Sophia, listened, with the most blind and
implicit credulity, to the lies of the latter, the receiver, who had passed by
chance through the street in which his mistress lived, had seen a young man
enter muffled in a long cloak. He doubted not but her ancient gallant returned:
rage and jealousy overpowered his senses. Hah! hah! said he, is it thus I am
duped? and that deceitful governess, whom I considered as my stoutest adherent!
Well, I swear to take vengeance upon the young spark, who has offended me so
often; and, as to Sophia, she shall hear of me tomorrow.

The receiver, persuaded that his rival would stay all night at Sophia's, went
quickly to Sciocco. Where is your friend? He is asleep; he is not well. I
should be glad to speak to him this moment. It Is impossible, he has retired to
his bedchamber; he is asleep. Well, my dear Sciocco, I cannot help it, you must
come along with me, and help me to give a sound drubbing to my insolent rival,
who has just got access to Sophia, that treacherous Sophia! To be sure,
Signior, I am sorry my master cannot be of the party; it would not be worth
while to awake him for that; we shall do the business full as well without him;
I will serve you with the most scrupulous fidelity.

The receiver and Sciocco, taking each a good cudgel, lay in ambuscade opposite
Sophia's door, determined to wait all night, if required, till the pretended
rival should leave the house, and fall into their hands.

Sophia, who had all this while frightened Alexis respecting her protector,
conjured him to save her, to take her with him, and to deliver her from a man
whom she hated more than death. It was in vain for Alexis to oppose her
arguments, Sophia would hear no reason. Alas! my friend, said she, that man is
capable of ruining me and even you, if he finds it his interest; it is a great
misfortune for you to have known him, and I am still more to be pitied, if I am
constrained to live with him: Oh! help me, my generous youth! I don't care
where I fly so I get rid of my tyrant! Alexis was so much embarrassed, that he
knew not kow to act. He promised to think maturely of it, and to give her a
decisive answer next day, at the usual hour of her lesson. Sophia, before he
went away, showed herself so kind to him, as to obtain a complete victory over
his will. Alexis, however took his leave, quite moved at what he had been told.

Well persuaded that the receiver must be a man of the blackest character, he
took the resolution to return the mysterious coffer, which he had received the
morning before. Who knows, said he to himself, whether this coffer does not
contain papers, jewels and other articles, which might very likely undo me, if
^ound in my possession.

Amidst these reflections, he went down stairs, left the house, and shut the
street door after him. He had scarcely walked three or four yards, when the two
companions sally forth from their ambuscade, fall upon him, and give him the
most consummate drubbing before ever he had time to look about him. Alexis
turned round and perceived the receiver and Sciocco* what becomes of him at
that sight! he dares not open his mouth, and receives, quite mute, all the
blows which Sciocco deals on him in a most masterly manner. Had it not been for
the interference of two strangers, who put the aggressors to flight, Alexis
would have fallen on the spot.

Alexis, quite sore, and severely bruised, returned thanks to his deliverers,
and crept to his lodgings; went up the private stairs, and betook himself to
(...)

CHAP, VII.
ALEXIS LEAVES MARSEILLES. -- ADVENTURES AT THE INN. -- A NEW SITUATION.

ALEXIS, who suffered great pain, reflected upon this sad accident. What have I
done to that miserable Italian? what could induce him to make such an attempt
upon my life? Oh heaven! on whom can I rely? That cursed receiver has surely
seen me enter Sophia's house! he must have been kindled with fury; he must have
fetched Sciocco, who, not finding me in my apartment, has easily given credit
to some story set up by his infamous accomplice: But can he, he that seemed to
love me, have recourse to such extremities!

These were the meditations of poor Alexis; and wounded as he was, he would
rather suffer death, than request Sciocco to fetch him a surgeon. Thus he spent
the night in groans and complaints. In the morning, Carlo, who thought him fast
asleep, entered his apartment on his toes. Alexis, trembling at his approach,
hid his head under the blankets, to avoid his ^ight. The Italian, who respected
his rest, waited upon the receiver, informing him that his dear master seemed
to be much indisposed. Well, we'll go and see him, answered the latter; but
don't let us lose time.

They both repaired to the apartment of their unfortunate victim. What ails
you, my dear Alexis, said the receiver, are you not well? No, sir, I am not; I
suffer very much indeed! Oh, my God! send quickly for the doctor.

Sciocco dispatched instantly a servant of the house, and returned to his
master's bed side.

Why was you not with us last night, said Sciocco, you would have helped us to
chastise a certain little gallant. Aye, replied the receiver, I saw him enter
at Sophia's; fury seized my heart; I came to fetch Sciocco, and we two gave him
such a drubbing with our cudgels, I ^^sure you as he will not forget as long as
he lives.

No pen (...) to describe the different sensations of Alexis during this
conversation. The traitors! said he to himself, only see their cunning!

The physician's arrival broke off their conversation. Alexis requested to
speak in private with the disciple of Esculapius. Carlo and his friend quitted
the apartment. Clara's lover opened the whole affair to the doctor, whose
gravity seemed to excite confidence Sir, said he at the conclusion, I cannot
live with (...) ^utchers! -- take me, I pray, take me from them! With pleasure!
answered the doctor -- should you like to be brought to my own house? --
Wherever you please, so I do not see my enemies.

The doctor sent for his carriage; it arrived, and Alexis got into it, in spite
of Sciocco's complaints and remonstrances -- which, far from being listened to
by our patient, only served to redouble his indignation.

Upon his arrival at the doctor's, he was carried to an apartment, the door of
which was kept locked. -- Alexis was determined to see Sciocco no more -- he
forbad him his premises, and earnestly entreated his host not to introduce him.

Poor Carlo was much grieved at the faults his master finds with him. How can
you be so unreasonable, said the doctor, you that have put him* in such a
condition?

After a deal of argument with the doctor, Sciocco discovered the cause of his
illness, and (...) went immediately to acquaint the receiver with what he had
heard. The latter was (...) surprised and thought Alexis had concerted some
scheme (...) of his mistress.

The receiver, to be circumstantially informed of the whole, called on Sophia
that very moment. -- Treacherous woman! said he, I know all -- Alexis has
seduced you; you have both betrayed me! -- O heaven! cried Sophia, throwing
herself at his feet, who could tell you this? I implore your clemency for him;
he is not guilty; it is me alone! what is he not guilty? Perfidious woman! I
have already taken vengeance upon him; and, as to you, I renounce you, I
despise you forever! I despise you too much to take the trouble of punishing
you! But leave this town; get out of my sight, for fear of some unlucky moment!
Begone! ungrateful wretch!

The receiver frowned once more at the guilty Sophia, left her apartment, and
returned to his house. From a remnant of commisseration, however, upon her
unhappy situation, he sent her the little coffer full of gold; and delivered
afterward to Sciocco, the sum of twenty-five louis d'ors, to pay his friend's
physician; commanding him particularly never to reveal the name of the person
who had done him that favor; he then took leave of Sciocco, stepped into his
carriage, and departed for Paris;

In vain Sciocco went hourly to the door of Alexis' apartment; in vain he
endeavored to convince the doctor of his repentance and attachment to his
master. The doctor himself made use of all his influence in favor of the poor
Italian. Alexis remained inflexible; every representation served only to
aggravate his resentment; Sciocco's crime became only more congenial to his
irritated mind; he openly taxed him with a design to murder him.

Alexis was soon able to walk, and began to think of commencing his journey.
Seeing himself well recovered, he ordered his effects to be brought and wished
to pay the doctor. It is useless, said the latter, I am paid. Paid! and who has
paid you? That I must not tell, sir; I promised to keep that secret. It was a
fruitless attempt of Alexis to plague his memory to remind himself of the
person who had rendered him this service; he supposed it to be Sciocco;
nevertheless, remembering the treachery of which he accused him, he resolved to
set out without either speaking to him, or even suffering him to be admitted to
his presence.

In consequence of this, one fine morning, the sky being serene and cloudless,
Alexis took leave of his hosts, begging they would not acquaint Sciocco with
his departure, and set out on his journey to Paris.

He would not take post at Marseilles, for fear Sciocco should find out by
inquiries, what road he had taken. The conduct of this friend hung so heavy
upon him, that he walked quite drooped, and with a world of ^^in; tears even
gushed from his eyes. -- "Am I not the most unfortunate of men! said he to
himself, -- whom can I trust? -- to whom can I have recourse?"

He was absorbed in the most profound melancholy, when Sciocco, who had watched
for him, threw himself at his feet; He embraced, and bedewed them with tears.
Alexis started, and strove to avoid him, but the other hindered him by
exclaiming with a most woeful and contrite tone of voice, Oh, my dear patron!
hear me! forgive me! What do thou want, wretch? How dare thou to show
thyself to me after what you have been guilty of? Those blows you mean! Oh! did
you but know how often I cursed myself for them! I did not think I was striking
my good master! indeed I did not! Traitor, can you be so impudent! By heaven, I
did not know you! Who else did you think it could be? The receiver is as
innocent as myself; he saw a man, muffled up in a long cloak, enter Signora's
house; he took him for the old gallant of the fair one; jealousy overcame him
with rage; he came to me, engaged me to be the joint instrument of his wrath,
and intended also to make you of the party; but I, who believed you was asleep,
did not choose to disturb you. We set out, and find the supposed gallant, and it
happened that the blows, instead of being the reward of a traitor, fell upon my
poor master! Now, is it our fault? could we guess it was you who was with your
scholar at an hour so unseasonable? It Is a lie! It is not a lie, signior, it is
the plain truth; ask the doctor who cured you; What, did not you and the
receiver know me? I swear by all the powers, we did not!

Sciocco dropped many a tear; Alexis, seeing him prostrate at his feet, began
to reflect, and accused none but himself of what had happened: Carlo asked him
with the most genuine simplicity, My dear patron, will not you tell me what
business you had with the damsel at such an hour? What lesson had you to give
her?

Alexis looked at Sciocco, and held out his hand to him, which the Italian
kissed with heartfelt transports, exclaiming, Do you pardon me, dear Alexis? I
think I ought, if you tell me the truth; Alas! I see all the fault lays on me!
Yes, it does indeed! and on that good natured receiver, who mistook you for his
rival, and insisted upon paying the expenses of your physician! Did he pay my
physician? He did, sir.

Alexis embraced him, and recounted his secret conversation with Sophia.
Sciocco showed him plainly how she sought to enthral him! and Alexis, stung
with remorse, could hardly forgive himself. They both pursued their road, and
longed to see Paris, where Alexis hoped to hear of his father and Dumont.

Since his departure from the cottage, he had gone through so many adventures,
and sustained such hardships, as had scarcely left him time to think on his
dear Clara. Sometimes, however, he would shed tears at the remembrance of his
parting from this dear object of his love: his imagination represented her, as
it were, in a state of forlornness; he heard her complaints, her reproaches,
and this moving picture quite wrung his soul.

We shall only stop with our travelers at Vienna^ where they happen to have a
very singular adventure, owing to the mistrustful temper of Alexis.

In the dusk of the evening our two travelers, who might have gone a few
leagues farther before night, found themselves so much spent with the fatigue^
of their journey, as to enter an inn with an intent to spend the evening, but
not to sleep there all night. They were conducted to an apartment, and sat down
to converse with one another: suddenly they hear a strange noise in the room:
their door was shut, they were alone, and yet they heard somebody breathe near
them, and a low restrained coughing. There is somebody in our room, cried
Sciocco. Yes, replied Alexis, there is somebody hidden.

This said, they search on all sides, they open a cupboard, and find a man
laying on the floor, and trembling like a leaf. What business have you here?
said our two travelers, putting themselves at the same time upon the
defensive. Ah! gentlemen, don't undo me! answered the stranger; I am a wretch,
pursued by the just vengeance of a man whom I have inhumanly sacrificed; he is
now at this inn; I saw him come in, and quickly hid myself in this apartment,
the door of which I ^ound open. You have other designs, villain! I tell thee
leave this room! Ah! by all that is dear to you, save me, extricate me! I am no
villain; and if I am guilty of a crime, it is love only that made me commit it.
Oh! suffer me to spend the night with you! you shall know who I am -- you shall
have an account of the whole affair! What, should we suffer a stranger? If you
turn me out, you undo me! If my enemy discovers me here, my life is lost! Alas,
let me owe you my preservation generous strangers! deign to keep me for this
night; tomorrow, when my rival shall be gone, I will go too.

Sciocco was very willing to befriend the stranger; but Alexis, afraid, perhaps
not without reason, of all the bad consequences which might have resulted from
harboring a man he had found hidden in his room, would by no means have acceded
to his request. In vain Sciocco attempted to prove that it was in the order of
things, and of predestination; in vain the stranger has recourse to entreaties
and tears. Alexis, who had so often been put upon, suspects some fraud in the
business, opens the door, and calls the landlord.

At the noise he made, the stranger attempted to escape; but another appeared
before the door of the apartment, who stopped him, and cried, Hah! have I found
the object of my ^ury, and immediately thrust his sword in his bosom. What
became of Alexis and his friend at this spectacle of horror! They see the
unhappy victim fall, and impute his death to none but themselves; and the house
resounded with the cries and complaints of the people who came in crowds.
Alexis and S^iocco, fearing to be compromised in that cruel affair leave the
inn, and pass through the crowds that had gathered round the house, and take,
with the utmost precipitancy, the road to Lions. Having marched to the distance
of about three leagues, they are overtaken by two men on horseback. One of them
alighted, and addressed them in a most furious tone, So, you have been the
accomplices of the wretch I have killed? -- We! -- Yes, you! he was hidden in
your apartment. Villain! cried Alexis, fear the due search of that justice,
thou seem to have evaded! Forbear insulting an unfortunate young man, who
will be sorry all his life time for the crime which he has given thee an
opportunity to commit.

The cavalier and his valet make an attempt to attack Alexis and Sciocco with
their pistols, but the latter disarm them, and begin a pugilistic combat, in
which the four champions display equal strength and dexterity.

The night was not very dark, and the battle being fought before a castle, made
several persons come to the windows to be spectators to an action most spirited
and vigorous.

Alexis and Sciocco knocked down their adversaries, suffered them to rise
again, set too and worsted them. This singular combat would have lasted much
longer, had it not been interrupted by a particular accident. It happened that
Sciocco, elated with the hopes of instant victory, exclaimed, Don't flinch!
courage, Alexis! -- Alexis! cried a lady, who was looking out of one of the
windows of the castle; What, is it he? is it that dear lad? fly to his
assistance!

That moment, a whole troop of valets, armed with cudgels, leave the castle,
fall upon the four champions, and strike both the aggressors and the aggressed.
Our two heroes ^ide with this unexpected reinforcement, and charged the
horsemen with such impetuosity as to make them fly, and leave them conquer^rs.

Alexis received a blow in his face, which quite disfigured him: the blood
flows: he stops it with his handkerchief; Sciocco and the valets of the castle
support him. The subsidiary dame arrived, and took him by the hand, and made
him enter the castle. What, is it you, my dear Alexis? Good God! you will not
escape from me this time.

Alexis is struck with astonishment; he wonders who may be this lady that shows
him such concern.

CHAP. VIII.
CLARA RELIEVED BY A CHARACTER ALREADY KNOWN -- HER ADVENTURES CONTINUED.

WHILST the ex-capuchin and the baroness were thus contending about Clara, a
phaeton stopped on the high road. The generous stranger who was sitting in it,
heard the cries of Clara, and alighted from the vehicle. He advanced
immediately with his valet, to the spot, where Clara hoped a speedy relief from
her persecutors. What are you doing to this young man, cried he? (The reader
will remember that Clara disguised in men's clothes, had made the conquest of
the baroness, under the name of Alexis) What is it to you, answers the father?
Ah sir, cried the poor victim, deliver me out of the hands of these two people,
who will carry me off! -- Traitor (said the stranger, advancing close up to
Stephen's breast,) let him go or thy life is at stake.

During this dialogue the baroness returns to her carriage, and bids her
coachman drive home with the utmost dispatch. The ex-capuchin is left alone,
and oblidged to make a precipitate retreat to his post-chaise, ordering the
post boy to carry him to Lions, as he could not be received again into his
confraternity.

Clara fell upon her knees before her deliverer, and returns him thanks with
the most heartfelt expressions: her candor and gentleness made her own the
situation she was in. -- O most generous of mortals! said she, the person you
have extricated from the hands of her cruel ravishers is a woman! -- A woman!
-- Yes, a woman who will ever remember with infinite gratitude the invaluable
service you have rendered her. -- Alas! my good lady who could? -- but please
to step in my phaeton, my age ought to warrant my good intentions, come with
me, I am ready to carry you to any place you please to appoint.

Sir, I cannot hesitate in the least to accept your liberal offer; your
generosity, your discourse, and the singular respect you inspire in me, in a
word every thing assures me of the exquisiteness of your sentiments, every
thing engages me to profit by the honor of your company.

At these words, the stranger handed her to his phaeton, the postilion whips
the horses, and Clara resumes her discourse. I am going to Paris, sir, where I
hope to -- You go to Paris, madam? well so do I, it is indeed a very fortunate
opportunity for me! You will find in me an honest, sensible companion, who feels
the deepest concern at your misfortunes! happy should I be, if you thought me
so far deserving your confidence as to give me an account of them. -- Sir, you
are certainly entitled to that confidence. I should scorn the least thought
tending to the contrary. I ought to inform first of all that my name is Clara.
A young man whom I loved, and whom I still do love, in spite of his treachery!
-- What do you love miss? -- I myself did love once! perhaps you were
unfortunate as me. -- Unfortunate, indeed! May I beg you to proceed? -- I have
left all that is dear to me, to follow Alexis; to follow my lover, and the
first news I received of him, was of his inconstancy. -- Alexis you say is your
lover's name, Alexis? -- Yes, perhaps you know him? -- I do not think it can be
the same-pray, is he a musician? -- Oh! an excellent one. A handsome young man?
-- As can be. About nineteen? -- Wants but a few months. He is very mild, shy?
-- It Is he indeed. Unfortunately deceitful and dissembling. It cannot be he! --
He told me he lived in a forest? -- Ah! it is Alexis: you know my lover -- sir,
where have you seen him? -- At Marseilles, miss: -- alas! his acquaintance has
proved very fatal to me. For God's sake, sir, explain yourself! -- How I pity
you to love at all, that perfidious -- Well? -- It will grieve your heart. Oh!
speak sir, pray speak? -- He deprived me of my mistress's affections. -- Is it
possible? -- Very possible; I had an unlimited confidence in him; -- him; I
introduced him to Sophia; I begged him to have an eye upon her conduct; the
traitor! he falls in love with her; they both unite their cunning to deceive
me, and in a nocturnal meeting, resolve to elope together, to forsake me, to
break my heart! -- Ah sir, sir! -- I see a young man enter my Sophia's house in
the dark; I never suspected him to be my friend Alexis! I watch him, in company
with another person -- he comes out of the house: I and my companion were armed
with bludgeons. I revenge myself upon the unknown person, and in the morning am
informed that the victim was no other than Alexis. -- You cained him? Ah tell
me, has he been much hurt? -- He was forced to keep his bed a whole fortnight;
but it seems you pity him my fair Clara, do not all these facts carry the
strongest conviction to your mind, must not he be a villain unworthy to
approach a person as lovely as you? -- Ah! let me respire, sir! So many blows
all at once? O Alexis! must I hear nothing of thee but thy perfidy! At St.
Marcellin, he elopes with the gaol keeper's wife; at Marseilles he projects an
elopement with -- O God! what a fickle man! how many mistresses in so short a
time! Oh! Clara could not fix thy inconstant heart; I am but too sensible of
it; my absence has effaced my image from thy soul, which thou said love had
engraven on it forever! I have done with him, I renounce him; I will neither
see nor love him any more.*You tell me, sir, he is at Marseilles; I will go
straight to Paris; I will put a distance of an hundred and sixty leagues
between him and me. I fain would add the whole globe to the space which shall
part us! -- (...), miss Clara, come with me; I will introduce you to a friend,
a friend dear to me by his virtue^ and his misfortunes; you shall make
acquaintance with the charming Arzelia, his spouse; they have no children; I
will have them to adopt you for their own, I will have you to be their
daughter. Ah! remember that virtue finds friends wherever it is to be met with.

Clara thanked the receiver (for it was he) with sincerity, sweetness, and
innocence. She then gave a faithful account of her adventures; mentioned her
father Duverly, and Candor, described the cottage, and by all this obtained the
entire confidence of her deliverer, who was a man highly respectable. During
this conversation, they arrived at Lions, where they made a stay of several
days, to see all that was curious and remarkable in that city. Nothing very
material having occurred in their way from Lions to Paris, I shall not trespass
upon the reader's time with uninteresting details, and enter the metropolis
with our two travelers, who alight at the hotel In France, the houses of
noblemen, and persons in high office are distinguished by the appellation of
Hotels.
of the marquis de Corsagne, the receiver's friend, who makes a conspicuous
figure in the remaining part of this history.

The marquis was about forty, tall, well made, and amiable. He had suffered so
much by misfortune, that his countenance was overcast by a melancholy gloom,
which nothing could dispel.

Arzelia, marchioness de Corsagne, had nearly obtained her seventh luster; she
had still the appearance of a woman who had been distinguished by exquisite
beauty; and though her eyes flushed no more with glances of juvenile vivacity,
though her cheeks and features had been sorrowed by torrents of tears, though
she had lost the seducing attractives which at first sight captivate the heart,
yet her soul was refined, her temper gentle, and her mind ingenuous and
upright. The loss of her external charms only helped to heighten the brilliant
qualities of her noble heart. Thus the panting rose, faded by the ardency of a
summer's day, the fickle butterfly approaches, and quickly leaves her for
another flower, whose full blown charms and sweet perfumes attract the
coquetting insect; but the prudent be is not deterred by the decayed
appearance of the queen of flowers; she reverently opens her calyx, sure to
find in it a nectar more precious than the useless perfume she has lost.

The receiver whom we shall forthwith denote by the name of Du Monay, had
intimated to Clara, before he presented her to his noble friends, that it would
not be proper to acquaint them with her adventures. Much have they suffered by
misfortune, added he; such a confidence would only sharpen the edge of their
grief; and with regard to the history of the cottage, to that Alexis who never
knew his family, all this appears so singular, so romantic, as might in all
likelihood, lessen the favorable opinion to which your merits lay so just a
claim. Pardon my plainness Clara, you have given me leave to speak with the
tenderness of a father; I shall exercise the paternal prerogative; nay I do
now, and in testimony of my friendship, I will introduce you to my friends, as
my neice, as my brother's daughter; they know that I was to take her with me to
Paris, but they know not that she i^ no more: take you her place, and be sure,
the marchioness will bring you up as her own daughter.

Clara had not the least objection to make Paris her place of residence; yet
she regretted the cottage. Many times thinking on Candor, she accused herself
of cruelty and ingratitude, and promised to return to a man, who had fulfilled
every duty of a parent toward her; but the bare idea of what he exacted from
Alexis, the vengeance he had meditated against Duverly, and her ownself, his
daughter, made her shudder, she trembled with indignation, and praised the
powers above for having rescued her from a bloodthirsty tyrant. Nevertheless,
said she, to herself, one day, Alexis may return to the cottage, and not
finding me there -- The question is will he seek me? This question I will not
decide. But who will answer, that this false man, not content with having thus
devoted me to all the neglect of slighted passion, who will answer, I say that
he will not add barbarity to broken faith. Oh God! that he were to bring with
him my father's head! -- O heaven! -- and should I witness it! and should I
behold! No; I had rather stay in Paris. In my deliverer I have found a real
father, and can the friends to whom he means to introduce me, be of an inferior
stamp? No, I will never leave those generous hearts; I will live happy far from
my relations; but what say I? -- Is not the place which gives happiness, the
real bosom of the family?

This was the wise determination of Clara: Arrived at the marquis' hotel, the
porter shows our travelers into a beautiful saloon, where the marquis was
reading* and his spouse amusing herself on the piano forte. They no sooner
perceived M. du Monay, than they fly to his arms. It is you, my dear friend
said the marquis, it is you? how happy I am to see you again.

The marchioness expressed no less the joy she felt at this meeting, and M. Du
Monay laying hold of Clara's hand, presented her to the noble hosts. Here you
see, my neice Clara, my brother's daughter. You have offered me your house to
receive her; that I make bold to accept your proposal, there she is; Arzelia,
what can be more lovely?

Clara blushed and cast down her blue eyes: the marchioness begs her to be
seated by her: yes, said the noble lady, yes my dear, I adopt you as my
daughter: our friend's niece will find again a father and a mother in us! what
a pretty creature! Come modest Clara, let us see those pretty blue eyes; come
embrace me.

Clara flies to the arms of her new protectress, who, in conjunction with her
consort, lavished the most tender and affectionate caresses upon her. Dinner
was served afterward. Clara conquered somewhat of her natural timidity: she
sung; the marchioness accompanied her on the piano forte, and the day was
entirely spent in conversation, and the sweets of friendly recreations.

M. Du Monay who only came to Paris to settle some affairs, set out a fortnight
after to Marseilles, whither his function called him. Previous to his
departure, he recommended his dear neice to his good friends: but he might have
saved himself that trouble. Clara by her gentleness and accomplishments had
already ingratiated herself so much, that the noble pair absolutely considered
her as their daughter.

Clara saw, not without tears, the departure of her worthy friend; and though
she was fully aware of the happiness she would enjoy with her new parents, yet
without him, she looked upon herself as banished to a desert. In consequence,
she desired to speak to him in private. Will you leave us, father said she? --
I must my dear niece! -- Oh! my best uncle, how shall I be able to endure your
absence? -- In obtaining the friendship of the generous hosts, who will soon
make you forget me! -- No, never! never! -- Farewell, Clara. My uncle! -- Well!
-- You go to Marseilles? -- Yes. Have you any commands upon that city? -- Oh!
none at all -- but -- go on. -- If in case he was there, never to mention my
name to him! -- To whom? -- To the perfidious Alexis; did he know where I was I
am sure he would write to me, and I -- I would burn his letters. Without
perusing them? -- Yes, without perusing them! -- Very well, my girl, I
understand you; I will not even tell him that I know you. O never mind, let him
know what you have done for me -- your generosity, your friendship do me too
much honor to conceal them; Well, let us come to the point! So you will not
even let him know you are in being. -- Ah you may tell him how happy I am, tell
him, tell him -- that I think no more on him, and that I am happy -- very
happy! -- Well, I will not forget that -- Ah! my daughter! you have not quite
got the better of your love. -- Me! I assure you! -- Come good bye my Clara,
write to me, and depend always -- always upon my parental tenderness and
affection.

They parted; Clara was melting in tears; but the marchioness who surprised her
in that condition, took her to an apartment, and tried to stifle her sorrow by
a thousand little amusements, which did not fail producing the desired effect.

While we leave Clara in her prosperous and happy state, let us return to
Alexis, whom we left wounded at the castle; let us see if he got better, and
persists (...) his resolution of going to Paris.

CHAP. IX.
ALEXIS AND HIS FRIEND LEAVE THE BARONESS' CASTLE. -- THE HERMITAGE.

FIRST of all it will be necessary to inform my readers (if they have not
guessed it already) who was the lady of the castle, that could not without
enthusiasm, utter the name of Alexis. He must remember, that Clara, by the same
name, had made a conquest of the heart of the baroness of Yrace! It was before
her castle, the battle between Alexis, Sciocco, and the strangers had
commenced; and it was that foolish old woman, who, upon hearing the name of
(...) young hero, had, mistaken him for the Alexis who deserted from her a few
days since.

Alexis stops the blood which gushes from the wound he has received in his
face, and the baroness not having examined him well, perseveres in her notion,
and orders him to be put into an excellent bed. I^lia, said she to her woman, I
could not see his wound without fainting! poor child! go and dress it --
tomorrow morning I shall see how he does, and shall myself bring him his
breakfast.

In fact the femme de chamber, who had but newly entered the service of the
baroness, goes up stairs to Alexis's apartment, and by dint of applications to
the patient's face, covered it so much, that his nose, eyes, and mouth, were
the only parts left visible.

Sciocco, who stood by his friend's bed side, gaped with astonishment; and
though he did not know the motive of all this, yet he failed not to attribute
it within himself, to the order of things and predestination. When every body
had left the apartment, mio caro padrone, said he, will you say now that hazard
brought you to this castle? I don't know; I have something else to think on,
Sciocco. And what is that? -- What a wretch! does not thy conscience upbraid
thee with the murder of the unhappy man at the inn, a murder of which we are
the cause! -- Oh! we are the cause; you had better own Signior, that you
yourself was the only cause; for my part, you know -- Alas! you speak the
truth! -- yes my suspecting temper. But how to trust the sincerity of a man
hidden in a cupboard? -- He had his reasons for it! -- He entreated me in so
urgent a manner. -- My God! it is I who have murdered him! -- What harm could
there have been to let him stay that night in my room? We would have watched,
that is all. Ah! Carlo! what a weight I feel upon my heart! how poignant is my
remorse! -- Dolce, Dolce, Signor! Sweet sir.
do not accuse yourself so much. Be it as it will, fate had some hand in the
accident. Well, fate! Certainly thus he was to perish; the matter was
pre-arranged on high! -- But fool, suppose, I had left him in the cupboard? You
was not to do it, Signor; no, it was forbidden; something restrained your
generous soul, and whispered in your ear Luscia lo fortira Let him come out.
-- How you tire my patience with your foolish arguments! -- methinks you keep
them on purpose to make me the more sensible of my wrongs! -- yes, the more you
say, the more I am sensible of them! because what could hinder me when -- but
let us drop this theme of despair -- Where are we, I wonder? -- In the house of
a very charitable lady, who is your intimate friend. My friend, you say? Yes,
signor, she says that you are charming, lovely, and that you was a sev'night
with her. I? Si signor! Surely I don't know her at all: this lady mistakes me
for some other person -- Well, so much the better, mio Caro! Lusciamo ^arla. My
dear sir, let her alone.
It is heaven that sends us that good soul; had not we have sound her castle
what should we have done in the open fields, wounded as you are? Let us make
the best of the bona stella Good Stars.
which --

Sciocco would have gone farther, but a servant came in with a message that the
baroness invited him to supper. Sciocco who did not want to be asked twice,
went down stairs to the old lady, and ate with a most hearty appetite, the
provision of his host.

The baroness asked him a thousand questions, to which he made no answer, lest
he should undeceive her, and be ordered to leave the house. Ah! poor Alexis!
have you known him long, sir? No, madame perdio Indeed, or by God.
he is a very (...) cavaliere! -- Aye, quite amiable! it is only ten days since
he has been here. ^ulto ridere la Signora. Your ladyship is a joking.
We have just left Marseilles, where we staid above a fortnight. Why are you so
pleased to contradict me? I know him well, the cruel little man! but tell me,
as you are his friend, and know his secrets, what has ^e done since our last
parting? -- Since your parting? Yes, we parted upon the road about one league
farther. Upon my word, madama I know nothing of it. O, but I know better, where
did he come from just now? where did you get acquainted with him? have you had
any dispute? who were the aggressors?

The baroness would never have put an end to her questions; and Sciocco, who
plainly saw that she mistook his master for some other person, was at a loss
what answer to make, so great was his apprehension of being dispossessed of his
good birth. The baroness, who, for her own part, did not know what to make of
Carlo's jargon; imagined that he was non compos mentis, and the blows he
received in the combat must have disordered his senses. After supper Sciocco
returned to our hero's apartment, and repeated the conversation which he had
just had with the hostess, asked him what he thought of it. Alexis, who was not
framed for falsehood, promised, that, on the next morning, he would discover
himself to the baroness, and rather quit her house than suffer her any longer
to remain in her mistaken notions.

At the break of day the old lady went up to her patient, whose face she did
not know, on account of the lint applied to it by Julia; she sat down by him,
and addressed him in the following words: "So, you ungrateful little man, I
have you again in my castle. I ought not to feel the least concern for you,
since you behaved so scandalously toward me; but -- my indulgence -- my
weakness -- you know me; -- you know well my feeling heart?" Madam, the
reception you gave me, puts it out of all doubt: but permit me to undeceive
you? -- I am not -- Come, be of good cheer -- what signifies that bashfulness;
that low voice? Indeed I hardly know you again. -- I believe you, madam,
because I never had the honor of being known to you. -- Ah! you dissemble;
cruel creature! you are sorry that fate has brought you to my feet; you mean to
-- but the artifice is too palpable; I have got thee a gain, little wretch, and
never more shall thou leave this place. It is all over, thou art with me for
life.

Alexis, frightened at this menace, was going to reply, when the baroness being
informed that somebody desired to speak to her below, suddenly left the
apartment. It was one of her farmers who had come to settle some accounts with
her ladyship, which would not suffer her to return to her young patient.
Sciocco had exhausted his whole rhetoric during that interval, to convince
Alexis that it was very lucky for him to be thus mistaken for another. Alexis
rejected his arguments. His suspicious disposition even made him find in the
old lady's conduct, some secret end, which did not alarm him a little; he
imagined that she must have some violent design upon him. If not, said he to
Carlo, we are fallen in a den of ruffians. What can she want of me? why does
that woman threaten me with perpetual confinement? Oh! I will be free this very
night! Is it possible you should think so, mio padrone? Possible you say! don't
you observe in the baroness and all her domestics, an air of savageness, an air
so singular? -- Why, I believe they look much like every body; only observe
them, Sciocco. Joke apart, I am not easy in this place. -- This is another
instance of the effect of your prejudices, your fears, your suspicions; But let
us be short; -- why should I be kept here in spite of myself? -- suppose it is
in the order of things. Sciocco, I perceive some fatal omens! Come, let us get
out of this place. -- But, your wound? -- My wound, hey? -- Only look how
dangerous it is?

Alexis, at these words, throws off the dressing, rises and taking Sciocco by
the hand, they both descend into the garden, walk across it, find a little gate
open from the field-side, and run as fast as they can! The sky became
insensibly more cloudy, and a thick obscurity, which, covering the earth,
seemed to indicate to our travelers a fast approaching and inevitable storm.

After having strayed for a while through windings, bushes, ditches, etc. the
most vivid flashes of lightning rent the eastern sky, and which were succeeded
by the loudest claps of thunder; already some little drops of rain, preceded
the torrents of hail and showers that were to follow. Alexis and Sciocco
continued their march with indefatigable haste, yet the silence, the night, the
awful horrors of nature, congealed their frame with involuntary shiverings; in
vain did they attempt to advance farther in their course, an extreme weakness
slackened their nerves, their knees tottered, they could neither breathe, nor
support the weight of their bodies. Well, imprudente cavaliere, said Sciocco,
you see now, to what we have exposed ourselves. -- What can we do, answered
Alexis, by way of consolation, was it not in the natural order of things? --
Certainly: but we could have avoided it, had we remained in a house where we
have been treated with so much gentility. -- Well, this brings, you over to my
opinion. -- Not it, indeed; I shall always adhere faithfully to my system.
There are events that cannot be avoided, in spite of all our efforts to the
contrary; but there are also some that can be avoided, which we seem to seek by
our imprudence, and which, in order that they may happen, are liable to certain
conditions. For instance: the storm to which we must be exposed; -- Might we
not as well have heard it roar in bed at the house of the baroness, hey? -- Go
on with your muttering, I think you have great reason for it. What can the
danger be to you? Veramente Truly
that is a great comfort! Ah! mio maestro! -- What a clap of thunder! Ah! Dio!
Dio! how unfortunate are we!

Sciocco, terrified at the storm, which was continually increasing; began to
weep bitterly! in vain, Alexis tried to console him, the Italian is always a
sobbing; he protests that this is the last moment of their life, and that both
are destined to be consumed by the lightning -- Alas! cried he, how have I
deserved to perish by celestial fire! -- Santa Maria, ascolta la mio
confessione. St. Mary, hear my confession. The translator, to render this
expression more intelligible to the general reader, wishes them to observe,
that all Roman Catholics, such as the Italians etc. are made to believe that
they will go to everlasting damnation, if their conscience has not been purged
by an auricular confession of the mortal sins. This idea desolates so much the
poor Italian in this story.
I ravished Signora Marzarelli from her father; but it was only to put her in
the hands of a very honest chevalier. Non ho peccato contra lalegge! I have not
^inned against the law.
-- Is it for having obliged the ungrateful at Paris with my property? Non ho
peccato contra la leg! Is it for having lived among thieves? don't we live
among them in all great cities? -- Non ho peccato! -- Is it, in fine, for
having given so merciless a drubbing to mio caro, mio tenero, mio tropoc dolce
maestro! Oh! Si hoc peccato, molto peccato, contra la leg, la venerabile
leg!

Whilst the Italian offered up the most fervent vows to all the saints in
paradise, the violence of the shower forced Alexis to look for shelter; and
there seemed to be a light at no great distance from him. Come Sciocco, said he
laying hold of his hand, I see a place of shelter, of propitious shelter.

He says, and advancing toward the spot whence the glaring of the light
proceeded, they discover an antique structure, with a little steeple on its
summit. The door is open, and nobody appears -- Our two travelers enter that
kind of a hermitage, and seeking every where for somebody to speak to -- they
call out -- Nobody answers the call -- However, the hermitage appears to be
inhabited: a lamp is suspended from the ceiling, and several rough utensils are
scattered about. Alexis seemed to perceive an inscription on the wall; he
approaches: -- O surprise! -- his name strikes his still uncertain sight; --
Yes, it is Alexis, graved every where upon stone: these words, above all,
strike him in a singular manner: Should the dear youth, Alexis, alas be no more,
I never will cease his fate to deplore:
In my bosom, his image remains still the same,
Then, forever ye walls, exhibit his name!


Throughout this desolate mansion he discovers these verses: every corner of
the hallowed place, proclaims his memory! Ah, good God! Who can reside here?
Every search of Alexis proves fruitless, in vain he calls, nobody appears;
thunder and lightning, incessant showers, the terror of Sciocco, in a word, all
augments his confusion; he dares not rest himself upon a stone, and all he sees
reminds him of his misfortunes: he gives himself up to the anguish of despair,
and floods of tears gush from his eyes. The Italian sympathises with his
sorrow, and both travelers are depressed by the bitterest woe, amidst the
sorrows of a stormy night, with no other shelter than a shattered hermitage,
where all re-opens their wounds: where all sinks them deep in the abyss of
wretchedness!

END OF THE THIRD PART.
PART FOURTH.
CHAP. I.
SCIOCCO RESOLVES TO TURN HERMIT.

WHY has Heaven, that endowed us with the faculty of the mind, made it subject
to so many different affections? Some are men of parts and not of judgment;
others have too much foresight and penetration; the former are only remarkable
for a knowledge suited to the moment: the latter are simple, timid, credulous,
and become exalted, if time is left them for reflection. So multivious is the
cast of the human mind! -- prejudices make it false and captious; vanity
renders it rediculous; timidity depresses its powers; in a word, it is
subordinate to the peculiarities of all the passions that can effect the heart.
For instance: Alexis and Sciocco are both distinguished by the gift of reason;
but how oblique are their views! One cannot believe in good nature and
frankness, and is furnished with a sufficiency of arguments to support his
opinion. The other is too confiding, too open, too much governed by false
maxims and erroneous systems, and his principles are not ill-propped. All that
happens to the one, does confirm him in his ideas; and all that is felt by the
other does coincide with his way of thinking; both argue plausibly, and both
are mistaken.

O human frailty, how amazing are thy deviations! -- Logic, morality,
philosophy, metaphysics, all these high sciences, are like so many perfidious
guides, who will only involve the deeper into the labyrinth of sophistry. He
that gives the best proofs, is not always he that sees best: learning and
eloquence are the only merits which raise him above the vulgar. He has used his
efforts to consolidate his opinion; he will ever bring you over to his party:
but does it imply, that his opinion is the justest? -- To illustrate this I
shall adduce no other example than that of the two philosophers, who spoke by
turns; one in favor of abstinence, and the other in favor of high living. A day
being appointed for each to preach his doctrine; the people fasted on the day
they left the former; and, as soon as they had heard the epicurean, gave
themselves up to the most brutal excesses of debauchery.

Thus every one has a mind of his own, opinions of his own, and a peculiar way
of viewing things; the best is that which is most consistent with equity and
reason. The man who gives all his admiration to the law of nature, is a man of
learning, void of common sense: he that follows and respects the civil law, is
a philosopher endowed with upright sense and sound judgment; yet,
notwithstanding, both are in the right: whence that difference?

Alexis had now lost a good deal of his mistrust, and if I am allowed to say,
of his susceptibility. Obliged to live with men, and what is worse still, to be
in want of them, he was sensible that he brought upon himself all the
misfortunes that had befallen him since he first left the cottage. The
adventure of the drubbing, that of the man killed in the inn at Vienna, and
perhaps that of the baroness, whom he had quitted too precipitately, made him
acquire experience, and feel the sting of remorse; be it as it will, the
receiver at Marseilles whom he suspected so much, was the most honest and
generous man, of which he had self evident proofs. His Sophia was a deceitful
creature, whom he had foolishly considered as virtuous; the stranger at the inn
neither was a thief nor an assassin; he had undone him, he had delivered him
into the hands of his butcher! -- How much did Alexis feel the weight of this
crime! -- What an inclination had he to believe and oblige every body! Perhaps
it is to be feared, that the murder has made too forcible an impression upon
him. A mistrusting character, if it be once corrected by the superior force of
example; if it feel too many rude shocks, will frequently become subject to
credulousness and imprudence; extremes are never so distant as we might suppose
them to be.

On the other hand he lived with Sciocco, whose foolish goodnature, whose
erroneous moral system made him often lose patience: compelled to contradict
his false opinions, he insensibly lost his own, and this indignation of the
mind has the same effect upon him as a wise and enlightened Mentor.

We shall go farther with these reflections, which must be obvious to the
reader who has followed my hero in his adventures and errors. If he be sorry to
find faults in him (faults which resulted from the manner in which he was
brought up, he will soon see him gentle, amiable, affable and judicious; but he
must be taught a little more in the school of adversity, before he can reach
that end.

We have left him with his good friend Carlo, in the middle of a stormy night
both sheltered in a kind of a desolate hermitage, where they see nobody; but
where a thousand inscriptions on the walls, demonstrate plainly that the hermit
knows Alexis.

However, the anchorite does not appear! Has he left his asylum, is he dead, is
he hidden in some cave? Alexis and Sciocco make the most diligent search all
over the place; they find themselves alone, absolutely alone, in the hermitage.
-- But why was the door open? Who has lighted the lamp? Their wavering minds
were lost in doubts and conjectures: in short, they are masters of the place;
they may wait till the storm has subsided, spend the night in it, nay, make it
their residence as long as they please. Sciocco proposed to his master to lay
down to sleep upon a bench. Alexis is willing, and they betake themselves to
rest; -- no sooner had sleep closed their eye lids, than a most tremendous peal
of thunder made them rise in a panic from the arms of Morpheus. Poor Sciocco
thinks the frail structure is going to be hurled down -- Alexis removes his
fears; the Italian commences fresh prayers, and Clara's lover, spent with
fatigue, caused by the smart of his wounds, soon enjoys a calm and profound
sleep.

No sooner dawn had dispelled the tempestuous clouds, than Alexis awaking, and
not a little surprised at seeing a man in a fri^r's habit, stand close by him:
he already takes him for the hermit, and prepares to make an apology for his
intrusion. (...) soon, he could not forbear laughing, when he found it was his
friend Sciocco who had put on that strange monastic attire. Hey! what is that
Carlo? Why that metamorphosis? O Signor (...)! don't rail, vi prego, I beg you.
don't mock the the holy resolution which I have taken, and which, if you
follow my advice, you will take also. What is it? -- Yes, heaven has inspired
me; it has destined me to be a hermit. I am very sensible of its decree. Well,
explain yourself. Last night after the dreadful peal of thunder. I kneeled down
before the image of our Savior, whilst you fell asleep; the silence of the
place inspired me wi^h the most sacred and religious thoughts. How happy is he,
exclaimed I, divino Giesu! how happy is he, who devotes all the days of his
life to thy service! How I envy the lot of the hermit, thy servant, whom,
without doubt, thou have called unto thee! how tranquil must he have been in
this hallowed place, detached from all the world! I was going to proceed -- it
seems as if a secret voice had whispered to me, why do thou not inhabit it?
Why not stay? -- I looked around; What do I perceive in this corner? A habit, a
pair of sandals, a cordon; in a word, the complete apparatus of a hermit! think
how much I was surprised: I, who in company with you had searched every corner
of the hermitage, and could not find such a thing; I had not a moment's doubt,
but the habit had fallen from heaven on purpose for me. I put it on, and
occupied myself the remaining part of the night with thoughts on the subject.
You are now awake, and find no more your friend Sciocco, but the reverend
father Santa Carlo. St. Charles.


Alexis examines that canonical figure, and cannot help bursting out a
laughing* father Carlo thought his holiness a little scandalized. Non (...)
Signor, You have no occasion to laugh, sir.
said he with an austere frown, what I say just now, is no matter of merriment!
It is a miracle, Si un miraculo ^oidente! It is a miracle, an evident miracle.
How I wish you a similar chance* it would check your raillery -- Oh, I believe
you, my friend, but in pity to you, let me undeceive you. The garment which you
now wear, did not, as you imagine, fall from heaven. Yesterday, when we were
both searching the place, not for clothes, but for the master, whose residence
it is, you remember, we moved the benches, this block, and other utensils to
that corner? I observed something black, but took no notice of it, my whole
attention being engrossed by the real object of pursuit. You advised me
afterward to lay down to rest, and fetched back one of these benches. I
discovered the attire, which you will pass for a miracle! -- Oh, you may say
what you please, I was not asleep in that moment. -- Well then, what do you
mean to do? -- What I mean to do, mio padrone? -- cannot you guess it? -- I am
bent upon staying all my life time in this holy hermitage, to do penance for
all the sins I have committed, and to die at last in the character of a saint.
-- So you leave me, you part with your friend Alexis? Non certamine, mio
dilettissimo. You will follow my example, I hope? No, that I will not, I
declare most openly. -- Well, well, where is your fortune, your design? have
you not been betrayed by every body! -- This I cannot deny. -- Well, if all men
are so false and deceitful as you imagine, you had better be without them. --
Your arguments are just: but may I not be in the wrong? -- Forbear all farther
expostulation; you go to Paris, and what are your hopes? Can you ask me such a
question? does my heart not long to see my father again? -- Who tells you so?
-- Heaven, Heaven! Yes, it tells us to be hermits, and by this signifies
clearly that all our inquiries would be fruitless. -- Come, you deviate from
reason! -- Though heaven disposes all events, yet it leaves us at liberty to
act according to our desires. -- You think our fate is in our own hands, and if
we are unfortunate it is often our own fault. -- Why, I never heard you talk in
that strain? -- I talk so in spite of myself, because I am constrained. -- I do
not understand you. -- Is not our last proceeding downright folly? -- What
business had we to leave a castle where we were so hospitably entertained? --
The discourse of the old man was really astonishing, and apt to give rise to
suspicion; but, granting all this, what had we to fear? -- What evil thing
could hurt us? I am a very odd being with my sottish fears! -- Not quite so odd
as you imagine; it was to be so: -- It was to bring me to this holy retreat
where God called me; Pray Sciocco, have done with your extravagancies. Let me
see: will you now stay? -- I can go alone to seek my father, and can die alone
too, if I do not find him. But pray, signor, only see how happy we would be
here! Happy! far from my father, far from my dear Clara? -- Poh! does Clara
return to your remembrance? -- I never forgot her a single moment! -- I do not
doubt Sciocco, but I shall see her again; and this very hope which animates me,
would make me bid defiance to the greatest dangers! -- Let us expose ourselves,
my Sciocco, to all misfortunes, in order to deserve that happiness Expose
yourself as much as you please, signor enamorato: as to me, who don't know your
Clara, her sight or absence can be but indifferent. Indeed Carlo, I admire your
attachment to me! To you, signor! to you I am molto, oh molto Much.
attached! but to no strangers -- Well, sir, stay where you are, let me go
alone; henceforth, I will never depend upon a friend! Ah! per Santo Dominico!
do not forsake me, mio padrone! Leave me, Sciocco, leave me! E^^me! Vestro
povero ser^o, vestro povero Carlo! What, your poor servant, your poor Charles.
Can you quit him, can you leave him here, and part from him? are you mad? is
it not your own pleasure? My pleasure! oh, no, never! I will pull off this
habit which deluded me for a moment. What, should I leave the friend of my
heart! Divina Maria, could you have such an opinion of me!

Alexis pitied the weakness of Sciocco, who was really as mad as a March hare,
but his heart was excellent. The part he had acted in the friar's habit had
amused him at first, but it soon made him angry. Sciocco was sensible of his
wrongs, and throwing off the hermit's garment, he put on his own with greater
joy than he had laid them aside.

It being now broad day light, and the hermit not making his appearance, Alexis
and Sciocco were determined to continue their way, though they knew not where
they were. They go out, not a little surprised at seeing before them a
beautiful and superb city, which seemed to be no farther than two leagues. The
rain and tempest had, on the day before hindered them from descrying it. They
soon find out a proper path, and perceive a farmer behind his plough, whom they
ask the name of this fine city. It is Lions, answered the farmer. What, are we
so near Lions, -- Why, to be sure, you are almost in it! My friend, could you
inform us to whom belongs the hermitage upon the right? -- To whom, why to you,
if you have a mind to have it. -- How to us? -- Don't you know that the hermit
who lived in it, went away since yesterday. -- Did he, pray who was he? -- A
madman, who would have been whipped a thousand times, had it not been for our
attachment to the bishop who protected him. -- Did he stay long at the
hermitage? -- Not he! it is hardly a twelvemonth since he first settled in the
place -- A twelvemonth! what is his name? -- Father -- Father -- indeed I cannot
tell you his name, I have forgot it; but hark'ee, if you go to Lions, inquire
for the Dolphin; he used that house a good deal! -- Where is that inn! -- Quite
near the place of Bellecourt; a child will tell you. Now, as you go there,
gentlemen, I wish you will take that there letter to my nephew, the first waiter
of the house: -- I would have sent my wife, but we are so busy, and it will not
cost you much time. Give it me vestro servo will deliver it. Oh! you're very
good, master, I beg you will give it into his own hands; his name is upon it,
John Pi^ot. I am sure he can tell you all about the hermit; he brought him his
victuals every day. -- Well, we shall ask him when he gets the letter. Good
bye, master, good bye.

Alexis and Sciocco proceed straight to Lions, and enquire for the Dolphin,
where they stop. -- Here our hero will meet with somebody, for whom he feels as
much concern as for those he loves.

CHAP. II.
THE TWENTY-FIVE LOUIS D'ORS OF JOHN PICOT.

THEIR first care* upon entering the inn, was to enquire for John Picot. John
makes his appearance: Sciocco delivers his uncle's letter, and Alexis, always
occupied with his hermit, began to enquire after him. Oons, answered John, he
was an odd fellow, that father Hilary; you just put me in mind of him; oh! I am
very sorry for him. Pray give me some particular account of that man? -- Only
think, sir, that father Hilary, who with permission of the Archbishop, has now
been a twelvemonth in the hermitage you have seen; did nothing all that time,
but lamented one Alexis; for whom he was highly concerned. I heard him often
speak of the young man; because as my master was a very charitable soul, sent
him every day his victuals, and it was I who carried it. "Alexis," he said many
times, "Alexis you accuse me; alas! I am innocent. If you are in distress, I am
so too, and perhaps much more than you. What must you have thought of my
conduct toward you? poor youth, how fond he was of me! how he respected me. I
shall never see you again; I am but too much convinced that I shall die far
from you: ah! what a world of torments!" It was thus father Hilary would always
fret. A few days ago, the very Alexis whom he loved so much, put up at this
inn, with a stranger, whom I believe, was his father. At first, not knowing his
name, I took no notice of him; the young man and his friend, stayed here about
a se'n-night to see the city. I attended them to every place curious or
remarkable, it was only the day before yesterday, at the very moment they set
off, that I heard the old gentleman call the lad Alexis. Alexis, said I Alexis;
good God should that be the unfortunate youth whose deplorable fate father
Hilary so often bemoans. I waited on father Hilary, and described the stranger
-- he knew him. "It is he," cried the old man, "It is he; he goes to Paris; I
will follow him and find him there; -- O supreme happiness! my lovely youth,
are we to meet again."

Father Hilary begged me to bring him some clothes: I gave him my own; he
throws his habit in a corner, dresses himself in great haste, thanks me, and
takes leave of his abode. "O precious mansion," said he, "floors which I have
so often sprinkled with my tears; walls bear a thousand times the name of my
friend, and repeat it on all sides to my eyes, fare ye well! I quit you,
hallowed premises, where I lived far from honors, far from those who have used
me ill; -- Be ever a shelter to the erring or fatigued wanderer; receive him,
let him find shelter under thy rustic roof, against the storms or heat of the
day: speak to his eyes, tell him, that you were the receptacle of an unhappy
man, and may this temple, sacred to friendship in despair, instruct the
sympathizing visitors, how sweet and unfortunate it is to be born with a
feeling heart."

At these words he lights his lamp for the last time, to illuminate once more
his hermitage. I will remember, thee, said he, upon my journey,; the idea of
its being useful to some erring traveller will keep up my spirits; -- From this
you see, sir, that father Hilary was not altogether right in his understanding.
Notwithstanding he was a good soul, and very fond of me. How often would he
say, young man you fully comfort the afflicted; you will be happy, my friend
you will be happy: In short, to satisfy your curiosity, I have to inform you,
that father Hilary, dressed as simple as I am now, set out yesterday about four
in the afternoon, Being too poor to take post, he is obliged to perform the
whole journey to Paris on foot, and beg alms of the charitable: he hopes to
find his Alexis in the capital, and will spare no pains to discover him. Now,
gentlemen, is this all you desire to know? I can give no farther information,
as I know no more. Moreover, am I at loss, about the mutual concerns between
the hermit and Alexis; but I find the latter is very amiable, oh, very amiable.

The discourse of John surprised Clara's lover, in a singular manner. Who, said
he to himself, can be that other Alexis, that overturns all the world like me,
and precedes me wherever I go, for I have not the least doubt of his being the
same that was with the baroness in the castle; she mistook me for him; did
there ever happen so strange an adventure? -- That second myself, may be
equally unfortunate: Is then our very name the emblem of wretchednes^? Father
Hilary -- I know nothing of a father Hilary -- His language is, however
strictly relative to my situation. Should it be my father? or what is more
probable, my poor friend Dumont -- Dumont? yes, yes, it must be he, it must be
he, it must be Dumont -- Alexis, you accuse me -- poor, poor youth! how fond he
was of me! -- It can be no other than Dumont -- But that second Alexis, whom
Picot described to him, and in whose pursuit father Hilary has gone -- My mind
is quite confounded in this maze of probabilities. What a cruel enigma, who
will clear it up? who will explain it to me?

Alexis and Sciocco, go up stairs to the apartment which has been prepared for
them. Next to them on the same floor, lived an old man of a very respectable
appearance; he passes and greets his new neighbors, but hearing the name of
Alexis mentioned, he approaches quite softly, to listen to their conversation.
Little by little, penetrated with the most lively concern -- he enters, and
addresses our two friends with these words: "Excuse an old man's curiosity,
amiable strangers, I heard you more than once pronounce the name of Alexis --
Don't you know that young man, who was here a few days ago?" Indeed, sir, this
very question we meant to ask you -- I do not know him, and am very sorry for
it. Hear my story, "I have now been three weeks in this inn, and intend leaving
it soon. The young man we are speaking of, came to live in your chamber, with a
stranger much older than himself. I have seen that lovely Alexis, and his
aspect excited a very singular sentiment in me, for which I cannot account --
His features put me in mind of those of a woman whom I loved once: It was just
as if I had seen her before me! -- The same eyes, the same mouth, the same tone
of voice; in a word, Alexis is her living portrait. You judge what I must feel
at this striking resemblance. A hundred times I sought an opportunity to speak
to him; it never offered itself, and he set out without my being able to ask
him a single question. Just now, gentlemen, you spoke of him, and I could not
refrain my curiosity; yet, excuse me, I am sensible of my indiscretion. I will
withdraw myself." "No sir," answered Clara's lover, detaining the old man, "no,
stay -- I am as curious as you to know that young man* for I must tell you, he
bears my name, and I have now been several times taken for him." "Methinks you,
gentlemen, know no more of him than I do: yet, be as it will, he is an engaging
being -- Alas! thou whom I adore so passionately, should it be thee: should
thou return in the form of an angel to charm all mankind? -- O how that Alexis
struck me; good God, how he struck me."

It would be doing an injury to the reader's penetration, to remind him it was
Clara, who during her stay at Lions with the receiver, and always going by the
name of Alexis had created that ferment in the mind of the old man, John Picot,
and the hermit. I shall therefore dwell no longer on this subject.

This was the conversation which passed for some time between Alexis, Sciocco
and the old man, hereupon the latter retired, and the Italian going below to
order some little matters, Alexis was quite alone. A moment after, being deeply
engaged in thought, he believed he heard the voice of Sciocco, expostulating in
a spirited strain with John, in an adjoining passage. "What," said John, "is
your master so rich as not to be in need of twenty-five louis d'ors?" "Quite
the reverse, Signor generoso; twenty-five louis d'ors, in this present moment,
would be of the greatest service to us. Nevertheless we intend tomorrow, to
demand a benefit concert in the city, that will fetch us rather better than
twenty-five louis d'ors.". "But pray don't I anticipate your wishes by offering
them thus to you instantly, without any father ceremony?" " Certamente, if my
master had no objection; but I know him; the expedient will vex him, he will
never agree to it."

Here the two interlocutors spoke lower, so that Alexis could not hear the end
of their conversation but little as he had heard, did not fail to cause him
some inquietude -- "What are those twenty five louis d'ors proposed to Sciocco?
How can he take them, he that knows how much I scorn obligations? Is it John?
How can that lad be master of such a sum; on what terms does he offer it?"

Already his imagination was set to work, he entertained a thousand suspicions,
all without foundation, when Sciocco, who entered, interrupted him in his
reveries. He thought to see Carlo constrained and embarrassed -- He dares not
look at his master, who, for his own part examined him, without asking him the
smallest question. The good natured Sciocco endeavors to speak; he is unable.
Finally while Alexis is walking up and down in the chamber, Sciocco seizing the
moment when he turned his back, pulls something out of his pocket, and thursts
it carefully into the little bag, which contains their effects. He goes out
afterward with the strongest persuasion, that what he had done escaped his
friend's observation; yet Alexis had observed all; a glass reproducing objects,
shows him Sciocco hiding with anxious care a parcel. What can it be? Alexis
wished not to insist upon knowing the cause of his friend's embarrassment, and
during his absence, he ventures to search the bag. This may probably be
construed as an act of indiscretion; but was not Alexis mistrusting, fearful,
and timed? Sciocco who, till then, had secreted nothing from him, had just
manifested a dissimulation, which alarmed him. After all, Alexis without
deliberation, searches the bag, and finds a rouleau of twenty-five louis d'ors,
which he had heard mentioned! -- Judge of his astonishment.

He had scarce time to put the mysterious rouleau in its former place, than the
little old man, his neighbor, enters the chamber, quite out of breath. Ah, sir;
Ah my neighbor -- What is the matter, sir? -- I am (...)! -- robbed! Yes: I
left my door open, (...) entered my room, and stole fifty louis d'ors. (...)!

Alexis falls down in a swoon; the old man endeavors to give him assistance; he
calls out for help; nobody appears. Alexis, by dint of care, brings, back the
unfortunate youth, who, not doubting that John and the Italian committed the
theft, knew not what to say or do in that sad crisis; nevertheless, he is alone
with the stranger, whose physiognomy is equally honest and respectable! the
place; his confidence; and emotion of heart, all encourages Alexis: he throws
himself at the stranger's feet. Sir, O sir, don't undo him: it is he: Heavens,
shall I go on! Take this twenty-five, sir! it is his share; don't undo him!

The old man was quite at a loss how to interpret the confusion of Alexis: some
words, however take the veil from his understanding; What! unhappy young man
says he, should it be possible for you to be guilty? I! O heavens, what I! It
is the other, it is the Italian I have with me. How did you know it? Sir, in
pity, don't run me down so much; I am vexed enough -- I am innocent, I declare
upon my honor.

The old man, moved with horror and compassion; knew no longer Alexis, the
stamp of candor and probity is imprinted on the youth's countenance. The
stranger stares at him, tells the five and twenty louis d'ors, which he holds
out with a wavering hand, and prepares to ask him for the accomplice that has
the remainder of the sum, when Sciocco, without the least suspicion enters the
room, with an air of gaiety and satisfaction. Come hither, thou wretch, cried
Alexis with a low voice, enter, shut the door, and own the vilest and basest of
all crimes! What crime? What crime, villain, replied the old man, shaking him
by the collar! tell me this moment the name of thy accomplice, or thou art
lost! Perdio lei Signori, I don't know what you mean; Ah! thou playest the
ignorant, infamous thief! Thief! I am no thief! He dares still to deny the
fact! and those twenty-five louis d'ors? They are mine. Thine? To be sure; John
gave them to me. Well, John has committed the theft! But pray, what are you
talking of theft? I tell you, John got a prize in the lottery, and gave me that
sum. Very well, resumed the old man, so he got it in the lottery? we shall see
that.

The old man leaves the room; in vain do Alexis and Sciocco use their utmost
efforts to retain him; he is gone. Being thus lest by themselves, Alexis,
overwhelmed with grief, loads the innocent Italian with reproaches, the latter
falls down on his knees, and swears by all the saints in Paradise that he is
innocent. They were both in that cruel agitation, when a great tumult arose
before the gate of the inn, and completed their terrors. People call out stop
thief! stop thief! soon the mob gathers -- the thief is taken, brought to the
inn, and known for having committed frequent depredations, not without violent
suspicion of being guilty of the present. At last he confesses, among other
things, to have stolen the fifty louis d'ors of the lodger, whose room was
marked with No. 12. He returns the sum, it is brought to the old man, who,
ashamed of the affront he had given his neighbors, returns to their chamber,
leading by the hand John the waiter, whom he had also much insulted -- They
embrace each other, the old man begs a thousand pardons, for his uncharitable
behavior, and John is requested to explain to Alexis, this matter, which still
puzzled him. He acquitted himself of their desire as follows:

You well know that Mr. Sciocco delivered me, this morning a letter from my
uncle the farmer: here is that very letter; hear it and judge:

My Nephew John,
I cant give you any clever news, but that you have won in the lottery two
thousand four hundred livres. I here return you the policy which you know you
left with us. Here it is: go immediately and get your money of the receiver,
and remember the promise you made when you took your numbers! did not you say,
if I am lucky, I will give the fourth part of my gain to the first poor
traveller that comes to our inn. Now, do you see, you have got good luck, so keep
your promise, John; it is to Almighty God, you have made it, and he, you know,
does punish the faithless man. But without all this, an honest fellow will
always stick to what he says. Therefore, I wish you well with all my heart, and
so does your aunt Jacklin.

I remain, Your true and faithful uncle, JOACHIN PICOT.


I did not wish my uncle to remind me of my promise, to fulfill it. In
consequence I went to the receiver, who told me down the sum, and thinking on
you my good gentlemen, I took Mr. Sciocco in private, to offer him the part I
had destined for him. At first he started a world of objections, remarking, how
his friend's delicacy might be hurt by such a proceeding. But, what occasion
have you, said I, to tell him so soon, but keep that sum in store, against some
unforeseen accident; he liked my notion, and has favored me in accepting the
offer. This, gentlemen, is strictly true; yet, I cannot help owning, that this
explanation costs me much, and that I shall always have at heart the affront
put upon me at this day! -- Oh, did my poor uncle know it -- It would break his
heart.

Thus spoke the honest the virtuous Picot, and the Italian, who, on the other
hand, was not less affected, could not conceive how his (...) Maestro could
think him guilty of so base an infame -- He chid him with gentleness; yet with
delicacy of sentiment. Alexis, abashed at his extravagance, dared neither to
speak, nor even to look at him.

The old man could hardly put an end to his excuses, and offered his purse, by
way of reparation to those he had insulted. John Picot above all, who shed a
torrent of bitter tears, had moved the sieur to such a degree, that he
addressed him in the following words, with an air of real contrition: Lovely
young man, you that deny forgiveness, give me but time to manifest my
repentance? Come with me, be my friend, my confident, and leave me the care to
make your fortune -- Answer me, John, will you serve me? -- Will you be a
second to myself? I will offer you no salary, my heart and equity shall fix it.
-- Come too, come amiable travelers! -- I am rich, very rich indeed. We shall
never leave one another; we shall live in brotherly union. -- Ah! may my hoary
age, comforted by you, forget the errors and misfortunes of my youth!

Alexis, Sciocco and John made no answer. At last, the stranger, whose
physiognomy was meek and respectable, begged with such energy and effect, that
they could no longer withstand his generous intentions.

We shall follow the four actors, now on the stage of this work, and soon
become more intimately acquainted with the old man, who professed to our
friends so frank and disinterested a friendship.

CHAP. III.
THEY MEET WITH THE HERMIT: -- HE RELATES HIS ADVENTURES.

OUR four friends, after having sworn the most inviolable union, resolved to
set out for Paris the very next morning. John, whom the generosity of the old
man had again moved to tears, went immediately to take leave of his uncle
Joachin. The stranger returned to his room, to pack up his portmanteaus, and
Alexis being left alone with Sciocco, was much at a loss what to think of him.
Luckily, and through the old man's discretion, the affair of the (...) louis
d'ors had not come to the knowledge of any person belonging to the inn; but
Alexis had nevertheless suspected his trusty Sciocco! he had even accused him!
All appearances were certainly against the Italian; the timid and mistrusting
Alexis, knew not how to act in so delicate a juncture; and had it been the fate
of Sciocco to be actually guilty, his conduct toward an humane and generous
stranger, was, in all respects calculated to extricate him from danger. But it
happened to turn out otherwise; Sciocco was innocent; Alexis had been too
hasty, too mistrusting; of this he was sensible, He blushed, and dared hardly
to lift his eyes toward the injured Carlo -- How little did he know him! He
was the first who clasped his Caro Maestro in his arms, entreating him to
discard the remembrance of a slight error, which he could not prevent, as it
must have happened. Yes, mio fidelle constant^ gratrone, said he, this event
was decreed by fate, to evince my friendship and honesty to you. Oche ringrazio
la divina providenza! che la ringrazio. O how I thank divine providence.


It wanted no less than this lesson of a good heart, to make Alexis still more
sensible of his wrong. The more Sciocco attributed it to predestination, the
more the other laid to his own charge all that had happened to him; the effect
of the contradiction of human principles: one defect is always corrected by
another of an opposite nature: mistrust and timidity vanish, if superseded by a
noble confidence, the soul of all good undertakings.

But let us lose no time in reflections. Alexis has blushed -- He has sworn
within himself to be more prudent and less inclined to suspicion in future. Let
us now bestow our attention on the series of his adventures.

Next morning they all met in the old man's apartment. The inn-keeper's bills
are discharged, our four travelers step into a post chaise, and depart.

The post-boy, who drove with the utmost dispatch, sets them down at the
beginning of the night at the first and best inn of Rouanne sur L^ire; not that
they wanted to stop all night, but only to refresh themselves and to change
horses. Alexis alighted with John for the purpose of walking in the evening
air. A bustle before the gate of the inn attracts their notice; they approach
and look -- It was the hostlers and servants of the inn, ordering away, with
the greatest inhumanity, a poor traveller, who requested permission to rest
himself in the stables for that night. No, cried the fa^cy valets, no! we would
not harbor such beggars as you, indeed, we have been tricked too often.

Alexis, from an impulse of humanity, addresses them, "why will you thus refuse
a -- "

He had not time to go farther; the beggar stars at him, he knows him, and
throws himself in his arms; it is he, it is he -- My Alexis; John looks; hey!
is it you, father Hilary? -- No, no, it is not he. Ah! dear Alexis, know your
old friend; your faithful Dumont. -- Dumont, you? -- Yes, I am the same: --
Good God, what a happy meeting! O heaven! thou have heard my vows.

Dumont and Alexis are locked in each others arms: Alexis, who remembers the
treachery of his tutor, sees but a friend in this moment.

The old man and Sciocco have left the post chaise; John shows them the
affecting scene. Soon after they all five enter an apartment of the inn, order
an excellent supper, and enjoy the bliss of the reunion.

Dumont and his pupil, are stimulated with a reciprocal eagerness to know each
other's adventures, which they are equally desirous to hear.

The meal is served, every one eats with the keenest appetite; and the desert
being brought in, Dumont, impatient of destroying the suspicions which his
pupil might have entertained of his fidelity, hastened, while all was
attention, thus to commence his narrative:

Doubtless, you too well remember, my dear Alexis, the cruel spectacle to which
your father exposed you at the inn at Valence. At his threats and his
imprecations, you dropped down, and when you opened your eyes to the light,
found yourself alone: well, attend to me; you shall hear the most extraordinary
event your imagination could ever judge. Hear me, Alexis, and condemn me not.

While you laid senseless on the floor, and I was giving you all the assistance
which friendship and humanity can afford, your father said to me, in a savage
tone of voice, You blame me, Mr. Dumont? -- Come down for a moment, come down,
and you shall find in my carriage, a person who will give you an account of the
misfortunes this unhappy boy has brought upon me. But, sir, can I leave him in
such a situation? He shall have every assistance: do come down stairs, I
conjure you.

Here he turned to the landlord: sir, said he, do not leave him. Come, then,
Mr. Dumont! it is but a step or two. I was hesitating whether I should follow
him, or stay with you. At last, (who would have suspected his cruelty?) I
followed him down stairs, trembling, well persuaded that I should return with
him, or alone: we advanced to a post chaise, which was waiting within a gunshot
from the inn. In it sat a woman in years, and rather of a finester appearance.
Step in, sir, step in, said she, it is only for a moment. I must tell you --

She added many things: I would not hear her; uneasy about you, and about what
they could want of me, I was ready to return to the inn; but time was not left
to me; your father steps in, lays hold of my hand; three tall fellows in livery
push me in the chaise, shut the door, and the post-boy raises clouds of dust,
so hard did he drive.

I solemnly declare, that hurried away with such violence, I had no strength to
call for help; my first feelings were horror and indignation. I looked at your
father, and said to him, with a bitter smile, Barbarous man! Is this the odious
design you had upon me? You tear me from the unfortunate Alexis! Ah! he cannot
survive it! -- Compose yourself, Mr. Dumont, Ah! did you know! -- All your
ferocity, unnatural father! I would, indeed, never have thought it! -- Sir! --
Oh! permit me to indulge my grief! -- What do you want of me? What means that
violence which you exercised upon me? have you any rights over me? -- Ah, is it
not enough to let loose your rage against your son? -- His son! said the lady,
he is not his son. Oh, I am pretty sure, madam, that you are not his mother,
but his most cruel enemy! -- I his enemy! the enemy of that child! why, I don't
know him. Had the gentleman followed my advice, he would have taken him along
with us; I would have brought him up, I would.

I glanced my eye with furious indignation upon the lady, and turning round to
your father, conjuring him with tears in my eyes, to let me go back to you; I
represented your situation, your grief, and succeeded in moving him a little.
Mr. Dumont, said he, what you ask I cannot grant -- You have been seen walking
in the royal botanical gardens, you are known, search is making after you both
-- Your life is in danger if you stay with him. I scorn it, sir -- His own life
if he is alone, is not as much exposed as it would be in your company -- I
cannot conceive it -- That child is the torch of discord, which the gods have
sent in their wrath, to be the scourge of his unhappy parents! -- Forget him,
Mr. Dumont, and leave him as we do* far from those whose life he has
embittered. It is yet a remnant of pity that makes me desire you to leave
Paris. You was undone, and so was he, had not I taken that precaution: He
lives, let us consign him to fate! -- But, sir, make me the confidence -- Of my
secrets? -- Oh, no, Mr. Dumont! no, nobody shall know them -- The grave will
soon contain them and me! -- What an astonishing mystery -- Impenetrable, my
dear sir! -- Ha^kee, my dear friend, I esteem you, I ever loved you: this
instant, you are perhaps indebted to me, for a blessing greater than life --
Yes, sir, greater than life! -- Had I not made use of this expedient to
extricate you from a danger as imminent as bodily destruction, you would both
have fallen into the snare! What, is he in danger, sir? -- Not so much; you
have been discovered and would have been described! -- I! good God, who are
those wretches! -- Alas! I cannot divulge their names, and that makes me
unhappy.

Your father, my dear pupil, said things which astonished me still more. The
half confidence he made me, so captivated my eager curiosity, that I could
neither perceive a post-chaise, flying with the rapidity of a dart, nor even
the approach of night -- We had just left a little village, when an unknown
voice called out to the people behind the carriage: Hey, is it you, Champaign?
Yes, answered the valet. It is they, answered the voice to the cavaliers. This
instant, they alight from their horses, lay hold of the doors of the chaise,
open them, and one of them said very bluntly to your father, Hey, marquis, have
you got that darling child? you must either deliver him to us, or die
instantly, you -- Ah! my brother, cried the lady, stop! Is it you, my sister?
-- Coward, replied your father, in a rage, stay, I Will alight; dare you take
away my life? rather beware of thine.

Your father, I, and his people, leave the carriage. We began with the
strangers, who were four or five in number, a bloody combat ensued, of which I
could not see the issue, my skull being wounded with a sword, in consequence of
which I fell down weltering in my blood.

To all appearance, I laid for a long time senseless on the ground; when I
recovered my reason, it was in the dead of night. I saw neither your father,
nor the lady, nor any of the assassins near me, except seven or eight shabby
fellows who carried me on a litter. They informed me on the road, that I was
then half a league from Lions; that the archbishop of that place, who passing
by in his carriage, had heard my moans, one of his servants had been
dispatched, and informed him that those groans were uttered by a wounded
person, who could only be removed upon a litter. The arch bishop had no sooner
reached Lions, than he sent people to bring me to the infirmary of the
archbishopric. I was actually carried there, and the archbishop came himself
to know who had put me in such a condition on the road. I thanked him for his
humanity, and gave him some evasive answers, to conceal the real cause of my
wound.

Is not the sudden intrusion of these strangers, and their combat with your
father, a problem to you? -- Well my dear Alexis, it was and still is one to
me. To all appearance they were your enemies; they were in pursuit of you,
because they thought to find you in the post-chaise, and one of them was the
brother of the lady who accompanied us. But when I reflect upon your father's
mysterious discourse, and upon the snare laid for us in the inn at Valence,
from which he delivered me, I could no help concluding them to be the very
wretches whom alone we had reason to fear. Besides, he that wounded me was no
stranger to my person; for as much as I am able to recollect, he said in giving
me the blow, prithee where is thy pupil? I fell, and they left me, because they
thought I was dead. All that I can say is, that I can remember to have
perceived among them the young man we met in the botanical garden, and who
stared at us, saying to his father, It is, my father, here he is, etc. Do you
remember it, my Alexis? -- Heavens! -- Yes, surely, he was one of them.

I was taken care of at the infirmary of Lions; the metropolitan, from time to
time came to visit me, and to see me properly tended and treated.

Having got well, I went out to take the air in the environs of Lions, the
situation of which is truly delightful. I discovered in one of my rural
excursions a little chapel; whose ancient and ruinous appearance struck me
much. -- Being informed by a peasant, of its having once been the retreat of a
(...) hermit, I took it into my head to make it my residence. -- I had lost all
hope of ever seeing you again, because one of the people who waited on me,
during my ailment, and a relation to the inn keeper at Valence, at whose house
I had left you, having wrote to him with regard to you, and was answered, that
same day that you had left the inn, and he did not know what was become of you.

Having thus lost every hope of seeing you again, and life being a burden to
me, I communicated part of my misfortunes to the archbishop, and entreated
him, in the most earnest manner to permit me to inhabit the hermitage I had
seen. The prelate seemed at first to state objections against my project; but
seeing me so firmly resolved, he not only granted my request, but added a
considerable donation, which was soon augmented by the charity, or curiosity of
those whom my edifying way brought to the hermitage. The master of the Dolphin
inn was one; and John, who is here before us another. This worthy young man
walked every day one league to bring me victuals; he often conversed with me; I
trusted my sorrow to his sensibility, and he consoled me as much as he was able
-- my good and sensible friend, be sure heaven will reward thy kindness.

Some time ago, my Alexis, you passed though* Lions -- John showed you all the
curiosities of the place; and came to let me know, he heard your name by
chance, on the very ^ay of your departure. -- What tidings were those for me!
-- John brought them, John even assisted me with his money; I pulled off my
habit, and began my journey on foot having, previously taken a solemn leave of
my hermitage, which I lest quite prepared for the reception of some other.

This is the the third day I am on the road, and I could not walk more than
sixteen leagues -- Oh, I am so weak! my long sickness, my grief, and the
necessity of bagging along the road* -- What a condition! -- What a sad
condition, my friend, must I have been doomed to.

Alexis clasped Dumont in his arms, and they pressed each other with the most
heartfelt cordiality! -- After this Sciocco broke in to make comments upon
Dumont's adventures, which made a very singular impression on him. -- Well,
(...) m^^stro, is not this (...) effect of predestination? -- What do you think
of this singular meeting? -- What of the hermitage? faith, all this is
wonderfully arranged! were it to be related to a stranger, he would think the
whole a fiction. -- How can you prevent such an inclination of judging in a
stranger, especially in one who is habituated to an uninterrupted prosperity,
in the bosom of his country and family? Yet, experience teaches us that facts,
be they ever so astonishing, are not less ^ounded upon truth -- what is a
fiction, or a novel, but a concatenation of adventures, which taken separately,
will be worthy of belief?

Dumont, having thus finished his narrative, he requested Alexis to give him
also an account to his adventures, who in compliance of his just demand, began
with his residence in the cottage, his passion for Clara, the history of
Dorance, the perfidy of Duverly, (...) concluding with the disagreeable
accidents, in which his indiscretion and imprudent conduct had involved him:
above all, his mistrust and suspecting temper.

All was profound silence; while Alexis related his adventures; the old man
alone seemed quite disconcerted, Had Clara's lover watched him a little closer,
she would gradually have seen him blush, turn pale, and feel the strangest
emotions. Yet, nobody perceived it, as the story related by the pupil of
Dumont, engrossed all their attention.

The old man, being in his turn requested to give the details of the
misfortunes of his life, excused himself under pretense that they could give
concern to none but himself; and that, after adventures as astonishing as those
that had been recounted, nothing remained to said, but what would be too
uninteresting; yet he would relate them one day; but as for the present, he
begged his friends, above all things, to bestow their attention upon a project
which he had just conceived, and advised them to profit by it, if they were any
ways attached to prudence and wisdom.

Let us hear, therefore, dear readers, what the little old man has to say; and
if you have not guessed it already, I am afraid he will soon betray himself. We
need but to follow him.

CHAP. IV.
WHO THE OLD MAN IS -- THE RETURN TO THE COTTAGE.

YOUR adventures, my dear Alexis, have given me no small concern. They reminded
me of many persons of my acquaintance -- Is it possible? -- A moment if you
please: do hear me without interruption?

Greenoble^ has been long ^my residence: that Dorance, Duverly, Adela, Clara,
Germain, I know them all. I hear Dorance is still alive, which gives me great
joy. As to Duverly, whom you have mentioned in your narrative -- he is no more,
that treacherous friend. -- Are you sure? -- Yes, very sure. -- Alas! so
Clara's father is dead! -- Her mother has preceeded him, I have been told, long
ago. The unfortunate Adela has been the victim of the crimes of her seducer,
and a husband's jealousy! -- Forgive those tears -- sad remembrance! -- Alas!
how lovely has she been!

It is therefore useless, my dear Alexis, to go any more in pursuit of the
traitor whose head you are charged to bring. Heaven! have you met with me who
could give you this intelligence, and inform you that you have fulfilled your
commission; but as Dorance might not altogether ^ake your word, I will myself
accompany you to the cottage, he knows me, and will be glad to hear, from my
own mouth, every thing that may satisfy his mind. You shall see again your
Clara, whom you love so dearly; and I shall see her too, that lovely child,
whom I have known from the earliest period of her infancy. -- In short, I can
assure you, every body shall be satisfied. -- What, sir, will you have me
return to a man, who dared to command a murder! My good youth, your humanity,
your virtues, in a word, all in you bespeak my savor. Yet give me leave to
excuse Dorance: he has been made a wretch for life, so it must be natural in
him to seek revenge; be as it will, you have not perpet^ated the bloody act!
Certainly not. I grant that Dorance is blood thirsty, but you have spilt no
blood, and fate has disposed events so, that without sullying yourself with a
crime, you shall be entitled to Clara's hand. -- Heaven! by the fatal tidings
of her father's death! -- Leave this to me, I will satisfy Dorance on that
head, I will engage him to unite you with Adela's daughter. -- Generous
stranger, how happy am I to have met with you! -- but may I not know the name
of so respectable a person? -- I go by the name of Preville. -- Is that your
rea^ name? -- I have still many others; but that I like best. -- Well, M. de
Preville, I shall follow your advice; I shall go to the cottage; but will
Dumont, Sciocco, and John, follow us?

These three friends swore to accompany Alexis wheresoever he should go; --
their departure for the cottage was of course fixed for the next morning.

Alexis easily perceived in the old man an air of constraint which astonished
him; but this he attributed to a^ kind of regret, which the story he had
related, and comprising so many of his friends, had excited in his breast. At
any other time Alexis might perhaps have taken umbrage at M. Preville's
confusion; but his own temper, which had always been so productive of
disagreeable incidents, had made him swear to banish mistrust from his heart,
and for this he would give no encouragement in his mind to similar ideas.

In short, our hero was happy: he had sound again his faithful Dumont; he had
found him as true to his attachment as he had been formerly. Moreover, the good
natured Sciocco whom he loved, was also in his company, and two honest
strangers, one of whom had extricated him from a very critical situation, by
announcing the death of Duverly, and promising to carry, himself, these tidings
to Dorance -- Thus, he returned to the cottage, in hopes of seeing his dear
Clara, for he was ignorant of her departure.

Alexis was restless all night long. He rose the first in the morning, and ran
to the post office to order a chaise. At his return, he found all his friends
ready and joyful, except M. de Preville, who had past a worse night than
himself. The chaise arrives, our friends step in it, and post away.

I shall not trespass upon the reader's time, with expatiating upon the
pleasure which our travelers felt in so pleasing a journey, as he will guess
the whole, from the tempers and characters of our respective heroes. For
instance, predestination, and the order of things were brought upon the carpet
by Sciocco, and refuted by Mr. Dumont, whom the folly of the Italian astonished
to the highest degree. Love, its pleasures and pangs, were discussed by Alexis
and the old man; and the latter dwelt upon the subject with more seriousness
and sorrow than his young friend. Honest John read again and again his uncle
Joachin's letter, and related the history of different strangers whom he had
served during his late prime waitership at the Dolphin.

In a word, some were talking, others meditating, and every one was occupied
one way or other. Having rode post all night, they arrived at St. Marcellin,
where Sciocco and Alexis, did not care much to make their appearance, lest they
should be recognized by the jailer, whose wife had delivered them from their
place of confinement. They were informed that the latter had returned to her
husband, and were much amazed at the man's good nature, who condescended with
such grace to receive his spouse whenever she thought it expedient or agreeable
to favor him with her person.

From Marcellin, (our strangers having previously dismissed the post-chaise,)
preceeded gently on the road which leads to the forest of Chamboran. All five
armed with pistols, cutlasses, and stout cudgels, they feared no attack from
the banditti who infested those woody domains.

Having thus walked to a distance of two leagues and upwards, upon paths well
known to our Alexis, they descried a winding path, the drawbridge, and the top
of the cottage. They were exactly on the very same spot, where Clara had once
said to Alexis There, do you see the cottage! The heart of Dumont's pupil was
now in a strong emotion, he felt an inconceivable Je ne s^^i quoi; yet it was
not quite displeasing.

M. de Preville's condition was far from being like that of Alexis; No sooner
did he perceive the cottage, and above all the great poplar that rose its lofty
top to the clouds, than he turned pale, and a cold sweat quite chilled his
frame -- he dropped down senseless on the mossy ground. -- Alexis endeavored to
make him recover from his swoon; it was in vain, all his efforts joined to
those of his friends proved useless. Finally, they resolved to carry him -- to
carry him -- poor Alexis! -- did thou but know what thou art doing.

Certain it is, that the confusion and swoon of M. de Preville struck his four
friends with a most singular surprise. However deeply he might have been
affected by Dorance, by Clara, even by the tragical exit of Adela, whom he
owned to have known once, yet it seemed incredible that all this should cause
so violent a revolution in him -- should he have had a share in the adventures
of Dorance? -- It was he! -- Let us banish superficial doubts, which we cannot
clear up -- let us enter the cottage, and not lose sight of our travelers.
Thus they carried the unfortunate Preville to the drawbridge, which was drawn
up. Nobody appeared, yet it was necessary for them to get admittance, which was
certainly difficult, there being neither bell nor porter to savor their design.
Long would they have waited, but for a circumstance which turned out propiteous.

Candor, since the flight of his dear Clara, which had affected him to an
extreme, suffered not a single day to elapse, without mounting the wall of the
fosse, to see whether he could descry her coming from afar. Always in hopes of
seeing again the lovely child, whom he cherished as his own, he spent whole
days upon a kind of terrace, shedding tears, and imploring providence to
restore his dear Clara.

"Great God!" said he, incessantly, "thou who know my heart, thou who
know how dear I held that offspring of crime, thee I call to witness the
sincerity of my feelings! -- I had, indeed, no other intention when I first
brought her up, than to devote her a sacrifice to my vengeance; but how much
have I abhorred that attrocious design! -- the sensible, gentle, engaging Clara
was my daughter; I had adopted her for such; I forgot her father's treachery,
my spouse's perfidiousness; I forgot all! -- She is fled, she is left a
generous benefactor to follow her lover! -- her lover whom I have inhumanly
exiled! -- with what design? to send him in pursuit of a man, whom it is
impossible for him to meet with. Left alone to himself in this wide world,
could Alexis discover the retreat of my enemy, the infamous Duverly? -- Thus a
vain desire of revenge has robbed me of my friend, of Clara, of all that was
dear to me! O my God, thou do punish me! -- well have I deserved the frowns
of thy justice."

These were the affecting ejaculations which Candor sent to heaven, when a
noise at his feet just facing the drawbridge, made him cast his eyes downwards
-- What does he perceive? -- Alexis! -- Alexis! -- can it be he? -- Yes, it is
the good natured Alexis, it is he -- attended by four strangers. Candor
examines eagerly each face; he seeks his daughter -- she is not among them! --
O grief!

But who is that stranger, pale, feeble, supported by his young friend? Candor
believes he knows his features! he tries to recollect -- should it ^e Duverly?
-- Duverly! should there be some collusion between Alexis and him! do they both
come to insult him! -- three strangers follow them! What means this cabal.

Candor hesitates for a moment whether or not he ought to open the cottage to
this band -- he is alone with an old servant as weak as he. But why should he
remain in suspense? If he must perish, his life shall be sold dear to his
assassins! It is Duverly! yes Candor knows him! What a fury blazes in his heart!

While he was thus engaged in thought, Alexis, who perceived him, cried in a
tone of sweetness and sympathy: Father, let down the drawbridge -- We are all
your friends! -- You all my friends?

Candor calls Germain; they both let down the drawbridge. -- Alexis, Sciocco,
Dumont, John Picot, and M. de Preville enter. M. de Preville, who had recovered
his strength, cannot withhold his tears at the ^ight of the unhappy Dorance,
grown hoary under the weight of years and misfortune.

Alexis looks around for his Clara; he does not see her, he turns pale, he is
going to enquire for her of Dorance, but the latter saves him that trouble.
What do you seek here, young man! -- Have you avenged me? -- Where is my
enemy's head! -- Upbraid me not, I pray, my father, this respectable old
gentleman, who condescended to accompany me, will satisfy your curiosity.

Dorance, who sees his doubts realized, stares boldly at M. de Preville, whose
tongue denies its office; Alexis occupied in looking for his Clara, goes all
round the place. Dumont, Sciocco, and John wait with terror the issue of an
event which they begin to comprehend better: all four actors impelled by
different sentiments, represent a strong characteristic picture, and for some
minutes, the profoundest silence reigns among them.

De Preville breaks it first. Well, Dorance, what do you fee^ at my sight! --
Rage, fury, despair! -- Do you know me again? The excess of my hatred calls
thee, perfidious Duverly.

Duverly, exclaim the four actors. O heaven! pursues Alexis, what, is it ^^u?
-- Duverly! -- What have I (...). Your duty, answered the unmasked old man,
doubtless, you have done your duty and fulfilled your promise: Dorance, said
he, to Candor, I come to surrender myself to thy just vengeance. My fate is in
thy hands, take away my life and I will not murmur. I have deceived, abused,
and basely betrayed thee -- under the mask of friendship, I have given thee
most cruel blows to thy generous and confiding heart -- I have caused the death
of a woman equally dear to us both -- I still offend thee, I see, by my
discourse; why do thou tarry? here is my breast, pierce it, it waits the
mortal blow from thy hand; it waits -- without a moan.

Alexis throws himself down before Duverly, whom Dorance surveyed with the
highest indignation. -- Cowardly foe, said he to Preville; how dare thou to
brave and insult me? -- To insult thee, what I? -- O Dorance! I wish thou
could pry into the innermost recesses of my heart? I wish thou could see it
divided, lacerated, and bleeding with repentance and remorse! -- Alas, ask that
guilty heart! It will tell thee, that even when it betrayed thee, it felt love,
pity, and self-detestation! Yes, Dorance, thee I have betrayed, but how must I
smart for it! -- Yet, think not I seek to avert the avenging dagger of thy
august fury; stab this heart, and I shall not utter a groan. Thou shall not
hear me say that youth and the violence of an irresistible passion, have hurled
me into the abyss in which we both are fallen. I shall not remind you of our
conversation at Grenoble, when you owned, you loved Miss Myrsange, and that it
was the desire of your parents to unite you with her. Long before had I adored
her; long before had Adela vowed to crown my love with mutual affection. What
have not I done to dissuade you from a marriage which I foresaw to be pregnant
with the greatest misery for two friends -- Adela swore she never could be
happy but with me -- Her mother forced her to give thee her hand -- Thou loved
her with all the phrenzy of enthusiastic love, and I too!

We went to Paris; I used every effort to surmount a fatal passion, whose
excess made me shrink with horror. I will hide the fatal secret in my bosom,
remember -- thou come -- thou tearest from me -- I am upon the point of
confessing all -- the name alone baffles my utterance -- thou give me
encouragement, make me hope, I listen to thee -- thou answerest for me
Adela's letter! -- Ah! this was the first fault which led me to many others! --
The step was made; confidence was then unseasonable and would have proved
destructive to my own self: love, effervescence, and ill placed shame, all, all
forced me to the crime!

You see, dear enemy, that I pretend not to justify myself; I am guilty -- Thy
misery and that of thy family has been caused by me: I condemn myself; I have
met with this youth, he related to me his adventures, thy misfortunes and thy
wish* I am prepared to accomplish them. I come to acquit thy vow, strike, I
tell thee once more, strike; I would scorn pity! -- Pity! will thou, villain
speak of pity? ah, I pitied my spouse, the most innocent of women, after I had
barbarously thrust a dagger in her bosom! It was however the effect of the
black suspicion which thou have exiled in my heart? -- Des Roches is the sole
author, that detestable termagant fostered my passion for Adela, it is she who
furnished us with means of obtaining mutual interviews, it is she who excited
me to betray thee -- she no sooner saw Adela's repentance and our separation
than she forced me to glut a passion, which she said, glowed in her breast for
me. The tokens of indignation and contempt which manifested at this overture,
kindled her rage, she was bent on my ruin, and would involve you and your
spouse into the gulf opened by her infernal vengeance. Having robbed me of
letters -- fatal letters, which I should have a thousand times destroyed; she
sent them to you, while I was in North Carolina, with the most calumnious
imputations. -- Poor Adela, terrified at a secret information she received of
her enemy, imprudently seeks safety in flight, you pursue her. -- You shudder!
Oh, It is for me to shudder! It was my fatal passion which guided your hand --
Oh, let me see that bloody tree where she received the deadly wound! let me see
if -- This is not the only monument, barbarous man, which puts me in mind of
thy perfidiousness: come, descend with me into the gloomy subterranean, where I
preserve the precious remains of my victims; come, but alone with me? -- There
I Will offer thee a sacrifice to the manes of my spouse and son! Let us go, I am
prepared.

Candor and Duverly laid hold of one another's hands, and forgetting to pull up
the drawbridge, they advance toward the door of the subterranean temple;
Alexis and his friends attempt to stop them. -- Let us alone, cried they! --
Divine justice must be satisfied.

Alexis, Dumont, John, even Germain himself obstruct their passage; but
suddenly Sciocco calls them aside; they expect to get some important advice.
Believe me, Cuoni Cavalieri, said Carlo, let them go down alone into the cave;
-- If they are not to perish, they will not; but if it is decreed for either --

Alexis, impatient of being thus detained, pushes him back, and joins the two
furious old men; Dumont, John, Germain and Sciocco follow them: so all descend
into the subterranean, regardless of the entreaties of Dorance and Duverly.

I shall not repeat what farther conversation passed between the two enemies;
their mutual reproaches and menaces are obvious to imagination. Fresh
elucidations were given on both sides, and in spite of Duverly's gentleness and
contrition, who knows how the matter would have been terminated, but for the
most astonishing event which curbed their rage, and put an end to their
resentment?

We shall leave our actors in the temple, to return to Paris, where we shall
find Clara at the hotel of the marquis de Corsange.

CHAP. V.
THE POINT OF REUNION IN THE COTTAGE.

SEVERAL days had elapsed since the departure of M. Du Monay, the receiver. The
marquis and marchioness had every regard for Clara, whom they still believed to
be the receiver's niece, and cherished her from this consideration.

The marquis, marchioness and Clara, took one day an airing in the delightful
gardens of Luxembourgh, a place of fashionable resort. Having made several
turns, they, in imitation of other strangers, sat down upon a chair, to rest
themselves from the fatigues of their walk.

A person, who appeared to be an abbe, was sitting by Clara, and had gazed at
her for a long time, so as to put her to the blush, and could not help
expressing his curiosity in these words: Miss, I beg you a thousand pardons for
my indiscretion; pray, had not I the honor of seeing you somewhere? Clara looks
in his face, and seems to know him -- she blushes. The abbe perceived it. I see
you recollect me, said he. -- Pray was it not at Lions? no, -- you are however
much like a certain Alexis -- Alexis! cried the marquis and marchioness both at
once. -- Alexis! cried a woman in her turn, who was sitting a little farther!
-- Yes, replied the abbe, you are that Alexis whom I saw at the baroness
d'Yrace! Father Stephen, whispered the trembling Clara, pray have done. What do
you wish to say of Alexis? asked the woman. -- I have seen a young man of that
name at Marseilles. -- At Marseilles, madam? said the intimidated Clara. Have
you known Alexis at Marseilles? Alas, miss, don't revive that dearest
remembrance. Dearest, you say, madam? Should you be the young lady from M. Du
Monay's? Who told you my tyrant's name? Yes, I am the unfortunate Sophia, who
loved so much the young Alexis! Let us not be under a mistake, ladies, said the
ex-capuchin. I speak of the lovely Clara here before us; and you, madam, of
that Alexis, who runs all over the world to seek a father whom he has never
known? A father he has never known! replied the marquis with great emotion. Ah!
what do you tell me? what name have you uttered? -- Softly my dear, said the
marchioness, methinks our Clara has more knowledge of the whole affair: we
shall beg of her for information: -- Knowledge of Alexis, madam, I have indeed!
-- Good God! my husband and I are much concerned for him; pray explain
yourself. -- Madam, neither the time nor place are suitable. I beg it as a
favor, let us return to the hotel, and there I will give you a most faithful
account of what you may wish to know, though I have the strictest injunctions
to the contrary from my uncle: forgive that expression; I mean to say from my
worthy benefactor.

Clara and the noble pair rise from their seats: Clara discovering her rival in
Sophia, casts a glance of indignation upon her, which the latter endeavors to
interpret. By this time, father Stephen seeing he must loose his prey, attempts
to whisper to Clara, and she will not hear him; the ex capuchin, awed by the
presence of the marquis and his spouse, proceeds no farther; he retires quite
desperately, and our three friends return to the hotel, where the marchioness,
who had violently restrained her feelings, let fall a torrent of tears. You
will not be surprised, my lovely Clara, said she sobbing, at the impression
which the adventure of the gardens make upon me, when you shall come to know.
From the description given of his person, it can be no other than your son, my
dear lord! Your son! cried Clara with an exaltation of voice, your son! What,
my lord, should Alexis be your son? Yes, answered the marquis, fetching a deep
sigh, and here is his mother! Oh Alexis, Alexis! where art thou? -- Come fly to
their arms! Clara you augment our anguish; speak, speak, have pity on a
father's pain.

Clara, in a transport of joy, is unable to collect her ideas; she lifts her
eyes up to heaven, and utters vague exclamations; soon after, she makes an
apology for having, on account of Du Monay's instruction, concealed her history
from her benefactors. They all sit down, and Clara relates her own history, and
that of Alexis, his residence and flight from the cottage; and concludes with
owning that she knew not what had become of her lover. He was at Marseilles,
added she; there he turned faithless! there he got acquainted with that Sophia
whom we have just left; but as he has not accompanied her, I know not where he
can be* Oh my God! why does thy power not read him to this house? -- Alas! how
happy would he be! -- and we how happy.

Arzelia and her lord could hardly respire during the long narrative of Clara;
the marquis especially, who remembered his cruelties, his wrongs to so amiable
a son, and the vexations he had caused him through the malice of his enemies,
could not forgive himself. It is I, exclaimed he; I am that unnatural father,
who involved him into the abyss of wretchedness! -- Where is he? innocent
youth: What is his fate? -- O God, thou art witness to the searches and
pursuits I have made since the blessed instant which reunited me with my
spouse! -- I sent emissaries, and went myself to a thousand places, to seek a
son who costs me so many tears! O Clara! if ever we find him, he shall be thy
consort! -- Be both our children. -- Ah! how worthy art thou of his heart and
affections.

During these sentimental emanations, the marchioness became very pensive. All
on a sudden she breaks in on her husband's discourse. My friend -- my dear
friend -- an idea takes my fancy! -- yes, hope influences my mind, and fills my
soul with consolation! perhaps he has returned to the cottage; we may find him
there! Madam, he certainly knows not that I have left it; he might, but no, he
has forgot me; there was no place I passed through in my journey, but gave me
the sad news of his broken faith. At St. Marcellin, ah! the perfidious Alexis;
perhaps he consoles himself in some other quarter of the world with some new
conquest. My daughter, believe a mother's heart! Your own was too intimately
connected with his! you were born for one another; he will return to the
cottage, he will surely return: Oh! sullied with my father's blood! What a
baneful suspicion! can a youth of so sweet and timid a temper, sully himself
with that attrocious murder? he is incapable of doing it, to be blessed with his
father's feelings. So he is graced with your virtues, my dearest Arzelia, he
must shrink at the very name of crime.

The marquis and marchioness, after having testified a thousand tender concerns
for the fate of their son, determined to set out instantly for the cottage. If
he is not there, said they, we will wait for him. To live in a place which our
son has inhabited will at least be some consolation for us. Clara knew not
whether to accept or decline the journey -- piqued at her lover's infidelity;
eager to see again the hermitage, her Germain, and the beneficent Candor, of
whom she had no occasion to be afraid, while under the auspices of the parents
of Alexis; her mind was divided between a thousand different thoughts; yet the
sweet desire of again seeing the cottage, and perhaps her lover too, overcame
all her scruples.

In less than a day every thing was prepared for the intended journey. They set
off, arrive at St. Marcellin, alight from their carriage, commit it to the care
of a valet, and take the pleasant road of the forest of de Chamboran, under an
escort of four vigorous domestics armed with pistols and cutlasses.

After a long walk of two hours and upwards, they descry before them the walls
of the cottage; the drawbridge being still let down and the door open, caused
Clara to be much surprised. Good God, cried she, should Candor, be dead, or has
the place been taken by assault, and plundered? Already her mind was agitated
by a thousand suspicions, when she perceived several tracts of the footsteps of
a man, which were directed toward the cottage. This revived Clara's hopes. --
Alas! said she, could we find him! oh! Alexis! should these be the traces of
thy feet.

Clara looks around, she examines all these marks -- she even believes to
distinguish them for being those of her lover's foot: childish reflections, a
ridiculous illusion, begot by a fancy wholly taken up with its object! --
Without doubt, this reflection must appear very trifling to the readers; yet
Clara could not be mistaken: -- let us then follow her.

The drawbridge, which was let down, favored the access of our little troop to
the cottage. They enter the premises -- look around on all sides, and perceive
nobody. Clara takes the van: -- how her poor heart beats -- she enters the
apartments -- not a soul! -- she looks in the garden not a soul! -- Where is
then Germain and Candor? -- Ah! I hear them speak, and very loud too -- Heaven!
the voice of Alexis! yes, it is his voice; -- Clara is more your daughter than
Duverly's! Have compassion, my father! Did Alexis pronounce these words? Oh!
I Am certain it is his voice, cried Clara, quite moved! His voice! replied the
marquis and his spouse; what, our son's voice?

Now all three unable to guess whence the sounds proceeded, listen, without
moving, and in the attitude of three statues.

At last, Clara cries, it is from the temple! Oh, come, come! -- we shall find
them there.

The door was actually open. Clara, the marquis, and Arzelia, descended with
precipation down the little stairs -- suddenly the faint glimmer of the lamp
replaces daylight; and leave them only a very imperfect view of objects; --
Alexis turns his head: Clara, cries he! -- Alexis! there is your father!

Here, I feel my inability of describing with proper energy, the sudden
sensations of each of our respective heroes. My pen is not sufficient to
express their surprise and transports. Can what happens in an instant, admit of
a long and tedious narration? My readers will form, themselves, an idea of this
picture, if they please to remember, that Candor finds again his dear Clara;
Duverly, his daughter; the latter, her father, her benefactor, and her lover;
Alexis, a father, whom he had so long panted for; the noble couple, a son who
had cost them so many tears; in short, Germain, Dumont, etc. met again with
dear friends of whom they had been so long deprived.

What effusions of heart! -- what questions! -- Are you here? -- Is it you? --
You, my father! -- My dear son, etc. They were all speaking, and none did
answer. -- All their faculties were suspended; their souls felt too much for
expression; they were clasped in each others arms, in the sweetest rapture.

At last, Alexis, who was afraid lest Dorance and Duverly should resume their
former conversation, engaged every body to leave that dismal place. They all
gather and join in a body: Clara between the two enemies, Alexis between the
marquis and marchioness; Sciocco, lost in admiration; Dumont and John both
moved to the soul, close the rear, and our heroes enter the garden, where they
ask each other for an account of their adventures. How happy am I, said Clara
to Alexis, to have brought back your father! -- And how unhappy am I to have
restored you to your own! Do thou deserve still, faithless man, that I should
show the least concern for thee! -- Ah! do not rebuke me, Clara! -- It was
against my own wish I served the cruel Dorance! -- Pray, what is become of the
goaler's wife, and that Sophia of Marseilles? I do not comprehend you! I know
all, ungrateful Alexis, I know all -- and am sorry to have ever loved you.

Alexis endeavors to unravel the meaning of this discourse; but his father
interrupts him: So I have found you my dear son! -- Can you still love a father
who has so cruelly forsaken you in the inn at Val^nce? Ah! you are my father,
and still will be! You know me now, and soon will know my misfortunes, and
those of Arzelia your tender mother! Ah, sir, how I seared for your life,
breaks in Dumont! -- Dear Dumont, have you then found my son? -- how, how, all
these meetings are like so many miracles! -- Oh! replies Sciocco, what an
irrefragable proof of the law of events! -- Why, says Dumont, there is nothing
astonishing in these meetings: What is surprising, is when several individuals
find each other in a corner of the globe, where none of them had any business,
where none of them was called; but when we have a point of reunion? -- Did we
not all look for each other? Did we not all repair to this place because we
presumed it fittest for us to meet than any other. Yes, replied Sciocco, e
vero; but what makes it appear to me so very strange, is, that we all arrived
in one day. It is rather strange, if chance had brought it about. -- Otherwise
you mean, that would have broke the great order which would be morally
impossible.

Meanwhile Dorance glanced on Duverly with looks expressive of fury and rage.
This event which had suspended Candor's resentment, had not extinguished it. --
His soul indeed fostered no more bloody and cruel projects, but he cannot bear
the fight of his enemy. -- Duverly, actuated by fear and self diffidence da^e
not lift his eyes upon a man, whose friendship he had thus inhumanely betrayed;
he observes silence, and is afraid to embrace his daughter, lest he should
shock Dorance's feelings, and solely yields to the sweet confidence which the
presence of Alexis, Dumont, Sciocco, and John, inspire him with.

Soon the whole troop reaches the grove, which extends itself along the
rivulet. There, every one sets down, and every one is requested to give an
account of his adventures: doubtless, those of the father of Alexis were of the
most interesting nature. Neither would the marquis suffer any long entreaties.
He places his son between him and his spouse; they form a circle all around,
and the marquis begins a narration, which the reader must have long ago
de^^red, if he felt the least concern for the fate of a young man of nineteen,
who neither knew the world, nor his father, nor the mystery of his birth.

CHAP. VI.
THE THUILLERIES AND PONT-TOURNANT.

LOVE, interest and ambition are the three scourges which desolated my life; --
Love was my own crime; interest swayed my barbarous brother; and ambition
became the motive of all the vexations which a father heaped upon me: -- why do
I say a father! -- he was not my father, and had no claim to that title! --
Nevertheless, I loved him, I respected him, and that timid respect has always
hindered me from shaking off the heavy yoke, beneath which he would crush me.
Alas! without his son, without the cruel chevalier d'Anfort! -- But I see these
exclamations are a mere enigma to you my friends; I ought to explain it and
relate the history of my family; thence I will make a digression upon my
misfortunes -- therefore attend to me.

Aurora Bleville, my mother, was the daughter of the celebrated count Bleville
The fictitious names of Bleville, Corsange, etc. have been substituted out of
respect for the families of my heroes, of which several distinguished families
are now in being.
ambassador at the court of Madrid in the preceding reign; she could aspire to
the hand of the most distinguished young noblemen who then graced the gay
circles of the court, as much by her beauty and virtues, as by the powerful
credit which her father enjoyed: but young still, she saw the count, and was no
longer free to make a choice of her own. The count, on his side, fell
desperately in love with Aurora, and even carried his imprudence so far as to
demand her in marriage. The ambassador, offended at this proceeding, discarded
the young nobleman, put his daughter in a convent, and compelled her a few
months after, to tie the marriage knot with the marquis de Corsange, the king's
favorite, of an amiable disposition, and endowed with a thousand brilliant
qualities; but for him Aurora felt an invincible repugnance; she complied,
however with a father's command, and gave proofs to her husband, if not of
love, at least of esteem and friendship. I was the offspring of this marriage,
and my mother feeling for me all the attachment of maternal fondness, began to
be accustomed to her present state of conjugal union, when suddenly a cruel
incident revived in her the sparks of her former passion, and its hopes. The
king was at that time engaged in a war with Germany. The Ambassador and his son
in law, who sought by one another's side, were both, and at the same instant,
laid dead on the field by a cannon ball. My mother, who saw herself thus
suddenly rid of her father's and husband's yoke, thought only of contracting a
second marriage: she was then twenty-six, and count d'Anfort was thirty: both
free, both equally in love, they saw one another again, and joined in wedlock:
but the imprudent Aurora, by this match, alienated from her the friendship of
my father's whole family. Nobody would see or assist me, when afterward I was
compelled by misfortune to have recourse to them.

Lady d'Anfort began to exact of her new husband that I should be brought up in
his own eyes, and he neglected nothing to make me happy, and to render my
education brilliant. The count promised all, and faithfully kept his word for
two years: I mean, till his spouse presented him with a son of his own. It is
he, my friends, who is the cause of all my misfortunes.

The tenderness which the count and my mother felt for this son, the fruits of
love, rather than that of matrimony, singularly cooled them in their affections
for me. A child as I was, I perceived and complained of it to my mother, who
answered with sullen steadiness: "Well, sir, you shall no longer be the object
of that neglect; for tomorrow you are to be sent to college, where you will
stay till you have completed your studies." I was thunderstruck at these words,
and spent the whole day in shedding tears, and on the next morning set out,
attended by one servant. When I went to embrace my mother, I remarked that she
turned her back upon me -- My heart was depressed, and I was upon the point of
leaving the apartment, when my father-in-law, who saw my anguish, clasped me in
his arms, and gently pressed a little present in my hand, telling me with an
air of affection, that if I was studious, and would behave well, he would give
me liberty to come to his hotel once a month. These words made me a little
calmer: I slept into the carriage, and repaired with my valet to the college of
Navarre -- the same college where I since put my Alexis!

There I found a tutor waiting for me; a true pedant, quite made up of Latin
and Greek, and who only added to my melancholy during all the time I had to
spend in that prison.

I was then twelve years of age, and I began to think my mother's coolness was
a real torment to me. Whence could it proceed? -- had I behaved ill to her? and
suppose this had been the case, should she not have made some allowance to a
boy only twelve years old? Yet the count's caresses had replaced her more than
ever in my ^^lial fondness. From that moment I loved her as much as she had
displeased me before. Sensible hearts have no steadiness in their opinions. A
harsh expression will grieve and discard them -- the least politeness makes
their affections return even farther than it has been before; it is as easy to
make them happy, as to afflict them.

During the first year of my being at college, I had the satisfaction to go
from time to time to the hotel d'Anfort; -- the second year, I was sent for
less frequently; the third less still, and soon I became quite ^^t of question.
I lived in the college, forgot, as it were, by all nature, left to the care of
mercenary people, with no other compensation than the company of a friend of
the same age as myself, whom I had the good fortune to find there.

This friend! forgive me my giving a tear to his (...) remembrance! this
friend! alas! was most dear to me, and I went so far as; pardon, my friends, a
thousand pardons! it is the effect of ranklin remorse, which rends my heart.

Dulys was his name; he professed the most steady attachment to me: the same
temper, the same affection, in a word, every thing united us; we were always
together. On those days which were fixed for the students to walk out, we lest
the crowd to our fellow-students to give scope to our reflections. In short,
the most tender friendship operated equally on our hearts. How he pitied my
condition; how he could alleviate my sorrows! But as I see my dear (...) my
regrets, I will pass rapidly ^ver this circumstance of my history, which will
soon, in your eyes, overwhelm me with confusion and guilt.

Dulys was then fatherless; his mother, who loved him tenderly, lived at Dreux,
and never came to Paris, but her son regularly spent the holidays with her*
Mrs. Dulys waited for that period with as much impatience as I felt sorrow at
its approach. -- Alone in the college, bereft of my friends and parents, during
two months of the year, I had no other medium than to study or to shed tears:
-- Youthful stage of life, with what bitterness have thou been annoyed!

I had now been six years at college, when I was one day informed that a
servant desired to speak to me. I go down, my heart palpitates for joy at the
sight of my step-father's livery. Sir, said the man, come quick with me! your
mother is breathing her last. A thunderbolt could not have struck me as much as
this news* -- Heaven, what accident has happened? -- What accident? It is no
accident, my lord: your mother has been very bad these two months. What, these
two months! Could you thu^ leave me ignorant? She never asked for you till
(...) morning for the first time: but pray, my lord, use dispatch, who knows
but we may not find her alive*

I felt so many sensations of grief caused by sudden starts of thought, that I
^as on the point of fainting away. The servant perceives it, carries me to the
coach, which was waiting before the gate of the college, and which ^rove with
the utmost dispatch to the hotel d'Anfort.

I was conducted to an apartment, where my mother on her deathbed, was only
waiting for that moment to resign her breath. My son (...) a ^aultering and
weak tone of voice -- I am ready to expire, you will lose me, my son; I leave
you a good father in the count (...) have appointed him to be your guardian; he
(...) condescend to take upon him for you the superintendance of the property
of my first husband, the marquis de Corsange. -- I give him full authority over
you; obey him as you would me, and remember that you would do me an outrage in
the tomb, which is ready to swallow me, should you be wanting in gratitude
toward him!

I pressed my mother's hand, and bathed it in my tears; the count stood weeping
at the bed side, and his son next him. -- This is your brother, added my
mother, pointing to the chevalier d'Anfort; I command you both to live in close
intimacy, and to love one another till death shall part you -- do you promise
me that?

I stammered a few monosyllables. Young d'Anfort answers, Yes; his voice being
intercepted by sobs. His mother takes him in her arms attempts to embrace him,
falls back on the pillow, and instantly expires! Notwithstanding the awfulness
and horror of that moment, it grieved me to the heart that the last glance of
my mother had been thrown on young d'Anfort. I envied him for it, and showed
him a hatred, which I could not suppress afterward: this without doubt was my
only offense; I charge myself with it, but I could not conquer it.

Two days after my mother's death, the count, who showed me many marks of
friendship, embraced and promised me an eternal attachment; begging me at the
same time to return to the college; whither I went accordingly with a heart
bleeding with sorrow. Dulys no sooner saw me than he flew to my arms. I related
to him all that had happened, and we agreed unanimously that it would be
necessary for me to be upon my guard against the fate which awaited me, as my
only dependence was now on a man whom I was a stranger to. Yet I felt some
concern for that man; I respected him; I even went farther, I loved him, he had
gained such an ascendency over me, that I feared and dared not to speak before
him. What follows will show you how fatal that timidity has proved to me.

I remained two years longer at college; yet the count used to send for me once
every fortnight. -- Thus I saw him, and the more his kindness attached me to
him, the more I detested the odious character of my brother. He was scarce
fourteen, but his haughtiness and impudence controuled all his actions. He
scarcely deigned to look at me, called me always Sir, and rendered himself to
be equally detestable to all those who came near him. All his faults had a
cause; my mother, who made him her idol, indulged him in all his whims from his
earliest infancy; he reigned with despotic sway over all the domestics, and the
caprices of a child were to be a sacred law to those who were appointed to wait
upon him. If chance ever made her mention my name to him, it was always to tell
him, "My little d'Anfort, my darling child, I love thee more, yes, I cherish
thee more than him, etc." a hundred similar expressions, of which I was
informed, tended to foster the boy's vanity, and to inspire him with a
sovereign contempt for me. -- His father, on the other hand, in spite of all
the friendship he bore to me, made him the sole object of his tenderness. --
That good father even carried his love to weakness, nay so far, that the little
master often behaved to him with disrespect. At last the father's indulgence
became as excessive as the son's arrogance. We often quarrelled: but I avoided
differences with the most scrupulous care, because I saw they became very
vexatious to my dear preceptor! the more so, as he always interested his
conscience in the boy's favor. At last the chevalier's insult appeared to me
rather contemptible than worthy of my notice. I did not foresee that my
complaisance in yielding would cost me so much one day, and that my brother
would soon assume such rights over me, as have rendered my life truly miserable.

The count, since my mother's decease, took to his house a very rich old maiden
sister, who treasured up her considerable finances for his son. This woman
doated so much on her nephew as to call him her jewel, her happiness; she could
never find terms strong enough to express her fondness and affection.
Notwithstanding, she esteemed me, and had much more regard for me, than she saw
the young gentleman would condescend to honor me with. In consequence, I put up
with all their oddities, and hoped that all this complaisance to the jewel of
the house would make it possible for me to live in some comfort.

I was twenty, and had three times repeated my course of study, when the count
would have his hotel to be my constant residence. I joyfully accepted his
offer; and of all the professions which he left to my choice, I gave the
preference to a military life, though he seemed to advise me to take holy
orders, foreseeing that I could not then fail to leave, one day, my whole
estate to his son, or the heirs of his body. Nevertheless, he would not force
my inclinations, and purchased me a lieutenancy in the regiment of Cond^.

I was very well at my guardian's, where I had no other vexation than the
tricks and malicious proceedings of my brother; but for these I consoled myself
with my friend Dulys: he, like me, had finished the course of his classical
studies, and was now studying law to qualify himself for the bar. His mother
had put him to board with a gentleman in the neighborhood, where we could see
one another at all hours. The marquis and all the family were fond of him, and
he was indeed the common friend of us all, except my brother, who could not
bear him: but little did Dulys trouble himself about him, and we were all well
content.

My disposition was sedentary, gloomy, and philosophical. -- I had no ruling
passion nor tastes: study and reading were my sole delight. Dulys was of the
same cast; we would often spend whole days in reading and making reflections.
-- Women were one day the topic of oar conversation; Dulys particularised all
the dangers to which marriage e^posed a man, in the most heinous colors; he
depicted marriage as a fatal dungeon which fetters the freedom of our being,
and whose bands neither domestic crosses, nor the caprices of a spouse can
dissolve. Doubtless, he argued like an inexperienced young man; but I listened
to his arguments, the result of which was a mutual oath never to marry. -- A
foolish, senseless promise, never made, but when the passions lay dormant in
our breast! -- Frail structure, which the least wind can overthrow! -- To my
sorrow I felt it but too much afterward.

Count d'Anfort, who was a man of parts, enjoyed our whole confidence: I kept
nothing secret from him, and was so imprudent as to communicate to him the firm
resolution I had taken. The project flattered his views; he seconded it,
bestowed a thousand eulogiums on me, and was eager to carry the news to the
countess d'Ezelle, my ^^^dmother, an old lady uncommonly rich, who was very
fond of me, and had promised many times to constitute me her sole and universal
heir. This countess, who was equally blind with regard to the chevalier
d'Anfort, was glad to see that her intentions should become useful one day, to
that dear family. Being therefore sick of a dangerous disorder, some time
after, she ordered us all to her bedside, and dictated, in our presence the
different articles of her will. Corsange, said she to me, the most tender
friendship united me with your father; I have made you my successor, I am rich,
and owe my fortune to no one: to you I bequeath the whole bulk of my estate,
but on condition of your signing a deed before witnesses, by which you are to
promise me never to marry, and leave your estate after your death, in reversion
to your brother, or his next heir, by due course of law.

Bewildered as I was by my philosophy, I consented to all, and signed all. The
countess expires; count d'Anfort demands a copy of my renunciation, and takes
upon him the administration of this new estate, till I should be of age. By it,
I acquired an annual income of three hundred thousand livres, and upwards.

I leave you now to think, if, after this, my friendship was courted by the
family of the count d'Anfort. Every body caressed me, even the chevalier
received orders from his father to treat me with more gentleness and
politeness; in short, as a person of high value.

I had unknowingly signed my ruin, and repented not; Dulys too, who was as mad
as myself, endeavored to confirm me in my principles, and I was happy! You
shall soon see, my friends to what catastrophs my imprudent conduct has
subjected me! These particulars have perhaps been tedious to you; they were
nevertheless necessary to lead you to the more interesting part of my
adventures. Prepare yourselves to hear a series of horrors and unjust actions,
brooded by the blackest and most baleful malignity.

Miss D'Anfort, my step father's sister, had a friend, who was baron
d'Arceville. That friend, who had been a widower long since, lived with his
only daughter at one of his manors. He frequently wrote to miss d'Anfort, who
had been very intimate with his late spouse. One day she received a letter from
the baron, in which he mentioned among other things: "That as some urging
affairs called him to the West Indies, he was obliged to sit out within a
month. As I dare not, added he, expose my daughter to the hazards of so long a
voyage, and firmly rely upon our ancient friendship, I shall make bold to put
her under your care, for the time I shall be absent. I hope you will not refuse
me that service: -- We shall be in Paris by the end of this week at farthest.

Miss d'Anfort, enraptured with her friend's confidence in her, ordered an
apartment to be fitted up for his reception, and another for her young pupil.
You shall see miss d'Arceville, would she say to us, every now and then; she is
so handsome, oh! so very handsome! I have no children, she shall be my
daughter: how pleased shall I be!

I listened to this discourse with indifference, far from thinking that this
ad^pted daughter should make me renounce forever what I had sworn. In vain we
waited for the baron on the day he had appointed; it was late at night, and
nobody came. The next day passed in the like manner, and on the morning of the
third we saw arrive a man alone, pale, bewildered, and seemingly given up to
the most gnawing sorrow. Eh! my dear friend, said miss d'Anfort! is it you? --
My God! what a situation you are in! -- Where is your daughter? -- My daughter!
my daughter! -- I have lo^t my poor daughter! -- O Heaven! is she dead? -- I
cannot tell. -- You cannot tell! pray explain yourself, what has then happened?

The baron sits down, composes himself a little, and sometime afte^ speaks as
follows:

We were in the vicinity of the subur^^ of the city of Nevers, when a man in a
phaeton, attended by one servant, drove against my carriage, and had nearly
overturned it. Sir, said I to him, take care of what you are at! -- He answers
me rudely: -- I reply in the same strain -- The insolent stranger even dares to
give me a lash with his whip. I alight and draw my sword -- we fight: I have
the misfortune to kill him! -- Neither the cries of my daughter, those of our
servants, nor any thing can withhold me; the stranger lies dead on the field;
his valet sought his safety in ^light. I stepped into my carriage, and order the
postilion to drive hard. In the evening of that same day, a post chaise, which
drove with the greatest rapidity, stopped my carriage; -- four men stepped out
-- they attack me, my resistance was vain: -- one of them wounds me, I drop
down senseless, and only recover to see myself, bereft of my daughter. Arzelia
was no more with me, Arzelia had been carried off by those four ruffians.
Germain, my valet, who gave me every succor in his power, saw her seized and
put into the post-chaise, without being able to give her the smallest
assistance. In short, I have lost my dear Arzelia. I know not whither she has
been carried! I stepped again into my carriage, and here you see me forlorn and
cruelly injured! -- What a fatal adventure, cried miss d'Anfort! -- and what do
you think of it? -- I can form no judgment whatever with any probability -- the
young man who insulted me was dead; I had laid him sprawling on the ground --
Who can then have taken away my poor Arzelia?

The unhappy baron yielded again to his grief, and we endeavored to console
him, but to no purpose: we could not pacify him, otherwise than by promising to
accompany him to the minister, to whom he intended to disclose the whole
affair, and who alone had it in his power to solve the problem.

In consequence of this promise, the baron, my stepfather (...) I, sat out on
the next morning for (...). The minister, who was at as great a loss as w^
(...) to exert every means to make a discovery (...) ^atisfied with that
answer, we returned to Paris, alighted before the Thuilleries, where count
d'Anfort begged us to stay, till he should have terminated an affair with a
person who lived in that palace.

While the count was gone, I and the baron walked about in the gardens. The
baron always repeated how grievous he was at his loss, and I endeavored, though
in vain, to dissipate his sorrow.

Night advancing, and the count not coming back, the baron, impatient of seeing
him, intended to enquire into the cause which detained him. Wait for me, said
he upon Pont-tournant; I am going to the palace. -- I know the person to whom
the baron went, and shall bring him back to you.

At these words d'Arceville advances toward the palace; the night began to be
very dark. -- I went to the place where he appointed me to wait for him.
Meanwhile I felt a secret uneasiness which I could not account for. -- Several
men of a suspicious appearance seemed to have dogged the baron and me all the
afternoon in the gardens. Now the baron having left me, -- the same people
followed me continually. -- What could they want -- did they suspect me of any
thing? Were they peace officers, or enemies who had formed a design upon my
life? -- Such were the reflections I made, and I was even going to speak to one
of them who was close to me, when a carriage stops: two men alight, join those
who followed me, stop my mouth, surround and throw me in the carriage, sit down
by me, and drive on with such haste, that I had no time to know where I was.

This is what I call the adventure of the Pont-tournant. Follow me, I pray: you
will hear of accidents of so extraordinary a nature, as will require no less
than the confidence you have in me to give them the sanction of your belief.

CHAP. VII.
THE DELIGHTS AND TORMENTS OF LOVE.

JUDGE of my fright and consternation! I question my guards: none of them
answer. -- Defenseless as I was, I could not make the least resistance -- I was
forced to wait in silence, the issue of so extraordinary an event -- But, how I
suffered! -- You may form yourself an idea of my situation, if you only put
yourself for a moment in my place.

As far as I am able to guess, we rode two whole days through the country;
because the doors of the carriage being shut, I could not see the cities, towns
and villages through which we passed. -- My guides offered me some victuals
which I refused to accept: I begged them again to let me know what they wanted
of me; but they were as mute as ever.

At last we stopped, and a moment after, the carriage passed under some vaults,
as I guessed from its hollow and rattling sounds. We alighted, in the dead of
night, in a spacious yard, before an edifice which had more the appearance of a
castle than a private house.

I ascended some steps, and entered a hall exceedingly well illuminated; here
the cloth was laid, and the table full of the most exquisite viands. One of my
guides asked me to sit down to supper. -- No, barbarous wretch, replied I; make
haste and strike your victim! We have no such thoughts, sir; will you please to
eat something?

Always supposing the servant's invitation to be ironical, I refused. He then
conducted me to another room, where the most dismal spectacle suddenly engaged
my attention. A coffin arose in the middle of the apartment, which was quite
hung with black. A few wax candles lighted it; an aged and ghastly figure of a
man, melting in tears, leaned on the bier. O my son! cried he, thou shall be
revenged, not by the just rigor of the laws, it would be too slow in serving my
fury. -- Barbarous stranger, I will punish thee in a manner -- Yes, I shall
strike thee with the same blow which has pierced my heart!

These words almost forced tears from my eyes! -- the old man hearing a noise,
looks around, perceives me, makes a gesture of amazement, and says to his valet
who conducted me to him, "Awkward fellow, -- What business have I with this
gentleman? How imprudent! -- Go, let him be re-conducted as you have brought
him." -- He looks once more about, then turns his back.

You cannot conceive how much these ^ew words calmed me! -- I, who believed
myself destined to be offered up a victim to the manes of that son I had never
known, saw myself at once freed from danger through a mistake made by the
servants! -- Oh, what comfort diffused itself in my heart.

My guide having laid hold of my hand, made me re-enter the parlor where the
table was so well served. He invited me a third time to take something. Now, I
would not have him repeat it again, being no more uneasy, and having not ate
since two days, I set down without ceremony to that singular table, and supped
with a very good appetite. The valet, who waited on me, expressed the greatest
contrition for his mistake; I wished from the bottom of my heart he would
accompany me alone, confident to get from him some intelligence of this
surprising adventure. -- It happened as I wished: they covered my eyes with a
blind; we both stepped in the same chaise which had brought me, and the
coachman followed the road to Paris.

I did not hesitate a moment longer to urge my companion to tell me what he
knew in respect to this affair; I begged and entreated, and concluded with
offering him my purse, a reward of an hundred lous d'ors, and a place in
my-house, if he would leave his master and satisfy my curiosity. The valet,
moved with all these brilliant offers, accepted them, and related the following
story:

"You must know, sir, that my master's son, on his return from Paris, was
attacked, near the city of Nevers, by a gentleman attended by a single lady and
a servant. The gentleman sought a duel with my young master, who in consequence
of it was left dead on the field, and his antagonist continued quietly his way
in his carriage. Being busy in lifting my young master from the ground, I could
only remark the carriage which fled with the murderer and a lady, his
companion. -- Quite disconsolate at this fatal event, I brought the corpse of
my master to his father, and told him the whole affair. After having given vent
to his grief, that unhappy father says to me, in a resolute tone, Will thou
know again the villain who has bereft me of my son? -- Yes sir, and his
carriage too. -- Well, then, let us set out.

"This said, he takes with him four or five servants; we get into a light
chaise and posted away with such dispatch that we perceived in the evening the
carriage we were in pursuit of, which could not go fast, because one of the
horses was wounded. We attack the murderer; he resists vigorously. My master
pierces him; he falls, uttering the name of his daughter. His daughter, cried
my master, she shall die! At these words, he ordered us to carry her off. We
were on the point of laying also hold of the father, when some horsemen in full
gallop made us afraid of being molested; we therefore returned to our chaise,
and safely conducted our prey to the castle. Since that time she has been
confined in a dark hole. My master, who spends day and night in bewailing his
son, will have her to be sacrificed upon his coffin. How savage! Oh! you don't
know him, sir, he is a man extremely cruel, violent, and revengeful. This is
not all yet; he has meditated a scheme of vengeance, a thousand times more
hineous. The day before yesterday, he gave us orders to go to Paris, to fetch
the father of that unfortunate young lady. Some of us having seen him in the
royal gardens of the Thuilleries! -- we watched him till night and probably
induced to a mistake by your shape or your dress, which was of the same color
as his, we carried you off instead of him. -- Wretches, it is Arzelia! -- O
heaven! proceed in your story! What did he want of that unhappy father? -- He
intended to reproach him with the death of his son, to stay his daughter before
his own eyes; and then, perhaps, to confine him for life in the dark hole of
his castle -- What a monster! -- Oh! my friend, I beg thee, if we can save
Arzelia, I will give thee two hundred louis d'ors, three hundred -- nay, my
whole fortune is at thy disposal! -- It is not an easy task, sir; but never
mind, we must make interest with the coachman.

That instant my man stops the chaise: we were then in a remote and solitary
district of the country. He therefore proposed to to the coachman either to
save Arzelia, or to prepare for immediate death. The proposal was very
categorical; the coachman consents to take the reward which is offered to him;
-- and we returned with the greatest expedition to the place from whence we
came, which was only at the distance of one league from Nevers. The night was
propitious to our undertaking. The two domestics enter the castle; the coachman
had the keys of the dungeon in which the innocent Arzelia had been thrown -- he
calls her, lays hold of her hand, and brings her to the carriage where I waited
for her with the greatest impatience. Every body being asleep in the castle,
the escape was effected without any obstacle.

How impatient was I to see the fair captive! -- she finally arrives with her
two deliverers -- we step into the chaise, and leave the place with the utmost
precipitation.

I shall not repeat the heartfelt thanks of the baron's daughter; her grief,
her misfortunes, her beauty, nay, all in her gave me the most tender concern: I
look at her and suddenly my liberty is gone; I felt a singular revolution in my
being. My eyes, my tongue, my heart, all my faculties are captivated. Surprised
at my situation, I search for the object which causes it, and as quickly
ascribe it to the concern I felt for her person: vague excuse of the heart,
which for the first time feels the power of love! indeed, what I considered as
an impulse of compassion, was actually the first shoot of a rising passion,
which was soon to maintain an imperious domination over my heart. The charming
Arzelia felt on the other hand, the same emotion. Whether from gratitude or
sympathy, she blushed, cast her beauteous eyes on another object, was afraid to
look in my face, and could only ask how her father did: this confusion, which
we felt mutually increased so much on the road, that when we arrived at Paris,
the least discerning eye must surely have perceived that our sentiments were
past beyond the limits of friendship. And such events have proved them
afterward.

Meanwhile I took care to send back the carriage to the cruel proprietor of the
castle, by a stranger, to whom I also delivered a letter. I wrote to Arzelia's
enemy in an anonymous manner, and without giving him any direction; I informed
him of my good fortune to restore a daughter to a father, signifying that
should he ever attempt the least method of revenge, he ought to tremble for his
life; as I had it in my power to surrender him to justice, being supported by
two individuals who had witnessed his enormities, and by the deposition of the
innocent victim whom he intended to sacrifice.

This was indeed the expedient I should have made use of when I first left the
castle, rather than to have liberated his prey by stratagem; but the remedy was
too violent, and I feared for the life of Arzelia, though ignorant as yet of
the great loss I would have sustained*

We found the hotel d'Anfort in the greatest consternation. The baron and my
guardian having not found me on the appointed spot, went home; but how
astonished was all the family, when the whole night elapsed, and I did not
return! -- Four days more glided in the same manner, and they receive no
intelligence from me! What could have befallen me? All enquiries proved
fruitless. The count, believing I had been murdered, shed real tears of
sincerity: his son had already worn out his grief: miss d'Anfort was quite
disconsolate; and the baron, bereft of his daughter, without hope of ever
seeing her again, had set out for the West Indies on the night before my
return. When he parted from Miss d'Anfort, he recommended her, his poor
Arzelia, if ever she should be brought to light again. -- You will be her
mother, added he, till heaven pleases to send me back to my native land! This
is the service I exact of your friendship. But what do I say? -- She is lost to
me, and to you also -- my Arzelia is lost! -- Ah! no doubt she is dead! -- The
monsters, who ravished her, have made her a victim of vengeance. Adieu! my
friends; far from this abode I will terminate my wretched career, the world is
a wilderness to me, since my poor daughter has been snatched from my arms!

The count and miss d'Anfort, who were also overwhelmed with a grief of their
own, tried, though in vain, to detain their friends: he sat out and left them
to their sorrow.

What must Arzelia have felt, my friends, when she heard the news of her
father's departure? As to my relations, the adventure which I related seemed so
singular to them, as to heighten their joy at seeing me returned. My brother,
alone, seemed not much moved; but my good friend Dulys! Oh! how he embraced me!
how he clasped me in his arms! -- O heaven! that deprives me of a father and a
mother! I had never tasted the sweets of parental fondness; -- but how did
friendship compensate for them!

Meanwhile, miss d'Anfort lost no time: the baron had given her his address at
the island of Orleron; whether she immediately dispatched a letter, with the
tidings of his daughter's return; he could not as yet have completed his
voyage, but must have received the letter upon his disembarkation, and his
sorrows were to be at an end. This conduct of miss d'Anfort calmed every mind.
Peace resumed her empire in the hotel; but it was not of a long continuance. My
brother did not see the fair Arzelia with indifference; ^e fell desperately in
love with her, and as enamoured eyes are more prying than the eyes of
friendship, he was the first aware of a mutual affection. Indeed, Arzelia knew
my sentiments: she had disclosed her heart to me; in short, we loved one
another, and were conscious of our passion! Dulys, who could not dive into the
mystery, w^^ made our confidant; in vain were all his remonstrances without
number, philosophy ceded to the violence of love; my friend pitied me; he
promised to do the utmost of his power to serve me; and repented the cruel
renunciation he had made me sign. It was too late, the count had the deed in
his own hands; he was my guardian, and maintained over me an authority which I
was not able then to shake off; on the other hand, I loved, I respected, and
always trembled before him.

Must I tell you, my friends? -- Love led us astray: I and Arzelia contracted a
clandestine marriage. -- A country house belonging to miss d'Anfort became
subservient to that purpose -- Thither we were gone to spend a few days. One
morning, the count, his son, and miss d'Anfort being asleep; Arzelia, her
woman, Dulys and I, repaired to the chapel of a convent, situate at the
distance of one league from miss d'Anfort's country seat. -- We made interest
with the priest; and an attorney was present at the ceremony.

Dulys and a friend of his served as witnesses, and we vowed eternal tenderness
to each other: inconsiderate measure! Ah! how dear have we paid for it!

The whole affair was consummated in less than two hours. At eight o'clock, we
returned to the house and found every body up. They made very merry at our
morning walk; blamed us for not having mentioned it the night before, as they
would have accompanied us; and here ^he whole subject was dropped: young
d'Anfort alone took umbrage at the proceeding. From that moment, he set people
to watch us, and soon he discovered, if not our clandestine marriage, at least
the intimacy which subsisted between us.

How enraged must he have been! he had been frustrated in all the declaration
of love he had made to my spouse; he detested me, he envied my property; in
fine he wished me to perform the promise I had made in writing: and he saw me
loved in return, and prepared for ties, to which the baron, at his return,
could not object, from a sense of gratitude which he owed to me, who had saved
his daughter from the jaws of destruction.

All the transports of hatred, jealousy, rage and vengeance, seized upon his
heart: -- he began with informing his father and aunt of all he knew, and
carried matters so far as to require them to put me in confinement, and to
throw Arzelia in a convent; -- violent and impracticable proceedings, no doubt,
but two moderate for the insult which he pretended to have received.

The count heard his son with all the coolness of a man of ripe and fair
experience; he represented to him the unreasonableness of having recourse to
similar extremities, and advised gentler means. The young man at these wise
counsels, wept, howled, plucked off his hair, and threatened to kill himself if
his father would not treat me with the utmost rigor and severity! The old man,
intimidated, consoled his son, begged him to discard his gloomy resolution, and
promised to do every thing. -- What weakness! In consequence, miss d'Anfort
received orders to speak to Arzelia; and the count proposed himself to take me
to task.

We were wholly ignorant of the chevalier's artifice; and I imagined our loves
were a perfect mystery! What was my surprise, when one day my guardian ordered
me to his cabinet, and addressed me with the following speech, in a prudent but
most passionate tone:

"I know all, sir, I know you adore miss d'Arceville, it will meet every
desired return. -- What is to be the end of that intrigue? answer me: a mere
piece of gallantry: it will not do! -- A marriage, you know, you have denied
yourself that state! What do you pretend, then, sir? If you have the least
sense of gratitude for the care I have taken of you, the least sentiment of
respect for the authority which your mother conferred on me, I command you
never to speak to that young lady, and to set out immediately for Besancon to
join your regiment in winter quarters. -- By that time your juvenile follies
will subside, and you will perhaps forget Arzelia, who is destined for your
brother! -- For my brother, sir? -- Yes, for your brother. He shall first have
my life! -- Imprudent young man! dare you to threaten him before his father? --
Do you know that I have it in my power to enforce means? -- Be what they will,
sir, I fear them not; Arzelia loves me, I adore her: and you can if you please
return me a premise which my age has invalidated. The promise is fair, the laws
shall decide it. Laws are not tyrants! -- You behave yourself disrespectfully,
audacious youth! Depart, fear my anger, or you are undone! -- But, sir, --
Depart, I say, or I Will make you obey!"

The count frowns at me, and leaves me to my grief -- I go out in hopes to see
my spouse -- I find her melting in tears. Ah! cries she, speak to me no more!
our life is at stake! Miss d'Anforth, I will sacrifice myself for you! only
wait my father's return.

This said, miss d'Anforth appears: they both step in a carriage and I see my
unfortunate spouse depart, without knowing whither she is conducted, or if we
shall ever meet again!

I kindled with rage; and I endeavored to follow the carriage; the servants
hinder me. -- I run up and down the house, called aloud for my brother, and had
he appeared, I believe his life would have been lost.

Nevertheless, heaven preserved me from that crime; it sent Dulys to be my
comforter. Dulys came, I told him all that had happened; and asked his advice.
My friend, answered he, I have no other advice to give you, than to obey your
step-father's commands; go, and stay for some time at Besancon. This will give
me time to do for you what ever shall be in my power: I will endeavor to
appease every mind: depart, my dear marquis, and leave to my care your
happiness. I shall discover the retreat of your spouse; I shall see her: she
shall hear of you, and an epistolary correspondence shall be established. We
have both been guilty of imprudence with regard to that fatal renunciation; but
it is not valid -- it wants a clause; -- it becomes useless to your tyrants. --
I Will convince you of it some other time, now depart; this submission will
perhaps have a better effect than your menaces.

I set out loaded with the reproaches of the count and miss d'Anfort. I arrived
at Besancon; and on the next morning received a letter from Dulys, purporting
that my wife was confined in a convent, in the Rue d^ Temple and that Miss
d'Antfort had cajoled and threatened her into it, that it was impossible to
speak to her, but time would soon be productive of a change.

This news overwhelmed me with despair; I answered my friend's letter, and was
a little more easy.

One day I received a very long letter from Dulys, which made me completely
miserable; I cannot help giving you some extracts from it, because nothing can
erase it from my memory.

My friend, miss d'Anfort has received letters from the island of Oleron, that
baron d'Arceville was dead! -- He was scarce arrived, but he received the
letter, purporting his daughter's return; his joy was so excessive that he
could only write these few lines, of which I send you a copy:

"Miss d'Anfort, I feel the approach of death! -- Take care of my daughter -- I
have no relations: be her mother -- You shall receive, by a faithful messenger,
a complete inventory of my titles and my property. Be my executor -- see my
daughter settled. Nothing but your friendship can excuse the weighty charge I
encumber you with. -- Adieu! I shall die more contented if I may hope that one
day you will unite my daughter with your lovely nephew -- this is my only wish.
-- But I am faint and in deadly anguish -- I cannot -- Receive, O my friend!
receive an everlasting farewell!"

That faithful messenger is arrived: he delivered into miss d'Anfort's hands,
property to a very great amount. Thus Arzelia must solely depend on her for a
maintenance. Alas! how I pity you!

P. S. I forgot to tell you, that miss d'Anfort, who doubted not a moment, that
the lovely nephew, mentioned in the letter of her expiring friend, could be any
other but her darling chevalier, has already made every preparation for their
marriage; he goes every day with his aunt to the convent in which Arzelia is
shut up, and, shall I tell you, he leaves it apparently much satisfied. I have
not been able as yet to speak to your spouse; either she does not read your
letters and mine, or she thinks them not worth answering."




By this letter Dulys ulcerated my very heart! Not that crossed love was a
sufficient torment, I was also to be laid on the rack of jealousy!

Another letter from Dulys I received, was as follows:

Unfortunate Marquis,
"All is prepared for the union of d'Anfort and Arzelia. -- It is inconceivable
to me, does she consent, it is impossible -- her bands are sacred! yet she is
always silent! No doubt this puts you to despair; but after all, I must not
dissemble; I must not, dear friend; -- I ought to reveal thy clandestine
marriage: my friendship expects thy commands to execute that commission."


At this, my friends, I could not moderate my trans-Ports! I doubted no longer
of Arzelia's infidelity, and resolved that instant, to set off for Paris.
There, said I, by myself I will discover my marriage, and seek redress from
justice of the laws.

I had now been eight months at Besancon, and compelled by duty to stay one
week longer. I fixed my departure for the Monday following. Having prepared
every thing on Sunday morning, I went, in the afternoon, to take leave of my
superior officers, and when I retired at night to go to rest, a singular
adventure happened, which cured me at once of my jealousy, and prolonged my
stay at Besancon: -- Hear it my friends, I am sure you would not expect it.

CHAP. VIII.
ALEXIS AND MRS. DULYS.

THE clock struck eight, when I reached my lodgings; I was gloomy, and absorbed
in thought. A woman shabbily dressed accosts me -- she seemed to be extremely
indigent. Sir, said she, in a weak and suffering tone, relieve me with some
little gratuity?

My mind was so much pre-occupied with other objects, that I rebuked the woman
without any farther reflection; she perseveres in her solicitations -- I rebuke
her again. I go, said she, but heaven will punish you! Heaven! exclaimed I,
what a resemblance! what a voice! Arzelia! Yes, ungrateful marquis! it is
Arzelia! -- I wished to see if you would know me. But how! -- in such an
appearance? To it I owe the bliss of seeing you again. It is a precious dress!
O, my worthy spouse, don't speak so loud, perhaps I Am followed!

Her supposition was just: she goes with me to my lodgings, sits down, and
gives me an account of what had happened to her, which my transports of joy
interrupted an hundred times.

"Forced by the advice and threats of miss d'Anfort, I followed her to a
convent, where she left me, giving orders to the mother abbess, not to suffer
any body to converse with me. The next day she came to see me again, and was
exact in her visits every subsequent day. I wish you had seen her in our
conversations, how she extolled the chevalier's merits, and every effort to
represent you as vicious. "My dear, said she, Corsange cannot marry you; he has
legally renounced marriage, and if he perjures himself, he forfeits an annual
income of two hundred thousand li^res. I hope you will not be his ruin.
D'Anfort will much better serve your purpose. He is a fine youth of eighteen,
well made, and his heart and mind are equally excellent -- moreover, d'Anfort
will be very rich: I shall make him my sole heir; with him, my dear, you will
be happier.

"This discourse roused my indignation; but I was too much afraid she would
guess our secret, had I then given her a decisive answer. From that instant,
Miss d'Anfort imagined she had conquered my heart for her nephew; and when she
informed me of the death of my father, she dwelt chiefly upon that passage of
the letter, where he ordered me, said she, to give the chevalier your hand. I
saw him every day with her, and they became so assiduous and intruding, that I
had scarcely time to peruse your letters: I dared not to answer them, lest I
should confide in a person that might betray me. The servant whom Mr. Dulys
sent might have been prevailed upon to take a bribe, and we would have been
undone. -- I had also another motive to be cautious against my tyrants -- dear
husband, I am pregnant! -- O God! Yes, my dear, I expect every minute to bring
to light that precious pledge: and this made me escape from my prison, and meet
you here! -- My dear spouse, how was you able to effect that escape? Oh, it was
a bold expedient! but it proved successful. -- An unfortunate and very poor old
woman came often to beg alms of the nuns; she conceived so great an attachment
for me, as to spend whole days in my apartment: I liked her, and was much
entertained with her wit and conversation. I thought her a fit instrument to
deliver myself from slavery. In consequence I told her my situation; and from
the concern which she seemed to feel for me, I requested her to change her
dress for mine, or rather to bring one like that she had on, and to lend me her
own. She agreed to my demand. Thus equipped, and fearing to bring the poor
woman into trouble on my account. I let her go out before me. When I saw
through my window, that she was at a good distance in the streets, I ventured
myself down stairs in the same dress, in hopes to make my escape. The good old
woman used to come to and fro so often in a day, that the domestics were
accustomed to it. -- I stooped, pulled my cap over my nose, and passing before
the porter, even took care to make a crooked bow, which made the fellow laugh.
Well, mother, said he, you just went out, how did you get in? -- Without losing
a minute by giving him an answer, I advanced, and as soon as I was in the
street, run as hard as I could to the post office, where I prepared myself to
set out without delay. The postmaster made some difficulty, but dazzling him
with my gold, he could no longer withstand my demand. I remained under this
disguise all the way, for sear of being discovered. Now I see thee again, my
dear husband, I am no longer grieved."

I embraced Arzelia, and begged her to take some sustenance. Meanwhile I feared
the pursuits of our tyrants. We of course determined to take other lodgings on
the next day, or rather to leave the town. But all these projects were
subverted by our friend Dulys, who entered our apartment in the dead of night,
and had but time to utter these few words: -- Fly, unfortunate couple, the
count and his son are at my heels!

Arzelia swooned: I went to her assistance, but so violent was the effect of
her panic, that she was delivered of a child! how embarrassing was my
situation! I had no light, my door was open, I take my little Alexis in my
arms! -- Several voices cry: Where are they? -- Where are they? Dulys leaves
the room, to keep off my tyrants. I attempt to shut my door. -- A man opposes
me, enters, in spite of me, tears the child from my arms, and endeavors to run
away. I become quite frantic, and suddenly take my sword: Treacherous d'Anfort!
Thou shall be punished! I pursue the man who carries off my child, overtake him
at the bottom of the stairs, thrust the steel in his body, and retake the
newborn infant. Heaven! what terror struck me! -- I heard a dying voice: Cruel
Corsange! Could thou slay thy friend, when he saved thee? It was the voice
of Dulys! it was Dulys I stabbed! -- O remorse!

Meanwhile this noise had spread the alarm among the servants of the inn; they
come up stairs, followed by count d'Anfort and his son! -- What must have been
my feelings, when, lights being brought, I saw Dulys sprawling on the ground,
and weltering in his blood! Heaven! that dreadful scene is still before mine
eyes! My guardian and his son are moved; they stop and raise the unfortunate
victim. He is put to bed; a surgeon is sent for, he gives us some hopes, by
assuring us that his wound was not mortal.

That scene of horror was not yet terminated: My spouse laid on the floor
bereft of her senses, my infant son, by her ^^de, shrieked lamentably; the
count and his son stood before me, ready to (...) from me the precious pledge!
I leave you to imagine if there can be a situation more cruel and embarrassing!
-- The count was the first who b^^^e tha^ (...) silence. Wretch, said he -- if
th^^ art not (...) with having butchered thy own friend, then (...); -- thy
^and, which made a mistake, was (...) to bereave me of my son! -- Ah! rather
plunge thy sword in his father's breast, and quench thy bloody thirst! -- What
has he done to thee? -- Thou alone have involved thyself into guilt! -- Thou
alone art the author of all our misery! I will pardon all -- I will forget all,
provided thou deliver into my hands that child, the fruit of an illegitimate
union? -- My son! ^^ay, cruel count, It would break his mother's heart!

The count insists upon my obedience; I fall in a passion: my rage, still more
aggravated at the presence of my brother, becomes excessive. -- My guardian,
who searing the consequences, resolves to withdraw; he takes his son with him,
and leaves me alone by the bed of my spouse, to whom I give every succor in my
power! -- Soon she opens her eyes; she sees me, demands her son, embraces, and
smiles at him. The unhappy mother was ignorant of my crime: I took care to
conceal it from her, and she knew it only two months after.

The count and his son remained at the inn as long as my spouse was forced to
keep her bed. They avoided seeing us, and we were rejoiced at it. Arzelia
nursed Alexis. Dulys, who was soon able to leave his room, and condescended to
pardon my mistake, took it upon him to find a proper nurse for my son, and had
him christened, because we could not keep him with us: uncertain, if we should
be suffered to live together. Our marriage was void by law; the count had a
right to have it dissolved; but, on the other hand, he was much at a loss to
prove the legality of the deed he had made me sign, because a gentleman of the
law who had been consulted, convinced him of its nullity, because it had been
made in haste, and by an ignorant attorney. I certaintly promised never to
marry; but then I was only twenty, and it was necessary that I should ratify
the promise when I came to be of age. As such, the deed would have been valid.
The count, who knew all this, endeavored to intimidate me, though he was
conscious that it was out of his power to hurt me; as for my own part, I was
afraid lest he should dissolve my marriage; we were, therefore, forced to adopt
gentle means on both sides.

The day before my departure from Besancon, he entered my apartment alone:
"Corsange," said he you are still dear to me; I loved your mother: she has
entrusted you to my care; she ordered you to obey me as you would have obeyed
her; and even to grant me all your confidence. Undutiful son! -- Have you
respected her commands? -- You have contracted a clandestine marriage, and
violated the most sacred engagements! Hear me, I will be candid with you: I am
old; folks at my age are ambitious; I ought to have that ambition. -- I cherish
the most lovely son, his fortune and advancement lies closest to my heart; but
you disappoint my hopes. It is your brother! -- Who can be dearer to you than
he? -- Did you but love each other, I would be happy. In a word, love and
interest have separated you; make me happy again: O! my second son, make me
happy again* -- Respected sir, it is my earnest desire; but, what sacrifice do
you exact of me? "Hear me; your marriage is illegal, of this you cannot
entertain the least shadow of a doubt. -- I have it in my power to dissolve it;
but I will not have recourse to extremes. Live with your wife: I permit it; but
give me up your son, dear Corsange, and be sure that I shall train him up with
the tenderness of a real father: the only thing I require, is to conceal from
him forever his name and family. This complaisance in you will insure you the
possession of your spouse, and I promise to destroy the deed which now is in my
hands. You know I can ruin you, and make you an object of poverty and disgrace.
Consent to your happiness, dear friend. -- Every day you shall see that son;
but never shall he know his father: this is the sole restriction I wish to lay
him under."

The old man's discourse was captious; but it could not dazzle me. I pryed
instantly into his policy, and was sensible that should I be so weak as to
yield up the offspring of my union, my spouse would be snatched from me in the
same manner, and that my compliance would become a manifest disavowal of the
dearest titles conferred on me by nature and love; besides, was it not, perhaps
disposing of my son's life? I did not fear the count; but the chevalier was, in
my opinion, capable of every crime; nevertheless, I found it then seasonable to
dissemble. I seemingly acquiesced in my guardian's design, and promised to put
my child under his care, after our return from Paris, where Dulys kept him
under his protection. D'Anfort, calmed by my ultimatum, communicated it to my
brother, who was equally satisfied; so that we all four sat out with apparent
content. Arzelia, who considered it as the sum of wretchedness to be parted
from her son, seconded my views, and we both hoped to find some subterfuge for
not delivering our Alexis into those cruel hands, which intended to deprive us
of what we held dearest on earth.

What was our grief when we arrived in the metropolis! Dulys! my dear
unfortunate Dulys was no more! The fatigues of a premature journey, and the
embarrassments under which he saw himself for our sake, had brought on a slow
distemper; his wounds re-opened, he ^ad just given up the ghost in his mother's
arms, to whom he had wrote, and who left Dreux with the greatest precipitancy,
to come and close the eyes of what was most dear to her in nature! -- That
woman left the house of the relation where she had put her son to board,
immediately after the death of the latter, and without doubt she returned again
to the country. -- What had then became of my son? -- Who could tell me where
he was?

An old housekeeper of that relation, who had observed my grief, and heard some
exclamations, took me in private one day: "Sir, said she, are you not uneasy
about a little child?" Alas! my good woman, could you give me any intelligence?
"Here, sir, my master's nephew entrusted me with this letter, a moment before
his death, and ordered me not to give it to any person but you." I hastily took
the billet, and read in it these words, traced by the most generous friend, by
that friend I had murdered! -- Judge of my remorse!

Cruel, yet ever dear friend,
Be no^ uneasy about your son: You will find him at Vitry, in the house of Mary
Vincent, his nurse: I had him christened by the name of Alexis Corsange. -- You
will find it so in the parish book of the church of Vitry; but believe me,
bring him up secretly, and make your tyrants believe he is dead; this is the
last advice of your expiring friend Dulys -- He might have been able to render
you more services still dearer to his heart, if your hand -- But I grieve you,
I sharpen the sting of your remorse. -- Pray forget me, and forgive yourself my
untimely end, as I forgive it you! All that I am sorry for is, that I must
leave you unhappy in this world. -- Alas, pity me not, I am happier than you!"


I imprinted a thousand kisses on this letter, and admired my friend's
generosity, who had still my interest at heart, even when my barbarity caused
his death! -- How all this aggravated my guilt! How I abhorred myself! --
Arzelia shared my sorrows, and we both gave tears to the most feeling and most
generous man, who, perhaps ever existed on earth!

Meanwhile, I was determined to follow the last advice of Dulys, and, however
repugnant I found it to dissemble, I yielded to necessity. In consequence, I
and Arzelia spread the report of the death of our friend and the child; and our
sorrow, of which Dulys was the sole object, appeared so natural to count
d'Anfort and his son, that they believed it, and made no farther enquiries.

We lived five years in our hotel, Rue de Richelieu, not without finding that
the count and his family had for us a great regard. In compliance with their
request, I and my spouse inhabited each a different apartment. I might as well
have freed Arzelia from that restraint; but the fear of a lawsuit, which we
should have been forced to stand, in order to have our marriage confirmed, made
us wait till the death of the count d'Anfort should remove that obstacle.

I was afraid of going too often to Vitry; I entrusted my son's nurse with the
secret of his birth; and lest the little innocent should betray himself one
day, I had him brought up by the name of Alexis, and would not permit the least
hint, with regard to his family, should be given him. Thus I hoped to enjoy the
sweets of a tranquil life, when a certain circumstance came to rouse my
prudence, and overthrow all my projects. I was one day walking with the count
and his son, in the yard of the hotel, when a milk-maid, who came from the
kitchen, stops, stares at me, and cries out with a naivet^, which she could not
refrain; O lord! -- Is it possible there can be such a likeness between them!
What do you say, good woman, asked the chevalier? I say, my lord -- I beg your
pardon! -- O good God! -- if he was his father! Whose father? Why, we have a
little child at Vitry -- he is an orphan, and such a pretty boy! he is
absolutely like my lord there! Sure, the woman is mad, replied I -- What is
there to be wondered at? -- Many folks resemble each other. I beg your pardon,
my lord; -- my little Alexis! he is so pretty! -- Ah, you cannot think.

The milk-maid was going to continue her chat, which wounded my soul, I take,
without ceremony, the father and son, to another part of the premises, and
endeavor to change the subject of the conversation; but my confusion had
betrayed me. A ray of light came to illuminate their mind; they began to
suspect the cheat, and growing cooler by degrees, left me, no doubt, to consult
what measures they should adopt in that conjuncture. I was fortunate enough to
read their design in their eyes, and, without losing time, I mount on
horseback, fly to Vitry, take away my son, and bring him to the Royal Botanical
Garden, neither knowing what to do, or where to hide him. It was twilight, and
not chosing to pass through the streets of Paris with so precious a treasure, I
determined to enter the garden, and concert some means of conduct in my present
dilemma. I was sitting on the turf, in the little grove; my son was in my lap;
I bathed him in my tears, and pressed him to my heart, when an old lady stops,
looks at me, and addresses me as follows, in so moving a tone, which tore my
secret from me, even in spite of myself. Alas! my dear sir, are you the father
of this pretty child? Yes madam. What a lovely little creature! -- But you
weep, have you met with some sinistrous accident? Oh! I have indeed! Well, it
must be consolatory for you that you never met with so many as I! -- May Not I
know the nature (...) your misfortune? but I beg your pardon! I was (...) once,
and still should me, had not death (...) from me a most amiable son! -- Ah! let
flow my tears for a moment, and then I will endeavor to dry yours? Madam it is
a secret! Oh, you can safely trust me; I am a stranger in this city; I have
only been in it two months; and, besides, who knows? I may be able to render
you some service: I am alone, I have neither husband or children; I am
absolutely solitary, without acquaintance; and without the least wish of having
any -- Speak, I beg, speak, my dear sir? -- I am concerned for you -- I feel a
very singular concern! -- Generous stranger, what could you do for me? Whatever
lies in my power. Well, then, please to save that child from those cruel
wretches, who will ravish him from his father! Who will ravish him from you?
Ambition, the covetousness of a brother! I understand you -- Oh, what a pity!
-- Is this child your natural son? No, he is the offspring of a lawful union;
but alas, that union is crossed by unfeeling relations. Pray, is it not a
clandestine marriage? Yes, that is our only fault. A fatal misfortune it surely
is; but it should not be punished with death. -- Give me the child, I will be
his mother; I will bring him up; Poor innocent babe! he puts me in mind of my
son's age! Was he born in Paris? No, madam, in Besancon. How long since? five
years. Five years! Good God, you must have lived there at the same time when my
son -- O cruel remembrance! Your son! Have you known him, sir! he was sweet,
amiable and generous! Alas! he was barbarously murdered! Murdered? Yes by a
fellow-collegian! What was his name? Dulys; did you know him? A little, madam*
Have you heard of his case? I shall never forget it! Pray, could you give me
all the details of it. Madam, I beg -- In pity excuse me! These were the self
same words he told me when he expired in my arms: he was at Besancon to render
some service to a certain marquis de Corsange, whom he many times had mentioned
to me in his letters. A giddy headed young nobleman with whom he got acquainted
at college, began a quarrel with him, and run his sword through his body! is
not that the real account! It is much like it. My son added, that he would have
bled to death of his wound, had it not been for the marquis de Corsange, whom
he always described as a good-^^tured and humane young gentleman. Ah! Heaven!
What do you bring to my remembrance?

This conversation, my friends, overwhelmed me with shame and confusion! To
claim the support of a woman, who is the mother of the friend I have immolated!
The mother of the friend whose proceedings were most generous! Far from
denouncing my guilt to his family, he had that grandeur of spirit to mention my
name only to be my eulogium. O God! I was then in one of those indescribable
situations which can only be felt.

Mrs. Dulys seeing me turn pale, asked me the reason of my confusion. I
answered her, that I was that marquis de Corsange, whom her son had so
advantageously pourtrayed in his letters. Mrs. Dulys expressed the joy she felt
at seeing me; invited me to step in her carriage, and begged for an account of
my adventures, promising to take every maternal care of my son, from that very
night.

The sting of remorse was going to make me commit an indiscretion; but after a
mature deliberation I began to think better. I would not therefore undeceive
Mrs. Dulys, as such an avowal would not only have kindled her wrath and
indignation, but have hindered her from undertaking to conduct my son's
education. Such a dissimulation laid, however, hard upon my feelings. After
having related the story of my misfortunes, and entreated her to take every
care of my Alexis, and above all, to conceal from him his real parents. I
withdrew, after having received assurances of friendship, secrecy, and an
implicit observance of my injunctions.

CHAP. IX.
THE FATHER OF ALEXIS CONCLUDES HIS NARRATIVE.

THE count's whole house was now in confusion: The chevalier, my inveterate
enemy, just arrived from Vitry; he had threatened the good nurse in such a
manner, as made her confess the whole affair. He heard, that a few minutes
before his arrival, I had taken away my son, but was ignorant of the place to
which I had conducted him. Having therefore had a council with his father and
aunt, they unanimonsly resolved, that Miss d'Anfort should conduct Arzelia to a
castle, situate in the environs of St. Germain, and there keep her a prisoner
till I should have delivered up my son, the object of their common hatred and
pursuits. I was not informed of this new disaster, till the two ladies were
gone. Nevertheless, Arzelia found means to send secretly a few lines to me, in
which she hinted that it was time for us to free ourselves from the control of
our tyrants; she also sent me a gold repeater, which she begged me to look at
every hour, that I might remember her.

We were really intimidated to the highest degree: Why should not we have
courage to shake off the chains in which our three cruel tyrants held us
fettered? -- Indeed, the fear of seeing our marriage dissolved, retained us;
this apprehension, and the deed of renunciation which I had signed, and of
whose invalidity we were still ignorant, bade us so much defiance, that we even
dared not to consult a lawyer, for fear of making ourselves liable to a
lawsuit, whose final issue we considered as very fatal.

Thus I was forced to bear this separation, without making the least complaint;
but I found means, by the adroitness of suggestion of Mrs. Dulys, to inform my
spouse my Alexis was safe. At night, when every body had retired to rest in the
hotel, I mounted my courser, and fled to the castle d'Anfort, near St. Germain.
An avenue of trees conducted to its entrance, and was covered with gravel. I
contented myself with tracing in large characters upon the gravel the word
well! I set out immediately after, reached the hotel before day break, and went
to bed, not to incur any suspicion. Every morning, Arzelia left the castle,
under the pretext of a walk, for which she chose the avenue, alleging, that
she liked it better than the park. There she read what I had written over
night, and sometimes made use of the same expedient to let me know her
thoughts. It was utterly impossible for her to write, or to find means of
conveying letters to me, because miss d'Anfort never left her an instant. Thus
we lived, till the moment when I sent my son to the college of Navarre, where I
put him under your care, Mr. Dumont: I saw you; your physiognomy announced an
honest man, and you have not deceived me! -- It was then that affairs took a
different turn at castle d'Anfort.

Miss d'Anfort, who could not conceive how I could live parted from my spouse
without seeing her, even without enquiring after her, (for she was ignorant of
my nocturnal excursions) began to let her enjoy more liberty: she changed her
lodging, and assigned her another more gay and pleasant, in the front of the
first yard of the castle, quite adjoining to her own. This made my spouse
invent a scheme of receiving me by night, unknown to every body. It was a bold
stratagem; and the more ludicrous, as we made it succeed. After a written
instruction of the intentions of my spouse, which she flung over the walls, I
behaved in the following manner.

Miss d'Antfort used to send every day to St. Germain, a large covered cart,
laden with the sundry productions of her garden. James, the driver, a simple,
harmless boor, sold them upon the market place, and returned to the castle
every night at twelve. It came into our mind to make use of that man to procure
ourselves without his knowledge, the pleasure of seeing and conversing with one
another, and for that end concerted these measures:

Champaign, my valet, disguised himself one day as a countryman; he knew the
inn at St. Germains, where (...) put up every night; thither he repairs, enters
in conversation with him, proposes a bottle, and makes him boozy. At midnight,
James wants to return; I will accompany you, answers Champaign, for I have now
to go a league beyond the castle. While they are on the way, the clown leaves
the cart a hundred yards behind him. I mount and squat in it. Before the gate
of the castle, Champaign wishes his comrad a good night. Will you come this
way, in the morning? asks James. Yes, at four o'clock. Aye, we'll go together
to my mistress's great kitchen garden, it is not a quarter of a league from
here, I take my cart there every morning, I spend the day with the gardener,
and in the evening I go to St. Germain, where I get very good customers for the
garden stuff. Well, if that is the case, we'll meet often, because I come this
way every day.

Our men part, James conducts his carriage into the yard, unteams his horses,
takes them into the stables, and goes to bed. He is no sooner gone, than a
woman makes her appearance, and comes to me in the cart. It is Arzelia! What
transports! What charming and painful moments! We could only entertain
ourselves with the tale of our woes. At three in the morning, Arzelia returns
to her apartment. James comes back, puts his horses to the cart, and carries me
back as he brought me. Champaign stands waiting for him at the gate: mutual
civilities are passing; and, drinking is the favorite topic. Whilst they enter
a public house de^^ched from the highway, I jump out of the cart, and run to a
neighboring inn, where my trusty Champaign soon comes to join me. We both mount
our horses, and reach the hotel before six.

You must grant, we exposed ourselves much! Well, we carried on the stratagem
two whole years, with as much success as on the first day. Honest James even
contracted such an intimacy with Champaign, that he would be sorry to have
missed him a single night. This my Alexis is the enigma of the gold repeater,
of which I made you a present; and, which I could not explain, without coming
to such illustrations, as necessity required us both to avoid.

Now, my son, I shall make a digression to relate the catastrophe which made me
be so barbarous to you; it was the instrument of my present happiness. You
shall see how forcibly maliciousness operates upon a feeble heart, at the same
time naturally inclined to suspicion.

Before I enter upon my narration, I ought to particularize the events
secondary to it: events which did not reach my knowledge till long after. Count
d'Anfort once having a restless night, rises with an intent to walk about the
premises; a mere motive of curiosity leads him toward the stables; he is
surprised to find the door open, and still more surprised upon entering, to
find my own and servant's horse missing; What is all this? is Corsange fled?
The Count wakes all the domestics, intimidate them by his threats, and is
informed that I leave the hotel every night, and do not return till six in the
morning. The count, who wanted no penetration, suspects me of going to St.
Germain, and of having apparently found means to get access to my spouse. His
indignation is kindled, he calls his son; both mount their horses, and reach
the castle about seven. They fail not to load Miss d'Anfort with a thousand
reproaches, though the poor lady knew not why. Equally fired with indignation,
she promises to use all efforts to bring the matter to a discovery. James had
often mentioned among the domestics, his good friend, who went every night with
him to St. Germain, treated him with wine, and returned each new morn to regale
him afresh. Miss d'Anfort suspected, that this good friend of James, could
perhaps be myself or one of my men. She ordered James an escort of two tall and
stout laborers for the ensuing night -- These have orders to seize James's good
friend, and bring him before her. These orders are executed: -- Champaign is
caught, and brought before that old demon, who knows him at first sight. After
many threats and offers of reward, she tears from that faithless valet, a
confession of our nocturnal interviews: -- she also inquires for the place
where my son was concealed; but Champaign can give no satisfaction on that part
of his examination, because, fortunately it is the only thing I have concealed
from him. Miss d'Anfort, in a furious transport, meditates a cruel revenge, and
easily prevails upon that sordid wretch to become her accomplice. Oh heaven!
why are there souls so base as to become tools to the criminal maneuvers of
the great, though ever sure to fall either sooner or later victims of their
guilt. This was the lot of Champaign.

Not suspecting their horrid designs, I arrived at St. Germain at the usual
hour, and was not a little surprised at finding neither James nor my valet. --
I enquire without any ceremony, and am informed they went away half an hour
before my arrival. Amazed at what could make them be in such a hurry, I advance
to the gate of castle d'Anfort, and stand waiting. Half an hour after, out
comes Champaign. Ah, sir, said this wretch, I bring sad news for you! How so?
The countess had me called up by James, and told me this: Go Champaign, go and
tell the marquis that I am heartily tired of the slavery in which I am held for
his sake. I beg him not to see me again, and forthwith he need not think of me
any more, because misfortune forces us to part. O heaven! -- Is it possible? I
wish to God it were not! -- but, my dear master, to give you a convincing
proof, I can show you the present she made me, to acknowledge, she said, the
trouble I had taken. "Here, Champaign," added she, "here is a purse of
twenty-five louis d'ors, rely always on my gratitude; but have nothing more to
do with this affair. All is over, I am determined to leave the marquis forever!"

I leave you to think what impression this discourse of Champaign made upon me.
-- Far was I from susspecting his treachery; and, besides, his report, as to
appearances, had too, much the tincture of truth, that I should have called it
into question. -- Grief overwhelms me; I break forth in reproaches and
imprecations upon the perfidious Arzelia, and return home with a bleeding heart.

Two days after, I receive, by a servant of miss d'Anfort, a billet from my
spouse, to the following purport:

"All is over, my friend: follow the only reasonable advice I have in my power
to give you; it is to fly from me till heaven please to dispose matters more
favorably."

This laconic billet confirmed me in my fatal opinion; I imagine that Arzelia,
impatient of slavery, would break her chain and renounce me forever! -- What
inconstancy! -- what perfidiousness! For several months these cruel ideas have
haunted my fancy, and I got rid of this situation only to be involved in a more
deplorable one! Champaign, (for he was always deputy) accosts me one morning,
and, with a most boding and dismal air, says: Alas, sir, how will you stand the
blow I am going to strike? What blow? Gather all the energy and strength in
your soul to hear me! -- Arzelia -- Well, Arzelia -- has proved faithless to
your bed. Faithless, traitor! -- dare thou? Yes, sir, your friend Dulys, who
is dead, had gained her graces and affections. Villain, tremble! Don't be in a
passion, my good master! I can prove it, prove it so as to strike you into
conviction! -- James, whom I see every day, and who is now in our interest and
confidence, has found two days ago in the place where Arzelia has been sitting,
this portrait and this letter, which he saw her kiss several times.

I was quite crest fallen, when I really saw the portrait of Dulys, and at the
bottom, the following words, in my wife's own hand writing: Him I shall never
forget! Gods! What a ray of light strikes the horizon of my understanding! -- I
hastily peruse the letter, it comes from Dulys himself; I know his hand! --
What are the contents?

"Take care to conceal the secret from every eye, most worthy and beloved lady!
-- Let this offspring of the most faithful union, be delivered to me alone. --
Prevent every suspicion of the marquis -- his passion might be productive of
the most fatal effects -- indeed, who is entitled more than I to the right of
receiving that lovely infant! Farewell, I have given you full instructions! --
Take care, above all, that nobody discovers our secret correspondence."

An hundred times I re-peruse that fatal letter; I look for expressions which
might destroy my suspicion, I only find such as serve to confirm it! -- For,
consider well! -- was it not a manifest proof of the treachery of Dulys and my
spouse? Such a letter, and from my friend's own hand; for his hand it was, and
I had well examined it. -- Suddenly, I recollect the speed which Dulys made to
reach Besancon, his zeal in snatching the child from my arms, to carry it to
Paris, as it were, without my consent, and to have it christened and educated
there! Add to this, the silence of my spouse in the convent, and the very
letters of my friend, which seemed to have no other tendency, than to alienate
my own heart from Arzelia; all this was like so many proofs to corroborate the
self speaking evidence before my eyes! -- She never told me, that she had the
potrait of Dulys in her possession, -- All these reflections made such an
impression upon me, that I found my affections suddenly detached from my spouse
and son. Methinks a veil dropped from mine eyes jealousy fired my weak heart,
and I was foolish enough to go and ask my guardian questions on that subject,
he having so often railed at me for my confidence in Dulys, and the intimacy
which I suffered him to keep up with my spouse. The count is a man of sound
judgment, said I; he is incapable of base calumny! -- I was upon the point of
going up to his apartment, when I saw him come toward me. Pray, what means
that kind of a tomb, said he, which your spouse has erected in a grove of her
park? -- My sister made me remark it: -- What, is Arzelia going mad? How, a
tomb? Yes, indeed, one would think she is a widow! -- She spends right and day
before it, moaning and uttering the name of Dulys! Yes, Dulys: he was a rare
friend, I declare, well may she be sorry for him; but, by the bye, she carries
her sorrow too far.

When the count had said these words, I withdraw for fear of hearing more, and
my heart wrung with grief; I retire to my apartment, weeping most bitterly! --
Every thought adds to my despair. When Arzelia spoke of Dulys, it was always
with such warmth, with such animation -- he was the pattern of men, the most
amiable and most perfect of mortals! -- Alexis owed him his preservation, etc.
all seemed to evince the possibility of Arzelia's crime.

At last, my friends, I formed the barbarous project of getting rid of Alexis,
who, on a sudden, became odious to me; nothing could move me, neither his
strict resemblance of me, which I deemed the effect of hazard, his tenderness,
nor his virtues! -- I sent for Mr. Dumont, to meet me in Luxembourg gardens,
and you know the orders, I gave him.

Thus I lived for a considerable time without seeing my wife, or even without
enquiring after her, and, my tyrants, to whom I had owned my having parted with
the child, yet, without telling them what had become of him, were tolerably
satisfied with the apparent success of their stratagem, till one day I saw them
both come home very much fatigued. We have seen him, said the chevalier to me,
his eyes glancing with fierceness, we have seen to day Mr. Dulys' son! Where?
In the royal Botanical Garden -- He is very tall! but, brother, as you are so
sure that he is not your son, why do you suffer him to be thus in Paris? What
is it to me where he is? Very true, but is not he christened by your name? he
may discover you some day, and force you to acknowledge him for your son; put
him out of the way, join with us, we will send him to the West Indies. To the
West Indies! -- Never! Whence that blind tenderness? -- he is either your son,
or a stranger's! But sir, what proof have I that he is not my son? Why did you
reject him, then? Alas, I don't know -- who will explain me that cruel enigma?

You see, my friends, I was always wavering between doubt and certainty -- You
tremble! you detest me! well, I deserve it! This circumstance of my history
does me no honor: it is my crime, my only crime! it will ever be my torment!
Happy if my spouse and son will ever condescend, if not to forget it, at least
not to call it to my remembrance?

When I left the count and his son, I perceived they had some project. -- My
tenderness for Alexis returned and as I never lost sight of him, I engaged that
same Champaign, that monster of a traitor, to carry him a letter and purse from
me. Whether or not Champaign followed my advice, I know not. Nevertheless, the
instant you left the capital, the count and his son had already got notice,
that you was going to Valence. Is it possible for a man to be thus cruelly
deceived?

Meanwhile, the crisis approached which was to decide my fate, and re unite
Arzelia with her ungrateful spouse!

Long since, miss d'Anfort had fostered a tender inclination for me. This
particular, which I have forgot to mention, has been partly the cause of all
our misfortunes. That vindictive and jealous termagant had declared her passion
twenty times; and twenty times I treated it with indignation, and contempt. Her
passion, my disdain, my union with Arzelia, all had rendered her my deadly
fiend -- so that she took delight to be our torment, and used every effort to
bring me to the point where she desired to see me.

On the evening of the same day, when you left Paris to go to Valence, I was
never more astonished than to see her alight at my house! she, who kept my
spouse a prisoner in her castle; she, in a word, I considered as more
despicable than her brother and nephew. My dear Corsange, said she with an air
of sweetness, I doubt not you are surprised at my visit; I come to do you some
service; only hear me.

I know all; the count and his son have seen Alexis in the king's garden; you
have ordered him instantly to ^uit Paris; he has taken the road to Dauphiny; in
short, I know all; but what you don't know is, that my brother has this very
afternoon obtained a littre de cachet from the minister, to have him taken up
with his preceptor for two vagabonds, and as such they will be sent to the
Bastile -- Heaven! -- Stop, I will save them, if you choose. Pray, h^w? How,
ungrateful man! -- don't you guess what I mean? Promise me to answer the
sentiments you have inspired in me; I will set ou^ with you for Valence, and
hope, by the authority I have upon my brother, to hinder him from executing
that cruel order. How, madam! They are just gone to Valence. But what a
barbarity! -- Without my consent? Let us not lose a moment; I have got a post
chaise waiting below. -- Let us join them. -- I have used all my endeavors to
break their resolution, but to no purpose. Ah, madam, what concern can you have
for a child, which is fully proved not to be my own? Very true; I have forced
Arzelia since to own it; -- but that youth is only unfortunate, and not guilty;
ought we to undo him? Madam, I don't go to save him, but poor Mr. Dumont, his
worthy preceptor, who is involved in his misery! What, will you suffer him to
be carried off? Let him depart, be his fate what it will! -- but that honest
man, who is attached to him much! -- Well, let us set off, my dear; you do
well! -- Let them exercise their rage upon Alexis, and we will save the honest
man in question.

So great was my perplexity, and so importunate miss d'Anfort, that, without
further reflection, I slept in the post-chaise; miss d'Anfort places herself
next me, my footman and Champaign mount behind, and the possition whips away.
It was but some time after I perceived my companion. -- I expressed my
surprise, but she answered me with smooth language, and promised to discomfit
all their intentions by her bare presence, and to save the innocent Dumont from
the hands of our enemies.

I observed silence, and sighed all the way. I hope, my friends, you will look
with the eye of pity upon my barbarous conduct toward Arzelia and Alexis, and
lay the guilt upon the authors of that infernal plot, who have taken the
advantage of my weakness. I shall, therefore, draw a veil over my conduct at
Valence, which I hold in horror and detestation.

Meanwhile, the count and his son had suffered some delay on their journey;
they only reached Valence after me, where, to all appearances, they did not
find Alexis. Enraged in the idea of my having saved their victims, they pursued
me in my way to Lions -- my chaise is overtaken; Champaign who was behind,
betrayed us, and that very instant I saw myself surrounded by a set of
horsemen; among others, by the count, his son, and an Exempt of the Police with
a proper escort. Traitor, cried I to the chevalier, convinced of his coming to
carry off Dumont, "Coward! what has that poor gentleman done to thee? --
Alight, I must either have thy life, or thou mine!"

That instant we began a bloody combat, in which I see my dear Dumont drop.
Champaign, who attempted to disarm me, is slain by my hand, and my brother
himself shares his fate -- the cruel chevalier drops down lifeless! -- The
Exempt and his followers rush upon me; I am bound, hand cuffed, thrown in my
chaise between miss d'Anfort, who had fainted, and the count, in despair, who
loaded me with threats. The dead were taken up in haste, and thrown in the
other chaise; but whether from the obscurity of the night, or from terror and
consternation, my poor Dumont was left on the field, the mistake was discovered
some time after; but, upon returning to the fatal spot, they ^ound he had been
taken away!

We proceeded to Paris, where I was thrown into an obscure prison, and my trial
for the wilful murder of the chevalier d'Anfort was soon brought forward. I
know not how it would have ended, but that Arzelia, upon receiving the tidings
of that fatal catastrophe, went and threw herself at the king's feet. She gave
the monarch an account of our adventures, who was moved, and promised to do her
justice. The count and I actually received orders to appear before his majesty.
Each of us exposed his own case; and that gracious prince, moved to tears,
granted me his mercy and pardon. He would not confine his clemency to this
only; as sovereign, he was most graciously pleased to order my renunciation to
be torn, my marriage legalized, Alexis acknowledged, and, if ever I should be
so fortunate as to find him, Louis enjoined me to present him at court.

Count d'Anfort alone was unhappy; he was exiled to one of his castles, his
sister followed him, and we, loaded with royal favors, dispatched several
faithful emissaries in search of Alexis.

How incensed was I against myself for my fatal jealousy! That portrait (...)
dear to Arzelia, was only the pledge of her regard and gratitude for all the
services rendered us by the (...) faithful friend! That letter which he had
written to her while she was confined in the convent, was the mere effect of
his zeal and delicacy. Dulys said, if Corsange comes to know that he is father,
his passion, already too violent, will not keep within the bounds which
prudence exacts in so cruel a juncture; in consequence, he made provision to
have Arzelia delivered of Alexis, at the house of a female acquaintance, near
the convent, from which he had planned her escape, previous to the birth of my
son. In short, the generous Dulys had done all for me, and I dared to insult
his memory, in accusing him and my spouse! -- Oh! how often have I blushed at
this crime -- how often have I felt the most gnawing remorse!

This, my son, is the secret of thy birth -- Thou have (...) the tale of
misfortunes, which thou have longed (...) much to know, and which then would
only have served to aggravate thy grief, or so much spirit thee up to some rash
or imprudent deed. How the times are changed! -- Now, thy father presses thee
in his arms, thy mother smiles on thee, and thou returnest their tender
caresses! O, my friends! O my Alexis! how happy am I to have been able to bring
back thy Clara, thy lovely Clara! Mr. Du Monay who put her under our care, knew
nothing of our adventures. -- That friend, whom we had known in Paris, before
his office of receiver-general of the king's farms, obliged him to fix his
residence at Marseilles, knew certainly something of our misfortunes; but we
had never made him an entire confidant of the whole; not that he was unworthy
of it, but because we wished to keep in our breasts secrets, the very
remembrance of which overwhelmed us with woe.

Now come, my Alexis, come to the feet of a feeling and humane king and
sovereign! -- it was he who protected us, it was he who saved us from the just
doom of frowning justice -- and it is he who will be still thy benefactor and
support! -- Ah! happy would I be, if the venerable Candor were pleased to unite
you with his daughter; and would thus unite in happiness beings whom dire fate
has so long and cruelly persecuted.

CHAP. X.
ALEXIS AND THE COTTAGE CHANGE NAMES.

THE marquis de Consange concluded his narrative, and all his hearers, who were
singularly moved, began talking in diverse ways upon events of so extraordinary
a nature. Unfortunate father, said the generous Dumont, you have been unjust
indeed; but how has misfortune soured your temper! -- The wretch suspects every
thing; once deceived, he thinks he always will be. The continual habit of
sorrow irritates his nerves, and renders him passionate, hard, even dead to
feeling! Obliged to be distrustful against every body, he believes every body
will hurt him^^ Such is my point of view, my principles and philosophy.

Per lo caro Giesu, replies Carlo, that philosophy is good for nothing. Nothing
can bid defiance to the machinations of the wicked: prudence in such cases
frequently draws you into their snares: certamente, it is wiser to fly from
them entirely, than to avoid them, by watching their motions! You are right,
said the marquis; better would it have been for me and my spouse to have fled
from our tyrants, and to have left a house. -- You could not, Signor Corsanjo!
You will pardon me, sir, I could have done it very early in the beginning. Eh,
no, perch, you was to suffer all those misfortunes! it was to be, it was
written -- predestination! Oh, predestination breaks in Alexis, are you going
to begin your nonsense, Sciocco? Pardonate mi, tenero padrone: -- have not you
yourself approved of it? How, pursues the marquis, does Mr. Sciocco think that
all that happens to us has been prescribed? Si veramente Signor. Let him run
on, father, replies Alexis: -- he will sometimes only talk nonsense. His moral
dogmas are very nonsensical, my son. Upon that footing there would be no
criminals, every body would excuse himself by predestination! -- Heavens! what
an error! -- have you imbibed those prejudices, my Alexis? No, my father, but I
entertained others of a different cast. Speak, then* give me an account of your
adventures from the time you left the cottage. -- You must have been concealed
in some dark corner of the globe, because I had searches made after you
throughout the kingdom. I was not concealed, father. Listen all to me, my dear
friends, and you too Clara. -- I will soon cure you of the unjust suspicions
you had against me, with regard of my connections with the wife of the jailer
of St. Marcellin, and Sophia of Marseilles.

Alexis satisfied their curiosity, and when he had done speaking, the marquis
and marchioness embraced him again. They were all satisfied, Duverly and
Dorance alone observed the profoundest silence. Duverly, above all, seemed to
be struggling with black ^^^pair. The narrative of the marquis had stolen ma^^
a tear from his eyes; and Dulys' good faith and generosity were so many lessons
which upbraided him for his past crimes: he dared not to look at any one of the
company, and seemed to wish to hide himself from his own self. Dorance had pity
on him. Unhappy man, said he, here is thy daughter, durst thou give her that
sweet name? Yes, I shall dare, answers Duverly! -- Yes, I shall give her that
precious name; but not before I have avenged thy cause! Avenged! Yes: soon.

At these words, Duverly draws his sword, and goes to thrust it in his body.
They all prevent him! Dorance, Dorance himself, who had just thirsted after his
blood, seized the murderer's steel, and flings it far from him. Dorance, what
do thou? My duty, ungrateful friend! -- The misfortunes of the marquis and
marchioness, my own, nay, experience, the greatest of all teachers, in short,
every thing shows me what passions are! -- They made me commit many imprudent
actions, and thee they have led to crimes! What say I (...) I am more guilty
than Duverly: this hand -- my spouse -- my son! -- But I will pardon thee more
than myself: Unite thy Clara with my Alexis; and let Hymen put the seal to our
reconciliation.

He says, and holding forth his hand to Duverly, sees the latter fall
precipitately to his feet; he seizes his beneficent hand, besprinkles it with
his tears, and utters the most woeful moans: the whole company join with the
unhappy Duverly. Dorance himself, at last, cannot withhold his tears, he
mingles them with th^se of his repentant friend, and they are now clasped in
one another arms, and both so moved, as to make it impossible to distinguish
the offender from the offended!

O divino spectaclo, cries the Italian, O augustie delle vicende humane! What
hand does conduct you! -- What being, great, sublime, and magnanimous, leads
thus mortals to happiness upon a stormy sea! How I can call myself happy! -- An
idea just starts in my mind! Signori Cavalieri, per gratia? -- doubtless you
will quit this dismal retreat, to live united in Paris. -- Oh, give me that
dear cottage, cede it to me. Here, in a brown (...) with a girdle about my
loins, my days will (...) in tranquillity and happiness, and you will come fro^^
time to time to see the good hermit -- the travelers will stop to see me. I
shall receive them, show them the cottage, and tell them: Here is the place
where love and nature have long sighed; travelers, learn the forgiveness of
injuries, and the respect due to the great author, who alone knows the order of
things, and the law of events.

This sally of Sciocco excited the laugh in every one of the company: but Carlo
was like to be angry; when he remembered that laughing was one of the sweetest
pleasures of man, and ingrafted by nature: ^his fermentation, therefore,
subsided, and he joined in the general joy.

All our heroes were happy; they spent several days in viewing the different
departments of the cottage, and afterward all set out together for Paris; the
good-natured Candor and his old servant, regardless of their hoariness and
infirmities, would be of the party. In consequence, all the apartments of the
cottage are carefully locked, the draw bridge is secured, and the journey
commenced.

How pleasant was this trip! all was buried in oblivion: neither complaints nor
reproaches were heard any more! All countenances were serene like all hearts,
and the happiness of seeing Alexis presented to the king, became the general
topic.

Arrived in Paris, the marquis and his son repair immediately to Versailles --
they arrive before the king! Alexis trembling, dares not look up. Is this your
son, Corsange? his majesty asked. Sire, it is he! He looks very shy, -- Young
man, be good-natured, modest, discrete, and I will never forsake you! Suppose
we begin to give him a regiment; what do you think, marquis, we shall see how
he will manage it! Sire, all the blood in his veins is at your majesty's
service. He ought to imitate the example of his grandfather, who died in my
father's service! -- He was a brave commander. I have known him myself, and am
not ashamed to own, that fighting by his side, I have learned to be a soldier.

The king spoke to them for some time longer with ^he most condescending
familiarity, and the commission of a colonel being made out, and signed for
young Corsange, his majesty dismissed them, loaded with praises and benefits.

A few days after, the young colonel and his Clara stepped to the altar, and were
joined together in holy matrimony! how dear had they purchased that happiness!
Alas, if it must be paid with so many crosses can we envy our mortal lot?

Meanwhile Duverly, always agitated by remorse, fell dangerously sick, and soon
expired in the arms of his friends, after having begged a thousand pardons of
Candor, who regretted him sincerely. On his deathbed he made a will, by which
he constituted the colonel and his lady, sole heirs to his considerable estate,
which he had much improved in America, where he had been resident fifteen
years. He neither forgot to settle an annuity upon the good John Picot, whom he
bad so unjustly charged with theft, at the Dolphin inn at Lions. Signor Carlo
had also a share of his property, for which he failed not giving thanks to
Providence, who had so favorably conducted that event.

Candor, also bent under the superior weight of age and infirmity, soon after
died composedly, and without a groan: Alexis closed his eyes, and bound himself
to execute his last desire. The old man had ordered in his last moments, his
body to be transferred to the cottage, to repose near the ashes of Adela and
his son. Therefore, with the permission of the rector, in whose parish he died,
Colonel Corsange, his lady, their children and friends proceeded to Grenoble
with the remains of their late friend. Upon their arrival, the corpse was
deposited for a while in a cathedral, till proper preparations could be made in
the cottage for its reception.

On the day following, thirty workmen were employed to rebuild the cottage: two
wings, and another story were added to it; the windows were made wider, and
decorated with balconies. Over the mysterious subterranean they built a chapel,
which was soon consecrated by the bishop of Grenoble. The form of the garden
was also changed, but the rivulet, the little bridge, the grove, and the great
poplar tree were suffered to remain. In short, the young couple left nothing
unimproved. They surveyed with pleasure and emotion the theater of their loves
and adventures. How sweet is the remembrance of the times when we were happy!
-- When we see places that have been dear to us, the heart dilates, and the
sight wanders to and fro, with a real sensation of delight!

Thus the little rivulet, the bridge, the grove, and poplar tree, were the only
objects not altered in the garden; all the remainder was transformed into a
magnificent park, and the cottage into a sumptuous and splendid castle. There
was but one room in it, left in its original state. It was the chamber in which
Alexis slept the first night of his residence in the cottage, and in which he
was so much frightened, when he heard the key turn to lock him up, and from
here he saw, through the window, funeral rites performed by Candor under the
great poplar tree. Clara's husband was fond of that room: and ordered his books
and musical instrumens to be placed in it.

When the inside was completed, the outside was also embellished, the draw
bridge was pulled down and a new one constructed, the fosse was bordered with a
fine breast wall, and before the entry to the castle, a fine avenue was opened
and prolonged as far as St. Marcellin.

So diligent were the searches made in the forest of Chamboran, that within a
month's time, the greatest part of the robbers which infested it were
apprehended* Several precipices and caverns were filled up with stones and
earth. Thus this place once so gloomy, sad, and dangerous, became in a little
time a real pleasure-garden.

When all was completed, ready, and in proper order, the remains of Candor were
placed in the chapel, next to those of his unhappy family. The colonel and his
lady returned to Paris, leaving the marquis and marchioness at Castl^ Corsange,
where their presence was required by some additional improvements they designed
to make.

The motives of the colonel's return to Paris were some regimental concerns:
two days after his arrival a man, in a very shabby dress makes his appearance
at his hotel; the porter would drive him away, but the stranger insists upon an
absolute necessity of speaking to the colonel, and demands immediate
admittance. The servants, tired of his importunate behavior, inform their
master of his obstinate request. The sensible Alexis runs quickly down stairs;
trained up in the school of adversity, could he reject the unfortunate!

He accosts the stranger. Don't your honor know me? asks the man. No, my
friend; yet I recollect to have seen you somewhere. Please your honor, to
recollect well. It is useless, I cannot now. Have not you been brought up at
the college of Navarre? Yes: Don't you recollect the beggar you one day took
into your apartment to explain to you a watch! Oh lord, is it thee, my good
fellow? The very same, an' please your honor: I then foretold you what has
happened since, and I dare say, you remember how I told you, If you are happy
one day, you shall see me at your door.

Alexis was quite (...) with amazement; he actually (...) fortune telle^ who
had explained (...) in so singular a manner, that now since the (...) ^ad been
explained to him, he found the man had told him the truth. Well, good man, how
did you come to know the change of my fortune? From the public accounts, an'
please your honor; your misfortunes and your father's are known to every body,
so the report must have reached me too. Well, my friend, I am happy, and so
shall thou be; yes, thou shall be happy too!

From this moment, Alexis received the poor man in his service, and had never
reason to repent it afterward: the man had been a soldier, some foolish trick
made him desert, and he was always sorry for it. The colonel obtained his
pardon, received him in his own regiment, and made him immediately a
quartermaster.

Alexis would not confine his generosity and gratitude to those only who had
obliged him: he received also Vincent, who had been his man while he was yet at
college, among the number of his domestics. Even young d'Erreville felt the
effects of his beneficence. The reader must recollect this fellow student who
introduced Dumont and his pupil to his father, whose secretary had robbed them
in the plains of Belleville. D'Ereville had lost his father. His mother had
since been married to a giddy young blade, who had ruined her, and, that he and
his sister were obliged to live on the fruits of their industry. D'Ereville was
recommended by Alexis, to an excellent place in the ammunition office, and his
sister was married much to her advantage. Alexis ruminated if there was nobody
else whom he might have served: he forgot nobody, and was cherished by all, but
especially by his king, who soon raised him to the most exalted station.

Clara lived happy, and became mother to many children. She was as good a
mother, as a tender and faithful spouse.

The marquis and marchioness lived with their children to the latest and
happiest winter of life.

Mr. Dumont, the friend of Alexis, superintended the educatian of his sons; he
had renounced his prejudices against mankind, by the habitual intercourse with
the upright and virtuous.

As for poor Carlo Sciocco, I am sorry to inform my readers he went as mad as a
march hare, by sounding too much the metaphysical straights, and being not
satisfied respecting the equilibrium of things, he would even scrutinize their
nature, and the laws of the equilibrium. There were moments when he fancied all
the saints in paradise before him, to reveal him, the principle of perfect
harmony. Alexis, who was extremely sorry to see him in such a condition, put
him under the care of some subaltern officers, paying them a considerable sum
to board and maintain him.

John Picot was made keeper of Castle Corsange, where Alexis and his family
spent a certain time every summer; yet, notwithstanding its recent splendour,
and magnificence, Alexis and Clara were better pleased with walking in the
grove, or along the banks of the rivulet; that happy couple would never forget
their former residence in this rural seat, and would always call it their
Cottage in the Woods.

FINIS.

