A JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM, CONTAINING The TRAVELS of Fourteen Englishmen in 1667,
to the HOLY LAND, and other MEMORABLE PLACES noted in SCRIPTURE.

TO WHICH IS PREFIXED, MEMORABLE REMARKS upon the Ancient and Modern state of
the JEWISH NATION.

TOGETHER With a Relation of the GREAT COUNCIL of the JEWS in the Plains of
Hungary, in 1650, to examine the SCRIPTURES concerning CHRIST. -- By SAMUEL
BEERT, an English Gentleman there present WITH An Account of the wonderful
DELUSION of the JEWS by a FALSE MESSIAH at SMYRNA, 1666.

Collected by R. BURTON.

HARTFORD -- PRINTED BY J. BABCOCK. 1796.

A JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM, etc.
I. A Description of the HOLY LAND, its situation, fertility, etc.
CANAAN is situated in Asia Major, or the greater Asia, one of the most famous
provinces of Syria; called by several names; as 1. The land of Canaan, from
Canaan the son of Ham, the son of Noah, who by his often chasings, was driven
to possess and inherit the same. 2. The land of Promise, because God had
promised it to the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and their posterity.
3. Israel, of the Israelites, from Jacob, who was surnamed Israel. 4. Judea,
from the Jews, or people of the tribe of Judah. 5. Palestin, by Ptolemy and
others, or the land of the Philistines, a potent nation that peopled part of
it. 6. The Holy Land, as the country in which the holy people dwelt, who had
the law, the promises and the priesthood, and so denominated by the Christians,
because herein was wrought the work of our salvation by Jesus Chirst, our
blessed Lord and Savior.

This country is seated in the middle of the world, between the third and
fourth climates, about 52 degrees north to the Equin^ctial Line, the longest
day being fourteen hours and a quarter; situated between the Mediterranean Sea
and Arabia, from which it is bulwarked beyond Jordan with a continual ridge of
mountains, which secures it from the burning air of the deserts of Arabia
Petrea, and Celo-Syria, that lie on the East thereof; as Idumea, the wilderness
of Paran, and Egypt on the south; part of Phenicia and Mediterranean Sea on the
west, the mountains of Libanus, or Lebanon, and the other part of Phenicia on
the north. It extends from 31 to 33 degrees; so that in length from Dan to
Beersheba it is not full two hundred miles long, nor does the breadth exceed
fifty (reckoning a thousand paces to a mile) and the whole circumference does
not exceed four hundred miles. A country so fruitful, that the scripture tells
us, it was a land that flowed with milk and honey, and the glory of all lands.
The salubrity of the air is excellent, the northern mountains keeping the
colder blasts at their due distance, and the midland sea sending thither its
refreshing breezes. This being that which the scripture usually calls the great
sea, for the Hebrews were little acquainted with the ocean, and so they gave
the name of sea to lakes, or any large conflux of waters. The winter is neither
too cold, nor the summer too hot. The inner part of the country is diversified
with beautiful mountains and Hills, advantageous for vines, fruit trees, and
small cattle, and the delightful valleys are watered with a great number of
torrents, beside the river Jordan. The rains fall very seldom, and are very
regular, coming in the spring and autumn, which the scripture calls the rains
of the morning and evening, considering the year as a day. In summer the
abundant dews supply the rarity of the showers. The very rocks produce
abundance of fruits and sweet springs. The pleasant pastures feed great numbers
of all sorts of cattle, and the cows give the best milk in the world. And all
kinds of beasts and fowl are to be found in abundance.

And though some authors write, that we must not judge of the Holy Land by what
is seen at this day, being now fallen under the dominion of the Turks and
Arabians, who by their continual wars and ravages, have made it almost desolate
and a desert, and like a place forsaken of God. Yet the late travelers assert,
that we ought not to believe the reports of those pilgrims, who arriving at
Joppa, from thence up the hills to Jerusalem, and then back again to the sea
for fear of the Arabs; whereas others who have been more adventurous, and have
had the courage to trace through the body of the country, have given far more
advantageous accounts of it, than the other who have only footed it over the
mountaneous tract of Judea, which was never reputed famous for beauty or
fruitfulness. These travelers tell us, that though the face of the land be
somewhat deformed for want of cultivation, by the barbarous infidels, and may
possibly in part groan under the heavy curse of God for the sins of its former
inhabitants, yet some of the verdure and features of its ancient excellencies
are still scattered here and there, as testimonies of its former glory; as
particularly in the region of Galilee, in the northern parts whereof stands a
pleasant range of mountains by the name of Lebanon, containing a valley of
fifty miles in length, and twenty-five in breadth, in the midst whereof is the
fair city of Damascus, about six miles in compass, fortified with a wall and
double ditches. The country adjacent is so exceeding fruitful, that for the
deliciousness thereof it is called the Garden of Eden to this day, and the
plains thereof are the most admirable prospects that any eye can behold upon
earth. And Mr. Biddulph, an English divine, traveling over a mountain near the
sea of Galilee, found it extreme pleasant, and so bespangled with a variety of
flowers among the green grass, that they seemed as it were to laugh and sing,
as the psalmist expresses it. All the way they traveled that day, the hills
and valleys were extraordinary fertile, according to the description of Moses,
Deuteronomy. viii. A land of brooks of water, of fountains, and depths that spring out
of valleys and hills; a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees,
etc. The fields of Bashan, or Bethshan, in Samaria, were the like* and coming
to a place called Jenine, or Engannim in scripture, they saw very fine gardens,
orchards, and springs of water. And north, of Lidda, n^^r the cas^le of Angia,
in his province, they entered a goodly forest full of tall and delightful
trees, intermixed with fruitful and flowery vales, so that nothing could be
more entertaining, and perhaps the whole earth cannot produce a more pleasant
prospect.

In Judea, between Rama and Jerusalem, are exceeding sat pastures, about six
miles in length, and the rising hills are mixed with fertile valleys. The
valleys of Rephaim, Eshcol, and Jericho, are very pleasant, except those
adjoining to the sea of Sodom, and the country in general is highly praised by
those who have traveled most extensively in it, and many places described as
exceedingly delightful. And though this blessed land lies in a hot climate,
equal to some parts of burning Barbary, yet by rea^^n of the mountains,
valleys, springs, and rivers, and a western sea, it is a moderate country
compared to those in the same latitude.

The fruits of the lands are principally these, ^alm, honey, spices, mirrh,
nuts and almonds; nor is their wheat, nor oil, to be forgotten, with which they
trade in the market of Tyrus; nor their barley, rice, pulse, melons, cucumbers,
figs, manna, frankincense, citrons, fennel, sage wild in the fields, and onions
thrice as big as any of ours, very pleasant and of no offensive smell, but
comfortable to the stomach, and therefore may give us a hint why the Israelites
so much desired them. Also mustard, which is the least of seeds among garden
plants, and yet brings forth the largest body, especially in the eastern
parts, of which the Jewish Talmud relates one or two stories: As that there was
in Si^hem a stalk or trunk of a mustard tree which had three branches, and one
branch was broken off to cover a potter's shed, under which he formed his
earthen ware in summer time, and that from this branch was taken the quantity
of twenty-four figs of mustard seed. Again Rabbi Simeon asserts in the Talmud,
that he had in his garden a mustard stalk so big, that he used to climb up as
into a fig tree. Buckorf relating these passages, avouches not for the full
credit of them, but only shows that this plant was of a large growth in these
parts, and may confirm the letter of our Savior's parable concerning it. The
mountains of Judah and Ephraim were places of great vineyards, and the relation
of the spies which Moses sent, who brought that prodigious cluster of grapes
from Eshcol, is a sufficient evidence of their largeness, if compared with
those of Spain, France, or Italy. Around Jericho there were palm trees of vast
revenue, through their sudden springing up after they wore lopped, and it was
the only part of the world where true balm was to be found. The mountains
likewise produce gold, silver iron and copper mines. And there seemed to be
nothing wanting in this Garden of God that was necessary either for the use or
delight of mankind.

The fruitfulness of the country, and the care they took to cultivate it, may
make us conceive how that being so little, it could nourish so great a number
of men; besides, the Israelites were but little employed in maritime affairs,
to furnish themselves with foreign wares, which very much confirms the
wonderful plenty of this land, and it is a country full of hills, which renders
it much larger than a level champain country.

By the degrees of lattitude, St. Jerome reckons that from Dan to Beersheba it
is not two hundred miles, and that the ordinary breadth of the land is about
sixty miles; but to them that travel up and down its hills and dales it will
extend much farther. These observations may strengthen our faith to believe all
that the scripture says of this holy land, and its numerous inhabitants,
notwithstanding it is confined within such small limits as we have mentioned.
When the people first entered that country under Joshua, there were above six
hundred thousand men bearing arms, from twenty years old to sixty, and we read
in Judges, that in the war of Gibeah the only tribe of Benjamin, the least of
all had an army of twenty-six thousand men, and that the rest of the people
amounted to four hundred thousand: King Saul marched with two hundred and ten
thousand against the Amalekit^s, when he extirpated them. King David kept
continually on foot twelve bodies of twenty-four thousand a piece, who served
by months, which was in all two hundred and four score thausand men, and in the
numbering of the people which brought the anger of God upon him, there were
found in this small compass of earth, fifteen hundred three score and ten
thousand men in Israel and Judah which drew sword, and were fit for war,
besides the men of Levi and Benjamin, and besides the women, children and aged
persons, and besides the strangers and heathens, and the remainder of the
Philistines which were not fully rooted out at David's time, none of which were
inserted in Joab's list, 1 Chronicles. 21.5. Neither was the muster of Jehoshaphat
much disproportionate, for although he had not much above a third part of
David's kingdom, yet he maintained several bodies of very good troops, which
altogether made up eleven hundred and sixty thousand men effectively, without
reckoning the garrisons that were in his strong holds, 2 Chronicles* xvii.

However in all this there is nothing incredible; for beside the indubitable
authority and veracity of sacred writ, which ought to be unquestionably
believed and attended to, we find the like examples in common history: The
great Thebes of Egypt raised seven hundred thousand brave soldiers of its own
inhabitants alone. At Rome, in the first year of Severus Tullius, being the
hundred and eighty-eighth year from its foundation, there were counted four
score thousand citizens able to bear arms, and yet all these subsisted in the
lands adjacent to Rome, and whereof the most part is barren and uninhabited;
for their dominions extend no further than eight or ten leagues: But herein
consisted the policy of the ancients, that instead of invading and disturbing
their neighbors, they endeavored to people and manure their country, whether
little or much. They studied to render marriages happy, and life easy, to
procure health and abundance, and to raise from their land all that it could
produce: They exercised their citizens by labor, inspired them with the love of
their country, of union between themselves, and submission to the laws: This is
what they called policy.

These maxims perhaps some will say are very pretty, but let us come to
particulars, and show how it was possible so small a country as Palestine
should nourish so great a number of men. An acre of good land bringing forth
five quarters, a comb, and a bushel of wheat, will feed four men for a year,
allowing each two pounds and six ounces of bread every day, which is about
three bushels a month, and thirty-six bushels a year to each man; but since our
Israelites were great eaters, let us allow them double the nourishment; that is
to say, four pounds twelve ounces of bread a day: Thus an acre will be
sufficient to feed two men; and by this account we shall have land still
remaining: For a league square makes five thousand six hundred and twenty-five
acres, by reckoning three thousand geometrical paces in a league, five feet in
a pace, twenty feet in a rod, and an hundred rods in an acre. The kingdom of
Judea was at least sixty leagues in length, and about twenty in breadth,
counting the length from east to west, and might support twenty millions of
people: So it was easy to levy twelve hundred thousand sword men in a country,
where all people bore arms, and still to have corn to sell to strangers toward
the purchase of cattle; for if the flocks that country produced did not
sufficiently furnish them with wool and flesh, we need not doubt but that
tributary strangers brought them many cattle. Jehoshaphat, besides the tribute
of money which he exacted from the Philistines, received from the Arabians
seven thousand five hundred rams, and as many goats, and there are other
examples of the like tributes: Add to this, that the Israelites lived frugally,
and that all the good land they had was carefully manured; since there were few
woods, they had neither parks for hunting, nor avenues, nor bowling greens, nor
grass plats. We see by the canticles of Solomon, their gardens were full of
fruit trees, and aromatic plants: and the mildness of their climate required
but little trouble to furnish lodging and raiment, according to their simple
custom. To this we may add, that the Jews in their greatest glory, under David
and Solomon, possessed countries far more extensive than Canaan; their
dominions extended from the Mediterranean Sea to the river Euphrates, and from
the Red Sea, near to the Black Sea; which was the accomplishment of the promise
made to the Patriarchs, of giving their feed dominion from sea to sea, and from
the river to the end of the earth.

II. The several captivities of the Jewish Nation, after they were possessed of
the land of Canaan.
THIS happy country was divided into thirty kingdoms, or principalities, when
the Israelites, under the conduct of their captain general, Joshua, by the
command of God, made a conquest thereof, most of the ancient inhabitants being
for their abominations excluded out of the land or destroyed by the sword of
the Israelites, who afterward governed the country by rulers and judges, till
the time of Samuel, being about four hundred years. These rulers, or judges,
were not all of one tribe, but the most ancient, grave, and prudent men were
chosen out for this government under which the Almighty had placed them. At
their earnest request, that they might be like other nations, the Lord
appointed the^ a king, and so their government was changed from a theocracy, or
government appointed by God, so that of a monarchy, under which they continued
from the year of the world 2909, to the year 3416, during which space of time,
by their repeated idolatries, oppressions and other great crimes, they provoked
the Almighty to bring them into bondage under several foreign princes, who were
ambitious to incorporate that happy land with their own; and at length by
persecuting and putting to death the saints and prophets sent them from God,
and crucifying the son of God, the Lord of Glory, and the Savior of mankind,
with their murderous hands* and finally wishing that the guilt of his innocent
blood might fall on them and their children, they brought their government and
country to utter ruin and destruction.

The Israelites were ten times led into captivity, four times by the hands of
Sanherib, or Sennacherib, four times by Nebuchadnezzer, once by Titus
Vespasian, and once by Adrian, Emperor of Rome, as it is recorded in scripture,
and according to the account of Josephus, with other historians.

The first captivity was by Sanherib, who invaded the land, and transplanted
the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, he took away also
the golden calf which Jeroboam, the son of Nebat had made; he carried the
Israelites into Helan, Habor, to the river Gozan, and to the cities of the
Medes. This captivity was in the time of Pelah, the son of Remaliah, in the
year from the creation of the world 3263.

The second captivity happened soon after, for Hoshea the son of Ela who
remained, slew Pekah, the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, and then became the
servant and subject of Sanherib seven Years; then came Sanherib the second
time, and carried away the tribes of Asher, Issachar, Zebulon and Nepthali, of
whom he set free one out of every eight, he also took away another calf that
was in Bethel.

The third captivity was in the reign of Zedekiah the son of Ahaz, in the forth
year of whose reign Sanherib came and entrenched about Samaria, besieging it
three years, and at length took it, in the sixth year of the reign of Hezekiah;
so he led away the Israelites that were in Samaria, and the tribe of Ephraim,
and the rest of Manasseh.

The fourth captivity was by Nebuchadnezzer, who having reigned eight years,
made war against Jerusalem, bringing with him the Clinteon Heretics out of
Babylon, Ethiopia, Areim, and Sephirvaim. And in Judea he took an hundred and
fifty cities in which ware the two tribes of Judah and Simeon, which he carried
with him, and caused them forthwith to be sent into Halan and Habor, until the
king of Ethiopia rebelled against him whose kingdom was on the Southern part of
Egypt. Then taking Simeon and Judah with him, he made war with the Ethiopian
king. So the holy and blessed God placed them in the dark Mountains. Thus in
these four captivities the ten tribes were carried into banishment by Sanherib
and Salmanasser. There remained yet of Judah an hundred and ten thousand, and
Benjamin an hundred and thirty thousand in the city of Jerusalem, over whom
reigned Hezekiah. Moreover Sanherib, or Sennacherib king of Assyria came out of
Ethiopia against Jerusalem again with an army of one hundred and ten thousand
men, but the holy God overthrew them, for the angel of the Lord smote an
hundred eighty and five thousand in one night. This slaughter was in the
fourteenth year of Hezekiah, in the year of the world 3294. From which
overthrow till the time that Nebuchadnezzer invaded the Jews, to the reign of
Jehoiakim were an hundred and seven years.

The fifth captivity was in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, when Nebuchadnezzer,
came the first time and carried away 3023 of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
and seven thousand of their most valient men of the tribes, whom they bound in
chains.

The sixth captivity was about seven years after, when Nebuchadnezzer came unto
Daphne, a city of Antioch, from whence he carried into bondage four thousand
six hundred of the tribe of Judah, of Benjamin fifty thousand, and of the other
tribes seven thousand, and trasmigrated them into Babylon.

The seventh captivity happened about nine years after this; for in the 9th
year of the reign of Zedekiah, Nebuchadnezzer in the 10th year of his reign
came the third time to Jerusalem, and overcame Zedekiah, he burnt the temple,
took away the pillars, the brazen sea, and the furniture that Solomon had made,
and all the vessels of the house of the Lord, and the treasures of the house of
the king which was in Jerusalem, and sent them all to Babylon. He likewise slew
of the Israelites nine hundred and one thousand, besides them that were slain
to revenge the blood of Zacharias. The Levites stood singing a song whilst
slaughter was made of them, but they were not able to finish it before the
enemy entered the temple, and found them standing in their places with harps in
their hands; therefore he carried away in this captivity 600 of the Levites,
who were of the seed of Aron, whom when the Gentiles had brought to the rivers
of Babylon, they demanded of the Jews, Sing a song of Sion. Whereat the priests
gnawed off the tops of their fingers with their teeth, saying, how shall we
sing a song of the Lord in a strange land? And the blessed Lord, says
Josephus, (seeing they would not sing a song) enlarged them, and placed them on
the further side of Sambatia. Nebuchadnezzer likewise carried away eight
hundred and thirty two thousand, and made Akiham ruler over the rest, who was
after slain by Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, whereupon the Israelites being
afraid, fled from their country into Egypt in the year of the world 3416.

The eighth captivity was in the twenty seventh year of the reign of
Nebuchadnezzer. He took Egypt and Tire, drowned the Jews that were therein, and
the nations which descended of Ammon and Moab, and of the land bordering upon
Israel, and led Jeremy and Baruch, with him into Egypt, with four thousand six
hundred persons more. The Israelites that remained alive in Egypt departed to
Alexandria, where they soon increased to many thousands, having their
sanctuary, altar, offerings, incenses, houses, studies, schools, in great
numbers, and in a short time grew very rich and powerful. But wicked Troganus
made war upon them, and slew very many of them. These are the eight captivities
of bondages which befell the Jews during the standing of the first house or
temple. Seventy years after the desolation of which, Cyrus king of Persia, sent
to Nehemiah, Zerebabel, Baruch and his whole society to build the second house
or temple. Then Ezra went from Babylon with forty thousand in his company, and
the Israelites were afflicted under Cyrus for thirty three years, being exposed
to the affronts and calumnies of their enemies, and ready to have their throats
^ut upon the least orders of the great king, as ^^pears by the cruel edict
which Haman obtained against them and the direful effects from which they were
preserved by Esther. Unable were they to finish the building of the temple till
20 years after their first return, and it took them up above sixty three years
more to complete the walls of Jerusalem, which was fourscore years in
re-establishing. After which, during the rest of the Persian monarchy, they
lived very peaceable in a kind of republic, governed by the highpriests and
the council of seventy-one elders.

Alexander, king of Macedon, having destroyed the Persian monarchy, reigned
twelve years, and then dying, four usurpers succeeded him, who afflicted the
Israelites an hundred fifty-eight years. Then the sons of Asmonani came and
slew those usurpers, and taking the dominion from them, reigned themselves an
hundred and three years. Then ruled one Herod, a servant to A^^ona^^, who
killed his masters and their whole family, save one maid whom he loved: But she
climbed up to the top of an house and said, There is no body left alive of my
father's house but I alone; so she cast herself headlong from the top of the
house and died, Herod laid her in honey, and preserved her for the space of
seven years dead. After him, Herop Agrippa, and Manazah, his nephew, possessed
the kingdom an hundred and three years. And thus have we the four hundred and
three years wherein the second house or temple stood before its fatal fall.

The ninth captivity of the Jews was under the conduct of the Romans. When the
Jews having made the full measure of their guilt run over, by putting to death
the Lord of life, God's judgments, according to their deserts, and our blessed
Savior's prophecy, quickly overtook them. For a mighty army of the Romans
besieged and plundered the city of Jerusalem, wherein by fire, famine, sword,
intestine discord, etc. eleven hundred thousand people lost their lives. An
incredible number it seems to be, but may command our belief if we consider
that the siege began at the time of the passover, when in a manner all Judea
was enclosed in Jerusalem, all private synagogues then doing their duty to the
mother temple, so that the city had more guests than inhabitants. Thus the
passover first instituted by God in mercy to save the Israelites from death in
Egypt, was now used by him in justice to hasten their destruction, and to
gather the nation in a bundle to be cast into the fire of his anger.

Besides those who were slain, ninety-seven thousand were taken captives; and
they who had bought our Savior of Judas for thirty pieces of silver, were
themselves sold thirty for one piece.

The general of the Romans in this action was Titus, son to Vespasian emperor
of Rome. A prince of such an excellent temper that he was styled the darling of
mankind; so virtuously disposed, that he may be justly counted the glory of all
heathens, and shame of most christians, so that it was great pity so good a
branch had not been better grafted. Thus the ancient nation of the Jews, which
in former times might have been called the favorites of the Almighty, were
utterly destroyed, and the famous city of Jerusalem, which had been surprised
and plundered five times before, was totally demolished.

The first founder of it was one of the princes of the Canaanites, called in
his own language the just king, and indeed he was so, for he was the first
priest that sacrificed to God, and dedicated a temple there called Solyma; but
David, king of Israel, having driven out the Canaanites, give it to the Jews to
be inhabited, and after four hundred and sixty-four years and three months, it
was destroyed by the Babylonians, together with the most magnificent and
beautiful temple of king Solomon, upon which one hundred and fifty thousand men
wrought continually till it was finished; the grandeur and glory whereof you
may read in the holy scriptures. Jerusalem was afterward taken and plundered
by Afocheus king of Egypt, afterward by Antiochus and Pompey, and lastly by
the Romans; and from the time it was first erected, until it was thus ruined,
were two thousand one hundred and seventy-seven years; yet neither the
antiquity, riches, nor fame thereof, nor the glory of religion, did any thing
avail to hinder this hard distiny; such was the end of besieging Jerusalem,
when none was left to kill more, nor any thing remaining for the soldier to get
at, or whereon they might exercise their courage, who resolved to spare nothing
they could spoil.

Titus labored to the utmost to have saved the temple, and many therein, but
the Jews by their desperate obstinacy rendered themselves incapable of mercy,
so that he was at length obliged to destroy the city and temple together; and
the temple where so many burnt sacrifices had been offered, was now itself made
a sacrifice, and burnt to ashes, and to that stately structure, which drew the
apostles' admiration, not a stone was left upon a stone, the walls of the city
being more shaken with the sins of the Jews that defended them, than with the
battering rams of the Romans that assaulted them, were levelled to the ground,
three towers only that were more beautiful than the rest, namely, Phaselus,
Hippicos, and Mariamne, with the wall on the west side being left standing,
designed to receive a garrison, and to remain as monuments of the strength and
valor of the Romans, who had overcome a place so well fortified; all the rest
being laid so flat, that to those who had not seen it before there was no
appearance that it had ever been inhabited.

But while this storm fell on the unbelieving Jews, it was a calm among the
Christians, who warned by our Savior's prediction, and many other prodigies,
sled betimes out of Jerusalem to ^ella, a private place beyond Jordan, which
served them instead of a little Zoar, to save them from imminent destruction,

As for the remaining Jews, divine vengeance did continually pursue them till
the most part were destroyed, and the rest dispersed throughout the world even
to this day; for first the inhabitants of Caesarea slew of the Jews in one day
above twenty thousand, and such as fled were taken and imprisoned by F^^rus,
the lieutenant of Judea; to revenge this slaughter, the Jews fell upon the
Syrians, in which battle thirteen thousand Jews were slain; the people of
Alexandria put fifty thousand to sword, they of Damascus ten thousand, and
Antonius a Roman captain slew in Ascalon ten thousand; and Cestius another
captain slew above fourscore thousand Jews: Vespasian the father of Titus, in
the siege of Apheca, slew and took prisoners seventeen thousand one hundred and
thirty persons, in Samaria eleven thousand and six hundred; and in Josaprata
forty two thousand two hundred; in Joppa so many were killed, and drowned
themselves, that the sea threw up four thousand two hundred, and the rest so
totally perished, that there remained not one to carry tidings to Jerusalem of
the loss of the town; In the city of Taticheo were slain and made captives
forty five thousand besides those which were given to king Agrippa: In Gamala
there perished ninety thousand, none being left alive but only two women; in
Gas^ala five thousand died by the sword: In the city of Gadara were slain
thirty two thousand two hundred, besides an infinite number that drowned
themselves. These desolations happened before the destruction of Jerusalem, in
which, as I have said, there died eleven hundred thousand Jews by sword and
famine, the worse enemy of the two; and there were found two thousand dead in
privies, and filthy sinks; which numbers may not seem incredible, if besides
the former account we are told that it is evident that when Cestius was
lieutenant of Judah, the high priest at his request numbered the people which
came to eat of the paschal lamb, and found them to be two millions and seven
hundred thousand souls, all healthy, and purified. All these massacres, besides
diverse others omited, and infinite numbers slain in the fields and villages,
which drowned themselves, and were privately made away, amounting to near two
millions of people, happened in the space of four years, beginning in the
twelfth of the emperor Nero, and ending in the second year of Vespasian.

The tenth and last captivity of the Jews was in the time of the emperor Aelius
Adrianus, about 60 years after, who rebuilt the city of Jerusalem, changing the
situation somewhat Westward, and calling it by his own name Aelius; In despite
of the Christians he built a temple over our Savior's grave, with the images
of Jupiter and Venus, another at Bethlehem to Adonis her gallant; and to enrage
the Jews, he ingraved a swine over the gates of Jerusalem and a Jew under his
feet, in token of subjection: Who being inflamed at this great profonation of
their land, broke out in open rebellion, and joined with one who pretended to
be the Messiah, who called himself Barchocbea (or Bencoiti) for they are
thought to be the same, that is, the son of a star, who said that the scripture
foretold of him, which says, there shall come a star out of Jacob.

And Rabbi Akiba, a man of great same in those; times, when he saw him, said,
This is the king, the Messiah: This Barchocbea was (as some affirm it) in
Jerusalem before its destruction, and Akiba applied unto him that of the
prophet Haggai, the desire of all nations shall come, and not only the common
people, but the Rabbis and chief doctors of the Jews that remained after the
city of Jerusalem was destroyed, owned and assisted him, and erected a city
called Eitter, as the metropolis or chief seat of the kingdom, declaring this
false Christ to be their king; the emperor Adrian besieged them in this city,
and at length he took it, and cut off the head of Benchocbea; in this war, by
the most moderate accounts, forty-five thousand Jews lost their lives, and such
a devastation was made of the whole nation, that to this day they could never
assemble in any great numbers in any part of the world. The captives were by
Adrian transported into Spain, and the holy land laid waste, parting with her
people and fruitfulness in a great measure all at once; Such stragglers as
escaped this banishment, and remained behind, were forbidden to enter into
Jerusalem, or so much as to behold it from any rise or advantage of ground; yet
they obtained of the after emperors the favor once a year on the 10th of
August, the day whereon the city was taken, to go in and bewail the destruction
of the temple and people, bargaining with the soldiers who waited on them to
give so much money for so long abiding there, and if they exceeded the time,
they must give more; so that as St. Jerome says, they that bought Christ's
blood, were then glad to buy their own tears.

It is the usual method of divine justice to correct first with rods, then with
scourges, and if that will not do, scorpions: the Jews felt all these three
degree and never was any people on earth made gr^^^ examples of God's wrath
than this his own chosen inheritance, a peculiar people that might have claimed
the right hand of primogeniture of mankind: And if we consult the grounds of
these dismal disasters, we may observe their proud, seditious rebellious
spirits were more fatal to them than their implacable adversaries; an that
though they were guilty of many flagitious crimes, yet their rejecting and
crucifying the Lord of life and glory, was the principal cause of their
terrible extermination; for after this tremendous act, nothing ever prospered
with them, and if there were no other motive for the Jews conversion, the
length of these heavy judgments under which they groan to this very day, were
enough to convince them that Jesus is the Christ, yea some of their Rabbis and
doctors are very much puzzled, and will stare and shrink their shoulders, and
sometimes break into a kind of confession, That certainly these severe
afflictions could never have continued so many ages, but for crucifying one
that was more than a man which together with the punctual accomplishment of our
blessed Savior's prediction of the utter desolation of their city, temple, and
nation, might enlighten the minds of any but that stiff necked and hard hearted
generation, and satisfy them that Jesus of Nazareth had no other to stand in
competition with him, or that can have the title, dignity, or office of the
Messiah appropriated to him; for though there have been some false Messiahs, or
pretenders to this dignity, yet they are disclaimed by the Jews themselves, as
seducers and causes of great (...) ry to their people and nation; of which
^^^rt were Thaudas, and Judas of Galilee, Benchocbea aforenamed, and some
others since; as in the reign of Theodosius the second, one Moses, of Crete,
acted the part of a false Savior, upon the stage of the world, giving out that
he was a second Moses, and a prophet like unto him that God had sent from
heaven, and that he would lead all the Jews from the isle of Crete through the
sea to Palestine dry shod: The promises of this bold impostor wherewith he
daily fed the Jews for a year together, so far prevailed upon many of them,
that leaving the towns and cities where they inhabited, they followed him,
being persuaded he would conduct them to the promised land; at an appointed
time great multitudes of men, women and children repair to him, whom he brings
to a high cliff or promontory hanging over the sea, at his command many cast
themselves down, some of which were drowned, others were saved by Christian
fishermen, who dissaude^ them what they could from so mad and murderous an
attempt; the Jews finding themselves deluded, thought to lay hands on the
deceiver; but the false Moses, as if he had been a true devil, was gone and
vanished they knew not whither: this occasioned many Jews to embrace the
Christian religion, and to leave that way of Judaism, which was subject to such
dangerous and costly deceits.

In the year 1135, one David Ettoi, or David and David, declared that he was
the Messiah, and that God had sent him to deliver his people Israel: the king
of Persia, in whose dominion he was, seized upon him, but he being a cunning
magician, freed himself, and did many pranks to the great enraging of that king
against the Jews; they to prevent the ruin they saw coming upon them by his
means, made a great feast for this mock Messiah, and when he was asleep, in his
drunkenness cut off his head, and presented it to the king, who thereupon was
appeased and reconciled to them. We read also of one called the king Thabor,
who would needs proclaim himself to be the Messiah, whom Charles the first,
emperor of Germany caused to be burnt; and Maimonides reckons up four other
false Christ's that did arise among the Jews in Spain and France, who brought
great misery upon themselves and followers: to which may be added the famous
impostor at Smyrna in 1666, of which you have an account in the latter end of
this book, by all which it is undeniably evident, there is none who with any
color of probability can be supposed to be the Messiah, but our blessed Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ.

III. Probable Conjectures of what is become of the Ten Tribes which were
carried captives, and transplanted by the Assyrians.
THE Jewish nation being dispersed, and removed out of their own land by the
ten captivities before mentioned, the present Jews are of opinion that the tribe
of Benjamin are those who now are settled in Italy, Poland, and Germany, the
Turks dominions, and all the Eastern parts of the Mediterranean; the tribe of
Judah they believe are settled in Portugal and Barbary* and affirm that some
thousand families of that race are there, whom they dispense withal, to make a
resemblance of Christianity, as far as to be Romish priests; and many for fear
of the papal inquisition can join themselves to a crucifix and rosary, and upon
occasion have again resumed their own religion in places where they were out of
danger; one of them affirming, that his compliance was only the work of his
nerves and muscles, and that his anatomy told him nothing of the heart was
therein concerned. They say their Messiah is to come from Portugal, which they
discours^ of with much warmth and pleasure, and therefore teach their children,
and expound the law in that language in their synagogues.

But to the ten tribes who were led captive by Shalmanezer king of Assyria (in
the year of the world 3280, and about 720 years before the birth of our
Savior) and were carried beyond the river Euphrates, mentioned 2 kings, chapter
17. The generality of the present Jews say, they know not what is become of
them: yet several inquisitive Christians being very desirous of the conversion
of that nation from their obstinate unbelief, have made diverse conjectures of
the countries whereunto these ten tribes were carried by the Assyrians. Among
others Dr. Fletcher, who was agent for queen Elizabeth to the Emperor of
Russia, is of opinion they may be found among the Tartars, the Tartar in the
Syrian tongue signifying remnants or remainders, for which he renders several
reasons, from the observations he made during his residence some years among
the Russians.

As 1. From the place whither they were transplanted, which was into the cities
of Media, which is situated about the Caspian sea, containing, a very large
territory, now possessed by the Tartars, and by the consent of all historians
that have written of the Assyrian and Persian monarchy, they have resided there
ever since the reign of Cyrus, who after he had obtained the kingdom, did first
invade these Scythian shepherds or Tartar people, about two hundred years after
the Israelites were carried thither, who were grown by that time a great
warlike people, and made a general desertion from the Assyrians in the tenth
year of Esarhaddon; and being uited in one community, they disdained to mix
with other people.

2. Their towns and cities had the same or like names with the ancient towns
and cities of the Israelites; their metropolis, and chief city, though now
deformed with many ruins, is Samarchin, which travelers report has many
Jewish monuments, where the great Tamerlane carried about Bajazet, the Turkish
emperor, in an iron cage. This name differs no more from Samaria (the seat and
chamber of the kings of Israel) than many other cities in the world do, by the
several pronunciations of different nations. They have also mount Tabor, a city
called Jericho, Cornzin, and several other places mentioned in scripture. These
Tartar cities are inhabited by so many as are sufficient to defend them from
the hostility of the Persians and other borderers, but the greater part who are
commonly called Scythian shephers, seldom come into any city or standing houses
but in winter time; abiding in tents or walking houses, carried upon wheels
like carts or wagons. These in summer time when the grass is grown for forage,
march with their flocks and herds north and north-east from the south-east
parts, where they continue all the summer in distinct hoords or armies, under
the conduct of the princes and vicegerents, constituted by the great cham,
their emperor, and graze along by the way; thus they go till they arrive at the
next stage or resting place, where they encamp their wagon houses in the form
of a great city with many streets and avenues, continuing there till their
cattle have eat up all. Thus they proceed by short stages till they arrive at
the fartest point toward the north, and then return toward south Tartary
another way, where their cattle have fresh pasturage, and so returning by easy
journies, before winter they arrive again in the south countries, near the
Caspian sea; into a more mild and temperate climate, where they remain all the
winter within their cities or car-houses, set together in form of a vast town,
till the approaching spring invites them to go their former progress.

3. They are distinguished into several hoords and tribes, united under one
government, and communicate in all things but intermarrying, to avoid confusion
of kindreds, except the public defense or safety make it necessary for them to
join together as one people. And this division of tribes without commixion,
which was observed by no other nation but the Jews, is still most religiously
continued among the Tartars.

4. The number of their tribes is the same, which are ten in all, no more nor
less than the Israelites, from one of which it is supposed, the Turks have
their origin.

5. The Tartars have a tradition from their ancestors that they had their
pedigree from the Israelites, who were transplanted near the Caspian, or
Hircanian sea, from which tradition it is reported that Tamerlane the great
would boast himself, that he was descended from the tribe of Dan.

6. Though the Tartar language be yet unknown, because they live as savage
people, without society or commerce with other nations, suffering none to come
within them; yet the Russians affirm, that their language has many Arabic
words, and is not much different from the Turkish tongue, which many travelers
observe has much affinity with the Hebrew.

Lastly, The Tartars are circumcised, as were the Israelites and Jewish people.
As for the other two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, which for their notable
infidelity, and contempt of the Son of God, were massacred, dispersed, and
captivated by the Romans, it is as well known both where they are, and how they
live, not distinguished by their tribes, not yet united into one policy or
community, but diffused in small numbers, and deprived of all, save their name,
which they retain rather for a reproach than an honor, being thereby noted by
other nations to be that people whom God has rejected for their infidelity.

If it be objected, that it is a thing unworthy, and unbeseeming the great
mercy of God to this people, whom he vouchsafed to choose out of all the
nations of the world, to be His peculiar people, to suffer them to degenerate
into Tartars, who are the most vile and barbarous people upon earth. It may be
answered, that it may well consist with that most holy and perfect justice, to
abase so wicked and rebellious a people against their God as the Israelites
were, and to cast them from the highest Heaven, to the lowest center of
dishonor.

Others conjecture that the first inhabitants of America were the ten tribes of
the Israelites, whom the Tartarians conquered and drove away. After which by
God's providence they hid themselves behind the vast mountains of Cordillarae.
And that as they were not captivated all at once, but in the reigns of several
of their kings, as you have already heard, so they were also scattered into
diverse provinces, as America, Tartary, China, Media, to the Sabbatical river,
and into Ethiopia: of this opinion was Manasseh Ben Israel, an Hebrew divine
and philosopher, who resided in England in 1650, and was a chief agent for
admitting the Jews into that nation, to the then governing power. He then
published a book called The Hope of Israel; wherein he gives many relations to
fortify his conjecture, particularly that of Aaron Levi, in 1644.

This Aaron Levi (says he) gave the following account to me, and other eminent
Portuguese at Amsterdam, at the time aforesaid, that about two years before, he
going from port Honda, in the Spanish West Indies in America, to conduct some
mules of an Indian Castellen, into the province of Quito, in company with other
Indians among whom one called Francis Cazicus, a great tempest happened as they
passed over the mountain Cordillerae, which threw the laden mules to the
ground; the indians complained of their great losses by the storm, yet confessed
that they deserved greater punishments then this for their many henious crimes.
Francis bid them be patient since they should shortly enjoy rest: They replied,
they were unworthy of it, and th^^ the barbarous cruelty of the Spaniards
towa^^ them was sent of God, because they had so (...) treated his holy people,
who were of all, the mo^^ innocent. They then concluded to tarry all nig^^ in
the top of the mountain, and Aaron Levi too^ out of a box, some bread, cheese,
and junke^ and gave them to Francis, upbraiding him th^^ he had spoken
disgracefully of the Spaniard who answered, that he had not told one half (...)
the miseries and calamities they had suffered from that inhuman nation, but
that they should (...) revenged of them by the help of an unknown people.

After this Aaron Levi went to Carthagen^ where he was for some time
imprisoned, b^^ being at length released, and much affected with what he had
heard from Francis, from when^ he began to imagine that the Hebrews or Jew^
were those innocent people which the Indian ha^ mentioned. He resolved to
return to Honda, and find him out, which having happily effected, (...) asked
the Indian whether he rememberred wha^ he had spoke upon the mountain? who
replied, yea, very perfectly. Aaron thereupon engaged him to take a journey
with him, giving him three pieces of eight to buy him necessaries. When they
got out of the city, Aaron confessed himself to be an Hebrew, of the tribe of
Levi* and that the Lord was his God, and all other Gods were but mockeries. The
Indian being amazed asked him the name of his parents? He answered, Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob. But said Francis, have you no other father? he replied yes,
his father's name was Ludovicus Montezinus. I am glad of that said the Indian,
for I was in doubt to believe you while you seemed ignorant of your parents.
Aaron swearing that the spoke the truth. The Indian asked him if he was not the
son of Israel? Who affirmed he was, desiring Francis more fully to explain
himself. After which having sit down and refreshed themselves, the Indian thus
began:

If you have a mind to follow me your leader, you shall know whatever you
desire, only I must tell you, that whatsoever the journey is you must go it on
foot, and eat nothing but parched maiz and Indian corn, and omit nothing that I
require of you. Aaron consented to all; next day being Monday, Francis bid him
throw away what he had in his knapsack, and put on a pair of shoes made of
pack-thread, and follow him with his staff. Whereupon Aaron leaving his cloak,
sword, and other things about him, they began their journey, the Indian
carrying on his back three measures of maiz, two ropes, one full of knots, with
a hooked fork to climb up the mountains. The other was to pass over marshes and
rivers, with a little axe, and linen shoes made of pack thread. They being thus
rigged, traveled the whole week till Sabbath, on which resting, the next day
they went on, and on Tuesday about eight in the morning, they came to a large
river; then said the Indian, Here you shall see your brethren, and making a
sign with a red linen cloth, which he wore instead of a girdle, thereupon they
saw a great smoke on the other side of the river, and soon after upon another
sign as they had made before, three men and a woman came rowing toward them in
^ little boat, and being come near, the woman went ashore (the rest staying in
the boat) and talked a long while with the Indian in a language which Aaron
understood not: She then returned to the boat, and told the three men what she
had learned of the Indian. The men always e^ing Aaron, they came presently out
of the bo^^ and embraced him, the woman after their example doing the like.
After* which one of them went back to the boat, and then the Indian bowed down
to the feet of the other two, and of the woman, they raised him up and embraced
him very courteously, talking a great while with him. After this the Indian bid
Aaron be of good courage, and not expect that they should come again to him
till he had fully learnt those things that they would tell him at the first
time. Then those two men standing on each side of Aaron, uttered in Hebrew, the
4th verse of Deuteronomy. (...) "Hear, O Israel, the Lord (...) God is one God." And
then added what follows, making a short pause between every particular.

1. Our fathers are Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and Israel; these four they signified
by holding (...) three fingers, and then added Reuben, by adding another finger
2. We will bestow sever^^ places on them* that will live with us. 3. Joseph
dwells in the midst of the sea; making a sign with two fingers put together,
and the parting them. 4. Speaking fast, they said, some of us will go forth to
see, and to tread under foot. -- At which word they winked and stamp with their
feet, 5. One day we shall all of us talk together, and we shall come sort as
issuing out of our mother the earth. 6. A certain messenger shall go forth. 7.
Francis shall tell you more of these things. They making a sign with their
finger that much must not be spoken. 8. Suffer us that we prepare ourselves.
Then turning their faces every way they prepared, O God do not stay long. 9.
Send twelve men; making a sign that they would have men with beards, and who
were skilful in writing, come to them.

This conference being ended, the same men returned on Wednesday and Thursday,
and repeated the same things, without adding a word. At length Aaron being
concerned that they did not answer what questions he asked them, nor would
suffer him to go over the river, he threw himself into their boat, but being
forced out again, he fell into the water, and was in danger of being drowned,
for he could not swim; but being got out they seemed angry with him for his
rash attempt, and for being too inquisitive to know more than they had told
him, which they signified by signs and words, as the Indian interpreted them to
Aaron. When these four were gone, four more came back in the same boat, who all
as with one mouth rehearsed the nine forementioned particulars, without adding
a word, and in the three da^^ which they continued there, about three hun^ d
came and returned. These men were somewhat scorched with the Sun, some wore
their hair down to their knees, others shorter; they had comely bodies, well
clothed with ornaments on their feet and legs, and a linen cloth wound round
their heads.

Aaron said, that when he designed to be gone on Thursday evening, they were
extreme kind, furnishing him with all necessaries for his journey back again,
intimating that they were well provided with meat, clothes, cattle, and all
other conveniences. Having taken their leave of these courteous strangers,
Aaron and his Indian arrived at the place where they had rested the night
before they came to the river; you remember Francis said Aaron, that my
brethren told me you should discover something to me, I would therefore entreat
you to be so kind as to relate it. The Indian replied, I will tell you the
truth of what I know, as I have received it from my forefathers, but if you
press me too earnestly, you will make me utter lies; attend therefore I pray to
what I shall speak.

Thy brethren are the sons of Israel, and were brought hither by the providence
of God, who for their sakes, wrought so many miracles that you will scarcely
believe the account of them that I have learnt from my fathers. We Indians made
war upon them, and used them more severely than we are now handled by the
Spaniards, and by the instigation of our magicians, whom we call Mohanes* we
went armed to that place where you saw your brethren, with an intent to dismay
them, but not one of those who went thither came back again: Whereupon we
raised a great army, and set upon them, but with the same success, for none
escaped, which happened also the third time: so that India was almost bereft of
all its inhabitants but old men and women: the old men therefore, and the rest
who survived, believing that the magicians used false dealing, resolved, and
consulted to destroy them all: and many being killed, those who remained
promised to discover, somewhat that was not known; upon this the old men
desisted from slaying them, and the magicians declared as follows.

That the God of the children of Israel, whose destruction they had occasioned,
is the true God, that all that which is engraven upon their stone table is
true, that about the end of the world they shall be lords of the whole earth;
that some should come who would bring them much good, and after they had
enriched the earth with all good things, those children of Israel going forth
out of their country, should subdue all nations under them, as their ancestors
subdued their enemies, and that they would be happy if they could make a league
with them.

Hereupon five of the chief Indians, whom they call Cazici, and who were my
ancestors, having understood the prophecy of the magicians, which they had
learned of the wise men of the Hebrews, went thither, and after much entreaty
obtained their desires, having first made known their minds to that woman whom
you saw, was my interpreter, for your brethren will have no commerce with
Indians; and if any of ours enter into their country they instantly kill them;
neither do any of your brethren pass into our country: Now by the help of that
woman we made this agreement with them.

1. That our five Cazies should come to th^^ without any other company at the
end of every seventy months. 2. That he to whom any secret should be revealed
should be above the age of 300 moons or months, that is, near 30 years old. 3.
That they would discover nothing in the presence of any but the Cazici alone,
and in desert: This secret, said the Indian, we keep among ourselves, hoping
for great favors from them, in requital for the good offices we have done for
many of their people, but it is not lawful for us to visit them till after
seventy months unless some new or very strange accident occur^ and this sell
out thrice in my time.
First, when the Spaniards came into their land.

Secondly, when some ships were discovered in the Southern sea; and

Lastly, when you arrived, whom they had long wished for and expected.

They rejoiced much for these three new things because they said several
prophecies were fulfiled: Here the Indian concluded his discourse. --

Aaron Levi likewise said, that three other C^zies were sent to him by Francis
to Honda, wh^ heartily embraced him, but would not tell the names: they asked
Aaron of what nation he was? Who answered, an Hebrew, of the tribe of Levi; and
that God was his God: Whereupon they again embraced him, and said, the time
will come when you shall see us, and shall know us: we are all your brethren by
God's singular favor: then bidding him farewell, they departed, we go about our
business. The Indian being left behind, he, after having saluted Aaron, took
his leave also, saying, farewell my brother, I have other things to do, I go to
visit thy brethren with other Hebrews Cazici, who are secure in this country,
for we rule all the Indians, and after we have finished our business with the
wicked Spaniards, we will bring you out of your bondage by God's help: not
doubting but that he who cannot lie will assist us according to his word and
promise.

This Aaron Levi, says Rabbi Manasseh Ben Israel, who gave the preceding
relation, being a Jew of our order, born of honest parents at Villefleur in
Portugal, a man of about forty years old, honest, and not ambitious, deserves
to be credited in what he says above many others: He went to the Indies, where
he was put into the inquisition, as a successor of a Jew in Portugal whom Don
Manual, the king, forced without law or religion to turn Christian, who yet to
this day privately practices their religion, being freed out of the
inquisition, he diligently inquired into these things, and was not quiet till
he came to Amsterdam to tell us the good news, I myself was well acquainted
with him for six months that he dwelt here, and I sometimes made him take an
oath in the presence of honest men, that what he told was true, and two years
after he took the same oath on his death bed.

The same author adds several other relations to prove the probability of the
Jews being the first inhabitants of America, being driven thither by the fury
of their enemies.

Esdras says, that the ten tribes which Salmanazar carried captive, in the
reign of Hoshea, beyond Euphrates, determined to go into countries far remote,
in which none dwelt, whereby they might the better observe their law; and that
as they passed over some branches of Euphrates, God wrought miracles --
stopping the course of the flood till they had gone over. From whence it may be
gathered, that the ten tribes went to New Spain and Peru, and possessed those
two kingdoms, which were then without inhabitants -- to which they might arrive
by going out of Tartary into Greenland, and from thence, by the straight of
Darien, into America, it being not above fifty miles from thence: And La Vega,
a famous Spanish author, writes, that in Collai, a fine province in the
West Indies, near a lake called by the Spaniards Chuta, among other antiquities
and great buildings there, a stately fabric is to be seen, which has a court
fifteen fathoms broad, a wall that compasses it two fur^ongs high; on one side
is a chamber forty-five feet long, and twenty-two broad; and that the court,
the wall, the pavement, the chamber, the roof, the portal, the pillars of the
two gates of the chamber, and of the entrance, are made only of one stone; the
three sides of the wall are an ell thick. The Indians say, this house is
dedicated to the Maker of the world, and is judged to have been a synagogue
built by the Israelites, since the Indians never knew the use of iron,
wherewith this building was joined together. -- Other Indians being asked about
it, declared that their fathers told them it was erected by a people who were
white, and bearded like the Spaniards, that came thither a long while before
the Indians, inhabitants there, and continued some time after, till they were
driven farther north, into this new large world.

The Indians retain many Hebrew customs, which it is thought they learnt from
the Israelites -- for, in many places, they circumcise themselves, they rend
their garments upon some sudden misfortune, they kept fire continually burning
upon their altars in their temples dedicated to the sun, and forbid women to
enter into them till they were purified; every fifty years they celebrated a
Jubilee at Mexico, the metropolis of Peru, with great pomp; every seventh, or
Sabbath day, all persons were obliged to be present in the temple, to perform
their sacrifices and ceremonies; they were divorced from their wives in case of
incontinency, and they married the widows of their dead brethren; they had also
some knowledge of the creation of the world, and of the universal flood: All
these things seem to demonstrate, that these Gentiles had learned those customs
from the Jews, who had formerly inhabited there.

Besides, the Indians are of a brown color and without beards; but in the new
world, white men with beards, were found, and who never traded with the
Spaniards. And the emperor Charles V. sending Philipus Utre to discover and
plant the northern region of America, and having learned of their neighbors the
greatness o^ that people who were the present inhabitants he determined to make
a conquest of them: but when he had marched many hundred miles, he came toward
a rich city, full of people, and fair buildings, and not far off saw two
husbandmen tilling the ground, whom his soldiers designed to have made
prisoners, and to retain them a^ guides: the men perceiving themselves
besettled apace toward the city; Philip Utre and his horsemen pursued them
hard, and had almost overtaken them; whereupon the husbandmen stood still, and
with their spears wounded Philip in the breast, piercing through his
breast plate, made of wool to keep off arrows; he, wondering at their
dexterity, judged it wisest not to proceed any further in that province,
against a nation so expert in war, that with only a spear, dared to resist
armed horsemen. Accordingly he immediately retired; and to this day none ever
attempted the like; and a passage thither is now entirely unknown.

Again, Pizarro, the Spanish captain, having, revolted from his nation, went to
search out new countries of the Indians who lived north-eastward, whose number
were never yet ascertained, they being reported to extend above two thousand
miles. Peter Osna, another captain, went with some soldiers up a great river,
in canoes, and at length came to a large plain, where many houses were built on
the water side by the Indians; and having sailed further on, in about
forty-eight hours, they saw a great number of high white houses, which they
feared to approach, observing the inhabitants to be numerous, and hearing the
sound of hammers like that of goldsmiths. These Indians, say they, were of a
tall stature, comely in person, with long beards, and appearing as valiant and
warlike as the Spaniards.

Eight other Spaniards, after nine months traveling north-westward in America,
came to a mountain, to whose top they arrived with difficulty, from whence they
discovered a plain, encompassed with a pleasant river, on the banks of which
dwelt a people who were white, with beards. In the reign of the late king,
Philip III. of Spain, five ships were sent from Panama to discover some unknown
lands in America: The captain was scarcely entered into the South Sea, when he
discovered land, which he called the Islands of Solomon and Jerusalem. In his
course of sailing he kept close to the shore of these isles where he saw and
took many of the natives, who were of a brown color: others, who dwelt in
larger and more fruitful islands, were white men, and wore long garments of
silk. The pilot bringing one of the ships too near the shore, she was split
upon a rock, the islanders running eagerly to see the sight. The captain
leaving this island, went further to discover the main land* and having failed
about an hundred leagues in sight the shore, he perceived by the smoke that
country was inhabited; whereupon entering of their ports, many white men with
yellow (...) came to the ship's side; they were tall like ants, richly clothed,
and had long beards. (...) another of his vessels being wrecked in the ^^^ven's
mouth he was forced to put again to (...) Whereupon the natives sent two
chaloftis, principal men to him, who were brown, like th^^ of the first island,
with sheep, fruit and other provisions, which they freely bestowed up them; but
strictly charged them to depart fr^^ their coasts at their peril: The captain
brought these two chieftains into Spain, yet could lea^^ nothing of them but by
signs, and instead of answers, when they were asked, they would show their
beards, as if their lords that sent them we^^ such kind of men: and if they
were question about religion, they held up their fingers to heaven, implying
that they worshipped but one Go^^ In a little while they died in Spain, and so
(...) the captain, who designed by the king's command, to have made a second
voyage, with great army, for subduing this potent people.

Lastly, a Dutch mariner lately sailing n^^^ these countries, put into a
harbor in a pleas^^^ river, where he found some Indians who understood
Spanish, of whom he bought provisions and dye wood; by whose directions he
sailed t^^ months up a large river, where he met white m^^ bearded, well
clothed, and abounding with gol^ silver, and many precious stones, having no
commerce with the Spaniards. By this account they were thought to be
Israelites, and some Jews designed to have sent him again to the same place, to
enquire more fully into the matter, but his death, which happened soon after,
prevented all ^uter discovery.

By the preceding relations, Rabbi Manasseh endeavored to make it probable,
that part of the ^en tribes are saved in America; and somewhat ^o corroborate
his conjectures, I will give an account of what Mr. William Penn writes
concerning the n^^ives of Pennsylvania, which is a part of America, lately
inhabited by the English, and under his government.

For their original (faith he) I believe them of ^he Jewish race, and of the
stock of the ten tribes, ^or.

First, they were to go to a land not planted, nor known, which to be sure
Asia, and Africa were, if not Europe: and he that intended that extraordinary
judgment upon them, might make ^he passage not uneasy to them, from the East
parts of Asia, to the West of America.

Secondly, I find them of like countenance and their children of so lively
resemblance that a man would think himself in Duke's place in London, where the
Jews inhabit.

Thirdly, they agree in rites and ceremonies, they reckon by moons, offer their
first fruits, have a kind of feast (...) tabernacles, wherein they sacrifice
the first (...) fattest buck they have; their mourning a year, their customs
about women, with many other things, are very consonant to the Jewish law. He
adds, that their language is ^^ry lofty, and much like the Hebrew: that th^^
believe a God and immortality; for they say the^ is a great king that made
them, who dwells (...) glorious country to the Southward of them, (...) that
the souls of the good shall go thither, when they shall live again.

To proceed, Manasseh Ben Israel says, that the ten tribes being conquered at
several times, we may suppose they were carried into several par^^ of the
world, and as he believes some went to the West Indies from Greenland by the
streights (...) Annain, so others might go out of Tartary in^^ China, by that
famous wall in the confines o^ both. One argument is taken from the relation of
the two Jesuits, who erected their colleges i^ these countries, and declare
that they found the Jews came in former times into these kingdoms; and that a
certain Jew coming to one of the Jesuits, named Dr. P. Riccius, at Pequin, and
having read in a book written by a Chinese doctor that the Jesuits were not
Turks, and knew no other God but the Lord of Heaven and earth, he would have
persuaded him that he did profess the law of Moses; and going to the Jesuits'
church he saw there the picture of the Virgin Mary, and the child Jesus in her
arms, and St. John the Baptist worshipping of her; whereupon the Je^^ thinking
it was the effigies of Rachel and (...) two sons, Jacob and Esau, he bowed also
to the image, but with this apology, (...) though (...) worshipped no images,
yet he could not but honor those who were the forefathers of the Jewish
nation; and seeing the four evangelists painted on each side of the altar, he
asked if they were not four of the twelve sons of Jacob. From him P. Riccius
understood that there were ten o^ twelve families of Israelites in Perquin,
where they had built a very neat synagogue, in which their forefathers and
themselves have kept the five books of Moses with great veneration for six
hundred years past; he affirmed, that in Chequin another province of China,
there were a great number of Jews, and a synagogue, who knew nothing of the
coming and suffering of Jesus Christ, and therefore are thought to be of the
ten tribes, and observe many Jewish ceremonies.

In the history of Persia we find, that in the reign of the emperor Zeno, Firuz
made a double war with the tribe of Nepthali, in which he was at length
destroyed: for being brought into unknown streights and passages, without hope
of extricating himself, he obtained peace, upon condition that he should swear
never for the futer to attempt any thing against them, and that he should do
reverence to the conquering commands of Napthali in token of subjection; the
Persian general was forced to submit to these terms, but by the counsel of the
magicians, he performed his submission craftily for he bowed toward the eastern
sun whom the Persians worship, that his own people might suppose it done in way
of worship, and not to honor his enemy, neither did he perform the other part
of his agreement, though confirmed by letters patents for not digesting the
disgrace of bowing to his enemy, he raised a new army, and marched against
them; but being a second time entrapped by the difficulties of the cou^^^, he
lost his life, and many with him in a gulf which the Napthalies had prepared
for him, by covering it over with re^ds, and earth on the the ^^p. The treaty
of peace was hung upon a spear at a distance, that this perfidious prince might
see it, and thereby remember his oath, repent and desist from his desperate
enterprise, but he utterly disregarded it, and came on furiously, till at
length himself, and the greatest part of his forces, fell into that deep ditch,
from whence there was no redemption. When by his unexpected fall he saw that he
must perish, he pulled off from his right ear a pearl of vast bigness and
whiteness, and threw it a great way from him, either to hinder his corpse from
being known, or else to prevent any after him from enjoying so precious a
jewel. Those our author affirms to be Jews, and relics of the tribe of
Napthali, whom Tiglath Pilesar the Assyrian, carried into those places, 2 kings
xv. 29. their countenance which is white, their government, manners, and many
other circumstances confirming the same.

Ortelius the great geoprapher writes, that in the country of Tabor, adjacent
to Persia, there dwells a people, who though they have lost the holy writings
yet obey one king, whose brother, called David the Reubenite, came into
Portugal in 1530, (having seen India in his passage) where he perverted the
king's secretary, and endeavored to draw the Pope, Charles V. emperor of
Germany, and Francis the first, king of France to Judaism, Moho, was taken at
Mantua, and ^urnt alive in 1540, yet was offered his life if he would again
have turned Christian. The Reubenite was by Charles V. carried prisoner into
Spain, where he shortly after died. This David constantly affirmed, that two
tribes of Israel were there, and other tribes a little farther, under the^^ own
kings and princes, and were an unspeakable number of people. perhaps the
province of Tabor is the same with that of Habor, mentioned 2 Kings 17. where
it is said that the ten tribes were brought by Salmanassar to Habor and Halah.

Part of the ten tribes also live in Ethiopia in the Habissin kingdom, as
diverse of that country reported at Rome, and Boterus relates, that two potent
nations dwell near the head of the river Nilus, one of which are Israelites,
who are governed by a mighty king. From whom it is supposed the Habyssins
learned circumcision, the observation of the sabbath, and other Jewish rites,
and without doubt, says my author, they also dwell in Media; for Josephus
writes, that all Israel dwelt in Media, for two tribes only setteld in Asia and
Europe, and lived subject to the Romans. And the other ten live on the other
side Euphrates, where they are exceeding numerous. And this king Agrippa seemed
to believe as a thing certain, when in an oration to the people of Jerusalem,
to dissuade them from rebelling against the Romans, he thus speaks. What
associates (says he) do you expect to join with you in your rebellion and war?
does not (...) known world pay tribute to the Romans? perhaps you hope for help
from them beyond Euphrates.

Lastly, (my author says) all think that part of the ten tribes dwell beyond
the Sabbatical ^^^ver, which is said to be about the Caspian (...) of which the
testimony of Josephus is famous the emperor Titus, says he, passing between
A^ca and Raphanes, cities of king Agrippa, he saw the wonderful river which
though it be swift yet it is dry on every seventh day, and that day being past,
it resumes its ordinay course as if had no change, and it always observes this
order. It is called Sabbatical from the solemn feast of the Jews, because it
intimates their rest every seventh day, on which God himself rested after the
creation of the world. This river run^ all the week, with such swiftness and
impetuosity, that it carries away with it the sand and stones which is the
cause that the tribes who live beyond (...) remain shut up and cannot discover
themselves. For though on the seventh day the river does rest, and is quiet,
yet it is forbidden to the Jews to take a journey on that day. And for that
reason they have remained there miraculously concealed for some ages. Neither
is this strange, since there are many things which we know, and yet can give no
account of their original: are we not at this day ignorant of the heads of our
four capital rivers, Nilus, Ganges, Euphrates and Tyris, and many large
countries are yet undiscovered. Yea, some are unknown by being placed beyond
mountains. So it happened in the reign of Ferdinand and Isabella about 1400,
that some Spaniards were found out by accident at Barneca, about ten miles from
Salamanca in Spain, to which place they ^led when the Moors possessed Spain,
and dwelt there eight hundred years without being dicovered. Furthermore as to
the Sabbatical river, I heard it from my father (says Manasseh Ben Israel, and
fathers do use to impose upon their sons) that there was an Arabian at Lisbon
in Portugal, who had an hourglass filled with the sand taken out of the bottom
of this river, which run all the week till the sabbath and then ceased, and
that every Friday in the evening this Arabian would walk through the streets of
that city, and show this glass to the Jews who counterfeited Christianity,
saying, ye Jews, shut up your shops, for now the sabbath comes. I should not
speak of these glasses, says he, but that the authority of my father has great
power over me, and induces me to belive the miracle is from God.

Let the reader believe what he thinks fit of these relations, which I thought,
for the strangeness of them not unpleasant to insert. I shall conclude with the
consequences which my Jewish author deduces from them, namely, 1. That America,
or the West Indies was anciently inhabited by a part of the ten tribes, which
passed thither out of Tartary by the streights of Annain, 2. That the ten
tribes are not in any one place, but in many, because the prophets have (...)
their return shall be into Palestine out of (...) places. 3. That these ten
tribes did not retu^^^ at the building of the second temple. 4. That at this
day they retain the Jewish religion. 5. That the prophecies concerning their
return their country are of necessity to be fulfilled. 6. That from all coasts
of the world they meet in Assyria and Egypt, go preparing an easy pleasant way,
and abounding with all things, as Isaiah says, Chap. xl. and from thence they
shall fly to Jerusalem as birds to their nests, Lastly, that the kingdom shall
be no more divided, but the twelve tribes shall be subject to one prince who is
under the Messiah the son of David, and that they shall never be driven again
out of their land.

IV. The state of the Jews after their extermination and the present condition
of Palestine.
AFTER the desolation of Jerusalem the Jews were dispersed throughout the
world, and especially in Spain, where the Emperor Adrian commanded them to
dwell; yet found every where so little favor, that having diverse times been
put to grievous mulcts and ransoms, they were all at last quite thrust out of
Europe.

The first Christian prince that expelled the Jews out of his territories, was
that heroic king Edw. I. who was such a fore scourge also to the Scots; and it
is thought diverse families of those banished Jews sled then to Scotland, where
they have propagated since in great numbers; witness the aversion this nation
has above others to hogs flesh.

Nor was this their extermination for their religion, but for their notorious
crimes; as poisoning of wells, counterfeiting of coins, falsifying of seals,
crucifying of Christian children, with other villainies. This happened in the
year 1392. And sixteen years after France followed our example. It was near two
hundred years after that when Ferdinand turned them out of Spain; and five
years after him, Emanuel of Portugal did the like.

But the countries from whence they were last expelled were Naples and Sicily,
in the year 1539. In other parts of Christendom they reside yet in great
numbers, as in Germany high and low, Bohemia, Lithuania, Poland and Russia; in
Italy also they are found, but in no country subject to the king of Spain.

They live very quietly at Rome under the Pope's nose, and St. Mark makes no
scruple to entertain them at Venice: in sundry places of the Ottoman Empire
they are very numerous: so that it is thought Constantinople and Thessalonica
only have near twenty thousand.

Asia is full of them, as Aleppo, Trippoli, Damascus, Rhodes, and indeed all
places of commerce and traffic; there are numbers also in Persia, Arabia, and
all over Cranganor in India.

In Africa they have their synagogues and Lumbards, as in Alexandria, Grand
Cairo, Fesse, Tremesen, and diverse places in the kingdom of Morocco. There are
about one hundred families left in Jerusalem, but the place where they are most
unmingled is Tiberias, which the Turks gave to Mendez the Jew for some signal
services; thither they often bring or send the bones of their dead friends, who
have left large legacies, to be there interred from other places.

The city of Jerusalem was afterward re-edified by Elius Adrianus, and given
to the Christians, from whom it was taken by Cosroes and the Persians, in the
year 615, and from them forcibly wrested by Hanmer, and the Saracens in 637.
Next it fell into the power of Cutlu Moses, and the Turks in 1000, under whose
oppressions when it had long groaned, Peter the Hermit stirred up the Western
princes to relieve the distressed Christians, whose designs attained their
wished effect, under the banner of the victorious prince Godfrey of Bullen, in
the year 1093. This Godfrey, for his merits, was to have been invested with the
royal wreath of Majesty, which he denied, thinking it unfit to wear a crown of
gold where his Savior had worn a crown of thorns; yet for the common good he
accepted the title; after whom reigned these Cristian princes, Baldwin the
first, Baldwin the second, Fulk, earl of Anjou, Baldwin the third, Almerick,
Baldwin the fourth, Baldwin the fifth, Guy of Lusignad, the last king of
Jerusalem; during whose time Saladine the sultan of Egypt won the kingdom,
which his successors defended against all invasion, till the year 1517, when
Selinus the first emperor of the Turks added the Holy land, together with Egypt
to his empire: and so the whole country of Palestine, with the city of
Jarusalem, are under the dominion of the Turks to this day; -- which is
inhabited by some Christians, (who make a great benefit of showing the
Sepulcher of Christ) and of late years also by Moors, Arabians, Greeks, Latins,
Turks, Jews; nay, I may say, that with people of all nations.

The whole land contains four regions, Idumea, Judea, Samaria and Galilee.
Idumea begins at Mount Cassius, or as some will, at the lake Sirion,
reaching to the Eastward of Judea; the chief cities are Maresa, Reinocorra,
Rapha, Antedo, Ascalon, Azotus, and Gaza. Maresa was the birth place of the
prophet Micah. -- Near unto this town Judas Maccabeus overthrew Gorgias.
Rhinocorura, Rapha and Antedon are towns of no great note. Of Ascalon, sir
George Sandis writes thus in his travels, that it is a place now of no great
reckoning, more than that the Turks does keep there a garrison. Venerable
heretofore among the heathen for the temple of Dagon, and the birth of
Semiramis, begotten of the goddess Decreta, who inflamed with the love of a
certain youth that sacrificed unto her, and having by him a daughter, ashamed
of his incontinency, put him away, and exposed the child to the deserts, and
confounded with sorrow, threw herself into a lake replenished with fish,
adjoining to the city; This Decrata is said to be that dagon the idol of the
Agrotonites, mentioned in scripture, which signif^eth the first of sorrow: who
had her temple close by the lake, with her image in the figure of a fish,
excepting the face, which resembled a woman; but the infant nourished by doves,
which brought her milk from the paps of the pasture, after became the wife of
Minus, and queen of Assyria, whereupon she was called Semiramis, which
signifies a dove in the Syrian tongue, in memorial whereof the Babylonians did
bear a dove in their ensigns, confirmed by the prophecy of Jeremiah, who
foretelling the devastation of Judea, advises them to flee from the sword of
the dove.

Azatus, where was a sumptuous temple built by the lieutenant to Demetrus;
eight miles beyond that stand Acheron, or Ekron, where Beelzebub was
worshipped, to whom Ahaziah sent to enquire of his health.

Lastly, Gaza, or Aza, one of the five principal cities belonging to the
Palestines (called Philistines in scripture) -- Gaza signifies strong, and in
the Persian language, a treasure, so said to be called by Cambyses, who
invading Egypt, sent thither the riches purchased in that war; it was also
called Constantia, by the emperor Constantine, first famous for the acts of
Sampson, who lived about the time of the Trojan wars, whose force and fortunes
are said to have given to the poets their invention of Hercules, who lived not
long before him; and it was afterward famous for two wounds there received by
Alexander the great, and was then counted the chief city of Syria.

Also there lies Joppa: now Joppa is a famous mart town, and a good haven;
where Jonah took ship to fly to Tar^us, where Peter raised Dorcas from death to
life, and where he lying in the house of one Simeon a tanner, was in a vision
taught the conversion of the Gentiles. -- This city is reported to have been
built before the flood. Here reigned Cepheus, the son of Phoenix, whose
daughter, Andromeda, was, by Perseus, delivered from a sea monster, some of
whose bones the people had wont to show to strangers, even till the flourishing
of the Romans. Here lies Gath also, the country of the huge giant Goliath.

Judea is the chiefest part of Palestine, and is of the same extent now as it
was when it was the kingdom of Judea, and entertained the two tribes of Judah
and Benjamin. It lies between the midland sea and Lacus Asphalite, or the Dead
Sea, and betwixt Samaria and Idumea: It took this name from the tribe of Judah,
in which lies the once famous city Jerusalem.

Besides Jerusalem, there are also in this country diverse other towns and
famous cities; as, Jericho, Turris, Stratonis, afterward named Caesarea,
Hebron formerly, now Arbea; also Mambre, and Carioth, that is to say, a town of
four men, the birth place of Judas Iscariot, who betrayed our Savior; and
beyond Jordan, Markberus, a town with a strong castle; here stood the town of
Sodom and Gomorrah, which for their sodomy and abomination, were consumed by
fire from heaven, and now lie buried in that cursed lake Asphalites, so named
of the bitumen which it vomiteth, called also the Dead Sea, perhaps in that it
nourishes no living creature, or for its heavy waters hardly to be moved with
any wind; so extreme salt, that whatsoever is thrown therein not easily
sinketh. Vespasian for a trial caused diverse to be cast in, bound hand and
foot, who floated aloft, as if supported by some spirit. They say, that birds
flying over it, fall down if enchanted or suffocated with the poison of the
ascending vapors. Samaria lies in the midst between Judea and Galilee; the
land is so called from the metropolis Samaria, built by Om^^ king of Israel,
and now called Sebasti; the towns in it are called Sichem, afterward Neapolis,
Capernaum, Bethsaida, and Chorazin.

Galilee lies between mount Lebanus and Samaria, and is divided into upper and
lower Galilee. Upper Galilee bordered upon Tyrus, called otherwise Galilee
Gentium, or the heatheni^^ Galilee. Lower Galilee lies near unto the lake of
Tiberius, and to Nazareth: In it are the towns of Nain, Cana, Nazareth and
Gadara. -- The Holy Land is seated between two seas and the river Jordan: It
has within it many valuable lakes abounding with fish. The river Jordan
running trough the midst of this country, dividing it into two parts. St.
Jerome writes, That this river springs out of two fountains, not far distant
one from the other; the one Jor, and the other Dan, shooting out like two horn^
which meeting together, make the great river Jordan. The chief mountains in the
Holy land are mount Hermon, lying in the east part thereof, and mount Tabor in
the west, both of them being very great and high, so that the other hills about
them, are but arms and branches of them, for the mountains Ebal, Betherton,
Mispa, or Mospoa, and Bethel, are reckoned under mount Hermon; Gilboa, Gerezin,
Saron and mount Carmel by the sea side, are counted under mount Tabor.

There are also about Jerusalem, mount Sion, Moriah, mount Olivet, mount
Calvary, and others, with goodly woods and forests, full of all kind of deer,
and many wild beasts.

In this land, especially in and about Jerusalem, there were many stately and
magnificent buildings, as namely, Mons Nomus, and the castle of the Jebusites,
into which king David brought the ark of the Lord, where it remained till
Solomon's temple was finished. The remainder and ruins of these buildings are
to be seen to this day: yea, it is said too, that in this very place the Lord
Christ eat the paschal lamb with his disciples: There are also the sepulchers
of David and other kings of Judah; and the house of David, which yet retains
the name of David's tower. Upon mount Moriah are to be seen some remainders of
Millo. Above all which, we must call to mind the most excellent and beautiful
temple of king Solomon, upon which one hundred and fifty thousand men wrought
seven years continually till it was finished. The glory and magnificency
thereof you may read in the scripture. The temple of the sepulcher, at the
first building, was highly reverenced by the Chri^tians of those parts, and
even until this day (...) much resorted to, both by pilgrims from all parts of
the Romish church, and by diverse gentlemen of the reformed churches, partly for
curiosity, and partly the antiquity of the place. It is farmed from the Turk,
and kept by the pope's creatures: whosoever is admitted to the sight of the
sepulcher pays nine crowns to the Turkish officers: So that this tribute is
worth to the grand signior eight thousand ducats yearly.

V. Of the Septuagint or seventy Jewish interpretations of the law of Moses.
WHEN Alexander the great, king of Macedon and Greece, had conquered the
chiefest part of the then known world, he died a young man, being not above
thirty years of age; after whose death his kingdom was divided among four of
his principal captains or generals, as is written, Dan. viii. His kingdom shall
be broken, and four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation. He left behind
him a son^ of tender years, named Archelaus, whose tutor perceiving him like to
be wise and valiant, he gave him a Poisoned drink which killed him, and then
usurped his dominions. These four generals made war upon each other, one of
whom was called Ptolemus Philadelphus, resolved to have the law of Moses
translated into Greek^ with intent to raise a quarrel against the Jews, and to
draw them from their law and religion; hereupon he appointed seventy ancient
Rabbis to perform the same; whom he shut up apart in a room, every one by
himself, that they might have no communication with each other; when they had
finished the work, though they had altered thirteen places of scripture, yet
they agreed so fully in the sense and meaning thereof, as if all had been
written by one alone, which may be reckoned to have happened rather by a
miracle than any thing else. The thirteen places are these:

I. Genesis i. They translated, God created in the beginning, etc. putting no
word or thing before the name of God, which way is generally used in the Greek
tongue, and might prevent the king from taking Berisheth, or the beginning to
be the creator, and Elohim, of God, for the creature. II. Genesis ii. 26.
Instead of let us, they translate it, I will make men after my own image; I,
for we, that it should not be thought there was a plurality of Gods, or that
the Almighty consulted with any one therein. III. Genesis ii. 1. They
translated, and God finished the sixth day, and rested the seventh instead of,
and God ended his work which he had made on the seventh day; sixth for seven*
lest it should seem that he had made any thing on the seventh day; and in it
had ended his working. IV. Genesis xi. 7. They translated, go to, I will go down
and there confound their language: instead of, and let us go down; lest he
should have been thought to have been many. V. Genesis xviii. 12. They
translated, and Sarah laughed, speaking to them that stood by her instead of
Sarah laughed within herself, saying Lest Ptolomy should mock them, and say,
how do you know what she said to herself. VI. Genesis xlix. 6. About Jacob's words
to Simeon and Levi, they translated them, For i^ their fury they killed a man,
and in their self will brake down a wall; instead of, Killed an ox (as it is in
the margin of our bible) that the king might not deride them for turning their
revenge against a beast. VII. Exodus iv. 10. And Moses took his wife and his
son, and set them upon what could bear a man instead of an ass; lest the king
should sco^ at the great prince and lawgiver Moses, because he rode upon an
ass, which was very contemptible among the Greeks, and that he should object
how could an ass bear a woman and two children? He would never have been so
hard put to it, if he had not been a beggar. VIII. Now the sojourning of the
children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was 330 years, Exodus xii. 40.
Notwithstanding they abode in Egypt but 210 years, as their father Jacob
fore^o^^ them, descend ye (the letters of which words ^ Hebrew signify 210)
neither; so that the computation 430 years must commence from the time that
Isaac was born, which was the holy seed Abraham; therefore they translated it,
and (...) dwelling of the children of Israel in Egypt (an other lands) was 430
years. IX. And unto the little ones of the children of Israel he stretched out
his hand, Exodus iv. little ones they put for princes, le^t the king should say
the great men escaped, but the children of the sons of Israel were punished. X.
Numb. xvi, 15. And Moses said I have not taken one ass from them; this they
translated, I took of them nothing of value, because Ptolomy might say, though he
took not an ass, yet he might take rewards of them of much greater value and
price. X. Deuteronomy. iv. 19. Lest thou should be driven to worship the Sun, and
Moon and the Stars, even all the host of Heaven, which the Lord thy God has,
divided (or imparted) to all nations under the whole Heaven, they added, the
Lord thy God has imparted (to shine) upon all nations; lest he should say the
holy and blessed Lord has divided the Sun, Moon, and Stars to all people, and
has given them license to worship them. XII. Deuteronomy. xvii. And has gone and
served other Gods, which I have not commanded; they added, to worship, lest the
king should say, that the Lord did command them to serve some other Gods
besides himself. XIII. They translated an hare, little feet, because the king's
wife was called Hare, and he might not say they mocked him.
When those seventy elders had translated the Jewish law into the Greek tongue,
Ptolomy instead of being offended with them, rejoiced much at their wisdom and
unanimity, honoring them with princely apparel, and with gi^^ sent them home
merry and glad, together with large oblations and offering to the God of Israel.

A Journey to Jerusalem, or the Travels of Fourteen Englishmen to Jerusalem, in
the year 1609.
IN A LETTER FROM ALEPPO.
Honored Sir,
THESE serve to accompany an account of our Journey to the HOLY LAND, for which
I might refer you to others, who have given a more exact relation of that
pilgrimage; yet according to your desire, I present you with this my narrative.

TUESDAY, May 3, 1669, we set sail from Scanderoon with N. E. wind in the
Margaret. Tho. Mideleton commander, being fourteen Englishmen (of the factory
of Aleppo) (...) company; but being forced to return three times by contrary
winds, by May 10. we arrived at Trippoly, whose port is guarded with six small
castles near the sea, and one great castle upon the land; defended from tempest
on the we^^ with i^^ands, and on the east with a cape of land (...) so that
only a north wind can prejudice ship^ in this port: the ground is stony, which
forced the captains to buoy up their cables, the ships ridi^^ in six or seven
fathom water. The town is, about a mile from the marine, situate upon a sh^^ of
a hill, and has one good castle for its defense the town is ruinate, and there
were few people to be seen, it being the time of making white silk, and most of
the people in their gardens.

May 13. After three days treatment by the consul (for English, French and
Dutch) with extraordinary civility; about four in the afternoon we set forward
for mount Lebanon, and two hours riding from Trippoly, pitched our tent at the
village Coffersinue; the inhabitants are Christians, and live in houses of
reeds, and covered with bushes; the road to this village is very pleasant,
through a forest of olive trees, and in the valleys are gardens of mulberries,
with which they feed their silk worms. May 14, we departed from Coffersinue
about four in the morning, passing in a good road, and through plains sowed
with wheat: About six we passsed over several mountains resembling marble, if
not really so, from which we had a fine prospect of the fruitfulness of the
valleys: between these mountains, upon the ascent of an hill, we came to a
fountain, where we breakfasted; at seven we rose from the fountain, and having
passed a very dangerous and rugged mountain, about nine we came to Eden, a
small village, and very pleasantly seated, being surrounded with mulberries,
and other sorts of trees, walnuts especially we found very common in this
mount: we went to the hishop's house, a most miserable ruinated cottage, who
coming to bid us welcome, appeared more like a dunghill-raker than a bishop. We
enquired whence this village had its name. The Naconites who inhabit the
mountains, say, this was the place where Adam committed (...) sin of eating the
forbidden fruit; but the bishop told us it was in heaven, where were three
trees Adam being forbidden to eat of one of them which was the fig tree: but
after having eaten he fell down from heaven among those ceda^^ which are two
hours riding from the bishop house, and there began to till the ground. The
bishop being very ignorant, we forbore to enquire farther. The bishop has great
respect shown him, every one kissing his hand on the knees bare headed: near
his house he has a r^inated church, with an altar in it; and a lit^^^ beyond
is a small chapel, near the head of a ^vulet that feeds his house with water,
where (...) found many men with Frank names, which ha^ continued there from the
year 1611.

Mid day coming, the bishop made what preparation his house would afford for
dinner, killing two kids and a goat, and giving us the b^^wine the mountain did
afford, being well-relish^ red and white wine. Night coming, after supper we
kissed his hand; and next morning, being now twelve in company, went to take
(...) leave, and made him a present of money, besides something to the
servants, as is usual f^^ pilgrims that take this voyage, two of our company
waiting our return to Trippoly.

May 15, about five in the morning, we ro^^ from thence, and about eight came
to the ^^dars, all that remain of them, being in a ve^^ small compass. We spent
some time in cutting sticks, and setting our nan^es on the great trees. At this
place came to us the captain of a village called Upshara, an hour's ride from
the cedars. In our way as we returned, he invited us to dinner at his village,
which we accepted of, and after dinner made him a present. This man is a
Maronite and takes caffer or toll of the Turks who pass that way with their
sheep and oxen; he has an hundred soldiers under his command, who are all
christians. About two o'clock we mounted, and after three hour's riding, we
came to a mighty deep descent, winding in and out, which is the way to the
patriarch of the Maronite's house, called Cannibene; it is a very good convent,
and lies under the rock; they have a bell in the church as in Europe, and go to
their devotions morning and evening: After we had kissed the patriarch's hand,
we demanded what was to be seen, and the drugger^ carried us to see Marrice's
cross, of whom they recount this story.

'That a Venetian in the time that the Franks had the country, came with his
wife and one daughter to live there; and after some years, his wife dying, he
was resolved to go into the convent and live a religious life, and would
therefore have his daughter to leave him, but his persuasions could not prevail
with her; but rather than leave her father, she would put on man's apparel, and
live a devoted life with him also; which at last (though unwillingly) he
assented, she being young and handsome; there they lived, very strictly for
several years: afterward her father died, and the lay brothers and fathers
going out as usually, to till the ground, she seldom went with them, the chief
of the convent keeping her at home (being much taken with such handsome young
man as he thought) whereupon they began to grumble, that St. Marrena d^^ not go
with them; so that at last, to satisfy the fratres he was sent out to work
among then near the village Tursa: presently after, one of the young virgins of
that village proving with child, she came to the convent, and laid it to the
charge of St. Marrena, who was thereupon presently excommunicated, and lived a
religious life in the grot near convent, for the space of seven years, and
being then again admitted into the convent, and still continuing to live a very
strict life, he at length died; and the fathers coming according to their
custom, to anoint the body, found that he was a woman, whereupon they began to
cross themselves, and to beg pardon for excommunicating her, and have built an
altar in a grot, and called it by the name of St. Marrena, as they have also in
several grots thereabouts, in remembrance of the religious relick of those that
dwelt therein; and when they carry any body to see them, they presently fall
down to prayers.'

About a league from the convent are two Frenchmen that live a hermit's life,
having bread and wine allowed them by the patriarch: Night coming on we went to
supper with the patriarch, the bishop Aleppo, and two other bishops, with what
the place afforded; at supper they brought out a great glass which held near
two quarts with which the old man soon made himself merry, it being their
custom to drink freely; he telling us that glass had belonged to the convent
above a hundred years, and that the Turks coming once to ransack the convent,
seeing this glass, told one of the Fratres, if he could drink off that full of
pure wine, he would save the convent: which one of them doing the Turks went
away, admiring what sort of people they were. May 16, we took our leave of the
patriarch, and presented him with some livres, ^as also the poor fratres and
other belonging to the convent, and so took our journey to Trippoly, having had
a review of those mountains, and the country adjacent, overspread with many
fair villages, and fruitful valleys, sown with corn, and a great quantity of
mulberry gardens; it being the general employment of the inhabitants to make
silk.

We returned to Trippoly to the consul's house that night, where after two
day's repose, and having been extraordinary well treated, we took our leave of
the consul. May 18, about midnight, we set sail for Joppa, with a good wind* in
the morning we came in the sight of Cape Blanco where the wind proving
contrary, we were forced to beat up and down for two days before we could
weather the cape; the wind coming good, we weathered it, and came within sight
of Cape Carmel, which two capes make the bay of Aerica, on which there is a
convent of white friars, and there they showed us Elisha's tomb. Three or four
hours fail further, we came in sight of Cesarea, now ruinate, and inhabited by
a company of savage Arabs. May 23, we arrived (...) Joppa, which has no
harbor to defend ship from storms, but very good ground to anchor i^ about ten
fathom water: It is a poor town, a^^ has one castle to defend these ships that
co^^ in close to the shore: the chief trade thereof (...) potashes for soap,
cottons and cotton yarn, which the Franks bring from thence. May 24, we arrived
at Ramah, a pleasant village, the trade o^ the inhabitants is in fillados, and
the livelihood of the women is to spin it; but the people a^^ poor. We were
treated there at the conven^ till a messenger was dispatched to the convent
(...) Jerusalem, for our admittance to pass thithe^ because of some stories
that flew abroad of the plague raging in the place from whence we ca^^ -- our
messenger returned back that night.

May 25. In the morning we mounted to take our journey for Jerusalem, and
baited at St. Jerome's church about twelve, and p^rtook (...) what small
provisions we had with us; and the heat of the day being passed, we proceeded
on our journey; and about four in the afternoon arrived at Jerusalem, at Joppa
gate, wh^^ we tarried till the druggerman of the conve^^ went to the caddy for
license for us to enter t^^ city, which having obtained, and delivered (...)
our swords, and what other arms we had, to (...) carried to the convent, we
entered the city (...) foot, and were conducted by the druggerma^ the Latins
convent, with two or three father we found them at their devotion, and
afterwa^^ all went into the father guardian's chamber, who embraced, and bid us
welcome; we were carried to our lodgings, and the father procurator came to us,
bringing two or three bottles of the best wine, and desiring us to call for
what we wanted: this was our first entertainment; but I should have told you,
that our druggerman, Mallanis Salley, who conducted us from Joppa, through the
mountains up to Jerusalem was formerly a robber himself, and could therefore
the better carry us through the Arabs, who insest those mountains, and live all
upon plunder. He was a Greek by nation and religion. Now to our further
entertainment at Jerusalem. The next morning father Tamasa, a lay brother,
mighty serious, and religious in their way, came to our chamber with milk,
wine, and fruit (with a blessing in his mouth) the season being very hot; and
about twelve o'clock we went to dinner, two or three lay brothers attending at
the hall-door, with a basin and water for us to wash; and then entering the
hall, the fathers stood all on one side near one another, saying grace in
Latin, and then signing the Lord's prayer all together; and afterward bowing
toward the picture of our Savior at supper with his apostles, which is placed
over the guardian's head, adorned with silver crosses about it, etc. The
guardian has his table along in the middle of the room, and two long tables
stand on each side, one for pilgrims, and the other for the fathers; after they
had kissed the ground, we all sat down, and had every one his allotment b^ought
in a little dish, never wanting three or four courses of several sorts of meat:
our wine water, and fruit was set ready: the wine about a quart, the water
something less, which was the allowance of two men, and had two glasses
belonging to it: about the middle of dinner the frater came and changed our
water, that it might drink the fresher. Dinner being ended, the father guardian
knocks, and the fratres rise and kneel with their faces toward the picture of
our Savior with his disciples at supper, and mumbling something to themselves,
they kiss the ground, and then began to take away, one carrying the dishes,
another the knives, every one having his appointment; and then give thanks in
the same manner as before dinner; then washing at the door, they go into the
church to prayer for a quarter of an hour; this they do daily, rising always
early, and in the night also to go to mass.

At this time there were two or three Christians come from Bethlehem, whose art
is to make the figure of our Savior's sepulcher, or what holy story you please
upon your arm, they make it o^ ^^^lue color, and it is done by the continual
pricking of your arm with two needles, they began presently to go to work on
some of us, and having presented us the patterns of abundance o^ prints, every
one took his fancy.

The next day, May 27. We all agreed to g^ into the temple, and about four in
the afternoon we went: ten or twelve fathers live there continually, and have
their church there: the do^^^ is sealed with the caddy's seal, and when any man
goes in, he pays fourteen livres; we being entered the temple, the fathers
saluted us, and conducted us to their lodgings; after we had been about an
hour, they prepared to go in procession to all the holy places, presenting us
every one a book of holy songs, for every place in Latin.

And so we set out, the fathers being dressed in white surplices, and the chief
among them with cloth of silver over his surplice, with two more dressed in the
like garb to lead him; there was a great silver crucifix carried before him,
and two men going on each side of it, with incense pots to perfume every holy
place that we came to. -- And so went to the places following.

1. The pillar to which our Savior was bound when he was scourged. 2. The
prison where he was put. 3. The place where the soldiers divided his garment.
4. The place where St. Helena found our Savior's cross. 5. The pillar to which
he was bound when he was crowned with thorns. 6. Mount Calvary, where he was
crucified. 7. Where our Savior was ^a^^ed to the cross. 8. Where he was
anointed. 9. The sepulcher of Christ. 10. Where our Savior appeared to Mary
Magdalen in the shape of a gardener. 11. The chapel of the Virgin Mary, where
our Savior first appeared to her after his resurrection. I might give you a
particular description of the adornment of these places; but to be short, every
one have lamps burning at them, some are paved with marble, others are hung
with pictures: the place where our Savior was laid down to be nailed to the
cross, is paved with marble also; but in the place where the cross stood, the
marble is covered over with silver, silver lamps, and wax candles continually
burning, and our Savior crucified standing on it: the sepulcher is covered
with marble, with silver lamps continually burning o^ it: so has she anointing
stone: you must go into the sepulcher bare foot, as also on Mount Calvary.

Here all sorts of Christians have their churches, the Greeks the best, the
Latins, the Armenians, the Coptes and the Syrians, have each of them churches
here. The Greeks and Latin^ are the two powerful religions in the temble, and
with great sums of money, and the credit they have at Stambul or
Constantinople, buy these holy places out of one another hands; the other
parties are poor and squeezed into a small part of the temple; the Latins once
offered ten thousand livres for a piece of the cross, which the Greeks bought
out of their hands. These religious people bear little respect one to another,
speaking very basely of each other. After our procession, we went to view all
the places and churches again; the Greeks have a place in the middle of their
church, which they say, is the middle of the world. They have another place by
the prison of Christ, with two holes to put the feet in; there is also a narrow
passage between two pillars, in imitation of the streightness of (...) path to
Heaven, which the Greeks creep through in the church of the Syrian, is the
intended sepulcher of Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus; and near the
anointing stone is a tomb where Godfrey and Baldwin kings of Jerusalem are
buried. In the same place is the rent of the rock which begins above, near the
place where our Savior was crucified, and in that rent, they say Adam's head
was found when our Savior gave up the ghost. Thus having seen the temple, we
returned to the convent.

May 18. Went out of the city at Damascus gate and turning on the right came to
one of fish ponds of the old city, and a quarter of a mile further to the grot,
where Jeremiah lived when he wrote his lamentations; on the left hand in the
entrance, is a lodge in the rock, about a story high, where they say Jeremiah
slept; and below over against the door is a hole intended for his sepulcher;
passing through a ruinate door, you come into the yard, where his well is,
being a very good spring of sweet water, there you pay one livre; afterward
passing a long the side (...) mountain that lies level with the city, a little
beyond Jeremiah's tomb, we came to the sepl^chre of the king; the entrance into
the first room was so small and low that we were forced to creep, in which
there were seven sepulchers cut out of the rock; the second room there are
eight, and in the third twenty six, and many more in several others. One of the
rooms has a door of stone cut out of the rock, and shuts and opens as a door
with hinges: this door belongs to the room where Jehosaphat was buried, his
coffin is of stone, with a cover to it, very neatly wrought on the sides with
flowers, as several are also in the first room, but they knew not what kings
they are; there is also another chamber into which we crept, so that there are
in all forty two burying places under ground, to which there is but one door to
enter, all adorned with admirable workmanship, which I being unskilled in, am
unfit to express in proper terms; and so we returned to the convent, entering
the city at the same gate.

May 29. We reposed, some of our company being a marking.

May 30. We took horse to go for Bethlehem, and went out at the West gate
called Joppa gate and turning on the left hand, and taking the lowest path, we
passed along the road that the Virgin Mary brought our Savior, when she came
to offer him at the temple; and half a mi^^ from the city is the place where
the tree tirabintha grew, which the Virgin Mary set under to give him suck, but
the tree being cut down, the place is encompassed with a wall: on the left hand
you see David's house, whence he spyed Bathsheba washing herself; on the right,
a little off the road, is old Simeon's and Elias's house; and a quarter of a
mile further is the well where the wise men first saw the star: a little
further (...) the ground where the reapers were at work^ when Habbakkuk coming
to bring them meat^ the Angel took him up by the hair of his head^ and carried
him into Babylon, to Daniel in the lion's den: afterward we saw Jacob's house,
and a hill like a sugar loaf, where the Franks remained forty years, after they
were driven out of Jerusalem; next is a monastery of Monks of the order of St.
Tavola Paula Romana, who when they die, are buried at a convent in Bethlehem.

A mile further is the place where the Angel appeared to the shepherds, and
cried, Gloria in excelsis, etc. when our Savior was born, where there has
been a convent, but now there only remains an arched vault where we paid money
to the Arabs, who when, they espy any Franks going thither, ride post before to
take possession of the place, and get something from them; a quarter of a mile
hence, in the way to Solomon's cisterns, is the village of the shepherds, on
the back part whereof is a well, of which they say the Virgin Mary desired to
drink; but the inhabitants denying to draw her any water, it presently
overflowed for her to drink; a little way from this village is Joseph's house,
and a while after we came to Solomon's gardens, lying shelving. At the bottom
of them is the road from grand Cairo, and round the top passes the aquaduct
which feeds Jerusalem with water, from thence we saw Tekoa standing on a high
hill; the waters come from the fountains which feeds Solomon's cisterns;
passing a mile along by the aquaduct, we came to Solomon's cisterns, which are
three; the first had no water in it, and about 150 yards long, and sixty broad,
and of a great depth; the second had a little water, something less in compass;
the third was full, and as big as the first: they run one into another, and are
fed by the spring that feeds the city. The fathers say, that they were made to
swim in, being built with steps for a man to go down, but seem father intended
for a reserve of water for the city or the gardens, having passage to both;
near the gardens is an ill contrived castle, where a few villains inhabit to
whom we paid one livre per man, for leave to go into the grot, where the
springs are that feed the city, and the cisterns; it is large, and has three
springs, and a large passage cut through the rock, toward the cisterns,
passable by a man, but we went not to the end of it.

We mounted our horses, leaving the castle on the right hand; at a distance we
saw St. George's church, where the fathers say the chains remain, wherewith St.
George was bound which will presently cure a mad man, if bound therewith. After
an hour and a half's riding we came near to Bethlehem, where passing through a
narrow lane, the guard consisting of four or five musketeers, received five
livres of every one of us, and our druggerman that went with us received three.
And arriving at the convent we paid one for our entrance: after being welcomed
by the fathers we took our repose till five in the evening, and then prepared
to go in procession to the holy places, in the same manner as we did at the
temple in Jerusalem; the places we visited were these.

1. The place where our Savior was born. 2. The tomb of St. Joseph to whom the
Virgin Mary was espoused. 3. St. Innocent's tomb. 4. The place where St. Jerome
lived, when he translated the Bible into Latin. 5. St. Jerome's praying place.
6. St. Jerome's tomb. 7. St. Paul's tomb. 8. St. Eustathia's daughters. 9. The
sepulcher of St. Eusebius, Abbot of Bethlehem. 10. We return to the chapel of
St. Catherina built by St. Paula. Next is the great church without the convent,
which has 48 pillars of marble, about three yards long, all in one piece. At
evening we went to visit the place of our Savior's birth, formerly belonging
to the Latins, till the Greeks bought it out of their hands; so that now the
Latins, when they go their procession pray at that door by which they formerly
entered. The precipio has two doors, one over against the other, well lined
with carved iron, and strengthened with iron spikes: we went in barefoot; on
the right hand in the entrance, is the place they say where our Savior was
born, which is lined with marble; and in the middle of the room there is a
plate covered with silver, by which they sat a dish to receive your charity: on
the left hand is a manger where the Virgin Mary laid our Savior, lined with
marble; which and at the end of the manger on the right hand, is the picture of
St. Jerome naturally in the marble, which the fathers esteem as a miracle; over
against this manger is the place where the three wise men stood when they came
to worship our Savior. At the end of this place in a corner, is a hole made up
with marble wherein they say the Virgin Mary put the water, when she had washed
her han^ over which a lamp burns continually, and great many in other places
over this precipio, the great church is the altar of circumcision where our
Savior was circumcised.

Having seen what was rare at Bethlehem May 31. early in the morning we
proceeded our Journey in which we saw the following.

1. The grot where the Virgin Mary hid herself when she was warned to flee into
Egypt and her milk running out of her breasts the^ made the earth turn white,
which earth the ^^tholicks do very much esteem. 2. David's ^^^^erns. 3. The
grot wherein the Virgin Mary and Joseph lived, before they could get a ho^^^.
4. The tomb of Rachel, Jacob's wife, whi^^ the Turks do also much esteem. 5.
The fi^^^ of Sennacherib, where the Angel of the L^^^ slew in one night one
hundred and eighty (...) thousand of the Syrians. In this place is a v^^^lage
called Boteechelle, where the fathers affir^ no Turk can live. 6. The place
where the pillars of the convent of Ramah were made. 7. The vineyard whence the
spies of the land (...) Canaan took the cluster of grapes, to show (...)
fruitfulness of it; also the fountain where Ph^^ baptized the Q. of Sheba's
eunuch. 8. The ^^sart of John Baptist: and after an hour's rid^ we came to John
Baptist's fountain, where (...) his chamber and a rock, wherein there was place
cut out like a bench for his bed: to br^^ off a bit of this rock, is worthy
excommunication. 9. Zechariah's house, where the Virgin Mary ^^me to salute her
cousin Elizabeth; for the angel that told her she should conceive; told her so,
that her cousin was with child; and upon ^er salutation the child leaped in the
womb. -- Near this house is a fountain with two cisterns, which is called
Elizabeth's fountain. 10. A stone where John Baptist preached, which the
fathers say the Turks have endeavored to break in pieces, but could not. 11
Where John Baptist was born, now a stable, but formerly a church; the fathers,
upon John Baptist's day carry an organ thither, and adorn the place for their
prayer. 12. The tombs of the Maccabees, which we saw a distance, and being
ruinated appear as so many arches. 13. We passed by a village, where the men
are all Turks, and the women Christians; for the people being poor, the Turks
were very severe with them for their harach; who not being able to pay all at
once, turned Turks, etc. 14. We came to the mountain Crupil, where part of the
wood whereof our Savior's cross was made was cut down, and over the place
where they say the tree stood, is a stately church, in the possession of the
Greeks; the place just where the tree grew is inlaid with silver, by which they
set a dish for charity. The floor of this church is well wrought with mosaic
work, and painted with scripture stories; and instead of a bell, they knock
upon a board that hangs up, which founds somewhat like a bell.

And now we go forward to the convent at Jerusalem, passing by mount Gihon,
where Solomon was anointed king, and about night came to our lodgings, having
made two days' jour^^^ to see the holy places, and traverse the mountains of
Judea, we slept very well that night, b^^ still we have more pilgrimages.

June 1. We lay still to recover ourselves (...) our Bethlehem journey, but
father Tomasa, o^ of his zeal, is very importunate with us to (...) walking to
see other places, which are merit^^ous in the Roman church, and had we been ^
their religion it had been impossible to have mi^^ heaven, for we received
indulgencies for all o^^ lives, which fancy, I fear deceives too many.

June 2. We began to search for the holy places, which are these following: 1.
The immo^tion of Isaac near the temple, called mount M^riah, inlaid with
silver, and a dish set by for your offering. 2. Peter's prison still made a
prison by the Turks: at the end of which is a ho^^ in the wall, where they say
the chain was faste^ed with which St. Peter was chained, little r^membering how
often Jerusalem has been distroyed, and the stones of that old wall are now
probably as far under ground, as these are above* 3. The monastery of the
nights of Malta; a v^ry fair building, one room has several partitio^ for
beds, with a hole in the middle, that if an^ of them are sick or fluxitive,
they are laid the^ to which the water, being bad, and the air, (...) wholesome,
does very much incline them. ^^ Solomon's temple, which if any Christian go
(...) to, or but up the stairs, he must turn Turk or (...) burnt: the rarity of
which I shall give you an ^^count of, when I come to a prospect, 5. St.
^^lena's hospital, where there are seven great cal^^rons, in which she used to
have provisions dressed for the poor, where we pay one livre for entrance. 6.
The judgment-gate at which our ^aviour was brought in; and near the gate is the
place where he was condemned. 7. The ^^^o^ous way which Christ went to be
crucified, (...) the way is the house of Veronica, who gave our Savior a
napkin to wipe his face, as he passed by: There is also Lazarus's house, and
the house of the rich glutton, and the place where our Savior fainted (as they
say) and Simon took up the cross, and near that is the church where the Virgin
Mary stood to see him pass by, and swooned with grief, now called the Virgin
Mary's church. 8. Herod's place, now ruinated, and is now the Bassa's seraglio,
in one room is the place where they clothed our Savior with purple. 9.
Pilate's house, here they show the place where our Savior was crowned with
thorns, and the pillar to which he was bound, which was brought from thence,
and put into the temple, next, we enter the hall, where Pilate washed his
hands, and declared himself innocent of our Savior's blood, out of which we
had a fair prospect of Solomon's temple, it is built within the middle of a
spacious yard, very well paved, there are several arches, good walks, and
buildings about it: the temple is wrought with mosaic work, and by the Turks'
report is very rich within, it being one of their mosques, and though they have a
half moon upon all their temples or mosques, yet this only has a cross through
the middle: the fathers reporting (...) world not stand till the cross was
made. 10. The place, where Christ was scourged, now a shop f^^^^nen cloth. 11.
The house of Annas, where o^ Savior being hurried with violence down a stee^
place to prevent falling, he laid hold of the corner of a wall, where there is
a place in one of the stones fit for a man's hand, which the fa^^^^ account a
great miracle. 12. Simon the Pha^^^sce's house, where there is a stone, with
the print of a foot, which they said our Savior made, when he stood to pardon
Mary Magdalen^ her sins: the fathers say, the Turks have endeavored oftentimes
to remove this stone, but still it comes into the same place again. 13. The
house of Joakim and Anna, a sair high building and in an under room, cut out of
the rock, (...) the place where they say the Virgin Mary was born. 14. The pool
of Bethsaida, where the sick lay to be healed, the Angel coming to trouble the
water, and he that entered in first was healed; but it is now dry, and half
filled with earth. 14. St. Stephen's gate, and a little out of the city is the
place where Stephen was stoned: and the fathers fancy, that there is the print
of his hands, face and knees when he fell down. 16. The valley of Jehosaphat,
at the bottom of the hill, between the mountain on which Jerusalem stands, and
mount Olivet. 17. The place where the Virgin Mary is buried, whence going down
a great many stone steps, you come into large vault, where all the Christians
have the altars apart, all being of several opinions, an^ the Turks and
Christians both burn lamps, over her grave: here we pay one livre for entrance,
and forty eight stone steps upward is Joseph's tomb, and against that the tombs
of Joakim and Anna. 18. The place where Christ sweat blood, and the Angel
appeared to comfort him, is near the bottom of mount Olivet. 19. The place
where our Savior prayed that this cup might pass from him, and near that, is
the rock on which his disciples sat, when he went to prayer, between which two
places he was taken, it is now bordering on the garden of Gethsemane, but might
formerly be part of the garden, and is on the ascent of the mount Olivet, where
the multitude going to carry our Savior away, Peter smote off Malchus' car.
20. The place where they say the Virgin Mary prayed for St. Stephen while he
was stoned. 21. Where Christ wept over Jerusalem, it is almost at the top of
mount Olivet. 22. The place where our Savior ascended into Heaven, having as
they say, left the print of his foot on a stone, it has now a chapel built
over it, with fourteen marble pillars, it is at the top of mount Olivet, and a
little way off is the place where the men of Galilee stood when the Angel asked
them, why stand ye gazing up? 23. Where the Angel told the Virgin he should be
raised in three days. 24. Pelagius his grot, where we saw Bethpage, where the
asses colt was tied. 25. The tree under which our Savior stood when he
preached the Judgment sermon. 26. The place where he made the Lord's prayer.
27. Where the apostles made the creed, being a growth of twelve arches. 28. The
sepulchers of the prophets, forty seven (...) number cut out of the rock, and
entering in (...) a door, we came into a large grot, where ar^ several places
cut out, sit to contain a coffin here we paid one livre. 29. The tree where
Judas hanged himself. 30. The sepulcher, which Jehosaphat intended for himfelf,
but being king, he was buried in the sepulcher of the king 31. Absalom's pillar
or sepulcher, cut out of the rock, and about the bigness of a small chamber
with pillars round about like a room, built for some single person, it is of a
good height, and has some carving about it. 32. They say he^ is the print of
Christ's feet, for when he was carried to Jerusalem he stopped at the brook
Ce^ron, and desired to drink: this brook is not but a small channel, and has no
water, in the winter the water comes down from the hills, and makes a small
current. 33. The place when St. James hid himself three days and thr^^ nights,
it is cut out of the rock, which m^^^ needs have been made a dwelling place,
near the is the sepulcher of Zacharias, the son of Barach^as, cut out of the
rock. 34. On the side of the hill on which Solomon worshipped Moloch, a^^
chambers cut out of the rock, which they say (...) the place wherein the three
hundred wives, and one thousand concubines of Solomon were kept 35. The
fountains of the Virgin Mary. wh^^ you go down to by stone steps, the water
wher^of is so sweet, that were a man blindfolded, could not think it to be any
thing but milk and water. 36. The place where the prophet Isaiah was sawn
asunder; his sepulcher is under a rock near the same. 37. The fountain of
Siloa, by which is a cistern wherein formerly the pilgrims used to wash, but
now ruined, and filled with stones and mud, yet is its water still recounted
good for the eye sight; and near this is Golgotha. 38. Next in a bottom is a
well, wherein they say Jeremiah hid the holy fire, when the children of Israel
were carried captive; and when they returned 40 years after, they say found the
same fire in the well. 39. Ascending up the mount we came to the tombs of Annas
and Caiaphas, who were high priests. 40. And near is the place where the
apostles hid themselves; entering a straight passage, we came into a room under
ground, out of which there go several holes, wherein they say, the apostles
lay. 41. We then came to Aceldama, a grot now held by the Armenians for a
burying place: it is said, the earth thereof will consume the body of a man in
forty eight hours; there are several vents on the top to let out the smell. We
went down under a rock, to a place where we could look into it, and there saw
the form of a man entire, they being laid in, but not covered with earth. 42.
We came to the fountain of Beersheba, at the bottom of Sion, in which there is
now little water, we being forced to tarry a quarter of an hour for one draught.

Having seen all that was remarkable in these parts, we made toward the
convent, having got a great deal of credit with father Tomaso, that we should
be such zealous pilgrims, as to was from five in the morning till midday; but
encourage us would still be foremost, and told (...) always there was some
places more worth (...) seeing than any before; and though he was (...) and the
weather hot, yet at the going up o^ hill, he would run that he might enco^^age
us protestants, but never hoped or thou^^^^ that he merited any thing by it;
but at leng^^ we came to the convent again well weary, ev^^^ one returning to
his lodgings.

June 3. We reposed at the convent: after dinner one of the fathers came and
told us, th^^ the father guardian would wash our feet; whi^^ honor we
accounted to great for us, and desired to be excused, but we were forced to
comply with the orders of the convent; the b^^ which was as big as a tub, was
placed by a (...) and rose leaves and herbs put into the wat^^ the fathers
stood in a row, singing godly hym^ we sat down, and the father guadian wrapped
towel about our knees, to save our cloths: th^^ they began to scrub our legs
and feet, being masters of their art, there were two fratres attending, one on
one leg, and one other on the other; having first dried the left foot, the
friar ^^es it, and puts on our slipper, then he dries (...) right foot, and
wraps the towel about the to^^ with his hand, and then come all the fra^^^ and
kiss it; he gives us a little candle, in ta^^^^ which we kiss his hand, and so
rise and stand (...) till all our company are washed in like man^^ then we went
in procession round their chap^^^ they saying several prayers at three altars,
and so (...) returned to our chambers.

June 4. After dinner we went into the kitchen, ^^ere we found all the fathers,
with napkins b^^^re them, washing the dishes, every one taking (...) part, even
to the father guardian himself; ^^me were cleansing, some handing away; but
(...) the while with one conceat, they say some prayer, it seeming to be their
endeavor, that all that they do, may be to the glory of God: this being done
they go all to pray, and you shall never see the chapel without some of them,
yea, and two or three times in the night they rise to prayers. On whit-sunday
the chapel was ador^ed something extraordinarily, a very rich canopy being set
on the right hand of the high altar, for the father guardian to fit under: when
the prayers began, the father guardian came into the chapel, and sat under this
canopy: there were three or four fathers dressed in cloth of silver, like
Heralds, two whereof attended on each side of the guardian, and two stand over
against him.

Then they began to dress the father guardian in his festival robes, and having
read two or three lines, put a piece of linen laced about his neck, and then
his surplice, reading still between every robe that was put on. Then they cover
him with a garment of rich satin, and cloth of silver, the two that stand over
against him, bowing at some words. His body being thus dressed, the two fathers
put a mitre on his head, with all the respect imaginable; after a short prayer,
they take the father guardian by the hand, and lead him to the altar, he
standing in the middle of (...) four fathers, adorned as aforesaid; the (...)
fathers have their surplices on, and the organ go; then making a short prayer
at the altar, they lead the guardian to his place again, and alter a little
reading they take off his mitre, and he sits bare till the prayer be done; then
they pat on another mitre, the first was of cloth silver, and second was of
cloth of gold, set fu^^ of rubies, diamonds, and other stones; they took off
that also, and put on a third mitre of cloth of gold, differing in shape from
the others; the guard being led to and from the altar a great while: at length
when they came to read where the Holy Ghost came down upon the apostles
assembled together, a father upon the terrace was appointed to throw down a
white pigeon, dres^ up with ribbons, in imitation of the Holy Ghost but he met
with some difficulty, for the window was so fast shut that he could not open it
for a great while: so that we had like to have gone away without their Holy
Ghost, but this difficulty overcome, he made the dove descend among us which
being done, after a prayer, they began to undress the father guardian again,
reading all the while his robes were taking off, and so that day's service was
done.

Now we began to think of going to the Dead sea, and the river Jordon,
demanding what our expenses would be, the fathers say, twenty-five livres, but
we all agreed not to give above twenty. The fathers sent our resolution to the
bassa^ and he returned answers, that if we would go we should pay twenty-two
livres, and if we would not, he would have ten livres a man: we thinking
ourselves under his command, were not willing to embroil the convent, who bear
all damages, as they have done for severals; but thanks be to God, none
happened in our time. We all resolved to go except Mr. H. T. one Englishman
more and a Dutchman, not thinking the bassa had been in earnest: but because
they went not, they were forced to pay ten livres for nothing. We then came to
Bethany, now a small village, where entering into a grot under ground, we saw a
tomb, from whence they say our Savior raised Lazarus, after he had been dead
so many days: here we had the bassa's guard to wait upon us, for fear of the
Arabs, who are on the other side Jordan, on the land of Moab, and often made
incursions, and have sharp disputes at the end of the lance, with those that
live on this side, in the land of promise: the bassa pretended he must send
fifty men with us, but it proved but fifteen or sixteen. Having reposed a
little on the ground, about nine at night we mounted our horses, and passing
through the turning and winding of the mountains, came in the morning to the
foot of the Quarantine mountain, where we dismounted, and making the cold earth
our bed, slept two or three hours, having our horses tied fast to our hands,
and the sun rising, we rose also, and walked to Elisha's fountain, a stone's
throw off; and before the sun was too hot, we mounted our horses at the foot of
the mountain, and so began to ascend it being very steep, and having ascended a
great height, (...) came to the place where they say our Savi^^^ slept when he
fasted forty days, and from (...) the mountain received its name: this place
(...) near the height of the mountain, but the passag^ to the top is known only
to the Arabs: be^^ are several cisterns of water, and frontispieces (...)
chapels, but the passage to them is cut of^ as we were going up, the thoughts
of the eager of descending entered into our heads, and (...) emperor of
Germany's druggerman or interpre^ter for those country languages being fearf^^
got two Turks to conduct him down, and so ha^^ing all had a safe descent, we
rode chearfull^ back to Elisha's fountain, formerly bitter, (...) he throwing
in a handful of salt, the water became sweet. Here we lay till four o'clock,
and the heat of the sun being over, made to Jerich^ and arrive about five,
where there are now onl^ a few poor cottages; we pitched by Zacheus tree. The
inhabitants are most Arabians and some Greeks. Here the captain of the village
came to welcome our bassa and his people, mounted on a mare valued at a
thousand livres, mare being only in esteem among them. Here we reposed under a
rotton hege, till about four next morning, having little pleasure in our
companions, the gnats and other stinging creatures.

We proceed then for the river Jordan, arriving by daylight, and tarried about
an hour t^ swim in the river; the streem is strong and rapid, and the force a
man can scarce resist; it run^ into the Dead sea; our guard were very hast^
(...) us to be gone, being afraid their enemies ^^uld find them; therefore we
all made ready, ^^d set forward for the dead sea, we passed through ^^most dreary
barren place, not having so much (...) a green herb, or grass, and the face of
the (...) covered with salt, and though dry, yet (...) horses sunk up to the
knees. We come (...) to the Dead sea, being about seventy or ^^^^ty miles in
breadth, and about eighteen o^^^. There is no place, from whence the wa^^r
which comes into it runs out again, except it (...) under the earth, neither
does it seem to in^^ease with the river Jordan, and several other ^aters that
run into it: it was once a fruitful ^alley, and compared for delight unto
Paradise, and called Pentapolis, of her five cities, but afterward destroyed
with fire from heaven, and ^^rned into this filthy lake, and barren desolation
which does encompass it; and to try the ^^^tue ^^at is reported to be in the
water, wherein they say a man cannot sink, some of our company went into the
sea, and found it impossible to get their bodies under water, yea could hardly
keep their legs under; the water is sulph^y, and the extremity of the saltness
not to be expressed, when they came out there was a perfect oil upon their
bodies. Our eyes being satisfied with curiosities and rarities, we made back to
Jerusalem -- the ruins of one of the cities that were destroyed for sodomy, now
lies good part out of the water, and is supposed to be Ze^oim.

Now the sun gets strength, and by reflection on the ground, makes the heat so
violent, that our faces looked as if the skin were flead off, b^ riding from
morning till four in the afternoo^ but the fathers being accustomed to meet
wi^^ tender faced travelers, soon provided something to mitigate our pain,
which was much increase by the saltness of the water of the dead sea; the night
we took little pleasure in eating, but mo^^ in sleeping, having had but little
in this voya^^ Having now visited all the places in the H^^^ Land, which
pilgrims usually do, we prepare^ for our return.

June 6. we being resolved to set forward in the morning, the father guardian
came and gave (...) his blessing, and sprinkled us with holy wate^ desiring us
to excuse our bad treatment, and th^^ if at any time we had been distasted we
would pass it over; but we knew it was a complimen^ for we had the civilest
entertainment imaginable and very far from disgusting us; for they were not
only ready to be our servants but our slaves yea, my honest namesake father
Tomasa, nev^^ ceased from morning to night from bringing us either victuals or
drink or asking whether w^ wanted any thing: and now for this his fourteen days
service we were no way able to recompense him, for they would take no money but
for (...) victuals, and some other small services: we therefore presented to
the convent thirty livres apiec^ and some that had servants more. The fath^^
procurator receiving it, they entered all (...) names in a book and the sums we
gave: the book where the names only were entered we ha^^ a view of, and took a
copy of all the Englishm^^ that were in it, from the year 1610 to this day,
being one hundred and fifty eight in number.

Now taking our leaves, the fathers all showed great affections to us, weeping,
and expressing their desires to enjoy our company longer; and our desires were
as much to be nearer home, to have an acccont of our friends.

June 7. We departed, our mulletteers having provided horses, intending to take
Emaus in our way; but night drawing on, we made St. Jerome's church our
sleeping place, formerly fathers lived in it, but the Arabs came upon them in
the night, and cut all their throats. The church is well bult, and has been
adorned with pictures on the walls, of which some remain to this day. About two
miles riding from Jerusalem we passed over the brook, out of which they say
David gathered the pebble stones to slay Goliath. June 8th, we arrived at the
convent in Ramah about ten in the morning, where we tarried till midnight, at
which time there was a ship to depart, and some of us intended to embark, the
rest took a boat like a Grave^end barge: we put our provisions of bread and
wine aboard, and so put to sea, keeping always near the shore for fear of a
storm. After three days sail we arriver at Acrica, formerly called Ptolemais,
always coming to anchor at night. The road being so bad, that all the art the
captains have, can but keep their cables together. This place is famous for
nothing but the ruins. The commodities in this place are only cottons, pot
ashes, and some fillotto's. Two days after, we arrived at Trippoly, where we
made bold at our old-house, the consul received as gladly, and our design was
to depart next day, but the plague still raging at Aleppo, the consul forced us
to stay twelve or fourteen days, all which time we were treated like princes,
and then, by his leave we embarked in a Dutch ship for Scanderoon, the rest of
our company (whom we left ^t Acrica to go to the sea of Galilee) being arrived.
June 26. we came to Scanderoon, where some were dead, and others dying, and one
flying from another, we tarried upon the mount and aboard the ship for some
time; and 29th arrived at Aleppo, where they died at that time seventy or
eighty in a day of the plague; and thus we ended our journey.

A true relation of the proceedings of the great council of the Jews, assembled
in the plains of Adjudy, in Hungaria, about thirty leagues distant fro^^ Buda,
to examine the Sriptures concerning Christ, Oct. 12th, 1650.
By Samuel Beert, an Englishman there present
IT has been very much desired by many honest Christians, that this relation
of the Jew^^ council should be published, which I did intend to communicate
only to my private friends. This chief argument which persuaded me to do it
was, because they conceive it to be a preparation, and hopeful sign of the Jews
conversion, and that will be glad tidings to the church of Christ, therefore I
yield to satisfy their desires, and thus it was.

At the place aforesaid there assembled about 300 Rabbis, called Jews, from
several parts of the world, to examine the scriptures concerning Christ. It
seems this place was thought most convenient for this council, in regard that
part of the country is not much inhabited, because of the continual wars
between the Turks and the king of Hungary. There they have fought formerly two
bloody battles. Yet both these princes, notwithstanding their own differences,
did give leave to the Jews to hold their council there. The Jews for their own
accommodation, made diverse tents for their repose, and had plenty of provisions
brought them from other parts of the country, during the time of their sitting.
The Jews making, as we said, diverse tents, they set up one large tent, only for
the council to sit in, being made almost four square, the North and South not
altogether so large as the East and West part. It had but one door, and that
opened to the East. In the middle of the tent there stood a table, and a stool
for the propounder to sit on, with his face toward the door of the tent. The
propounder was of the tribe of Levi, named Zacharias. And within this tent,
round about were placed forms, on which stood the rest of the council. They
were enclosed with a rail, at a distance from them, to prevent all strangers
and all such as could not prove themselves to be Jews by record, or dispute in
the Hebrew tongue, which many had forgotten that l^^^d in such countries, where
they were not a^^owed their synagogue; as in France, Spain, and those parts of
Italy that belong to the king of Spain, and the king or Naples, with the
province (...) Ap^lia, Sicilia, Calabria, and Sardinia: In which places if a
Jew be found, and denies the p^^ish religion, he is condemned and executed for
it. and yet profit and benefit allure them to dwell in those countries,
notwithstanding their fears and dangers and they are willing themselves t^
^^^get and neglect to teach their children their native language rather than
lose their opportunity of profit. And again, some of these Jews have burned the
ancient record of their tribes and families, that they might not be discovered
by searching, or other ways. And for this defect; that they could not prove
their tribes and family they were not permitted to come within the rails in the
time of their council, but commanded to remain with the strangers that attended
to see the event of this assembly. We conceive the number of people that
attended to see the issue of their preceedings were about three thousand
persons. The most part of them Germans, Almaine, Dalmatians, with some Greeks,
and a few Italians, but not one Englishman more than myself; for I was informed
that the king of Hungary not favoring the reformed religion, did give no
encouragement to any protestant church to send a divine thither. But he did
allow there should be some assistance sent from Rome; and their coming hither
proved a great unhappiness to this hopeful assembly, or council.

The first day, when the assembly first met, they spent some time in mutual
salutations, and as their manner is, kissed one another's cheeks, expressing
great joy for their happy meeting. And now all things being prepared for their
accommodation, they considered of the Jews that were to be admitted for members
of this council, for they only were admitted members, that could by record
prove themselves to be native Jews. And I observed, there were about five
hundred refused, and put by, though doubtless they were true Jews, yet they
could not by record prove themselves so to be. The number accepted was about
three hundred; and thus the business of the first day closed.

The second day, the assembly being full, the propounder Zacharias, of the
tribe of Levi stood up, and made a speech concerning the end of their meeting.
And this, said he, is to examine the scriptures concerning Christ, whether he
be already come, or whether we are to expect his coming? In examining this
question, they searched the Old testament with great care and labor most part
of that day, to be resolved in the truth, having bibles to that end. About
which point began a dispute that lasted many hours, which at last lead to this
conclusion, that the major part of this assembly were of opinion that Christ
was not come. But some others of the assembly having strictly examined the
scriptures, and finding them so plain for his coming, were inclined to think
that Christ was come, being the rather so moved to think, by the consideration
of the great judgments that have been upon them these 1600 years; they imputed
the destruction and long afflictions of their nation to the wickedness they had
been guilty of, and one of their greatest sins, they said, was the spilling the
blood of the Prophet sent from God to their nation, and massacring those who
believed the doctrines he taught. For, said they, we are no idolaters, and
therefore we have not had this heavy judgment upon us for that; but surely it
is for the spilling the blood of Jesus, the prophet sent from God, and for
massacring those that loved him. And this was the sum of what was disputed the
second day of their meeting, and so they ceased until the next morning.

The third day, being assembled together again, the point chiefly agitated was
concerning the manner of Christ's coming; and that (they said) should be like a
mighty prince, in the power and authority of a king; yea, in greater power than
ever any king had, and that he will deliver their nation out of the power of
their adversaries, and restore them to their kingdom again: and that the
nations shall be of their religion whenever he comes; and therefore began to
conclude that Christ was not come. For Jesus, said they, the great prophet,
when he came, began to alter our religion, therefore h^ is not the true
Messiah. And f^rther, wh^^ Jesus came, whom some call the true Messiah, he
began presently to pluck down our religion, and set up his own, therefore he
was not the true Messiah. Thus some of them concluded, and some did not. But
they went from this dispute to another, concerning his parentage, they did all
agree in this, that he shall be born of a virgin, according to the predictions
of the prophets in the Old Testament. And in this also, that he should be born
of a virgin of mean note and parentage among their nation, as was the virgin
Mary that bare Jesus, the great prophet from God. And upon this many of them
seemed to think that Christ was come: but left it to next day, when they should
again meet together.

The fourth day, the assembly being met, the propounder demanded what they
thought, whether Christ was come, or not? they said, they thought he was come;
but they answered this, that if he were come, he was no other than Elias;
because Elias was formerly in great power, and with great power he declared it,
in slaying the priests of Baal, and for fulfilling the scriptures he was
opposed by Ahab and Jezebel. And so they esteemed this man, whom they called
Jesus, to be that same Elias. Moreover, others said, that they thought he was
more than a mortal man, in that he so strangely ascended up into Heaven, which
some of our forefathers saw; and this was all that was done on the fourth day.

The fifth day, the assembly being met, they went about the same question that
was controverted the day before, and took into examination again, to answer
them that said Elias was not the Messiah. They of the contrary opinion, did
argue the love and care of Elias for the good of their nation: that he left
them Elisha his disciple to teach and instruct the people, and this they took
to be the care of the Messiah. These were their chief arguments to maintain
their opinion: the same day toward night came into question among them, what
then he was that said, he was the son of God, and was crucified by their
ancestors; but because this was a great question among them, they deferred the
farther cosideration thereof until the next day.

The sixth day, there were some Pharisees that stood up, who were the great
enemies of Christ and said, they would undertake to answer the last question;
and would by no means yield that he was the Christ. And these are the reasons
they give for their opinion, viz. 1. Because he came into the world like an
ordinary and inferior man; not with his scepter and royal power; for they
affirmed, that the coming of Christ would be glorious. 2. They pleaded against
him, the meanness of his birth, in that his father was a carpenter, and this
(they said) was a dishonor of which, when Christ comes he will not be capable.
3. They accused him to be a false Christ, and an enemy to Moses' law, in doing
and suffering his disciples to do unlawful works on the Sabbath day. For they
believed (they said) that the true Messiah will exactly keep the law of Moses.
Now, though it were replied, that the Gospel does testify of Christ; th^^ he
did ^ul^^l the law of Moses, yet they rejected that answer, because they did
not believe, and own the gospel. But these reasons did not satisfy the council.

So that, after the Pharisees had done speaking, there stood up one Rabbi
Abraham, and objected against the Pharisees, the miracles that Christ wrought
while he was on earth, viz. The raising of dead to life again; his making the
lame to walk; the blind to see; the dumb to speak; by what power, I pray you,
my brethren, did he them? With that the Pharisees arose, and desired to answer
him; and this is the answer they returned to the council: Perhaps, said they,
this Jesus was an impostor, and magician, and so was enabled to do those
miracles. And for our parts, we believe, that all the miracles he did were done
by magic and charms, whereby they were restored to their former condition
again. But this answer gave little satisfaction to the council, and especially
to Abraham: whereupon Abraham stood up, and replied, How could this Christ
charm the blind, lame, and dumb, etc. when they were so born before Jesus
Christ himself was born, as it appeared same of them were? This seemed a
paradox to the Pharisees. And truly, the prosecuting of this argument almost
put the Pharisees to a nonplus, but at last they began to speak again, and gave
this answer, though a weak and vile one; Perhaps, say they, the said impotent
persons were made so by other magicians, and conjured to be lame, blind, and
dumb, etc. And though himself were not then born when they were born with those
evils, yet this Jesus being a great dissembler, and more cunning than any
magician before him, power was given him by the devil to remove those charms
which others had placed. But there Eas one Pharisee among the rest, named
Zebedee, who among all the Pharisees there assembled, did more opprobriously
and blasphemously revile Christ, and vehemently urged those things to the
council, against him; but, I conceive, not to the well liking of any that heard
him, even to the members of the council, or of the Pharisees. And as the
Pharisees played their part against Christ, so did the Saducees likewise: for
some of the council were of that sect, who did endeavor to render Christ vile
and odious to the rest of the Jews.

I observed it to be with the Pharisees and Sadducees as once it was with Herod
and Pilate^ though these two could not agree at other time^, yet they could
agree together to crucify Christ. So the Pharisees and Sadducees, though they
^e much divided in opinion among themselves, y^^ did they, at this time, too
well agree to disgra^^ Christ, with their lies, clamers, and blasphemi^^ For
the Saducees as well as the Pharisees, ac^^sed him for a grand impostor and
magician, (...) that in his Gospel he taught the resurrection from the dead,
which, say they, we deny. But it i^ no wonder to see ^actions agree in some
evil design against others, as I found by experience in 1650 (which was the
year of their Jubilee.) At which time there was a great ^^ri^e between the
Jesuite^ and the Friars of the order of St. Augustine. And though their
dissentions have been, ^mothered over by the care and vigilance of the pope,
that the world then took not much notice of them, yet this fire broke out again
into a flame, greater (as they informed me) than before, even to public
disputations, and bitter wranglings one against another, opening the ^eluge of
errors, and one another factions. Thus seeking to disgrace one another, the
pope threatened to excommunicate the authors of all such black libellous books,
tending to the dishonor of the clergy (as he called them) to make them
infamous to the world. But these things by the way.

The seventh day. We are now come to the seventh day of their meeting, on which
this was the main question, Whether if Christ be come, what rules and orders
has he left for his church to walk by? This was a great question among them,
because they did not believe the new Testament, and so would not be guided by
it, but demanded some other instructions to direct them in this point.
Whereupon six of the Roman clergy, who were on purpose sent thither by the
pope, to advise in the council, (two of which were Jesuits, and four were
Friars, two of the order St. Augustine, and two of the order of St. Francis.)
being admitted into the council, began to open ^o them the doctrine and rules
of the holy church of Rome, which they magnified to them for the holy catholic
church of Christ; and their doctrines to be the infallible doctrine of Christ,
and their rules to be rules which the apostles left to the church forever to be
observed And that the pope is the holy vicar of Christ and the successor of St.
Peter. For particul^^ they affirmed the real presence of Christ in (...) Lord's
supper, the religious observation of the holy days, invocation of saints, their
prayer^ the Vvirgin, and her commanding power in H^^ven over her son, and holy
use of their cross (...) images, with the rest of their idolatrous worshi^ all
which they recommended, for the doctr^^^ and rules of the apostles.

But so soon as the assembly of the Jews hea^ these things from them, they were
all excee^ingly troubled thereat, and fell into high ^^mours against them,
crying out, No Christ, (...) virgin Mary, no women Gods, no intercessi^^ of the
saints, no holy crosses, no worshipping (...) images, etc. Their grief and
trouble was (...) great, that it would have troubled an hard hea^ to have seen
and heard it: for, they rent the^^ clothes and tore their hair, and cast dust
upon their heads, and cried out, Blasphemy, blasphemy, blasphemy, against
Jehovah, and Christ our king; and in this great confusion and p^^plexity the
council brake up.

But being willing to do something, being ye^ unresolved, they assembled again
upon the eight^ day, and all that was done upon that day was (...) agree upon
another meeting of the Jews, which was to be three years after; which was the^
concluded upon before their final departing.

I believe, says the relater, there were many Jews there who would have been
easily persuaded to own the Lord Jesus Christ. And I assur^ (...) truth, to the
honor of our protestant religi^^, and for the encouragement of our divines,
(...) one of the rabbis, eminent among them, (...) conference with me, gave
his opinion in this (...): That he found it at first, that they who ^^re sent
from Rome, would cause an unhappy ^rejudice to their council. 2. That as he
pro^^ssed to me he much desired the presence of ^^ine protestant divines at
their assembly, especially of our English ministers, of whom he had ^ greater
liking than of any in the world beside. For he did believe we had a greater
love to their ^ation: and the reason of his good opinion of our ministers, was,
as he told me, that he had often heard that they do pray ordinarily for the
conversion of their nation; which he did acknowledge to be a great token of
their love toward them: especially he recommended the ministers of London, for
their excellent preaching, and for their charity toward their nation, as he
had hear by many travelers. Moreover, he said, that he did account the church
of Rome to be an idolatrous church: and therefore will not own their religion.
But by conversing with other of the Jews; I found they thought there was no
other Christian religion in the world, than that of the church of Rome; and by
the Romish idolatry, they took offense at all Christian religion. Whence it
does appear, that Rome is the greatest enemy of the Jews conversion.

Now, for the place of the Jews next meeting, it was appointed to be in Syria;
in which country I also was, and did converse with the sect of the Rechabites,
who still observe their old rul^^ and customs. They neither plant nor sow, no^
build houses, but live in tents; and often (...) move from place to place, with
their whole families, bag and baggage. The Italian tongue (...) much spread in
the world, and the Jews as often discourse in that language as their own; an^
therefore I did converse with them as well as if I could have spoken their own
language. And (...) God give me leave and opportunity, I shall attend their
next council, which will be in the year 1653. The Lord prosper it.

The Counterfeit Messiah; or False Christ of the Jews at Smyrna, in the year
1666. -- Written by an Englishman there present.
ACcording to the predictions of several Christian writers, especially of such
who commer^^^^n the Apocalypse, or Revelations, this year, 1666, was to prove a
year of wonders and strange revolutions to the world, and particularly of
blessing to the Jews, either in respect of their conversion to the Christian
faith, or of their restoration to their temporal kingdom: This opinion was so
dilated, and fixed, in the countries of the reformed religion, as to the
downfall of the pope and antichrist, and the greatness of the Jews, in as much
that subt^^ people udged this year the time to stir, and (...) their motion
according to the season of the modern prophecies; Whereupon strange repor^^ ^ew
from place to place of the march of multi^udes of people from unknown parts,
into the remotest deserts of Arabia, supposed to be the ^en tribes and half,
lost so many ages. That a ship was arrived in the nothern parts of Scotland,
with her sails and cordage of silk, navigated by mariners, who spoke nothing
but Hebrew, with this motto on their sails, The twelve tribes of Israel. These
reports agreeing thus near to former predictions, put the wild sort of the
world into an expectation of strange accidents this year should produce, in
reference to the Jewish monarchy.

In this manner millions of people were possessed, when Sabbatai Sevi first
appeared at Smyrna, and published himself to the Jews for their Messiah,
relating the greatness of their approaching kingdom, the strong hand wereby God
would free from bondage, and gather them from all parts of the world. It was
strange to see how the fancy took, and how fast the report of Sabbatai and his
doctrine flew though all parts were Turks and Jews inhabitted; the latter of
which were so deeply possessed with a belief of their new kingdom and riches,
and many of them with promotion to offices of government, renown and greatness,
that in all parts from Constantinople to Buda, (which it was my fortune that
year to travel) I perceived a strange transport in the Jews, none of them
attending to any business, unless to wind up former negociations, and preparing
themselves and families for a journey to Jerusalem: all their discourses, their
dreams, and disposal of their affairs tende^ to no other design but a
re-establishment in the land of promise, to greatness, glory, wisdom, and
doctrine of the Messiah, whose original birth, and education are first to be
recounted.

Sabatai Sevi was son of Mordecai Sevi, an (...) habitant and natural of
Smyrna, who gained his livelihood, by being broker to an English merchant in
that place: a person who before his death was very decrepit in his body, and
full of the gout, and other infirmities, but his son Sabbatai Sevi addicting
himself to study, became a notable proficient in the Hebrew and metaphysics,
and arrived to that point of sophistry in divinity and mataphysicks, that he
vented a new doctrine in their law drawing to the profession of it so many
disciples as raised one day a tumult in the synagogue; for which afterward, he
was by a censure of the Chochams (who are expounders of the law) banished the
city.

During the time of his exile, he traveled to Thessalonica, where he married a
very handsome woman; but either not having that part of economy as to govern a
wife, or being impotent toward women, as was pretended, or that she found not
favor in his sight, she was divorced from him; again he took a second wife;
more beautiful than the former, but the same causes of discontent raised a
difference between them, he obtained another divorce from this wife also. And
being now free from the encumbrances of a family, his wandering head moved to
travel through the Morea, thence to Trippoly in Syria, Gaza and Jerusalem; and
by the way picked up a Ligorness lady, whom he made his third wife, the
daughter of some Polonian or German, her original and parentage not being very
well known -- And being now at Jerusalem, he began to reform the law of the
Jews, and abolish the feast of Tamuz, which they keep in the month of June, and
there meeting with a certain Jew called Nathan, a proper instrument to promote
his design, he communicated to him his condition, and course of life, and
intentions to proclaim himself Messiah of the world, so long expected and
desired by the Jews. This design took wonderfully with Nathan; and because it
was thought necessary according to scripture, and ancient prophecies, that
Elias was to precede the Messiah, as St. John Baptist was the forerunner of
Christ, Nathan thought no man so proper to act the part of a prophet as
himself, and no sooner had Sabbati declared himself the Messiah, but Nathan
discovers himself to be this prophet, forbidding all the fasts of the Jews in
Jerusalem, and declaring that the bridegroom being come, nothing but joy and
triumph ought to dwell in their habitations: writing to all the assemblies of
the Jews to persuade them to the same belief.

And now the schism being begun, and many Jews really believing what they so
much desired, Nathan took the courage and boldness to prophecy, that one year
from the 27th of Kisleu, (June) the Messiah should appear before the grand
seignor, and take from him his crown, and lead him in chains like a captive.

Sabbatai also at Gaza preached repentance to the Jews, and obedience to
himself, for that the coming of the Messiah was at hand; which novelties so
affected the Jewish inhabitants of those parts, that they gave up themselves
wholly to prayers, alms, and devotions; and to confirm the belief the more, it
happened that at the same time news hereof, with all particulars ^ere
dispatched from Gaza, to acquaint the br^thren in foreign parts; the news of
the Messiah was flown so swift, and gained such reception, that intelligence
came ^^om all parts and countries where the Jews inhabited, by letters from
Gaza and Jerusalem, congratulating the happiness of their deliverance, and
expiration of the time of their servitude, by the appearance of the Messiah, to
which they adjoined other prophecies, relating to that dominion the Messiah was
to have over all the world; that for nine month after he was to disappear:
during which time the Jews were to suffer, and many of them to undergo
martyrdom -- but then returning again mounted on a celestial lion, with his
bridle made of serpents with seven heads, accompanied with his brethren the
Jews, who inhabited on the other side of the river Sabatian, he should be
acknowledged for the sole monarch of the universe; and then the holy temple
should descend from heaven already built, wherein they should offer sacrifice
for ever.

This noise and rumor of the Messiah having ^^lled all places, and the
deceived multitude being wholly transported from their ordinary employments,
Sabatai Sevi resolved to travel toward Smyrna, the country of his nativity, and
thence to Constantinople, the capital city, where the principle work of
preaching was to have been performed; Nathan thought it not fit to be long
after him, and therefore travels by the way of Damascus, where resolving to
continue some time for the better propagation of this new doctrine; and that he
might publish this doctrine of himself, and the Messiah more plainly, he wrote
from Damascus to the Jews at Aleppo, and other towns. And now all the cities of
Turkey, where the Jews inhabited* were full of the expectation of the Messiah;
no trade nor course of gain was followed; every one imagined that daily
provisions, riches, honors and government were to descend upon them by some
unknown and miraculous manner: an example of which was most observable in the
Jews at Thessalonica, who, fall of assurance that the restoration of their
kingdom, and the accomplishment of the time for the coming of the Messiah was
at hand, judged themselves obliged to double their devotions, and purify their
consciences from all sins and enormities, which might be obvious to the
scrutiny of him, who was now come to search the heart of man: in which work
certain priests were appointed to direct the people how to regulate their
prayers, fasts and other acts of devotion. But so forward was every one now in
his acts of penance, that they stayed not for the prescription of rules, but
applied themselves immediately to fasting; some going beyond the ability of
nature, and taking no food for seven or eight days, were famished to death;
others buried themselves in their gardens, covering their naked bodies with
earth, their heads only excepted, remaining in their beds of dirt until their
bodies were stiffened with the cold and moisture: others would endure to have
melted wax dropped upon their shoulders, others to roll themselves in snow, and
throw their bodies in the coldest season of winter into the fen, or frozen
waters: but the most common way of mortification was first to prick their backs
and sides with thorns, and then to give themselves a number of lashes. All
business was laid aside, none of them opened shop, unless to clear his
warehouse of merchandise at any price; who had superfluity in household stuff
sold it for what he could, but yet not to Jews, for they were interdicted from
bargains or sales, on the pain of excommunication, pecuniary mulcts, or
corporal punishments; all business and employment was esteemed for the test and
touchstone of their faith. It being the general tenet, that in the days that
the Messiah appears, the Jews shall become masters of the estates and
inheritance of infidels, until when they are to content themselves with matters
only necessary to maintain and support life, but because every one was not
master of so much fortune and provision as to live without daily labor; and
therefore to quiet the clamours of the poor, and prevent the enormous lives of
some, who upon these occasions would become vagabonds, and desert their cities,
due order was taken to make collections, which were so liberally bestowed, that
in Thessalanica only 400 poor were supported by the mere charity of the richer.
And as they endeavored to purge their consciences of sin, and to apply
themselves to good works, that the Messiah might find the city prepared for his
reception, so lest he should accuse them of any omission in the law, and
particularly in their neglect of that ancient precept, of increase and
multiply; they married together children of ten years of age and some under,
without respect to riches or poverty, condition or equality, but being
promiscuously joined to the number of six or seven hundred couple, upon better
and cooler thoughts, after the deceit of the false Messiah, was discovered, or
the expectation of his coming grew colp, were divorced, or by consent separated
from each other.

In the heat of all this talk and rumor comes Sabatai Sevi to Smyrna, the city
of his nativity, infinitely desired there by the common Jews; but by the
chochams, or doctors of their law, who gave little or no credence to what he
pretended, was ill received, not knowing what mischief or ruin this doctrine
and prophecy of a new kingdom might produce. Yet Sabatai bringing with him
testimonials of his sanctity, holy life, wisdom, and gift of prophecy, so
deeply fixed himself in the hearts of the generality; both as being holy and
wise, and thereupon he took courage and boldness to enter into dispute with the
grand chocham, (who is the head, and chief expositor of the law, and
supperintendant of their will and government) between whom the arguments grew
so high and language so hot, that the Jews who favored the doctrine of
Sabatai, and feared the authority of the chochams, doubtful what might be the
issue of the contest, appeared in great numbers before the Cadi of Smyrna, in
justification of the new prophet, before so much as any accusation came against
him. The Cadi (according to the custom of the Turks) swallows money from both
sides, and afterward remits them to the determination of their own justice. In
this manner Sabatai gains ground daily; and the grand chocham with his party,
losing both the affection and obedience of his people, is displaced from his
office, and another constituted, more affectionate and agreeable to the new
prophet, whose power daily increased by those confident reports, that his
enemies were struck with phrensies and madness, until being restored to their
former temper and wits by him, they became his friends, admirers, and disciples.

And having thus fixed himself in the opinion and admiration of the people, he
began to take on himself the title of Messiah, and son of God.

Notwithstanding the disciples of Sabatai Sevi were not so numerous, but many
opposed his doctrine, publicly avouching that he was an impostor and deceiver
of the people, amongst which was one Samuel Pennia, a man of a good estate and
reputation in Smyrna, who arguing in the Synagogue, that the present signs of
the coming of the Messiah were not apparent, either according to scripture, or
the doctrine of the Rabbis, raised such a sedition and tumult amongst the
Jews, as not only prevailed against arguments, but had also against his life,
had he not timely conveyed himself out of the synagogue, and thereby escaped
the hands of the multitude, who now could more easily endure blasphemy against
the law of Moses, and the profanation of the sanctuary, than contradiction or
misbelief of the doctrine of Sabatai. But howsoever it fell out, Pennia, in a
short time becomes a convert, and preaches up Sabatai for the son of God, and
deliverer of the Jews; and not only he, but his whole family: his daughters
prophesy and fall into strange ecstasies; and not only his, but four hundred men
and women prophesy of the growing kingdom of Sabatai, and young infants, who
could yet scarce stammer out a syllable to their mothers, repeat and pronounce
plainly the name of Sabatai the Messiah and son of God. For thus far had God
permitted the Devil to delude this people, that their very children were for a
time possessed, and voices heard to sound from their stomachs and intrails;
those of riper years fell first into a trance, foamed at the mouth, and
recounted the future prosperity and deliverance of the Israelites, their
visions of the lion of Judah, and the triumphs of Sabatai: all which were
certainly the effects of diabolical delusion, as the Jews themselves since have
confessed unto me.

With these concomitant accidents and successes Sabatai Sevi growing more
presumptious, that he might correspond with the prophecies of the greatness and
dominion of the Messiah, proceeds to an election of those princes which are to
govern the Israelites in their march toward the holy land, and to dispense
judgment and justice after their restoration. The names of them were well known
at Smyrna, who never (God knows) had ambition to aspire to the title of
princes, until a strange spirit of deceit and delusion had moved them, not only
to hope for it as possible, but to expect it as certain.

In this manner things ran to strange height of madness among the Jews ot
Smyrna, where appeared such pegeantry of greatness, that no comedy could equal
the mock-shews they represented; and though none durst openly profess any
scruple, or doubt of this common received belief, yet for confirmation of the
Jews in their faith, and astonishment of the Gentiles, it was judged no less
than necessary, that Sabatai should show some miracles whereby to convince all
the world that he was the true Messiah; and as the present occasion seemed to
require an evidence infallible of this truth, so it was daily expected by the
vulgar, with an impatience suitable to humors disposed to novelty; who out of
every action of their prophet, began to fancy something extraordinary and
supernatural. Sabbatai was now horribly puzzled for a miracle, though the
imagination of the people was so vitiated that any legerdemain, or slight of
hand would have passed more easy with them for a wonder than Moses striking the
rock for water, or dividing the red sea; and an occasion happening that Sabatai
was, in behalf of his subjects, to appear before the Cadi, or judge of the
city, to demand ease and relief of some oppressions which aggrieved them; it
was thought necessary a miracle should be now or never, when Sabatai appearing
with a formal and pharisaical gravity which he had starched on, some on a
sudden avouched to see a pillar of fire between him and the Cadi, which report
presently was heard through the whole room, filled with Jews that eccompanied
Sabatai, some of whom who strongly fancied it, vowed and swore they saw it;
others in the outward yard, or that could not come near to hear, or see, for
the crowd, as speedily took the alarm, and the rumor ran and received belief
of the women and childred at home in a moment, so that Sabatai Sevi returned to
his house triumphant, fixed in the hearts of his people, who now needed no
farther miracles to confirm them in their faith. Sabatai Sevi having thus fully
fixed himself in Smyrna, and filled other places with rumors of his fame,
declaring that he was called by God to visit Constantinople, where the greatest
part of his work was to be accomplished. In order, whereunto he privately
shipped himself, with some few attendants.

The wind proving northerly, as commonly it is in the Hellespont and Propontus,
Sabatai was thirty nine days in his voyage, so little power had this Messiah
over the sea and winds; in which time news being come to Constantinople that
the Jews Messiah was near, all that people prepared to receive him with the
same joy and impatience as was expressed in other parts where he arrived, the
grand vizier (then also at Constantinople, being not yet departed on his
expedition for Candia) having heard some rumors of this man, and the disorder
and madness he had raised among the Jews, sent two boats, whilst the Salack was
detained by contrary winds, with commands to bring him up prisoner to the port,
where accordingly Sabatai being come, was confined in the most loathsome
dungeon in the town, there to remain in farther expectation of the vizier's
sentence. The Jews were not at all discouraged at this treatment of their
prophet, but rather confirmed in their belief of him, as being the
accomplishment of the prophecy of those things which ought to proceed his glory
and dominion; which consideration induced the chiefest persons among the Jews
to make their visits and addresses to him, with the same ceremony and respect
in the dungeon, as they would have done had he then sat exalted on the throne
of Israel:

The Jews in Constantinople were now become as m^d and distracted as they were
in other places, all trade and traffic forbidden, and those who owed money, in
no manner careful how to satisfy it: amongst which wild crew some were indebted
to our merchants at Galata, who not knowing the way to receive their money,
partly for their interest, and partly for curiosity, thought fit to visit this
Sabatai, complaining, that such particular Jews upon his coming, took upon them
the boldness to defraud them of their right, and desired he would signify to
these his subjects his pleasure to have satisfaction given: whereupon Sabatai
with much affection took pen and paper and wrote to this effect.

In this manner Sabatai Sevi remained a prisoner at Constantinople for the
space of two months: at the end of which the Vizier having signified his
expedition for Candia, and considering the rumor and disturbance the presence
of Sabatai had made already at Constantinople, though it not secure to suffer
him to remain in the imperial city, whilst both the Grand Seignior and himself
were absent: and therefore changes his prison to the Dardanelli. This removal
of Sabatai from a worse prison to one of a better air, confirmed the Jews with
a greater confidence of his being the Messiah, supposing that had it been in
the power of the Vizier to have destroyed his person, he would never have
permitted him to have lived to that time, in regard their maxims enforce them
to end all jealousies and suspicions of ruin to their (...), by the death of
the party feared, which much rather they ought to execute on Sabatai, who had
not only declared himself the king of Israel, but also published prophecies
fatal to the Grand Seignior and his kingdoms.

With this consideration, and others proceeding, the Jews flock in great
numbers to the castle, where he was imprisoned, not only from the neighboring
parts, but also from Poland, Germany, Leghorn, Venice, Amsterdam, and other
places where the Jews reside: on all whom as a reward of the expense and
labors of their pilgrimage, Sabatai bestowed plenty of his benedictions,
promising increase of their store, and enlargement of their possession in the
Holy Land. And so great was the confluence of the Jews to this place, that the
Turks thought it requisite to make their advantage thereof, and so not only
raised the price of their provisions, lodgings, and other necessaries, but also
denied to admit any to the presence of Sabatai, unless for money, setting the
price sometimes at five, sometimes at ten dollars more or less, according as
they guessed at their abilities, or zeal for the person, by which gain and
advantage to the Turks no complaints or advices was carried to Adrianople,
either of the concourse of people or arguments amongst the Jews in that place,
but rather all civilities and liberty indulged unto them, which served as a
farther argument to ensnare this poor people in the belief of their Messiah.

The devotion of the Jews toward this pretended Messiah increased still more
and more, so that not only the chief of the city went to attend and proffer
their service toward him in the time of his imprisonment, but likewise decked
their synagogue with S. S. in letters of gold, making for him on the wall a
crown, in the circle of which was wrote the 91st Psalm at length in fair and
legible characters; attributing the same titles to Sabatai, and expounding the
scriptures in the same manner in favor of his appearance, as we do of our
Savior. However, some of the Jews remained in their wits all this time,
amongst which was a certain Chocham at Smyrna, one zealous of his law, and of
the good and safety of his nation, and observing in what a wild manner the
whole people of the Jews was transported, with the groundless belief of a
Messiah, leaving not only their trade, and course of living, but publishing
prophecies of a speedy kingdom, of rescue from the tyranny of the Turks, and
leading the Grand Seignior himself captive in chains: matters so dangerous and
obnoxious to the state wherein they lived, as might justly convict them of
treason and rebellion, and leave them to the mercy of that justice, which on
the least jealousy and suspicion of matters of this nature, uses to extirpate
families, and subvert the mansion houses of their own people, much rather of
the Jews, on whom the Turks would gladly take occasion to dispoil them of their
estates, and condemn the whole nation to perpetual slavery.

This chocham so enraged and scandalized the Jews, that they judged no
condemnation or punishment too severe against such an offender and blasphemer
of their law, and holiness of the Messiah: and therefore with money and
presents to the Cadi accusing him as disobedient in a capital manner to their
government, obtained sentence against him, to have his beard shaved, and to be
condemned to the galleys. There wanted nothing now to the appearance of the
Messiah, and the solemnity of his coming, but the presence of Elias; whom the
Jews began to expect hourly, and with that intention and earnestness, that
every dream or phantasm to a weak head was judged to be Elias; it being taught
and averred, that he was seen in diverse forms and shapes, not to be certainly
discovered or known before the coming of the Messiah; for the superstition is
so far fixed amongst them, that generally in their families they spread a table
for Elias the prophet to which they make an invitation of poor people, leaving
the chief place for the Lord Elias, whom they believe to be invisibly present
at the entertainment, and there to eat and drink without diminution, either of
the dishes or of the cup.

This being the common opinion among the Jews, and that Sabatai Sevi was the
Messiah, being become an article of faith, it was not hard to persuade them
that Elias was come already, that they met with him in their dishes, in the
dark, in their bed chambers, or any where else invisible, in the same manner as
common people of England believe of hobgoblins and fairies.

For so it was when Solomon Cremona, an inhabitant of Smyrna, making a great
feast, to which the principal Jews of the city were invited, after they had
eaten and drank freely, one starts from his seat, and avouches that he saw
Elias upon the wall, and with that bows to him and compliments him with all
reverence and humility; some others having in like manner their fancies
prepared to distinguish shadows immediately agreed upon the object, and then
there was not one in the company who would say he did not see him: at which
surprise every one was struck with reverence and awe; and the most eloquent
amongst them having their tongues loosed with joy and wine, directed orations,
encomiums, and acts of thankfulness to Elias, courting and complimenting him as
distracted lovers do the supposed presence of their mistresses.

But to return again to Sabatai Sevi himself, we find him still remaning a
prisoner in the castle of Abydos, upon the Hellespont, admired and adored by
his brethren with more honor than before, and visited by pilgrims from all
parts, where the fame of the coming of the Messiah had arrived: amongst which
one from Poland, named Nehemiah Cohen, was of special note and renown learned
in the Hebrew, Syriack and Chaldee, and versed in the doctrine and cavals of
the Rabbis, as well as Sabatai himself, one (of whom it was said) had not this
Sevi anticipated the design, esteemed himself a notable fellow, to act the part
of a Messiah as the other: Howsoever, it being too late to publish any such
pretense, Sabatai having now eleven points of the law by possession of the
office, and with that the hearts and belief of the Jews, Nehemiah was contented
with some small appendage, or relation to the Messiah; and therefore to lay his
design the better desired a private conference with Sabatai; these two great
Rabbis being together, a hot dispute arose between them; for Cohen alleged,
that according to scripture, and exposition of the learned thereupon, there
were to be two Messiahs, one called Ben Ephraim, and the other Ben David; the
first was to be a preacher of the law, poor, despised, a servant and forerunner
to the second, who was to be great and rich, to restore the Jews, to sit upon
the throne of David, and to perform all the wonders expected from Sabatai.
Nehemiah was contented to be Ephraim, the afflicted and poor Messiah, and
Sabatai was willing he should be so; but that Nehemiah accused him for being
too forward in publishing himself the former Messiah, before Ben Ephraim had
first been known unto the world. Sabatai took this reprehension so ill, either
out of pride of his own infallibility, or he suspected that Nehemiah being once
admitted for Ben Ephraim (being a subtle and learned person) would persuade the
world that he was Ben David, would by no means admit of this new doctrine; and
thereupon the dispute grew so hot, and irreconcilable, as was taken notice of
by the Jews, and controverted by them as every one fancied. But Sabatai being
of greater authority, his sentence prevailed, and Nehemiah was rejected as an
enemy to the Messiah, which afterward proved the downfall of this impostor.
For Nehemiah being thus baffled, and being a person of authority, and haughty
spirit, meditated nothing but revenge; to execute which, he takes a journey to
Adrianople, and there informs the chief ministers of state, who, by reason of
the gain the Turks made of their prisoner, heard nothing of him, or of the
prophecies -- and taking likewise to his council certain discontented and
unbelieving chochams, who being jealous of the consequences of this increasing
madness, took liberty to inform the chocham who was deputy of the great vizier,
that the Jew, prisoner at the castle, called Sabatai Sevi, was a lewd person,
and one who endeavored to debauch the minds of the Jews, and divert them from
their honest course of livelihood, and obedience to the grand Signior; and that
therefore it was necessary to clear the world of so factious and dangerous a
spirit. The chocham being thus informed, could do no less than acquaint the
grand seignior, who instantly dispatched a chiaux (messenger) to bring up
Sabatai to Adrinople. The chiaux executed his commission after the Turkish
fashion, and without ceremony hurried Sabatai to Adrinople, not even affording
him time to take a solemn farewell of his disciples, who were now come to the
vertical point of all their hopes and expectations.

The Grand Seignior having received by this time diverse informations of the
madness of the Jews, and the pretense of Sabatai, grew big with desire and
expectation to see him: so that he no sooner arrived at Adrinople, but the same
hour he was brought before the Grand Seignior; Sabatai appeared much dejected,
and failing of that courage which he showed in the synagogue; and being
demanded several questions by the grand seignior, he would not trust so far to
the virtue of his Messiahship, as to deliver himself in the Turkish language,
but desired a doctor of physic, who had from a Jew turned Turk, to be his
interpreter, which was granted to him, but not without reflection of the
standers by, that had he been the Messiah, his tongue would have flown with a
variety, as well as with the perfection of languages. But the grand seignior
would not be put off without a miracle, and it must be one of his own choice;
which was; that Sabatai should be stripped naked, and set as a mark to his
archers: if the arrows pierced not his body, then he would believe him to be
the Messiah. But Sabatai not having faith to stand so sharp a trial, renounced
all his title to kingdoms and governments, alleging that he was but an
ordinary chocham, and a poor Jew, as others were, and had nothing of privilege,
or virtue above the rest. But the grand seignior not being fully satisfied with
this plain confession, declared, that having given public scandal to the
professors of the Mehometan religion, and done dishonor to his sovereign
authority, by pretending to draw such a considerable portion from him as the
land of Palestine; his treason and crime were not to be expatiated but by a
conversion to the Mehometan faith, which if he refused, the stake was ready at
the gate of the S^raglio to impale him.

Sabatai being now reduced to extremity, yet not doubtful what to do, for to
die for what he knew to be false would be the death of a mad man; replied with
much cheerfulness, that he was contented to turn a Turk, and that it was not of
force, but of choice, having been a long time desirous of so glorious a
profession: he esteemed himself much honored, that he had an opportunity to own
it first in the prefence of the grand seignior. And here was the non plus ul^ra
of all the bluster and noise of this vain imposter.

During the time of all these transactions, the Jews of Smyrna, etc. leaving
their traffic, filled their letters for Italy, and other parts, with nothing
but wonders and miracles wrought by their false Messiah. As that when the Grand
Seignior sent to take him, he caused all the messengers immediately to die, upon
which other janissaries being again sent, they all fell dead with only a word
from his mouth; and being desired to revive them again, he immediately recalled
them to life. After this they added, that he went voluntarily to prison, and
though the gates were barred and shut with strong locks of iron, yet that
Sabatai was seen to walk through the streets with a numerous attendance: and
when they laid shackles on his neck and feet, they not only fell from him, but
were converted into gold, with which he gratified his true and faithful
believers and disciples. Some miracles also were reported of Nathan, that only
at reading the name of any particular man or woman, he would immediately
recount the story of his or her life, their sins or defaults, and accordingly
impose just correction and penance for them.

These strong reports coming thus confidently into Italy and all parts, the
Jews of Casel in Montserrato resolved to send three parsons in behalf of their
society, in the nature of extraordinary legates to Smyrna, to make inquiry
after the truth of all these rumors.

At length Nathan arrives near Smyrna, on Friday the third of March, toward
evening and on Sunday these legates made their visit to him; but Nathan, upon
news of the change of his be loved Messiah, began to grow sullen and reserved,
so that the legates could scarce procure admittance to him; all they could do
was to inform him that they had a letter to him from the brotherhood of Italy,
and commission to confer with him concerning the foundation and authority he
had for his prophecies; but Nathan refused to take the letter; so that the
legates returned ill contented, but yet with hope at Nathan's arrival at Smyrna
to receive better satisfaction.

By these means Nathan being disappointed of his wandering progress, and
ashamed of the event of things, contrary to his prophecies, resolved to return
again, and not to enter Smyrna. And thus the embassy of these legates was
concluded, and they returned to the place from whence they came, and the Jews
again to their wits, following their trade of merchandise and brokerage as
formerly, with more quiet advantage. These matters were transacted in the years
1665 and 1666, since which Sabatai has passed his time devoutly in the Ottoman
court.

Sabatai Sevi continued in the house of the grand seignior until the year 1676,
and then died.

FINIS.

