A NARRATIVE OF THE SUFFERINGS OF JAMES DERKINDEREN, Who was taken prisoner by
the Halifax Indians, on the 10th of the 6th mo. (commonly called June) 1759.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR THE PURCHASER. MDCCXCVI.

Printed Verbatim et literatim from the author's manuscript.

The journall of JAMES DERKINDEREN, whom was taken on the 10 of the month
commonly called June, 1759, at Hallifax, by 6 Indians, whom shot and barbarously
scalped them two before mine eyes the 3 others a little distance. --
THIS 10 of the month I went to the governors iseland to bring up brush for to
kiver my (...) to spread fish on to dry, it being the Sabbath day, contrary to
law or gospel, in a littell schooner who was loded with codfiish But when we
got down on the beech somebody called out Indian! whom appeared with their
musgets loaded and primed to our great surprise: for my own part I James
Derkinderen run into the sea, the salt water as I opened my mouth went into my
belly, calling to my Maker to have mercy on me: whom methinks hears the cries
of the poor and distressed now, as in old times, and will not leave us or
forsake when we humble cry to him, who has all power both in heaven and earth.
Those savages or Indiens pointing their muskets at us, and commanded us to cum
into the wood, 2 of them fired at us. and Christoper Dyer of Casco bay was
shot and an other man, with buck shot, many in them, and bleeding very fast:
those Indians came to them and struck the little ax in there heads, and sculped
them before my eyes; O dreadful to behold! as for the boy he run a way, but one
Joseph ketched him and brought him back, and then stripped those dying men:
pressently I heard the other Indiens fire, and brought the other sculps to us,
and their clothes, leaving them on the ground, whom I had to beg for quarters
as I had of the others; now those three and the other two made 5 sculps a bloody
conquest endeed. Loaded their muskets and so sat of I knuw not whither, as it
appeared for their wigwoms; their 2 cunnoas being halled up into the woods -- 3
in one, and my self and the boy in the other, those sculps in the bottom of the
connoa to sit on, a bloody carpett indeed, both terrable and fritefull -- a
time of mourning. Presently we landed on an iseland, kitched some birds eggs but
no appetite to eat -- they gave me and the boy some -- Lying on our bellyes
and mourning much, and weeping bitterly; about an hour after we went on the
sea, padling along until we came to a run of water, waided and got over. We
herd there was some Inglish connoes thereabouts -- our lndens loaded their
guns, telling me if they saw those connoas they would kill me, but we seed them
not -- Sometime they cought some trowts, they gave me some, a little left for
our support more than they could eat. Parting the trees and brushes to get
thru, and so 4 days before we got to their wigwoms. Setting up a strong
current then they fireed of their guns, sot up a holloing to let their people
know off the blody conquest. Their wigwoms appeared and a number of Indians on
a point of land. They took me to the Indians wigwam my master, and the boy to
an other, about 2 days after they sold the boys unto the French; so left alone
they herd there was an Englis frigate there in the gut of Cancer, but was not.
As for my self I was obliged to scrap their scins -- being constantly employed.
And in a gust obliged with my burch hatt to stand under the trees, and very
wett until I got a little further, where we made a fire and so got some sleep.
We came to a little town of Indians, who sot me down dancing and singing
against the sun expecting to or not knowing how soon the little ax would com
upon my head. But blessed be the Lord that can deliver by a small thing as well
as a big: a small shower coming on they went into their wigwoms; but it seemed
to me the buchers were restrained by an invisable power, and did not sculp me:
blessed be my merciful preserver. So those Indians came about 20 in number and
toock me away by fors, but the old Indians would have me sculped, as soon as I
got over I kissed the old Indians hand to show my thankfullnes: but it was the
kind preservor that showed mercy on me, thanks and praises be to his holy name.
We got to there wigwams about 20 in number and full of Indiens, I was takeen to
mr. Joseph's and their boy unto cap. John Baptisto. I must remark the way of
keching salmon, an Indian and squa would go with their connow and a flamboy to
give light in the water and strike their speer in the salmon and ketch 20 or 30
salmon, and so divide them amongst their familyes etc. When don and koocked
them hollowing and rejoicing much I suppose by the way of thanksgiving. O dear
friend many that is rich forgets the poor, fairing sumptuosly every day, what
will become of those rich? A woman etc. came padling a long shore, I walked up
to them and talking to her in Inglish, my Indien mistress came behind me and
boxed my ears sevarely. O the just judgment of my God, just and equal in all
his dispensations toward us. Two of the Indiens went to make a bargain for us
-- we went on board to fit out the schooner. When we were at their town the
Indiens advised me to rite to St. John's which I did, commanded by Adlam, a
copy of a letter sorrowing for me much, and advised the French to take me to
cape Britton, which they did and so got clear for the bargain the French with
the Indians was about L10 sterling, but the French demanded L35 for me and the
boy, which sum Adlam would not pay them and so came home -- his advise to carry
us to cape Brittoon and then the governor would pay for us, in the gut of
Cancer the Indians had killed one man and like to have taken a sloop, those
Indians lay as a decay in the gutt of Cancer but got clear with the sloop into
cape Britton giveing them 6 months provisions to bring in those Indians and
becomb peasable. Dearly beloved take notes and see how that Almighty can work
for the deliverance of his poor cretures man rather than deliver him to
everlasting destrucktion O thou beloved of my soul praise ye the Lord and all
that is within prays ye the Lord -- O my soul praise the Lord for his mercy
endures for ever amen.

Telling me to go over to our Indiens across the water and so I kissed the
captains hand as if he resqued me, the old Indien women thursted I verily
believe for my blod presently the connows went into the sea and so thru the
gutt leaving the high bluff of lands until we got into a beech where we got
over, keched lobsters and flat fish and crabs so got provisions; fireed of
their guns and prepeared them if they should see any of the Inglish counoes,
but no appearance of them, which I was very thankful off; got to the Indians
and then appeared on the land or on the point of land, a number of them
meakeing me fetch water and lay down the brass kittle on my -- by me while at
supplycating for mercy O my dr. friend the bowedness of the distress I was in
both in boddy and soul, neeiling on my neess on a roten tree for a fut stool a
long by the beeach tree I nealed against, did you know the humble supplications
I put to my merciful preservor you would pity men soul and bowed down in
debth of adoration that this may be sangtifyed for the honor of God and the
good of may poor soul, is the humble prayer of James Derkinderen a poor slave.
O the equity and justis of a merciful God O let every thing that has breath
prais the Lord, for he is good and his mercyes endures for ever, prais ye the
Lord, let every thing that has breath prais him for he is good and his mercyes
endures for ever -- The leaves of this beech tree made me sick but he cured me
without money but a thankful heart -- from thence we got safe to the town or to
the Indians settellment and there we was until we had like to have been set
again to Hallifax, but I discoraged them had I a gone I verily believe we should
have had some more prissiners, about 2 or 3 days they went to the gut of Cancer
but no ships there. The boy I mean Cristoper Dyer to be ransomed, thanks be to
our preserver amen then got over this dismoll arrand.

FINIS.

