COOK's VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. VOL. I.

CAPT: JAMES COOK, F.R.S.


A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN.

Undertaken by Command of his MAJESTY, FOR MAKING DISCOVERIES IN THE NORTHERN
HEMISPHERE: PERFORMED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF Captains COOK, CLERK, and GORE,
In the Years 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780.

BEING A COPIOUS. COMPREHENSIVE, AND SATISFACTORY ABRIDGEMENT OF THE VOYAGE
WRITTEN BY Captain JAMES COOK, F. R. S. AND Captain JAMES KING, LL. D. and F.
R. S. ILLUSTRATED WITH CUTS.

In FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

New York: Printed by TIEBOUT and O'BRIEN, For BENJAMIN GOMEZ, BOOKSELLER AND
STATIONER. No 9^. MAIDEN-LANE

CONTENTS.
BOOK I. TRANSACTIONS FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE VOYAGE, TILL OUR DEPARTURE FROM
NEW-ZEALAND.
CHAP. I. Captains Cook and Clerk appointed to the Resolution and Discovery --
Preparations for the Voyage -- Sail from D^ptford to Long-Reach -- Are visited
there by the Earl of Sandwich and others -- Proceed to Plymouth -- Employments
there -- Number of Officers and Men in each Ship -- Departure of the
Resolution. Page ^ CHAP. II. The Resolution proceeds to Teneriffe -- Reception
there -- Captain Cook visits the Governor -- Description of Santa Cruz Road --
Ample Supplies to be obtained -- Some Account of the Island, and of the Cities
of Santa Cruz and Laguna -- Agriculture -- Natural History -- Air -- Climate --
Produce -- Description of the Inhabitants. CHAP. III. Departure from Teneriffe
-- Danger of the Ship from the sunken Rocks near Bonavista -- Isle of Mayo --
Necessary Precautions against Rain and Heat in the Neighborhood of the Equator
-- Position of the Coast of Brazil -- Arrival at the Cape of Good Hope --
Captain Cook's Reception there -- Loses some of his Sheep -- Other Transactions
at the Cape -- Junction of the Discovery -- Account of Mr. Anderson's Journey
up the Country. CHAP. IV. The Resolution and Discovery leave the Cape of Good
Hope -- See two Islands, named Prince Edward's Islands -- Description of their
Appearance -- Visit Kerguelen's Land -- Arrive at Christmas Harbor -- Take in
water there -- Discover an Inscription -- Description of Christmas Harbor.
Page 26 CHAP. V. Depart from Christmas Harbor -- Range along the Coast -- Cape
Cumberland, Cumberland Bay, Point Pringle, Howe's Foreland, etc. described --
Remarkable beds of Rock-weed -- Danger from Shoals -- Arrive at Port Palliser
-- Cape George described -- Mr. Anderson's Natural History of the Animals,
Plants, Soil, etc. of Kerguelen's Land. 35 CHAP. VI. Passage of the Ships from
Kerguelen's to Van Diemen's Land -- The Resolution damaged by a Squall --
Arrival in Adventure Bay -- Various Interviews with the Inhabitants --
Description of their Persons, Dress, Manners, and Customs -- Mr. Anderson's
Remarks on the Character and language of the Natives, and on the various
Productions of the Country. 47 CHAP. VII. Course to New-Zealand -- Transactions
in Queen Charlotte's Sound -- Intercourse with the New-Zealanders -- Their
Dexterity in building Huts -- Information with regard to the Massacre of
Captain Furneaux's People -- Two violent Storms -- Account of Haboora, who
headed the Party that killed our People -- Of the two Youths who accompany us
on board -- Captain Cook's Observations on the Inhabitants of New-Zealand. 60
CHAP. VIII. The Country near Queen Charlotte's Sound described -- The fertility
of the Soil -- Temperature of the Climate -- Rain and Winds -- Plants -- Birds
-- Fish -- Animals -- Description of the persons of the Inhabitants -- Dress --
Ornaments -- Buildings -- Canoes or Boats -- Food, and Method of Cookery --
Arts -- Weapons -- Horrid Cruelty to their Enemies, whose Bodies they mangle
and eat -- Various other Customs. Page 78
BOOK. II. CONTAINING OUR ADVENTURES FROM OUR DEPARTURE FROM NEW-ZEALAND TILL
OUR ARRIVAL AT O^AHEITE, OR THE SOCIETY ISLANDS.
CHAP. I. Course of the Voyage -- Behavior of the two New-Zealand Youths on
board -- The Island of Mangeca discovered -- Account of the Persons and dress
of the inhabitants -- Mourooa and his Companion described -- Figure of a
Mangecan Canoe -- The Coast of the Island examined -- Impracticability of
landing -- Transactions with the Natives -- Description of the Island --
Disposition and Manners of the Mangecans. 93 CHAP. II. An Island named Wateeo
discovered -- Visits from the inhabitants on board the Ships -- Their Persons
and dress described -- The Coast of the Island examined -- Lieutenants Gore and
Burney, Mr. Anderson and Omai, sent on Shore -- Mr. Anderson's Account of their
Reception -- They are introduced to three Chiefs -- Dance of twenty young Women
described -- Omai's apprehensions of being roasted -- The Islanders send
Provisions on board -- Further Description of the Natives -- Of their double
Canoes -- Trees and Plants -- Omai's Expedient to prevent being detained on
Shore -- He meets with three of his Countrymen -- Account of their distressful
Voyage -- additional Remarks relative to Wateeo. Page 104 CHAP. III. Otakoo^aia
visited -- Description of the Island, and its Produce -- Birds -- Fish -- Visit
Harvey's Island -- Discover it to be inhabited -- The inhabitants refuse to
come on board -- Their Propensity to Theft -- Their manners, Persons, Dress,
Canoes, etc. -- Make a fruitless Attempt to land -- Bear away for the Friendly
Islands -- Two Islets of Palmerston's Island touched at -- Description of the
Islets, their Produce, etc. -- Refreshments procured there -- Proceed to the
Friendly Islands. 125 CHAP. IV. Barter with the natives of Komango and other
Islands for Provisions, etc. -- Arrival at Annamooka -- Variety of Transactions
there -- A visit received from Feenou, a Principal Chief from Tongatabo^ -- His
Reception in the Island -- Dines frequently on board the Resolution -- Several
Instances of the pilfering Disposition of the Natives -- Punishments Inflicted
on them -- Account of Annamooka -- Proceed to Hapaee. 141 CHAP. V. Arrival at
Hapaee -- Friendly Reception there -- Taipa harangues the People -- Exhorts
them not to steal, etc. -- Presents and Solemnitis -- Entertainment -- Single
combats with Clubs -- Wrestling -- Boxing -- Female Boxing -- Marines exercised
-- A dance by Men -- Fireworks -- Night Entertainments, consisting of Singing
and Dancing by Men and Women. Page 158 CHAP. VI. Captain Cook makes an
Excursion into Lefooga -- Description of that Island -- Occurrences there -- A
false Report propagated -- A Female Oculist -- Singular method of Shaving --
The Ships are removed to another Station -- A remarkable artificial Mount and
Stone -- Description of Hoolaiva -- Account of Poulaho, King of the Friendly
Isles -- The Commodore accompanies him on Shore -- Departure from the Hapaee
Islands -- Kotoo described -- The Ships return to Annamooka -- Meeting of
Poulaho, and Feenou-Both the Ships strike on the Rocks -- Arrival at
Tongataboo. 171 CHAP. VII. Favorable Reception at Tongataboo -- Distribution
of Pork, Yams, and Kava among the King's Attendants -- The ships supplied with
Water -- The Observatory erected -- The Natives flock to our People from all
Quarters -- Excursion of our Captains to see Mareewagee -- Their Disappointment
-- Description of the Village where the chiefs reside -- Interviews with
Mareewagee and Toobou -- Presents from the King's Son -- A curious Work of Art
-- Process of manufacturing Cloth -- A grand Haiva given by Mareewagee --
Exhibition of Fireworks -- Wrestling -- Boxing -- Presents of Animals to the
Chiefs -- Poulaho, Feenou, etc. con^ined -- The King's Present, and Hai^^. 189
CHAP. VIII. Some Officers plundered of their Muskets, and other Articles by the
Natives -- Omai complains to the King of this Outrage -- Consequences that it
was probable might attend it -- A visit to Poulaho -- Description of a Fiatooka
-- Country Entertainment at Poulaho's House -- His Mourning Ceremony -- Beastly
Method of preparing Kava -- Account of Onevy -- Messrs. King and Anderson visit
Futtafaihe Entertained by him -- Method of dressing Hogs, and carving them --
Manner of passing the Night -- Observations on the Country -- Prepare for
Departure -- Description of the Island, its Animals, Vegetables, etc. Page 219
CHAP. IX. Strange Solemnity at Mooa, called Natche, in Honor of the King's Son
-- Description of many extraordinary Processions and Ceremonies during the
first Day -- Manner of supping and spending the Evening at the King's House --
Description of the second Day's Ceremony -- Captain Cook ventures himself in
the midst of the Assembly -- His Reception there -- Arrival at Eooa -- Some
Account of that Island -- Weigh Anchor -- And turn through the Channel. 240
CHAP. X. Quit the Friendly Islands with Regret -- Time not misemployed in
visiting the Friendly Islands -- Variety of Refreshments to be procured there
-- Number of Islands, among which are Keppel's and Boscawen's Islands --
Account of Vavao^, Hamoa, and Feejee -- Method of Calculating Distances by Time
-- Omai incapable of giving exact information -- Persons of the inhabitants
described -- Their Diseases -- Character -- Manner of wearing the Hair in both
Sexes -- Of puncturing and painting their Bodies -- Their Habits -- Ornaments,
etc. Page 267 CHAP. XI. Various Employments of the women of the Friendly
Islands -- Occupations of the Men -- Agriculture -- Manner of building their
Houses -- Their Furniture -- Canoes -- Working Tools -- Cordage -- Fishing
Tackle -- Instruments of Music -- Weapons -- Vegetable and Animal Food --
Methods of Cooking -- Diversions -- Marriage -- Mourning Ceremonies -- Custom
of cutting off their little Finger -- Their Deities -- Sentiments concerning
the Soul, and a future State -- Their Fiatookas -- Form of Government -- Power
of the Chiefs -- Mode of paying Homage to the King -- Taboo incurred by it --
Precaution against Famine -- Of the Tammahas -- Language -- Tides. 285
BOOK III. OCCURRENCES AT OTAHEITE AND THE SOCIETY ISLES; AND PROSECUTION OF
THE VOYAGE TO THE COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
CHAP. I. Heavy Squa^l -- The Island of Toobouai discovered -- Its Situation,
Extent, and Produce -- Description of the Persons, Dress, and Canoes, of its
Inhabitants -- Arrival in Oheitepeha Bay at Otaheite -- Omai's Reception -- His
imprudent Conduct -- Account of two Spanish Ships which had twice visited
Otaheite -- Great Demand for red Feathers -- Captain Cook visits a Chief, who
was said by Omai to be the God of Bolabola -- Account of the House erected by
the Spaniards -- Inscriptions -- Allowance of Grog lessened -- The Captain's
Interview with Waheiadooa -- Description of a Toopapaoo -- An Enthusiast -- The
Ships anchor in Matavia Bay. Page 308 CHAP. II. Interview with Otoo, King of
Otaheite -- Imprudent Behavior of Omai -- Various Animals landed --
Occupations on Shore -- Visit from a Native who had been at Lima -- Account of
Oedidee -- False Report -- The Islanders make a precipitate Retreat, but soon
return -- a Rebellion in Eimeo -- Council of Chiefs -- War with Eimeo resolved
on -- A Human Sacrifice -- Circumstantial Description of that Solemnity -- The
great Morai at Attahooroo described -- Behavior of the Natives during the
Ceremony -- Particular Customs. 329 CHAP. III. Re-embark for Matavai --
Conference with Towha respecting the human Sacrifice -- Description of the
Hoovas -- Dinner given by Omai -- Exhibition of Fireworks -- Remarkable Method
of making a Present of Cloth -- Manner of preserving, for many Months, the dead
Body of a Chief -- Another human Sacrifice offered -- Riding on horseback,
matter of great Astonishment to the Natives -- Otoo's great Attention to
prevent Thefts, etc. -- Animals given to him by Captain Cook -- Audience given
to Etary, etc. -- Manner of fighting two War Canoes -- Naval Power, and^ 354
INTRODUCTION.
ALTHOUGH Great Britain cannot vaunt of being an early Stoop to the spirit of
Discovery, but in that respect must give place to the Dutch, yet it may with
truth be asserted that she has since far surpassed them, even in their own
track. In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, some spirited enterprises were
undertaken; but afterward, the spirit of Discovery, seemed to have totally
subsided, till about the year 1741, when by the command of his late Majesty, a
voyage was undertaken under the direction of Captain Middleton, for discovering
a North-west passage through Hudson's Bay. In 1746, two ships were sitted out
by subscription for the same purpose, under the command of Captains Smith and
Moor. But it was reserved for his present Majesty, by that munificence and
patronage, which every liberal pursuit meets with from him, to open friendly
communications, with some recesses of the Globe, hitherto unexplored. Captain
(now Admiral) Byron, with the ships Dolphin and Tamar, in 1764 -- 6; Wallis and
Carteret, with the Dolphin and Swallow, in 1766 -- 9; and Cook, with the
Endeavor, in 1768 -- 71, and with the Resolution and Adventure, in 1772 -- 5,
carried on a plan of Discovery, which it was the purpose of the present voyage
to finish.

The intimate connection between these voyages, render it very necessary, to
state as shortly as possible, the objects accomplished by the preceding
voyages, and how far the intention of the present one has been answered.

In general, it may be premised, that the universal object of all the voyages
of the present reign, was to explore the vast Ocean which extends through the
whole Southern Hemisphere; as the result of all the researches which had
hitherto been made might be justly considered as obscure traditions, bold
fictions, and plausible conjectures; that these five different
circumnavigations have answered a better purpose, is visible from the following
observations.

Falkland's Islands in the South Atlantic Ocean were barely known to exist
before Anson, and so erroneous was even his idea of them, that he considered
Pepys Island and Falkland's Isles to be different places; there can be no doubt
that they are the same, from Byron and M'Bride's joint testimony: and of them
we have as exact charts, as of the Coasts of Great Britain itself. Besides
this, the discovery of Sandwich Lands, the most southerly point yet known, and
the certain accounts we have of the Isle of Georgia, are all to be attributed
to Cook. Sir John Narborough gave us very imperfect accounts of Magalhaen's
Straits, but Captains Byron, Wallis and Carteret, have furnished us with very
accurate accounts of its coast, harbors, headlands, bays, islands, tides,
soundings, and currents, which are a very valuable acquisition, and should
deter any future adventurers from steering that course, especially when a much
safer entrance may be had to the Pacine Ocean, by doubling Cape Horn; this
navigation Captain Cook has clearly shown, is by no means attended with such
danger as might be suspected from the hardships and distresses which Anson a^^
Pizarro suffered there; and that, wholly owing (...) the season in which they
were obliged to hazard it. But they have not only rendered the access to the
Pacific Ocean more easy, but have made us acquainted with a far greater part of
its contents. As the Spanish navigators had no further design than to get a
passage to the Moluccas and other spice i^lands, they never steered further
westward, by deviating from their track, except accidently, and if then they
fell in with any islands, or made any discoveries, little benefit was derived
from them, their accounts being so inaccurate as sometimes to occasion a
question if such places existed. Indeed, the vast quantity of territory annexed
to the Spanish Crown, and the many rich mines never wrought rendered new
acquisitions by no means to be coveted; so that, except the annual Manilla and
Acapulco ship, they seldom attempted to steer across the vast gulf which
separates Asia from America.

Other Navigators in these seas, generally followed the Spanish track: as
indeed, their sole business there was either for the purpose of commerce or
hostilities with them. It is probable then, that after passing Terra del Fuego,
they would hold a notherly course to the uninhabited Island of Juan Fernande^
and thence sail along the American coast from Chili to California, but they
would either return to the Atlantic by the same course, or steer the track of
the Phillipine galleons, as trade or rapine could be benefited by no other. In
latter years, the enterprising Dutch have made some more certain and effectual
researches in the southern latitudes of this ocean. In 1642 Tasman's voyge will
ever be remembered, for the discoveries he made in a circuit, reaching from a
high southern latitude, so far North as New Guinea. Le Maine and Schouton in
1616, and Roggiuein in 1772, crossing the south tropic, traversed this ocean,
from Cape Horn to the East Indies. But even the discoveries they made, can only
be considered as a proof how much might be done. If they discovered a coast,
they often declined to land; or if they ventured, their enquiries and
observations were so futile, as not to satisfy common curiosity, much less
philosophical enquiry.

While we thus must allow the Dutch to have been our harbingers, it is also to
be observed, that we afterward went beyond them, even in their own track. And
now successively his Majesty'^ ships have penetrated into the obscurest
recesses of the south Pacific Ocean, will appear from a recital of their
various and extensive operations, which have adjusted the geography of so
considerable a part of the globe.

The several lands, mentioned to have been discovered by preceding navigators,
whether Spanish or Dutch have been diligently sought after; and most of those
which appeared to be of any consequence, found out and visited; when every
method was put in practice to correct former mistakes, and supply former
deficiences. Thus, the famous Tierra Australia del Espiritu Santo, which was
always considered a part of a southern continent, Captain Cook has defined its
true position and bounds, in the Archipelago of the New Hebrides.

But besides perfecting the discoveries of their predecessors, our late
navigators have added a long catalogue of their own, to enrich geographical
knowledge. By repeatedly traversing the Pacific Ocean, within the south
trophic, a seeming endless profusion of habitual spots of land was found.
Islands interspersed through the amazing space of eighty degrees of longitude,
either separately scattered, or grouped in numerous clusters; and such ample
accounts have we received, both of them and their inhabitants, that, to make
use of the Captains own words, we have left little more to be done in that part.

Byron, Wallis, and Carteret, all contributed toward increasing our knowledge
of the isles in the Pacific Ocean, within the limits of the southern tropic;
but how far that ocean extended to the west, by what lands it was bounded on
that side, and the connections of those lands with the former discoveries,
remained unknown, till Captain Cook, after his first voyage, brought back a
satisfactory decision to these questions. With wonderful skill and
perseverance, amidst perplexities, difficulty and dangers, he traced this
coast almost 2000 miles, from the 38 of south latitude, across the tropic, to
its northern extremity, within 10 and a half of the equinoctial, where it
joined the land, already explored by the Dutch, which they have denominated New
Holland. Tasman's discoveries in the last century is now completed by Captain
Cook; and we are fully acquainted with the circumference of this vast body of
land, which is justly computed to be One Fifth of the Globe.

Although Tasman was the first Discoverer of New-Zealand, yet the small portion
of it along which he sailed, rendered his account of it so imperfect, that it
was the general opinion of geographers, that New-Zealand was part of a Souther^
Continent, running North and South from the (...) to the 64 of south latitude.
Captain Coo^ having spent six months in this coun^^y in 1769 and 70 has fully
explored it, and all its coasts, so that from his accounts, as well as that of
other visitors, it is established to be ^o part of a continen^, but containing,
the largest (...), hitherto (...) ^n the southe^n ^^misphere.

Again, Captain Cook has put beyond doubt, that there is no junction between
New-Holland, and New-Guinea, as he sailed through between them. Though Mr.
Dalrymple and others had discovered some traces of such a passage, yet the
uncertainty of its practicability, as well as the importance of the discovery,
may be judged of, by reflecting that Mons. Bougainville in 1768, rather than
attempt such a passage, sailed ninety leagues about, while reduced to feed on
seal skins from of the yards and riggings, for want of provisions.

For a similar discovery to the preceding, we are indebted to Captain Carteret;
viz. that the land named by Captain Dampier New Britain, consists of two large
and several smaller islands, through which by Sir George's Channel, is a much
better and shorter passage, whether from the eastward or westward, than round
all the Islands and lands to the northward.

Byron, Wallis and Carteret were principally employed in exploring the south
Atlantic, and knew no more of the south Pacific, than accidentally occurred in
the direct tract they held: and as Captain Cook's main object in his first
voyage was to observe the transit of Venus at Otaheite, his anxiety to be there
in proper time, preventing his visiting that part of the South Pacific, where
the riches and mine of discovery was supposed to exist. To put an end to all
conjectures on this matter, Captain Cook was sent out with the Resolution and
Adventure, in 1772, on the most enlarged plan of discovery hitherto attempted,
viz. to circumnaviga^^ the Globe in high southern latitudes, and carefully to
examine every corner of the south Pacific, at once to determine, whether a
southern continent existed in any accessible part of the southern hemisphere.

In attending Captain Cook in this second voyage together with his preceding
one, we have the greatest certainty to conclude, that many extensive continents
and islands mentioned by former navigators, were either large fields of ice, or
existed only in the chimerical heads of the pretended discoverers.

It has been, by many, considered as an unanswerable argument; that a southern
continent is necessary to preserve the due equilibrium; but from the thorough
knowledge of the greater part of the southern hemisphere, of which we are now
possessed, we may with certainty aver, that the equilibrium of the earth is
maintained although the vast track of sea sailed through, leaves no proportion
for an equal quantity of land.

Thus though some preceding navigators have annexed more land to the known
Globe, than Captain Cook* to him belongs the honor of disclosing the extent of
sea covering its surface. To con^^ude our observations on this subject we shall
make (...) with hi^ own words: "I had now made the circut of the southern Ocean
in a high latitude, and traversed it in such a manner as to leave not the least
room for there being a continent, unless near the pole, and out of the reach of
navigation. By twice visiting the tropical sea, I had not only settled the
situation of some old discoveries, but made there many new ones, and left, I
conceive, very little to be done in that part. Thus I flatter myself, that the
intention of the voyage has, in every respect, been fully answered; the
southern hemisphere sufficiently explored; and a final end put to the searching
after a southern continent, which has, at times, engrossed the attention of
some of the maritime powers for near two centuries past, and been a favorite
theory amongst geographers of all nations.

From the general sketch we have already given of the preceding voyages, it is
evident that, though the utmost accessible extremities of the southern
hemisphere had been visited, yet our own had not; and it remained a question,
how far a northern passage between the Atlantic and Pacific Ocean was
practicable, either by sailing westward round North America, or eastward, round
Asia.

Could such a passage be effected, it would greatly shorten passages to Japan,
China, and the East Indies in general. But all the attempts for this purpose
proved ineffectual The principal of these attempts were made by, 1 st, Cabot,
in 1496, who discoverd Newfoundland and the Labradore coast; 2d, Frobisher, in
1576; 3d James and Fox, in 1631; 4th, Wood, in 1676; 5th Middleton, fitted out
by government, in 1741; 6th, Captains Smith and Moore, by a private society in
1746; lastly, Lord Mulgrave, in 1773.
.

Notwithstanding the insuperable bars which these different navigators had
experienced, the obtaining a northerly passage was an object so desirable, that
it was determined to bring the matter to a certainty, by sending out Captain
Cook once more on this important errand. Thus was this valuable commander again
called to expose himself to new toils and dangers, in the service of mankind,
although, after what he had already done, he might have enjoyed himself at
home, in ease and plenty, without any imputation of sloth.

The various operations proposed were so new and extensive, that they can be
best judged of from the following Instructions, under which he sailed.

By the COMMISSIONERS for executing the office of Lord High Admiral of
GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND, etc.
SECRET INSTRUCTIONS for Captain JAMES COOK, Commander of his Majesty's Sloop
the RESOLUTION.
WHEREAS the Earl of Sandwich has signified to us his Majesty's pleasure, that
an attempt should be made to find out a Northern passage by sea, from the
Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean; and whereas we have, in pursuance thereof,
caused his Majesty's sloops, Resolution and Discovery, to be fitted, in all
respects, proper to proceed upon a voyage for the purpose above mentioned, and,
from the experience we have had of your abilities and good conduct in your late
voyages, have thought fit to entrust you with the conduct of the present
intended voyage, and with that view appointed you to command the first
mentioned sloop, and directed Captain Clerk, who commands the other, to follow
your orders for his further proceedings. You are hereby required and directed
to proceed with the said two sloops directly to the Cape of Good Hope, unless
you shall judge it necessary to stop at Madeira, the Cape de Verd, or Canary
Islands, to take in wine for the use of their companies; in which case you are
at liberty to do so, taking care to remain there no longer than may be
necessary for that purpose.

On your arrival at the Cape of Good Hope, you are to refresh the sloops
companies, and to cause the sloops to be supplied with as much provisions and
water as they can conveniently stow.

You are, if possible, to leave the Cape of Good Hope by the end of October, or
the beginning of November next, and proceed to the southward in search of some
islands said to have been lately seen by the French, in the latitude of 48 0
south, and about the meridian of Mauritius. In case you find those islands, you
are to examine them thoroughly for a good harbor; and upon discovering one,
make the necessary observations to facilitate the finding it again; as a good
port, in that situation, may hereafter prove very useful, although it should
afford little or nothing more than shelter, wood, and water. You are not,
however, to spend too much time in looking out for those islands, or in the
examination of them, if found, but proceed to Otaheite, or the Society Isles,
(touching at New-Zealand in your way thither, if you should judge it necessary
and convenient), and taking care to arrive there time enough to admit of your
giving the sloops companies the refreshments they may stand in need of, before
you prosecute the further object of these instructions.

Upon your arrival at Otaheite, or the Society Isles, you are to land Omai at
such of them as he may choose, and to leave him there.

You are to distribute among the Chiefs of those islands such part of the
presents with which you have been supplied as you shall judge proper, reserving
the remainder to distribute among the natives of the countries you may discover
in the Northern Hemisphere; And having refreshed the people belonging to the
sloops under your command, and taken on board such wood and water as they may
respectively stand in need of, you are to leave those islands in the beginning
of February, or sooner if you shall judge it necessary, and then proceed in as
direct a course as you can to the coast of New Albion, endeavoring to fall in
with it in the latitude of 45 0 north; and taking care, in your way thither,
not to lose any time in search of new lands, or to stop at any you may fall in
with, unless you find it necessary to recruit your wood and water.

You are also, in your way thither, strictly enjoined not to touch upon any
part of the Spanish dominions on the Western continent of America, unless
driven thither by some unavoidable accident; in which case you are to stay no
longer there than shall be absolutely necessary, and to be very careful not to
give any umbrage or offense to any of the inhabitants or subjects of his
Catholic Majesty. And if, in your further progress to the northward, as
hereafter directed, you find any subjects of any European Prince or State upon
any part of the coast you may think proper to visit, you are not to disturb
them, or give them any just cause of offense, but, on the contrary, to treat
them with civility and friendship.

Upon your arrival in the coast of New Albion, you are to put into the first
convenient port to recruit your wood and water, and procure refreshments, and
then to proceed northward along the coast, as far as the latitude of 65, or
further, if you are not obstructed by lands or ice; taking care not to lose any
time in exploring rivers or inlets, or upon any other account, until you get
into the beforementioned latitude of 65 where we could wish you to arrive in
the month of June next. When you get that length you are very carefully to
search for, and to explore, such rivers or inlets as may appear to be of a
considerable extent, and pointing toward Hudson's or Baffin's Bay; and if,
from your own observations, or from any information you may receive from the
natives, (who there is reason to believe are the same race of people, and speak
the same language, of which you are furnished with the vocabulary, as the
Esquimaux), there shall appear to be a certainty, or even a probability, of a
water passage into the aforementioned bays, or either of them, you are, in such
case, to use your utmost endeavors to pass through with one or both of the
sloops, unless you shall be of opinion that the passage may be effected with
more certainty, or with greater probability, by smaller vessels; in which case
you are to set up the frames of one or both the small vessels with which you
are provided, and, when they are put together, and are properly sitted, stored,
and victualled, you are to dispatch one or both of them, under the care of
proper officers, with a sufficient number of petty officers, men and boats, in
order, to attempt the said passage; with such instructions for their rejoining
you, if they should fail, or for their further proceedings, if they should
succeed in the attempt, as you shall judge most proper. But, nevertheless, if
you shall find it more eligible to pursue any other measures than those above
pointed out, in order to make a discovery of the beforementioned passage, (if
any such there be), you are at liberty, and we leave it to your discretion to
pursue such measures accordingly.

In case you shall be satisfied that there is no passage through to the
abovementioned bays sufficient for the purposes of navigation, you are, at the
proper season of the year, to repair to the port of St. Peter and St. Paul in
Kamtschatka, or wherever else you shall judge more proper, in order to refresh
your people, and pass the winter; and, in the spring of the ensuing year 1778,
to proceed from thence to the northward, as far as, in your prudence, you may
think proper, in further search of a North-West passage from the Pacific Ocean
into the Atlantic Ocean or the North Sea; and if, from your own observation, or
any information you may receive, there shall appear to be a probability of such
a passage, you are to proceed as above directed: and, having discovered such a
passage, or failed in the attempt, make the best of your way back to England,
by such route as you may think best for the improvement of geography and
navigation; repairing to Spithead with both sloops, where they are to remain
till further order.

At whatever places you may touch in the course of your voyage, where accurate
observations of the nature hereafter mentioned have not already been made, you
are, as far as your time will allow, very carefully to observe the true
situation of such places, both in latitude and longitude; the variation of the
needle; bearings of head-lands; height, direction, and course of the tides and
currents; depths and soundings of the sea; shoals, rocks, etc.; and also to
survey, make charts, and take views of such bays, harbors, and different parts
of the coast, and to make such notations thereon, as may be useful either to
navigation or commerce. You are also carefully to observe the nature of the
soil, and the produce thereof; the animals and fowls that inhabit or frequent
it; the fishes that are to be found in the rivers or upon the coast, and in
what plenty; and, in case there are any peculiar to such places, to describe
them as minutely, and to make as accurate drawings of them, as you can; and, if
you find any metals, minerals, or valuable stones, or any extraneous fos^ils,
you are to bring home specimens of each; as also of the seeds of such trees,
shrubs, plants, fruits, and grains, peculiar to those places, as you may be
able to collect, and to transmit them to our Secretary, that proper examination
and experiments may be made of them. You are likewise to observe the genius,
temper, disposition, and number of the natives and inhabitants, where you find
any; and to endeavor, by all proper means, to cultivate a friendship with
them; making them presents of such trinkets as you have on board, and they may
like best; inviting them to trassic; and showing them every kind of civility
and regard; but taking care, nevertheless, not to suffer yourself to be
surprised by them, but to be always on your guard against any accidents.

You are also, with the consent of the natives, to take possession, in the name
of the King of Great Britain, of convenient situations in such countries as you
may discover, that have not already been discovered or visited by any other
European power; and to distribute among the inhabitants such things as will
remain as traces and testimonies of your having been there; but if you find the
countries so discovered are uninhabited, you are to take possession of them for
his Majesty, by setting up proper marks and inscriptions, as first discoverers
and possessors.

But forasmuch as, in undertakings of this nature, several emergencies may
arise not to be foreseen, and therefore not particularly to be provided for by
instructions beforehand; you are, in all such cases, to proceed as you shall
judge most advantageous to the service on which you are employed.

You are, by all opportunities, to send to our Secretary, for our information,
accounts of your proceedings, and copies of the surveys and drawings you shall
have made; and upon your arrival in England, you are immediately to repair to
this office, in order to lay before us a full account of your proceedings in
the whole course of your voyage; taking care, before you leave the sloop, to
demand from the officers and petty officers the log-books and journals they may
have kept, and to seal them up for our inspection; and enjoining them, and the
whole crew, not to divulge where they have been, until they shall have
permission so to do: and you are to direct Captain Clerk to do the same, with
respect to the officers and crew of the Discovery.

If any accident should happen to the Resolution in the course of the voyage,
so as to disable her from proceeding any further, you are, in such case, to
remove yourself and her crew into the Discovery, and to prosecute your voyage
in her; her Commander being hereby strictly required to receive you on board,
and to obey your orders, the same, in every respect, as when you were actually
on board the Resolution; And in case of your inability, by sickness or
otherwise, to carry these Instructions into execution, you are to be careful to
leave them with the next officer in command, who is hereby required to execute
them in the best manner he can.

Given under our hands the 6th day of July, 1776. SANDWICH. C. SPENCER. H.
PALLISER.

By command of their Lordships, PH. STEPHENS.

Government, now heartily in earnest, neglected no step which might tend to
promote the object in view. In 1745, a law had passed offering a donation of L.
20,000 to the discoverer of a Northern passage through Hudson's Bay, in which
his Majesty's ships were excluded. This was now extended to any ship belonging
to his Majesty, or any of his subjects, and the restriction to Hudson's Bay
cancelled, bearing that the discoverer of a passage by sea, between the the
Atlantic and Pacific Ocean in any direction, or paralled of the Northern
Hemisphere, should be entitled, etc. As also a reward of five thousand pounds,
to any ship that should approach to within 1 of the North Pole. In the
beginning of summer 1776, Captain Pickersgill was appointed Commander of the
armed brig the Lion, and ordered to proceed to Davis's Straits, to protect the
British fishers; and in order to facilitate Captain Cook's expedition, to
proceed up Baffin's Bay, and make such charts and take such views of the
several bays, harbors, etc. as might be useful to navigators and others; and
to be careful to return in the fall of the year. Pickersgill failed in
executing his commissions, and in March following Lieutenant Young was
appointed to succeed him.

As the object of this voyage is immediately connected with that of Captain
Cook, we have annexed a summary of his instructions, dated March 13th, 1777.

"That as the Resolution and Discovery had been sent out under the command of
Capt. Cook, to attempt the discovery of a northern passage, by sea, from the
Pacific to the Atlantic Ocean, and to run as far up as the 65 of north
latitude, and there, and as far north as he judged it proper, carefully to
search for such rivers or inlets as might appear to him pointing toward
Baffin's or Hudson's bay, or the north seas; and to attempt a passage by these
if possible; so, on the other hand, you are to proceed to Baffin's Bay, and
carefully to explore the western shores thereof, and if an inlet or river is
discovered seemingly pointing toward the Pacific Ocean, you are to attempt
navigating the same; and if not, endeavor to return to England once this year."

But this expedition was of no service; Young was found more calculated to
assist in the glory of a victory, than explore icy mountains.

On examining these instructions, it may be questioned, why Captain Cook was
not directed to commence his search, before he arrived at 65? Why not examine
Hudson's Bay, on our side of America? Why was the western sea of John de Fuca
in latitude 47 and 48; the Archipelago of St. Lazarus of Admiral de Font from
50 to 55; and the rivers and lakes to the north eastward, neglected? It may
easily be shown that these pretended discoveries are mere fictions, and that
the Orders, not to begin his search before the 65 of north latitude was founded
upon a thorough knowledge of the coast to the southward of that point.

Captain Middleton, the commander of the expedition in Hudson's Bay, in 1741,
and 42, had entertained a notion of the probability of discovering a passage to
the Pacific, and in search of it, had proceeded further north than any of his
predecessors; but he found it utterly impracticable. Mr. Dobbs, however, the
patron of the enterprise, upon the information of some of Middleton's officers,
ventured to accuse him of misrepresenting facts, and that from his own accounts
of an inlet running westward in latitude 65 or 66 it was evident he had not
taken proper pains. To be at a point upon this, he prevailed upon a society of
merchants and gentlemen to fit out the Dobbs and California to investigate this
very inlet, having previously got the L. 20,000 premium (...).

But this voyage abundantly established Captain Middleton's opinion; for the
supposed straits was found to be a fresh water river. So high had expectation
been raised in favor of this supposed passage, that notwithstanding the
failure of this expedition, it was still considered as attainable. Two places
were mentioned as the most probable, the one Chesterfield or Bowden's inlet, in
latitude 63 or 64, the other Repulse Bay in latitude 67. This last, the
committee who directed the enterprise, declared to be impracticable, upon the
testimony of Mr. Ellis, the commander of the Dobbs, and some of his officers;
and the former has been fully explored, and traced 170 miles up the country, to
a large lake from whence it takes its rise, in two different voyages by Captain
Christopher, in the sloop Churchill in the years 1761 and 62.

Besides these sea voyages, the matter is much elucidated by the journey of Mr.
Hearne, who was sent out by the Hudson's Bay company to travel over land, as
far as the Copper Mine River, which had been much spoken of by Mr. Dobbs and
other favorers of the scheme. He set out in December 1770, from Fort Prince of
Wales, on Churchill's River lat. 58 50, and his transactions are preserved in
his written journal. It is much to be wished that this journal were published,
as it contains a very dismal account of the wretched situation of the
miserions, inhabitants of that part of the globe. His general course was to the
north-west. In June 1771, when at a place called Conge Catha who Chaga, he
determined by two good observations, that this place is situated 24 2 west
longitude of Churchill River, and in 68 46 north latitude. On the 13th of July,
he reached Copper Mine River; and contrary to the idea he had been left to form
of it, sound it scarcely navigable for a canoe. Without entering particularly
into the account Mr. Hearne gives of this river, it is sufficient for our
purpose to mention, that he found it by no means navigable for the smallest
vessels, and impossible to be made so. On our general chart, the particular
situation of this river, as well as the country in general, through which Mr.
Hearne passed, is accurately laid down. In fine, Mr. Hearne's traveling 1300
miles before he arrived at the sea, makes it clear that the continents of North
America stretches from Hudson's Bay, at least that distance to the north-west,
while his most westerly distance from Hudson's Bay was about 600 miles; and the
Indians who attended him as guides were convinced that there existed a vast
track of continent, stretching on in the same direction. What we have now
mentioned, being sufficiently known to the first Lord of the Admiralty, was a
good reason for his ordering Captain Cook to commence his search in latitude
65, and not more to the southward. But if there are any, we are still inclined
to think it should have begun earlier. We beg leave to recommend to them a
perusal of the Spanish voyages, particularly that on the coast of America in
1775, published by Mr. Danes Barrington. In the general sketch we have now
given of the present and preceding voyages, a pretty distinct idea may be
formed, of what was intended to be done, and what was really accomplished. The
benefits arising from them may be enumerated as follows:

1. All visionary speculators and schemers, such as Busson, Campbell, and de
Brosses, will find few votaries to support their airy fanciful dreams of
treasures and paradises in these seas, as Captain Cook has sufficiently
investigated what is and what is not to be found there; so, many impracticable
undertakings which would probably have taken place, will be entirely prevented.

2. But unprofitable searches will not only be discouraged, but the distresses
and inconveniences attending the navigation of these seas, in a great measure
prevented. The exact situation of the different islands are properly laid down;
rocky shores, perplexing currents, dangerous shoals, and narrow straits
accurately described; besides many other advantages, to enumerate which, it
would be necessary to transcribe great part of the journals of our several
Commanders. By thus lessening the danger of these voyages, a scene of commerce
comes in view, that in a course of years will probably come to such a height as
is impossible for us at present to have any conception of; nay, in our own day,
it is highly probable that some speedy advances will be made to form some
commercial establishments in the south Pacific; at least, if we do not, we have
taught the Russians and Spaniards some important lessons in the skintrade, and
otherwise, which they will not fail to improve.

3. The valuable accessions which human knowledge has made by the continued
plan of discovery carried on in the present reign, cannot fail to distinguish
Britain as taking the lead in the most arduous enterprises, for the benefit of
mankind. And were no real benefit to accrue to us, either in this or a future
age, as mentioned in the preceding article, certainly no greater scope was ever
given to the dignified exercise of the powers of the human mind, particularly
in the astronomical lines.

4. It is commonly observed, that acquisitions in one science, are generally
followed by acquisitions in other branches; so here, the discovery of so (...)
new places in the globe presents to our view fresh objects of science. Upon the
report of any common sailor, much information may be obtained; but when we
consider that in these voyages, the labors of some of the most eminent men of
the times are united, we must be satisfied that every thing new and valuable
throughout the wide extent of their researches are collected and recorded. It
is necessary here to mention that in his second voyage, Captain Cook was
accompanied by Sir Joseph Banks; the obligations which (if we may use the
expression) science lies under to this great man, cannot be b^^te^ expressed
than in the words of Mr. Wallis, which we beg leave to transcribe.

"That branch of natural knowledge which may be called nautical astronomy, was
undoubtedly in its infancy, when these voyages were first undertaken. Both
instruments and observers, which deserved the name, were very rare; and so late
as the year 1770, it was thought necessary, in the appendix to Mayer's tables,
published by the Board of Longitude, to state facts, in contradiction to the
assertions of so celebrated an Astronomer as the Abbe de la Caille, that the
altitude of the sun at noon, the easiest and most simple of all observations,
could not be taken with certainty to a less quantity than five, six, seven, or
even eight minutes. The Abbe's words are. "Si ceux qui promettent une (...)
grande precision dans ces fortes de methodes, avoient navig^e quelque temps,
ils auroient vu souvent, que dans I observation la plus simple de toutes, qui
est celle de la hauteur du soleil a midi, deux observations, munis de bons
quartiers de reflection, biens rectifies, different entr'eux, lorsqu'ils
observent chacum a part, de 5 6 7 and 8. -- Ephemer. 1755. -- 1765. Introduct.
p. 32."

It must be however mentioned, in justice to M. de. la Caille, that he
attempted to introduce the lunar method of discovering the longitude, and
proposed a plan of calculations of the moon's distance from the sun and fixed
stars; but, through the imperfection of his instruments* his success was much
less than that method was capable of affording, The bringing it into general
use was reserved for Dr. Maskelyne, our Astronomer Royal. See the Preface to
the Tables for correcting the Effects of Refraction and Parallax. published by
the Board of Longitude, under the direction of Dr. Shepherd, Plumian Professor
of Astronomy and Experimental Philosophy at Cambridge in 1772.


But those who will give themselves the trouble to look into the astronomical
observations, made in Captain Cook's last voyage, will find that there were
few, even of the petty officers, who could not observe the distance of the moon
from the sun, or a star, the most delicate of all observations, with sufficient
accuracy. It may be added, that the method of making and computing observations
for finding the variation of the compass is better known, and more frequently
practiced by those who have been on these voyages, than by most others. Nor is
there, perhaps, a person who ranks as an officer, and has been concerned in
them, who would not, whatever his real skill may be, feel ashamed to have it
thought that he did not know how to observe for, and compute the time at sea;
though, but a short while before these voyages were set on foot, such a thing
was scarcely ever heard of amongst seamen; and even first-rate astronomers
doubted the possibility of doing it with sufficient exactness In addition to
Mr. Wallis's Remark, it may be observed, that the proficiency, of our naval
officers in taking observations at sea must ultimately be attributed to the
great attention paid to this important object by the Board of Longitude at
home; liberal rewards having been given to mathematicians for perfecting the
Lunar Tables, and facilitating calculations; and to artists for constructing
more accurate instruments for observing, and watches better adopted to keeping
time (...). It appears, therefore, that the voyages of discovery, and the
operations of the Board of Longitude, went hand in hand; and they must be
combined, in order to form a just estimate of the extent of the plan carried
into execution since his Majesty's accession, for improving astronomy and
navigation. But, besides the establishment of the Board of Longitude on its
present footing, which has had such important consequences, it must also ever
be acknowledged that his present Majesty has extended his patronage to every
branch of the liberal arts and useful sciences. The munificent present to the
royal Society for defraying the expense of observing the Transit of Venus; --
the institution of the Academy of Painting and Sculpture; -- the magnificent
apartments allotted to the Royal and Antiquary Societies and to the Royal
Academy, at Somerset Place; -- the support of the Garden of Exotics at Kew, to
improve which, Mr. Mason was sent to the extremities of Africa; -- the
substantial encouragement afforded to learned men and learned works, in various
departments; and particularly that afforded to Mr. Herschell, which has enabled
him to devote himself entirely to the improvement of astronomy; these, and many
other instances which might be enumerated, would have greatly distinguished his
Majesty's reign, even if he had not been the patron of those successful
attempts to perfect geography and navigation by so many voyages of discovery.
."

"The number of places at which the rise and times of flowing of tides have
been observed, in these voyages, is very great; and hence an important article
of useful knowledge is afforded. In these observations, some very curious and
even unexpected circumstances have offered themselves to our consideration. It
will be sufficient to instance the exceedingly small height to which the tide
rises in the middle of the great Pacific Ocean; where it falls short,
two-thirds at least, of what might have been expected from theory and
calculation."

"The direction and force of currents at sea, make also an important object.
These voyages will be found to contain much useful information on this head; as
well relating to seas nearer home, and which, in consequence, are navigated
every day, as to those which are more remote, but where, notwithstanding, the
knowledge of these things may be of great service to those who are destined to
navigate them hereafter. To this head also we may refer the great number of
experiments which have been made for inquiring into the depth of the sea, its
temperature, and saltness at different depths, and in a variety of places and
climates."

"An extensive foundation has also been laid for improvements in magnetism, for
discovering the cause and nature of the polarity of the needle, and a theory of
its variations, by the number and variety of the observations and experiments
which have been made, both on the variation and dip, in almost all parts of the
world. Experiments also have been made, in consequence of the late voyages, on
the effects of gravity, in different and very distant places, which may serve
to increase our stock of natural knowledge. From the same source of information
we have learned, that the phenomenon, usually called the aurora borealis, is
not peculiar to high Northern latitudes, but belongs equally to all cold
climates, whether they be North or South."

"But perhaps no part of knowledge has been so great a gainer by the late
voyages, as that of botany. We are told See Dr. Shepherd's Preface, as above.
that, at least, twelve hundred new plants have been added to the known system;
and that very considerable additions have been made to every other branch of
natural history, by the great skill and industry of Sir Joseph Banks, and the
other gentlemen Dr. Solander, Dr. Forster and his son, and Dr. Sparman. Dr.
Forster has given us a specimen of the botanical discoveries of his voyage in
the Characteres Generum Plantarum, etc. and much curious philosophical matter
is contained in his Observations made in a Voyage round the World. Dr. Sparman,
also, on his return to Sweden, favored us with a publication, in which he
expatiates on the advantages accruing to natural history* to astronomy,
geography, general physics, and navigation, from our South Sea voyages.
who have accompanied Captain Cook for that purpose."

To Captain Cook himself, we are indebted for another improvement, which was
the general health of his crew, during his long voyages, and that may be
observed particularly in every passage of the succeeding volumes. Another good
effect of these voyages, and that not the least of them, is the opportunity
they have afforded of studying human nature in various situations both
interesting and uncommon. However secluded from the rest of mankind any tribe
may appear to be at this time, yet if any traces remain of a quondam
acquaintance with any sect or race, by history or our own observation, there
cannot be seen uncultivated nature. And in this state the Islands contiguous to
the continent of Asia seem to be. But our interprising discoverer had occasion
to observe, in the center of the Pacific Ocean, tribes of fellow creatures
hitherto unknown; their manners, customs, religion, laws, their every thing,
the production of nature and necessity. What a soil for philosophical enquiry!

On the one hand, our admiration is raised, in observing their songs, their
dances, their games, their processions, and on the other, our detestation in
observing them feed on human flesh.

The Scholar and Antiquarian consider it as a valuable acquisition to discover
some relic of Roman or Grecian workmanship; but how much more is not
curiosity awakened, in observing the ingenious inventions of our newly
discovered friends in the Sandwich Isles? What rusty collection of antiques can
vie with the valuable addition made by Cook to Sir Ashton Lever's repository?
And the expense of all his three voyages does not exceed the expense of digging
out the buried contents of Herculaneum. In a nation so far advanced in
refinement as this, the contrast must be very striking, and to trace the
transition from barbarism to civility truly pleasing.

The Philosopher will find a new field of discussion opened for him, in what
may be termed the natural history of the human species. For example, the
question concerning the existence of giant's is now determined; as upon the
joint testimony of Byron, Wallis, and Carteret, we are assured that the
inhabitants of a district bordering on the north side of the strait of
Magalhaens, considerably exceed the bulk of mankind in statu^e.

No subject can be more entertaining than to trace the various migrations of
those who first peopled the Globe. It was formerly known, that the Asiatic
nation, called the Malayans, traded considerably in the Indies, not only on the
side of Asia, but also on the African coast, particularly to Madagascar. But we
are indebted to Captain Cook for the information, that the same nation, who are
also called Phoenicians, visited, made settlements, and sounded colonies, at
different islands and places at vast distances from one another, and that
extending from the east side of Africa to the west side of America, a space,
including above half the circumference of the Globe; this he demonstrates, by
the surest of all proofs, viz. the affinity of language.

Connected with this, we shall mention a very important benefit resulting from
these (...), viz. the effectual answer we have now to give those cavillers
against the Mosaic account of peopling the earth; the vicinity of the two
continents of Asia and America is fully established.

When the recesses of the globe are investigated in order to promote general
knowledge, and not with a prospect of enlarging private dominion; when we
traverse the globe to visit new tribes of our fellow creatures, as friends,
wishing to learn their existence, for the express purpose of bringing them
within the pale of the offices of humanity, and to relieve their wants, by
communicating to them our superior seize; the voyages projected by his
gracious Majesty George the Third, and carried into execution by Captain Cook,
have not, it is presumed, been entirely useless. Some rays of light must have
been darted on the Friendly Society, and Sandwich Islands, by our repeated
intercourse with them. Their stock of ideas must naturally be enlarged, and new
materials must have been furnished them for the exercise of their reason, by
the uncommon objects we exhibited to them.

Convinced, by comparing themselves to their English visitors, of their extreme
inferiority, they will probably endeavor to emerge from it, and to rise nearer
to a level with those who left behind them so many proofs of their generosity
and humanity. The useful animals and vegetables introduced amongst them will
certainly contribute to the comforts and enjoyments of life.

When Great Britain was first visited by the Phoenicians, the inhabitants were
painted savages, much less civilized than those of Tongataboo, or Otaheite; and
it is not impossible, but that our late voyages may, in process of time, spread
the blessings of civilization amongst the numerous islanders of the South
Pacific Ocean, and be the means of abolishing their abominable repasts, and
almost equally abominable sacrifices.

A GENERAL CHART: Exhibiting the DISCOVERIES made by Captn. JAMES COOK in this
and his two proceeding VOYAGES; with the TRACKS of the SHIPS under his Command.




A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK I. TRANSACTIONS FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE
VOYAGE, TILL OUR DEPARTURE FROM NEW ZEALAND.
CHAP. I.
Captains Cook and Clerk appointed to the Resolution and Discovery --
Preparations for the Voyage -- Sail from Deptford to Long Reach -- Are visited
there by the Earl of Sandwich and others -- Proceed to Plymouth -- Employments
there -- Number of Officers and Men in each Ship -- Departure of the Resolution.

ON the 10th of February, 1776, Captain Cook went on board his Majesty's sloop
the Resolution, and hoisted the pendant, having received a commission to
command her the preceding day. The Discovery, of three hundred tons, (...), at
the same time, prepared for the service, and Captain Clerk appointed to the
command of her. It may be necessary to observe, that Captain Clerk had been
Captain Cook's Second Lieutenant on board the Resolution, in his second voyage
round the world.

These two ships were then equipping in the dock at Deptford, for a voyage to
make farther discoveries in the Pacific Ocean, under the direction of Captain
Cook.

The Resolution was hauled into the river on the 9th of March to complete her
rigging, and take in stores and provisions for the voyage. Both ships, indeed,
were abundantly supplied with every thing requisite for a voyage of such
duration. We sailed on the 29th of May, and arrived the next day at Long Reach,
where our powder and shot, and other ordnance stores, were received.

On the 8th of June, while we lay in Long Reach, we had the satisfaction of a
visit from the Earl of Sandwich, Sir Hugh Palliser, and others of the Board of
Admiralty, to examine whether every thing had been completed pursuant to their
orders, and to the convenience of those who were to embark. They honored
Captain Cook with their company to dinner on that day; and were saluted, on
their coming on board, and on their going ashore, with seventeen guns and three
cheers.

To convey some permanent benefit to the inhabitants of Otaheite, and of the
other islands which we might happen to visit, his Majesty commanded some useful
animals to be taken out. On the 10th we took on board a bull, two cows with
their calves, and some sheep; with hay and corn for their support. We were also
furnished with a sufficient quantity of our valuable European garden seeds,
which might add fresh supplies of food to the vegetable productions of our
newly discovered islands.

Both the ships, by order of the Board of Admiralty, were amply supplied with
an extensive assortment of iron tools and trinkets, to facilitate a friendly
commerce and intercourse with the inhabitants of such new countries as we might
discover. With respect to our own wants, nothing was refused us that might be
conducive to health, comfort or convenience.

Those at the head of the naval department were equally solicitous to render
our vo^age of public utility; accordingly we received on board, the next day,
variety of astronomical and nautical instruments, which the Board of Longitude
entrusted to Captain Cook and Mr. King, his Second Lieutenant; they having
engaged to supply the place of a professed observator. The board, likewise, put
into their possession the time-keeper, which Captain Cook had carried out in
his last voyage, and which had performed so well. It was constructed by Mr.
Kendal, and was a copy of Mr. Harrison's. Another time-keeper, and the same
assortment of astronomical and other instruments were put on board the
Discovery, for the use of Mr. William Bailey, a diligent and skilful
observator, who was engaged to embark with Captain Clerk.

Mr. Anderson, Surgeon to Captain Cook, added to his professional abilities a
great proficiency in natural history. He had already visited the South Sea
Islands in the same ship, and enabled the Captain to enrich his relation of the
preceding voyage with useful and valuable remarks.

Though several young men, among the seaofficers, were capable of being
employed in constructing charts, drawing plans, and taking views of the coasts
and head-lands, Mr. Webber was engaged to embark with Captain Cook, for the
purpose of supplying the defects of written accounts, by taking accurate and
masterly drawings of the most memorable scenes of our transactions.

The necessary preparations being completed, Captain Cook received orders to
proceed to Plymouth, and to take the Discovery under his command. In
consequence of which, he ordered Captain Clerk to carry his ship also ^ound to
Plymouth.

The Resolution, with the Discovery in company, sailed from Long Reach on the
15th of June, and anchored at the Nore the same evening. The Discovery
proceeded the next day in obedience to Captain Cook's order, and the Resolution
remained at the Nore till Captain Cook, who was then in London, should join her.

It being our intention to touch at Otaheite and the S^^ic^y Islands, it had
been determined to carry Omai back to his native country; accordingly Captain
Cook and he set out from London early on the 24th, and reached Chatham between
ten and eleven o'clock, where they dined with Commissioner Proby, who
afterward ordered his yacht to convey them to Sheerness, where the Captain's
boat was waiting to take them on board the Resolution.

Though Omai left London with some degree of regret, when he reflected upon the
favors and indulgencies he had received, yet, when mention was made of his own
islands, his eyes sparkled with joy. He entertained the highest ideas of this
country and its inhabitants; but the pleasing prospect of returning home,
loaded with what would be deemed invaluable treasures there, and of obtaining a
distinguished superiority among his countrymen, operated so far as to suppress
every uneasy sensation, and when he got on board the ship, he appeared to be
quite happy.

Omai was furnished by his Majesty, with quantities of every article that were
supposed to be in estimation at Otaheite. He also received several presents
from Lord Sandwich, Mr. Banks, and many others. Every method had, indeed, been
employed, during his abode in England, and at his departure, to make him the
instrument of conveying to his countrymen, an exalted opinion of British
greatness and generosity.

About noon on the 25th we weighed anchor, and made sail for the Downs, with a
gentle breeze at north-west by west. At nine the same day we anchored, with the
North Foreland bearing south by east, and Margate Point south-west by south.

On the 26th, at two o'clock, we weighed, and stood round the Foreland; and at
eight o'clock the same morning anchored in the Downs. Here Captain Cook
received two boats on board, which had been built for him at Deal; and the next
day, at two o'clock in the afternoon, we got under sail, but the breeze soon
died away, and we anchored again. At ten o'clock the same night we weighed
again, and proceeded down the (...).

We anchored at Plymouth Sound on the 30th, at three o'clock in the afternoon.
The Discovery had arrived there three days before. We saluted Admiral Amh^rst,
whose flag was flying on board the Ocean, and he returned the compliment.

We were employed on the 1st and 2d of July in replacing the water and
provisions we had expended, and in receiving on board a supply of port wine. On
the 8th Captain Cook received his instructions for the voyage, and an order to
proceed to the Cape of Good Hope with the Resolution; with directions also to
leave an order for Captain Clerk to follow him, as soon as he should join his
ship, he being at that time in London.

The officers and men on board the Resolution (including marines) were one
hundred and twelve, and those on board the Discovery were eighty.

On the 10th of July the proper persons came on board, and paid the officers
and crew up to the 30th of last month. The petty officers and seamen received
also two months wages in advance. Such indulgence to the latter is customary;
but the payment of what was due to the superior officers, was in consideration
of our peculiar situation, to enable us to defray the expense of furnishing
ourselves with necessaries for a voyage of such uncommon duration.

In the morning of the 11th, Captain Cook delivered into the hands of Mr.
Burney, First Lieutenant of the Discovery, Captain Clerke's sailing orders; a
copy of which he also left with the commanding officer of his Majesty's ships
at Plymouth, to be delivered to the Captain on his arrival. In the afternoon we
weighed with the ebb, and got out beyond all the shipping in the Sound, where
we were detained most of the following day. At eight o'clock in the evening, we
weighed again, and stood out of the Sound, with a gentle breeze at north-west
by west.

CHAP. II.
The Resolution proceeds to Teneriffe -- Reception there -- Captain Cook visits
the Governor -- Description of Santa Cruz Road -- Ample Supplies to be obtained
-- Some account of the Island, and of the Cities of Santa Cruz and Laguna --
Agriculture -- Natural History -- Air -- Climate -- Produce -- Description of
the Inhabitants.

SOON after we came out of Plymouth Sound, the wind came more westerly, and
blew fresh, which obliged us to ply down the channel; and we were not off the
Lizard till the 14th at eight in the evening.

On the 16th at noon, the light-house of St. Agnes, on the Isles of Scilly,
bore north-west by west, distant about seven or eight miles; and on the 17th
and 18th, we were off Ushant.

On the 19th we stood westward till eight o'clock in the morning, when the wind
shifted, and we tacked and stretched to the southward: here we beheld nine sail
of large ships, which we supposed to be French men of war. On the 22d, at ten
in the morning, we saw Cape Ortegal about four leagues distant.

We had calm weather on the 22d and 23d, and on the afternoon of the 24th, we
passed Cape Finisterre, with a fine gale at north-north-east.

Captain Cook determined to touch at Teneriffe, to get a supply of hay and corn
for the subsistence of his animals on board, as well as the usual refreshments
for ourselves. We saw Teneriffe on the 31st of July, at four in the afternoon;
and at daylight on the first of August, we sailed round the east point of that
island, and anchored on the south side, in the road of Santa Cruz, about eight
o'clock, in twenty-three fathoms water.

There were, riding in this road, a French frigate, two French brigantines, an
English brigantine, and fourteen sail of Spanish ships.

Immediately after we had anchored, we received a visit from the master of the
port, who asked the ship's name. Upon his retiring, Captain Cook sent an
officer ashore, to present his respects to the Governor, and ask his permission
to take in water, and to purchase such articles as were thought necessary. The
Governor very politely complied with Captain Cook's request, and sent an
officer on board to compliment him on his arrival. In the afternoon Captain
Cook waited upon him, accompanied by some of his officers; and, before he
returned to his ship, bespoke some corn and straw, ordered a quantity of wine,
and made an agreement for a supply of water.

The Road of Santa Cruz is situated on the south-east side of the island,
before the town of the same name. It is said to be the principal road of
Teneriffe for shelter, capacity, and the goodness of its bottom.

The water to supply the shipping, and for the use of the inhabitants of Santa
Cruz, is derived from a rivulet that runs from the hills, which is conveyed
into the town in wooden troughs. As these troughs were at this time repairing,
fresh water was extremely scarce.

From the appearance of the country about Santa Cruz, it might naturally be
concluded that Teneriffe is a barren spot: we were convinced however, from the
ample supplies we received, that it not only produced sufficient to supply its
own inhabitants, but also enough to spare for visitors. Though wine is the
chief produce of the island, beef may be had at about threepence sterling a
pound; the oxen, however, are small, lean, and boney. Sheep, goats, hogs, and
poultry, may be had on terms equally reasonable. A great variety of fruits are
to be had in plenty, as pears, figs, grapes, mulberries, musk-melons, etc.
besides others that were not then in season. The pumpkins, potatoes, and
onions, which grow here, are excellent.

Indian corn is produced on this island, and is sold at about three shillings
and sixpence per bushel: the fruits and vegetables are, in general, very
cheap. Though the inhabitants are but indifferently supplied with fish by the
adjoining seas, they are engaged in a considerable fishery on the coast of
Barbary, and the produce of it sells at a very moderate price.

Teneriffe is certainly a more eligible place than Madeira, for ships to touch
at which are bound on long voyages; but the wine of the latter is infinitely
superior to that of the former: the difference of their prices is almost as
considerable as their qualities, for the best Teneriffe wine was sold for
twelve pounds a pipe, whereas a pipe of the best Maderia was worth considerably
more than double that sum.

Behind the town of Santa Cruz, the country rises gradually to a moderate
height; afterward it continues to rise south westward toward the celebrated
pic of Teneriffe. But we were much disappointed in our expectations with
respect to its appearance In Sparta's History of the Royal Society, page 200,
etc. is an account of a journey to the top of the pic of Teneriffe. A modern
traveller, viz. the Chevalier de Borda, who measured the height of this
mountain in August 1776, makes it 123^0 English feet.
.

The island, eastward of Santa Cruz, appears perfectly barren. Ridges of high
hills run toward the sea, between which are deep valleys, terminating at
mountains that run across and are higher than the former.

On the 1st of August in the afternoon, Mr. Anderson (Captain Cook's surgeon)
went on shore to one of these valleys, intending to reach the top of the
remoter hills, but time would not permit him to get farther than their foot.
The lower hills produce great quantities of the euphorbia canariensis. The
people on the spot imagine its juice to be so caustic as to erode the skin; but
Mr. Anderson convinced them to the contrary, by thrusting his finger into a
plant full of it. The inhabitants dry the bushes of euphorbia, and carry them
home for fuel.

Santa Cruz, though not large, is a well built city. Their churches have not a
magnificent appearance without, but they are decent and tolerably handsome
within.

Almost facing the stone pier, which runs into the sea from the town, is a
marble column, lately erected, enriched with human figures which reflect honor
to the statuary.

On the 2d of August, in the afternoon, Mr. Anderson and three others hired
mules to ride to the city of Laguna, about the distance of four miles from
Santa Cruz. They arrived there between five and six in the evening, but the
sight of it did not reward us for our trouble, as the roads were very bad, and
our cattle but indifferent. Though the place is extensive, it hardly deserves
to be dignified with the name of a city. There is some good houses, but the
disposition of the streets is very irregular. Laguna is larger than Santa Cruz,
but much inferior to it in appearance.

The road from Santa Cruz to Laguna, runs up a steep barren hill; but, lower
down, we saw some fig trees and cornfieldsd. The corn, however, is not produced
here without great labor, the ground being greatly encumbered with stones.
Nothing else presented itself, deserving notice, except a few aloe plants in
flower on the side of the road.

The laborious work in this island is chiefly performed by mules, horses being
scarce, and reserved for the use of the officers. Oxen are also much employed
here. Some hawks and parrots were seen, which were natives of the island; as
also the sea-swallow, sea-gulls, partridges, swallows, canary-birds, and
black-birds. There are also lizards, locusts, and three or four sorts of dragon
flies.

Mr. Anderson was informed, by a gentleman of acknowledged veracity, that a
shrub is common here, agreeing exactly with the description given by Linnaeus
of the tea shrub, as growing in China and Japan. It is considered as a weed,
and large quantities are rooted out of the vineyards every year. The Spaniards,
however, who inhabit the island, sometimes make use of it, and ascribe to it
all the qualities of the tea imported from China.

The same gentleman mentioned to Mr. Anderson another botanical curiosity,
which is called the impregnated lemon. It is a distinct and perfect lemon
enclosed within another.

A certain sort of grape growing here, is deemed an excellent remedy in
phthisical complaints. The air and climate are remarkably healthful, and
particularly adapted to afford relief in such complaints. By residing at
different heights in the island, it is in the power of any one to procure such
a temperature of air as may be best suited to his constitution. He may continue
where it is mild and salubrious, or he may ascend till the cold becomes
intolerable. No person, it is said, can live comfortably within a mile of the
perpendicular height of the pic, after the month of August.

Smoke continually issues from near the top of the pic, but they have had no
earthquake or eruption since 1704, when the port of Garrachica was destroyed,
being filled up by the rivers of burning lava that flowed into it; and houses
are now built, where ships formerly lay at anchor.

The trade of Teneriffe is very considerable, forty thousand pipes of wine
being annually made there; which is consumed in the island, or made into
brandy, and sent to the Spanish West Indies. Indeed the wine is the only
considerable article of the foreign commerce of Teneriffe, unless we reckon the
large quantities of filtering stones brought from Grand Canary.

The race of inhabitants found here when the Spaniards discovered the Canaries,
are no longer a distinct people, having intermarried with the Spanish settlers;
their descendants, however, may be known, from their being remarkably tall,
strong, and large-boned. The men are tawny, and the woman are pale. The
inhabitants, in general, of Teneriffe, are decent, grave, and civil; retaining
that solemn cast which distinguishes those of their country from others. Though
we are not of opinion that our manners are similar to those of the Spaniards,
(...) Omai declared, he did not think there was much difference. He said,
indeed, that they did not appear to be so friendly as the English; and that
their persons nearly resembled those of his countrymen.

CHAP. III.
Departure from Teneriffe -- Danger of the ship from the sunken rocks near
Bonavista -- Isle of Mayo -- Necessary precautions against Rain and Heat in the
Neighborhood of the Equator -- Position of the Coast of Brazil -- Arrival at
the Cape of Good Hope -- Captain Cook's Reception there -- Loses some of his
Sheep -- Other Transactions at the Cape -- Junction of the Discovery -- Account
of Mr. Anderson's Journey up the Country.

HAVING got our water and other articles on board, we weighed anchor on the 4th
of August, quitted Teneriffe, and proceeded on our voyage.

On the 10th, at nine o'clock in the evening, we saw the island of Bonavista
bearing south, distant about a league; though we then thought ourselves much
farther off, but it soon appeared that we were mistaken; for after hauling to
the eastward, to clear the sunken rocks that lie near the south-east point of
the island, we found ourselves clos^ upon them, and bearly weathered the
breakers. Our situation was, for some minutes, so very alarming, that Captain
Cook did not choose to sound, as that might have increased the danger, without
any possibility of lessening it.

Having cleared the rocks, we steered between Bonavista and the island of Mayo,
intending to look into Port Praya for the Discovery, as Captain Cook had told
Captain Clerk that he should touch there. At one o'clock we saw the rocks
south-west of Bonavista, bearing south-east, distant three or four leagues.

On Monday the 12th, at six o'clock in the morning, the isle of Mayo bore
south-south-east, distant four or five leagues. We sounded, and found ground at
sixty fathoms. At the distance of three or four miles from this island, we saw
not the least appearance of vegetation; nothing presented itself to our view,
but that lifeless brown, so common in unwooded countries under the torrid zone.

During our continuance among these islands, we had gentle breezes of wind,
varying from the south-east to east, and some calms. On the 13th, at nine
o'clock in the morning, we arrived before Port Praya, in the island of St.
Jago, where two Dutch East India ships, and a small brigantine, were at anchor.
The Discovery not being there, we did not go in, but stood to the southward.

We lost the north-east trade-wind, the day after we left the Cape de Verde
islands; and, on the 30th, got that which blows from the south-east. The wind,
during this interval, was principally in the south-west quarter. It generally
blew a gentle breeze, but sometimes fresh, and in squalls. We had few calms,
and those of short duration. Between the latitude of 12, and of 7 north, the
weather was very gloomy, and frequently rainy; insomuch, that we were enabled
to save as much water as filled the greatest part of our empty casks.

Every bad consequence is to be apprehended from these rains, and the close
sultry weather accompanying them. Commanders of ships ought carefully to purify
the air between decks with fires and smoke, and to oblige the people to change
their clothes at every opportunity. These precautions were strictly observed on
board the Resolution and Discovery; and we enjoyed the advantage of it, having
fewer sick than on either of Captain Cook's former voyages. Our ship, however,
was very leaky in all her upper works. The sultry weather had opened her seams
so wide, that the rainwater passed through as it fell. The officers in the
gun-room were driven from their cabins, by the water that came through the
sides, and hardly a man could lie dry in his bed. The caulkers were employed to
repair these defects, as soon as we got into fair settled weather; but Captain
Cook would not trust them over the sides while we were at sea.

On the 1st of September, we crossed the equator, in the longitude of 27 38
west, and passed the afternoon in performing the old ceremony of d^^king those,
who had not crossed the equator before. On the 8th, we were a little to the
southward of Cape St. Augustine. We proceeded on our voyage, without any
remarkable occurrence, till the 6th of October. Being then in the latitude of
35 15 south, longitude 7 45 west, we alternately met with light airs and calms
for three successive days. For some days before we had seen albatrosses, and
pintadoes, and we then saw three penguins. In consequence of this we founded,
but found no ground with a line of one hundred and fifty fathoms. We shot a few
birds, one of which was a black petrel, about the size of a crow.

In the evening of the 8th, a bird, which the sailors call a noddy, settled on
our rigging, and was taken. It was larger than a common English blackbird, and
nearly of the same color, except the upper part of the head, which was white.
It was web-footed, had black legs, and a long black bill. Though it is said
th^se birds never venture far from land, we knew of none nearer our station
than Gough's or Richmond island, which could not be less than one hundred
leagues. But as the Atlantic ocean, southward of us, has been but little
frequented, there may possibly be more islands than we know of.

A fresh gale from the north-west succeeded this calm weather, which continued
two days. Afterward we had variable light ^ir^ for about twenty-four hours,
when the north-west wind returned, and bl^w fresh. On the 17th we saw the Cape
of Good Hope, and, on the 18th, anchored in Table-bay, in four fathoms water.

After receiving the usual visit from the Masterattendant and the Surgeon,
Captain Cook sent an officer to Baron Plettenberg, the Governor, and saluted
the garrison with thirteen guns, and was complimented in return with the same
number. Two French East India ships were in the bay, the one outward, and the
other homeward-bound.

After having saluted, Captain Cook went on shore, accompanied by some of his
officers, and waited on the Governor, the Lieutenant Governor, the Fiscal, and
the Commander of the troops. These Gentlemen received Captain Cook with the
greatest civility; and the Governor, in particular voluntarily promised him
every assistance that the place afforded. Before Captain Cook returned on
board, he ordered fresh meat, greens, etc. to be provided every day for the
ship's company.

On the 22d we fixed our tents and observatory; the next day we began to
observe equal altitudes of the sun, in order to discover whether the watch had
altered its rate. The caulkers were set to work to caulk the ship; and Captain
Cook had concerted measures for supplying both ships with such provisions as
were wanted; and, as the several articles for the Resolution were got ready*
they were immediately conveyed on board.

The homeward-bound French ship sailed for Europe on the 26th, and by her we
sent letters to England. The next day the Hampshire East India ship, from
Bencoolen, anchored in the bay.

On the 31st of October it blew excessively hard at south-east, and continued
for three days. The Resolution was the only ship in the bay that rode out the
gale without dragging her anchors.

The storm ceased on the 3d of November, and on the 6th the Hampshire sailed
for England, in which Captain Cook sent home an invalid. On the 10th, in the
morning, the Discovery arrived in the bay. She sailed from Plymouth on the 1st
of August, and would have been in with us a week sooner, had not the late gale
of wind blown her off the coast. Captain Clerk, on his passage from England,
lost one of his marines, by falling over board. No other accident happened
among his people, and they arrived in perfect health.

The next day the Discovery wanting caulking, Captain Cook sent all his workmen
on board her, and lent every other assistance to the Captain to expedite his
supply of provisions and water.

Having, by the Governor's permission, taken our cattle on shore, on the night
preceding the 14th, some dogs got in amongst the sheep, forced them out of the
pen, killed four, and dispersed the rest. We recovered six of them the next
day; but among those which were missing were two rams, and two of the finest
ewes in the whole flock. Though the Dutch frequently boast of the police at the
Cape, yet the Captain's sheep evaded all the vigilance of the Fiscal's officers
and people. At length, after much trouble and expense, by employing some of the
lowest fellows of the place, we recovered all but the two ewes. One of the
rams, however, was so miserably torn by the dogs, that we thought he would
never recover.

Mr. Hemmy, the Lieutenant Governor, very obligingly offered to make up this
loss, by giving Captain Cook a Spanish ram, out of some he had sent for from
Lisbon; but the Captain declined the offer, thinking it would equally answer
his purpose to take with him some of the Cape rams: in this, however, the
Captain was mistaken. Mr. Hemmy had endeavored to introduce European sheep at
the Cape; but all his attempts were frustrated by the obstinacy of the country
people, who highly esteemed their own breed, on account of their large tails;
the fat of which sometimes produces more money than the whole car^ass besides.
Indeed the most remarkable thing in the Cape sheep is the length and thickness
of their tails, which weigh from ten to fifteen pounds.

While the ships were repairing for the prosecution of our voyage, Mr.
Anderson, and some of our officers, made an excursion, to take a survey of the
neighboring country. Mr. Anderson relates their proceedings to the following
effect:

In the forenoon of Saturday the 16th of November, he, and five others, set out
in a wagon, to take a view of the country. They crossed the large plain to the
eastward of the town, which is entirely a white sand, resembling that which is
commonly found on beaches. At five in the afternoon they passed a large
farm-house, some cornfieldsd and vineyards, situated beyond the plain, where
the soil appeared worth cultivating. At seven they arrived at Stellenbosh, a
colony, in point of importance, next to that of the Cape.

The village stands at the foot of the range of lofty mountains, about twenty
miles to the eastward of Cape-Town, and consists of about thirty houses, which
are neat and clean: a rivulet, and the shelter of some large oaks, planted at
its first settling, form a rural prospect in this desert country. There are
some thriving vineyards and orchards about the place, which seem to indicate an
excellent soil, though perhaps much may be owing to the uncommon serenity of
the air.

At this season of the year, Mr. Anderson could find but few plants in flower,
and insects were very scarce. He and his companions left Stellenbosh the next
morning, and soon arrived at the house they had passed on Saturday; Mr.
Cloeder, the owner of which, having sent them an invitation to visit him, they
were entertained by this gentleman with great politeness and hospitality. They
were received with a band of music, which continued playing while they were at
dinner; which, in that situation, might be reckoned elegant.

In the afternoon they crossed the country, and passed some large plantations.
In the evening they arrived at a farm-house, which is said to be the first in
the cultivated tract called the Pearl. Here they had a view of Drakenstein, the
third colony of this country, which contains several little farms or
plantations.

Plants and insects were as scarce here as at Stellenbosh, but there was a
greater plenty of shrubs, or small trees, naturally produced, than they had
before seen in the country.

On Tuesday the 19th, in the afternoon, they went to see a remarkable large
stone, called by the inhabitants the Tower of Babylon, or the Pearl Diamond. It
stands upon the top of some low hills, and is of an oblong shape, rounded on
the top, and lying nearly south and north. The east and west sides are nearly
perpendicular. The south end is not equally steep, but its greatest height is
there; whence it declines gently to the north-part, by which they ascended, and
had a very extensive prospect of the whole country.

The circumference of this stone is about half a mile, as they were half an
hour walking round it, including allowances for stopping and a bad road. Its
height seems to equal the dome of St. Paul's church. Except some few sissures,
it is one uninterrupted mass of stone. The stone is of that sort which
mineralogists call Saxum Conglutinatum.

On the 20th, in the morning, they set out from the Pearl, and going a
different road, passed through an uncultivated country to the Tiger Hills,
where they beheld some tolerable cornfields. About noon, they stopped in a
valley for refreshment, where they were plagued with a vast number of
musquitoes; and, in the evening, arrived at the Cape-Town.

On Saturday the 23d, we got the observatory, clock, etc. on board. From the
result of several calculations and observations, we had reason to conclude,
that the watch, or time-piece, had performed well all the way from England.

CHAP. IV.
The Resolution and Discovery leave the Cape of Good Hope -- See two Islands,
named Prince Edward's Islands -- Description of their Appearance -- Visit
Kerguelen's Land -- Arrive at Christmas Harbor -- Take in Water there --
Discover an Inscription -- Description of Christmas Harbor.

CAPTAIN Cook, fearing a second disaster, got his sheep and other cattle on
board as soon as possible. He also increased his stock by purchasing two bulls,
two heifers, two stone-horses, two mares, two rams, some ewes and goats, some
poultry, and some rabbits.

Both ships being supplied with provisions and water sufficient for two years
and upwards, and every other necessary article, and Captain Cook having given
Captain Clerk a copy of his instructions, we repaired on board in the morning
of the 30th. A breeze sprung up at south-east, at five in the afternoon, with
which we weighed and stood out of the Bay; at nine it fell calm, and we
anchored. At three o'clock the next morning, we weighed and put to sea, with a
light breeze at south, but did not get clear of land till the 3d of December in
the morning.

On Thursday the 5th, a squall of wind carried away the mizen topmast of the
Resolution, but we had another to replace it. On the evening of the 6th, being
then in the latitude of 39 14 south, and in the longitude of 23 56 east, we
observed several spots of water of a reddish hue. Upon examining some of this
water that was taken up, we perceived a number of small animals, which the
microscope discovered to resemble crayfish.

We continued to the south-east, followed by a mountainous sea, which
occasioned the ship to roll exceedingly, and rendered our cattle troublesome.
Several goats, especially the males, died, and some sheep. We now began to feel
the cold in a very sensible degree.

On Thursday the 12th, at noon, we discovered land extending from south-east by
south, to south-east by east. We, at length, discovered it to be two islands.
That which lies most to the south, appeared to be about fifteen leagues in
circuit; and the most northerly one, about nine leagues in circuit.

We passed at equal distance from both islands, and could not discover either
tree or shrub on either of them. They seemed to have a rocky shore, and,
excepting the south-east parts, a ridge of barren mountains, whose sides and
summits were covered with snow.

These two islands, and four others more to the east, were discovered by
Captains Marion du Fresne and Crozet, French navigators, in January 1772, on
their passage from the Cape of Good Hope to the Philippine Islands. As they
have no names in the French chart of the southern hemisphere, Captain Cook
named the two we now saw Prince Edward's Islands, and the other four by the
name of Marion's and Crozet's Islands.

We had now, in general, strong gales, and very indifferent weather. After
leaving Prince Edward's Islands, we shaped our course to pass to the southward
of the four others, to get into the latitude of the land discovered by Monsieur
de Kerguelen.

Captain Cook had received instructons to examine this island, and endeavor to
discover a good harbor. On the 16th we saw numbers of penguins and diverse, and
rock-weed floating in the sea; and on the 21st we saw a very large seal. The
weather was now very soggy, and as we hourly expected to fall in with the land,
our navigation was both dangerous and tedious.

On the 24th, at six in the morning, the fog clearing away a little, we saw
land, bearing south south-east, which we afterward found to be an island of
considerable height, and about three leagues in circuit. We soon after
discovered another of equal magnitude, about one league to the eastward; and,
between these two, some smaller ones. In the direction of south by east,
another high island was seen. We did but just weather the island last
mentioned: it was a high round rock, named Bligh's Cap. Captain Cook supposed
this to be the same that Monsieur de Kerguelen called the Isle of Rendezvous;
but he knew nothing that could rendezvous at it but the fowls of the air, for
it was certainly inaccessible to every other animal.

The weather beginning to clear up about eleven, we tacked, and steered in for
the land. At noon we were enable to determine the latitude of Bligh's Cap to be
48 29 south, and its longitude 68 40. We passed it at three o'clock, with a
fresh gale at west.

Presently after we clearly saw the land, and at four o'clock it extended from
south-east to south-west by south, distant about four miles. The left extreme,
which Captain Cook judged to be the northern point of this land, called in the
French chart of the southern hemisphere Cape Francois, terminated in a high
perpendicular rock; and the right one in a high indented point.

Toward the middle of the land there appeared to be an inlet; but, on our
approaching it, we saw it was only a bending on the coast: we, therefore, bore
up to go round Cape Francois.

Having got off the Cape, we observed the coast, to the southward, much
indented by points and bays, and, therefore, fully expected to find a good
harbor. We soon discovered one, into which we began to ply; but it presently
fell calm, and we anchored in forty-five fathom water: the Discovery also
anchored there soon after. Mr. Bligh, the master, was ordered to sound the
harbor; who reported it to be safe and commodious.

Early in the morning of the 25th we weighed, and having wrought into the
harbor, we anchored in eight fathoms water. The Discovery got in at two
o'clock in the afternoon; when Captain Clerk informed us, that he had with
difficulty escaped being driven on the south point of the harbor, his anchor
having started before he could shorten in the cable. They were, therefore,
obliged to set sail, and drag the anchor after them, till they had room to
heave it up, when they perceived that one of its palms was broken off.

Immediately after we had anchored, Captain Cook ordered all the boats to be
hoisted out, and the empty water-casks to be got ready. In the mean time he
landed, to search for a convenient spot where they might be filled, and to
observe what the place afforded.

He found vast quantities of penguins, and other birds, and seals, on the
shore. The latter were not numerous, but so insensible of fear, that we killed
as many as we chose, and made use of their fat and blubber to make oil for our
lamps, and other purposes. Fresh water was exceedingly plentiful; but not a
single tree or shrub was to be discovered, and but little herbage of any kind;
though we had flattered ourselves with the hope of meeting with something
considerable growing here, having observed the sides of some of the hills to be
of a lively green.

Before Captain Cook returned to his ship, he ascended a ridge of rocks, rising
one above another, expecting, by that means, to obtain a view of the country;
but before he had reached the top, so thick a fog came on, that it was with
difficulty he could find his way down again. Toward the evening we hauled the
seine at the head of the harbor, but caught no more than half a dozen small
fish; nor had we any better success the next day, when we tried with hook and
line. Our only resource, therefore, for fresh provisions, was birds, which were
innumerable.

Though it was both foggy and rainy, on Thursday the 26th, we began to fill
water, and to cut grass for our cattle, which we found near the head of the
harbor. The rivulets were swelled to such a degree, by the rain that fell,
that the sides of the hills, bounding the harbor, appeared to be covered with
a sheet of water.

The people having labored hard for two successive days, and nearly completed
our water, Captain Cook allowed them the 27th of December as a day of rest, to
celebrate Christmas. In consequence of which, many of them went on shore, and
made excursions into the country, which they found desolate and barren in the
extreme. In the evening one of them presented a quart bottle to Captain Cook,
which he had found on the north-side of the harbor, fastened with some wire to
a projecting rock. This bottle contained a piece of parchment, with the
following inscription: Lud^vico XV. Galliarum rege, et d The d is probably a
contraction of the word Domino.
de Boynes reg^ a Socretis ad res maritimas annas 1772 et 1773.

It is evident from this inscription, that we were not the first Europeans who
had visited this harbor. Captain Cook supposes it to have been left by
Monsieur de Boisguehenneu, who went on shore the 13th of February 1772, the day
that Monsieur de Kerguelen discovered this land; but the Captain appears to be
for once mistaken; for how could Monsieur de Boisguehenneu, in the beginning of
1772, leave an inscription which The first American Edition by Gomez Tiebout,
and O'Brien.
commemorates a transaction of the following year?

Captain Cook, as a memorial of our having been in this harbor, wrote on the
other side of the parchment as follows: Naves Resolution et Discovery de Rege
Magnae Britanniae, Decembris 1776.

He then put it again into the bottle, accompanied with a silver two penny
piece of 1772, covered the mouth of the bottle with a leaden cap, and placed it
the next morning in a pile of ^^ones, erected for that purpose on an eminence,
near the place where it was first found. Here Captain Cook displayed the
British flag, and named the place Christmas Harbor, it being on that festival
we arrived in it.

It is the first inlet that we meet with on the south-east side of Cape
Francois, which forms the north side of the harbor, and is the northern point
of this land. The situation sufficiently distinguishes it from any of the other
inlets; and, to make it still more remarkable, its south point terminates in a
high rock, perforated quite through, forming an appearance like the arch of a
bridge. The head of the harbor lies open to only two points of the compass,
and these are covered by islands in the offing, so that a sea cannot fall in to
hurt a ship. It is high water here about ten o'clock at the full and change
days, and the tide rises about four feet.

In the afternoon, Captain Cook, accompanied by Mr. King, his Second
Lieutenant, went upon Cape Francois; expecting from this elevation to have had
a view of the seacoast, and the islands lying off it. But they found every
distant object below them, hid in a thick fog. The land even with them, or of a
greater height, was visible enough, and appeared exceedingly naked and
desolate; except some hills to the southward, which were covered with snow.
When they returned to the ship, they found her unmoored, and ready to put to
sea; but we did not weigh anchor till five o'clock the next morning.

CHAP. V.
Depart from Christmas Harbor -- Range along the Coast -- Cape Cumberland,
Cumberland Bay, Point Pringle, Howe's Foreland, etc. described -- Remarkable
Beds of Rock-weed -- Danger from Shoals -- Arrival at Port Palliser -- Cape
George described -- Mr. Anderson's Natural History of the Animals, Plants,
Soil, etc. of Kerguelen's Land.

ON the 29th of December we sailed out of Christmas Harbor, steering
south-east along the coast, with a fine breeze and clear weather. This was
unexpected, as, for some time past, fogs had prevailed more or less every day.
Though we kept the lead constantly going, we seldom struck ground with a line
of sixty fathoms.

We were off a promontory, which Captain Cook called Cape Cumberland, about
seven or eight o'clock. It lies about a league and an half from the south point
of Christmas Harbor; between them is a good bay. Off Cape Cumberland is a
small island on the summit of which is a rock, resembling a sentry-box, which
name was given to the island on that account. A group of small islands and
rocks lies two miles farther to the eastward: we sailed between these and
Sentrybox Island, the breadth of the channel being full a mile. We found no
bottom with forty fathoms of line.

After passing through this channel, we saw a bay on the south side of Cape
Cumberland, running in three leagues to the westward. It is formed by Cape
Cumberland to the north, and by a promontory to the south. Captain Cook named
this promontory Point Pringle, as a compliment to Sir John Pringle, President
of the Royal Society. The bottom of this bay was called Cumberland Bay.

The coast is formed into a fifth bay, to the southward of Point Pringle. In
this bay, which obtained the name of White Bay, are several lesser bays or
coves, which appeared to be sheltered from all winds. Off the south-point,
several rocks raise their heads above water, and probably there are many others
that do not.

The land which first opened off Cape Francois, in the direction of south 53
east, we had kept on our larboard-bow, thinking it was an island, and that we
should discover a passage between that and the main; but we found it to be a
peninsula, joined to the rest of the coast by a low isthmus. The bay, formed by
this peninsula, Captain Cook named Repulse Bay. The northern point of the
peninsula was named Howe's Foreland, in honor of Lord How.

Drawing near it, we observed some rocks and breakers not far from the
north-west part, and two islands to the eastward of it, which, at first,
appeared as one. We steered between them and the foreland, and were in the
middle of the channel by twelve o'clock. The land of this foreland or
peninsula, is of a tolerable height, and of a hilly and rocky substance. The
coast is low, and almost covered with sea-birds. We also saw some seals upon
the beaches.

Having cleared the rocks and islands beforementioned, we perceived the whole
sea before us to be chequered with large beds of rock-weed, which was fast to
the bottom. There is often found a great depth of water upon such shoals, and
rocks have, as often, raised their heads almost to the surface of the water. It
is always dangerous to sail over them, especially when there is no surge of the
sea to discover the danger. We endeavored to avoid the rocks, by steering
through the winding channels by which they were separated. Though the lead was
continually going, we never struck ground with a line of sixty fathoms; this
increased the danger, as we could not anchor, however urgent the necessity
might be. At length we discovered a lurking rock, in the middle of one of these
beds of weeds, and even with the surface of the sea. This was sufficiently
alarming, to make us take every precaution to avoid danger.

We were now about eight miles to the southward of Howe's Foreland, across the
mouth of a large bay. In this bay are several rocks, low islands, and beds of
sea-weed; but there appeared to be winding channels between them. We were so
much embarrassed with these shoals, that we hauled off to the eastward, in
hopes of extricating ourselves from our difficulties; but this plunged us into
greater, and we found it absolutely necessary to secure the ships, if possible,
before night, especially as the weather was hazy, and a fog was apprehended.

Seeing some inlets to the south-west, Captain Cook ordered Captain Clerk (the
Discovery drawing less water than the Resolution) to lead in for the shore,
which was immediately attempted: after running over the edges of several
shoals, on which was found from ten to twenty fathoms water* Captain Clerk
made the signal for having discovered an harbor, in which we anchored in
fifteen sathoms water, about five o'clock in the evening.

No sooner were the ships secured, than it began to blow so very strong, that
we deemed it necessary to strike top-gallant yards. The weather, however,
continued fair, and it presently became clear, the wind having dispersed the
fog that had settled on the hills. As soon, therefore, as we had anchored,
Captain Cook ordered two boats to be hoisted out; in one of which he dispatched
Mr. Bligh, the Master, to survey the upper part of the harbor, and looking out
for wood. He also desired Captain Clerk to send his Master to sound the
channel, south of the small isles, and went himself, in his other boat,
accompanied by Mr. Gore and Mr. Bailey, and landed on the north point, to see
what discovery could be made from thence.

From an hill over the point, they had a view of the sea-cost, as far as Howe's
Foreland. Several small islands, rocks, and breakers, were scattered along the
coast, and there appeared no better channel to get out of the harbor, than
that by which they had entered it.

While Captain Cook and Mr. Bailey were making these observations, Mr. Gore
encompassed the hill, and joined them at the place where the boat was attending
for them. There was nothing to obstruct their walk, except some craggy
precipices; the country being, if possible, more barren and desolate than that
about Christmas Harbor. There was neither food nor covering for cattle of any
sort, and, if any had been left, they must inevitably have perished. In the
little cove, where their boat was waiting for them (which Captain Cook called
Penguin Cove, from the immense numbers of those birds appearing there) is a
fine river of fresh water, which we could approach without difficulty. Some
large seals, shags, and a few ducks were seen here; and Mr. Bailey had a glance
of a very small land-bird, but it flew among the rocks, and they lost it.

At nine o'clock they got on board, and Mr. Bligh returned soon after. He
reported that he had been four miles up the harbor; that its direction was
west south-west; that its breadth near the ships did not exceed a mile; that
the soundings were from thirty-seven to ten fathoms; and that, having landed on
both shores, he found the land barren and rocky, without a tree or shrub, or
hardly any appearance of verdure.

The next morning we weighed anchor and put out to sea. This harbor was named
Port Palliser, in honor of Admiral Sir Hugh Palliser. In getting out to sea,
we, in general, steered through the winding channels among the shoals, though
we sometimes ventured to run over some of them, on which we never found less
than eighteen fathoms water; they would not, therefore, have been discovered,
had it not been for the sea-weed growing upon them.

Having got three or four leagues from the coast we found a clear sea, and,
about nine o'clock, discovered a round hill, like a sugar loaf, bearing
south-east, and a small island to the northward of it, distant about four
leagues. Captain Cook named the sugar loaf hill Mount Campbell; at noon it bore
south 47 west; a low point bore south-east, at the distance of about twenty
miles; and we were little more than two leagues from the shore.

The land here, in general, is low and level. The mountains end about five
leagues from the low point, leaving a great extent of low land, on which Mount
Campbell is situated. These mountains seemed to be composed of naked rocks,
whose summits were covered with snow; and nothing but sterility was to be seen
in the valleys.

At noon we perceived low land, opening off the low point just mentioned, in
the direction of south south-east. It proved to be the eastern extremity of
this land, and was named Cape Digby. Between Howe's Foreland and Cape Digby,
the shore forms one great bay, extending several leagues to the south-west. A
vast quantity of sea-weed grows over it, which seemed to be such as Mr. Banks
distinguished by the name of fucus giganteus. Though the stem of this weed is
not much thicker than a man's thumb, some of it grows to the amazing length of
sixty fathoms.

At one o'clock, seeing a small bending in the coast, on the north side of Cape
Digby, we steered for it, with an intention to anchor there; but, being
disappointed in our views, we pushed forward, in order to see as much as
possible of the coast before night. From Cape Digby, it trends nearly
south-west by south to a low point, to which Captain Cook gave the name of
Point Charlotte, in honor of our amiable Queen.

In the direction of south south-west, about six leagues from Cape Digby, is a
pretty high projecting point, called the Prince of Wales's Foreland; and six
leagues beyond that, in the same direction, is the most southerly point of the
whole coast, which, in honor of his Majesty, was distinguished by the name of
Cape George.

Between Point Charlotte, and the Prince of Wales's Foreland, we discovered a
deep inlet, which was called Royal Sound; and, advancing to the south, we saw
another inlet into the Royal Sound, on the south-west side of the Prince of
Wales's Foreland.

On the south-west side of the Royal Sound, all the land to Cape George
consists of elevated hills, gradually rising from the sea to a considerable
height; they were naked and barren, and their summits capt with snow. Not a
vestige of a tree or shrub was to be seen. Some of the low land about Cape
Digby seemed to be covered with a green turf, but a considerable part of it
appeared quite naked. Penguins, and other oceanic birds, were numerous on the
beaches, and shags innumerable kept flying about our ships.

Desirous of getting the length of Cape George, Captain Cook continued to
stretch to the south, till between seven and eight o'clock; when, seeing no
probability of accomplishing his design, he took the advantage of the wind,
which had shifted to west south-west, (the direction in which we wanted to go)
and stood away from the coast.

Cape George now bore south 53 west, distant about seven leagues. We saw no
land to the south of it, except a small island that lies off the pitch of the
Cape; and a south-west swell, which we met when we brought the Cape to bear in
this direction, almost convinced us that there was no more in that quarter.

The French discoverers imagined Cape Francois to be the projecting point of a
southern continent. The English have discovered that no such continent exists,
and that the land in question is an island of small extent; which, from its
sterility, might properly be called the Island of Desolation; but Captain Cook
was unwilling to rob Monsieur de Kerguelen of the honor of its bearing his
name.

Mr. Anderson, who, during the short time we lay in Christmas Harbor, lost no
opportunity of searching the country in every direction, relates the following
particulars.

No place, (says he) hitherto discovered in either hemisphere, affords so
scanty a field for the naturalist as this steril spot. Some verdure, indeed,
appeared, when at a small distance from the shore, which might raise the
expectation of meeting with a little herbage; but all this lively appearance
was occasioned by one small plant, resembling saxifrage, which grew up the
hills in large speading tufts, on a kind of rotten turf, which, if dried might
serve for fuel, and was the only thing seen here that could possibly be applied
to that purpose.

Another plant, which grew to near the height of two feet, was pretty
plentifully scattered about the boggy declivities; it had the appearance of a
small cabbage when it was shot into seeds. It had the watery acrid taste of the
antiscorbutic plants, though it materially differed from the whole tribe. When
eaten raw, it was not unlike the New-Zealand scurvy grass; but when boiled, it
acquired a rank flavor. At this time, none of its seeds were ripe enough to be
brought home, and introduced into our English kitchen-gardens.

Near the brooks and boggy places were found two other small plants, which were
eaten as sallad; the one like garden cresses, and very hot; and the other very
mild: the latter is a curiosity, having not only male and female, but also
androgynus plants.

Some coarse grass grew pretty plentifully in a few small spots near the
harbor, which was cut down for our cattle. In short, the whole catalogue of
plants did not exceed eighteen, including a beautiful species of lichen, and
several sorts of moss. Nor was there the appearance of a tree or shrub in the
whole country.

Among the animals, the most considerable were seals, which were distinguished
by the name of sea-bears; being the sort that are called the ursine seal. They
come on shore to repose and breed. At that time they were shedding their hair,
and so remarkably tame, that there was no difficulty in kelling them.

No other quadruped was seen; but a great number of oceanic birds, as ducks,
shags, petrels, etc. The ducks were somewhat like a widgeon, both in size and
figure; a considerable number of them were killed and eaten: they were
excellent food, and had not the least fishy taste.

The Cape petrel, the small blue one, and the small black one, or Mother
Carey's chicken, were not in plenty here; but another sort, which is the
largest of the petrels, and called by the seamen Mother Carey's goose, is found
in abundance. This petrel is as large as an albatross, and is carnivorous,
feeding on the dead carcasses of seals, birds, etc.

The greatest number of birds here were penguins, which consist of three sorts.
The head of the largest is black, the upper part of the body of a leaden-grey,
the under part white, and the feet black; two broad stripes of fine yellow
descend from the head to the breast; the bill is of a reddish color, and
longer than in the other sorts. The second sort is about half the size of the
former. It is of a blackish gray on the upper part of the body, and has a white
spot on the upper part of the head. The bill and feet are yellowish. In the
third sort, the upper part of the body and throat are black, the rest white,
except the top of the head, which is ornamented with a fine yellow arch, which
it can erect as two crests.

The shags here were of two sorts, viz. the lesser corvorant, or water-crow,
and another with a blackish back and a white belly. The seaswallow, the tern,
the common sea-gull, and the Port Egmont hen, were also found here.

Large flocks of a singular kind of white bird flew about here, having the base
of the bill covered with a horney crust. It had a black bill and white feet,
was somewhat larger than a pigeon, and the flesh tasted like that of a duck.

The seine was once hauled, when we found a few fish about the size of a small
haddock. The only shellfish we saw here, were a few limpets and muscles.

Many of the hills, notwithstanding they were of a moderate height, were at
that time covered with snow, though answering to our June. It is reasonable to
imagine that rain must be very frequent here, as well from the marks of large
torrents having rushed down, as from the appearance of the country, which, even
on the hills, was a continued bog or swamp.

The rocks consist principally of a dark blue and very hard stone, intermixed
with particles of glimmer or quartz. Some considerable rocks were also formed
here from a brownish brittle stone.

CHAP. VI.
Passage of the Ships from Kerguelen's to Van Diemen's Land -- The Resolution
damaged by a Squall -- Arrival in Adventure Bay -- Various Interviews with the
Inhabitants -- Description of their Persons, Dress, Manners, and Customs -- Mr.
Anderson's Remarks on the Character and Language of the Natives, and on the
various Productions of the Country.

CAPTAIN Cook intending, pursuant to the instructions he had received, to
proceed next to New-Zealand, to take in wood and water, and provide hay for the
cattle, steered east by north from Kerguelen's Land. The 31st of December, our
longitude, by observation of the sun and moon, was 72 33 36 east; and on the
first day of the year 1777, we were in the latitude of 48 41 south, longitude
76 50 east. Till the 3d of January the weather was tolerably clear, with fresh
gales from the west and south-west; but now the wind veered to the north, and
continued in that quarter eight days; during which, though there was at the
same time a thick fog, we ran upwards of three hundred leagues, chiefly in the
dark; the sun, indeed, sometimes made its appearance, but very rarely. On the
7th, Captain Cook dispatched a boat with orders to Captain Clerk, fixing their
rendezvous at Adventure Bay, in Van Diemen's Land, if the ships should happen
to separate before they arrived there. However, we had the good fortune not to
lose company with each other. On Sunday the 12th, the northerly winds were
succeeded by a calm, which was soon followed by a southerly wind. Our latitude
was now 48 40 south, longitude 110 26 east. The wind blew from the south a
whole day, and then veering to the west and north-west, brought on some fair
weather.

On the 19th, a sudden squall carried away the Resolution's fore-top-mast, and
main-top-gallantmast, which occasioned some delay in fitting another topmast.
The former was repaired without the loss of any part of it. The wind still
remaining at the west point, we had clear weather; and on the 24th, in the
morning, we discovered the coast of Van Diemen's Land, bearing north west.
Several islands and elevated rocks lie dispersed along the coast, the most
southerly of which is the Mewstone. Our latitude, at noon, was 43 47 south,
longitude 147 east, the south-east or south cape being near three leagues
distant. Captain Cook gave the name of the Eddystone to a rock that lies about
a league to the eastward of Swilly Isle or Rock, on account of its striking
resemblance to Eddystone light-house. These two rocks may, even in the night,
be seen at a considerable distance, and are the summits of a ledge of rocks
under water. On the north-east side of Storm Bay, are some creeks that seem
tolerably sheltered; and if this coast was carefully examined, several good
harbors would most probably be found.

The 26th, at noon, a breeze sprung up at south-east, which gave Captain Cook
an opportunity of executing his design of carrying the ships into Adventure
Bay, where we anchored at four o'clock in the afternoon in twelve fathoms
water, about three quarters of a mile from the shore. The Captains Cook and
Clerk then went, in separate boats, in search of convenient spots for wooding,
watering, and making hay. They found plenty of wood and water, but very little
grass. The next morning Captain Cook detached two parties, under the conduct of
Lieutenant King, to the east side of the bay, to cut wood and grass, some
marines atttending them as a guard, though none of the natives had yet
appeared. He also sent the launch to provide water for the ships; and
afterward paid a visit to the parties thus employed.

In the evening we drew the seine, and caught a great quantity of fish, with
which this bay abounds; and we should have procured more, if the net had not
broken. Every one now came on board with the supplies they had obtained; but
next morning, the wind not being fair for sailing, they were again sent on
shore on the same duty; and Mr. Roberts, one of the Mates, was dispatched in a
boat to examine the bay. We had observed columns of smoke in different parts,
from the time of our approaching the coast; but we saw none of the natives till
the afternoon of the 28th, when eight men and a boy surprised us with a visit
at our wooding-place. They approached us with the greatest confidence, none of
them having any weapons except one, who had a short stick pointed at one end.
They were of a middling stature, and somewhat slender; their hair was black and
wholly, and their skin was also black. They were entirely naked, with large
punctures or ridges, some in curved, and others in straight lines, on different
parts of their bodies. Their lips were not remarkably thick, nor their noses
very flat: their features, on the contrary, were not unpleasing, their eyes
pretty good, and their teeth tolerably even and regular, though exceedingly
dirty. The faces of some of them were painted with a red ointment, and most of
them smeared their hair and beards with the same composition. When we offered
them presents, they received them without any apparent satisfaction. They
either returnrd, or threw away some bread that was given them, without even
tasting it: they likewise refused some elephant fish; but when we gave them
some birds, they kept them. Two pigs having been brought on shore to be left in
the woods, they seized them by the ears, and seemed inclined to carry them off,
with an intention, as we supposed, of killing them.

Captain Cook wishing to know the use of the stick which one of the savages
held in his hand, made signs to them to show him; upon which one of them took
aim at a piece of wood placed as a mark, about the distance of twenty-yard;
but, after several essays, he was still wide of the mark. Omai, to show the
great superiority of our weapons, immediately fired his musket at it, which
unexpected noise so alarmed them, that they ran into the woods with uncommon
speed; and one of them was so terrified, that he let fall two knives and an axe
which he had received from us. They then went to the place where the crew of
the Discovery were watering; but the officer of that party firing a musket in
the air, they sled with great precipitation.

Immediately after they had retired, Captain Cook ordered the two pigs, one a
male and the other a female, to be carried about a mile within the woods, and
he himself saw them left there, taking care that none of the natives should
observe what was passing. He also intended to have left a young bull and a cow,
besides some goats and sheep; but he soon relinquished that design, being of
opinion that the natives would destroy them; which he supposed would be the
fate of the pigs, if they should chance to find them out. But as swine soon
become wild, and are fond of being in the woods, it is probable that they were
preserved. The other cattle could not have remained long concealed from the
savages, as they must have been put into an open place.

We were prevented from sailing on the 29th by a dead calm, which continued the
whole day. Captain Cook, therefore, sent parties on shore to cut wood and
grass, as usual; and he accompanied the wooding party himself. Soon after our
landing, about twenty of them joined us, one of whom was distinguished not only
by his deformity, but by the drollery of his gesticulations, and the seeming
humor of his speeches, which, however, we could not understand. Those whom we
now saw differed in some respects, particularly in the texture of the hair,
from the natives of the more northerly parts of this country, whom Captain Cook
met with in his first voyage. Some of our present company had a slip of the
kangooroo skin round their ancles; and others wore round their necks some small
cord, made of fur. They seemed not to value iron, but were apparently pleased
with the medals and beads that were given them. They did not even appear to
know the use of fish-hooks, though it is more than probable, that they were
acquainted with some method of catching fish.

Their habitations were small hovels or sheds built of sticks, and covered with
the bark of trees. We had also good reason to suppose, that they sometimes took
up their residence in the trunks of large trees, hollowed out by fire.

Captain Cook, on leaving the wooding party, went to the grass-cutters, and
having seen the boats loaded with hay, returned on board. He had just quitted
the shore, when several women and children appeared, and were introduced to
Lieutenant King by the men who accompanied them. These females wore a kangooroo
skin fastened over their shoulders, the only use of which seemed to be, to
support their children on their backs, for it left those parts uncovered which
modesty directs us to conceal. Their bodies were black, and marked with scars
like those of the men; from whom, however, they differed, in having their heads
shaved; some of them being completely shorn, others only on one side, while the
rest of them had the upper part of their heads shaved, leaving a very narrow
circle of hair all round. They were far from being handsome; however, some of
our gentlemen paid their addresses to them, and made liberal offers, but
without effect.

In the afternoon Captain Cook went again on shore, and found the grass-cutters
on Penguin Island, where they had met with excellent grass in the greatest
abundance. The different parties labored hard till the evening, and then,
having provided a sufficient quantity of what was most wanted, returned on
board.

During our continuance in Van Diemen's Land, we had either light airs from the
east, or calms: we therefore lost little or no time by touching on this coast.
This land was discovered in November 1642, by Tasman, who gave it the name of
Van Diemen's Land. Captain Furneaux touched at it in March 1773. It is the
southern point of New-Holland, which is by far the largest island in the known
world, and almost deserves the name of a continent. The land is diversified
with hills and valleys, and well wooded. The only wind to which Adventure Bay
is exposed, is the north-east; and, upon the whole, this may be considered as a
very safe road. Its latitude is 43 21 20 south, and its longitude 147 29 east.

Mr. Anderson, surgeon of the Resolution, employed himself in examining the
country during our continuance in Adventure Bay. His remarks on the inhabitants
and their language, and his account of the natural productions of the country,
are to the following purport. There is a beautiful sandy beach, about two miles
long, at the bottom of Adventure Bay, formed to all appearance by the particles
which the sea washes from a fine white sand-stone. This beach is very well
adapted for hauling a seine. Behind it is a plain, with a brackish lake, out of
which we caught, by angling, some bream and trout. The parts adjoining the bay
are mostly hilly, and are an entire forest of tall trees, rendered almost
impassable by brakes of fern, shrubs, etc. The soil on the flat land, and on
the lower part of the hills, is sandy, or consists of a yellowish earth, and in
some parts of a reddish clay; but further up the hills, it is of a gray tough
cast. This country, upon the whole, bears many marks of being very dry, and the
heat appears to be great. No mineral bodies, nor stones of any other kind than
the white sand stone, were observed by us; nor could we find any vegetables
that afforded subsistence for man. The forest-trees are all of one kind, and
generally quite straight: they bear clusters of small white flowers. The
principal plants we observed were wood sorrel, milk-wort, cudweed, bell-flower,
gladiolus, samphire, and several kinds of fern. The only quadruped we saw
distinctly was a species of opossum, about twice the size of a large rat. The
kangooroo, found further northward in New Holland, may also be supposed to
inhabit here, as some of the inhabitants had pieces of the skin of that animal.

The principal sorts of birds in the woods are brown hawks or eagles, crows,
large pigeons, yellowish paroquets, and a species which we called motacilla
cyanea, from the beautiful azure color of its head and neck. On the shore were
several gulls, black oyster-catchers, or sea-pies, and plovers of a
stone-colour.

We observed in the woods some blackish snakes that were pretty large, and we
killed a lizard which was fifteen inches long and six round, beautifully
clouded with yellow and black.

Among a variety of fish we caught some large rays, nurses, leather-jackets,
bream, soles, flounders, gurnards, and elephant-fish; besides a sort which we
did not recollect to have seen before, and which partakes of the nature both of
a round and a flat fish. Upon the rocks are muscles and other shellfish; and
upon the beach we found some pretty Medusa's heads. The most troublesome
insects we met with were the musquitoes, and a large black ant, whose bite
inflicts extreme pain.

The inhabitants seemed mild and cheerful, with little of that wild appearance
that savages in general have. They are almost totally devoid of personal
activity or genius, and are nearly upon a par with the wretched natives of
Terra del Fuego. They display, however, some contrivance in their method of
cutting their arms and bodies in lines of different directions, raised above
the surface of the skin. Their indifference for our presents, their general
inattention, and want of curiosity, were very remarkable, and testified no
acuteness of understanding. Their complexion is a dull black, which they
sometimes heighten by smutting their bodies, as we supposed, from their leaving
a mark behind on any clean substance. Their hair is perfectly woolly and is
clotted with grease and red ochre, like that of the Hottentots. Their noses are
broad and full, and the lower part of the face projects considerably. Their
eyes are of a moderate size, and though they are not very quick or piercing,
they give the countenance a frank, cheerful, and pleasing cast. Their teeth are
not very white, nor well set, and their mouths are too wide: they wear their
beards long, and clotted with paint. They are, upon the whole, well
proportioned, though their belly is rather protuberant. Their favorite
attitude is to stand with one side forward, and one hand grasping, across the
back, the opposite arm, which, on this occasion, hangs, down by the side that
projects.

Near the shore in the bay, we observed some wretched constructions of sticks
covered with bark; but these seemed to have been only temporary, and they had
converted many of their largest trees into more comfortable and commodious
habitations. The trunks of these were hollowed out to the height of six or
seven feet, by means of sire. That they sometimes dwell in them, was manifest,
from their (...) the middle made of clay, round which (...) persons might sit.
These places (...) rendered durable, by their leavi^^ (...) tree sound, so that
it continues (...) luxuriance.

That the natives of (...) from the same (...) habit the northern parts of New
Holland, (...) evident. Though they differ in (...) their dissimilarity may be
reasonably (...) for, from the united considerations of (...) place, length of
time, total separation, and ^^versity of climate.

As the inhabitants of New Holland seem all to have sprung from one common
source, there is nothing very peculiar in them; for they greatly resemble the
savages of (...) Manicola. There is (...) some reason (...) supposing, that
they man ^riginally (...) from the same place with (...) Pacific Ocean: for, of
(...) words (...) we found means to (...) them, (...) used to (...) Zealand
(...) the sec^nd (...) The re^^inder^ of (...) Diemen's (...) follows, (...) A
MAN and WOMAN of VAN DIEMEN'S LAND.
Quadne, a woman. Eve'rai, the eye. Muidje, the nose. Ka'my, the teeth, mouth,
or tongue. Lae'renne, a small bird, living in the woods here. Koy'gee, the ear.
Teegera, to eat. No'onga, elevated scars on the body. Toga'rago, I will go, or
I must be gone.


It will probably be found, upon a diligent enquiry, and an accurate comparison
drawn from the affinity of languages, that all the people from New Holland,
eastward to Easter Island, are of the same extraction.

CHAP. VII.
Course to New-Zealand -- Transactions in Queen Charlotte's Sound --
Intercourse with the New-Zealanders -- Their Dexterity in building Huts --
Information with regard to the Massacre of Captain Furneaux's People -- Two
violent Storms -- Account of Kahoora, who headed the Party that killed our
People -- Of the two Youths who accompany us on board -- Captain Cook's
Observations on the inhabitants of New-Zealand.

ON the 30th of January, in the morning, we weighed anchor with a light
westerly breeze, from Adventure Bay. Soon after we had put to sea, the wind
became southerly, and produced a perfect storm; but veering in the evening to
the east and north-east, its fury began to abate. This wind was attended with
an almost-intolerable heat, which, however, was of so short a continuance, that
some of our company did not perceive it.

In the night, between the 6th and 7th of February, one of the Discovery's
marines fell overboard and was drowned. On the 10th, in the afternoon, we
descried the coast of New-Zealand, at the distance of eight or nine leagues. We
then steered for Cape Farewell, and afterward for Stephens's Island; and, in
the morning of the 12th, anchored in Ship Cove, Queen Charlotte's Sound. We
soon after landed many empty watercasks, and cleared a place for two
observatories. In the mean time several canoes came along-side of our ships;
but very few of those who were in them would venture on board. This shyness
appeared the more extraordinary, as Captain Cook was well known to all of them;
and as one man in particular among the present group, had been treated by him
with distinguished kindness during a former voyage. This man, however, could
not by any means be prevailed on to come aboard. We could only account for this
reserve by supposing, that they were apprehensive of our revenging the death of
Captain Furneaux's people who had been killed here. But, upon Captain Cook's
assuring them of the continuance of his friendship, and that he should not
molest them on that account, they soon laid aside all appearance of suspicion
and distrust. The next day we pitched two tents, and erected the observatories,
in which Messrs. King and Baily immediately commenced their astronomical
operations. Two of our men were employed in brewing spruce beer; while others
filled the watercasks, collected grass for the cattle, and cut wood. Those who
remained on board were occupied in repairing the rigging, and performing the
necessary duty of the ships. A guard of marines was appointed for the
protection of the different parties on shore, and arms were given to all the
workmen, to repel all attacks from the natives, if they had been inclined to
molest us; but this did not appear to be the case.

During the course of this day, many families came from various parts of the
coast, and erected their huts close to our encampment. The facility with which
they build these temporary habitations, is remarkable. They have been s^en to
erect above twenty of them on a spot of ground, which was covered with plants
and shrubs not an hour before. Captain Cook was present when a number of
savages landed, and built a village of this kind. They had no sooner leaped
from the canoes, than they tore up the shrubs and plants from the ground they
had fixed upon, or put up some part of the framing of a hut. While the men were
thus employed, the women took care of the canoes, secured the provisions and
utensils, and gathered dry sticks, to serve as materials for a fire. These huts
are sufficiently calculated for affording shelter from the rain and wind. The
same tribe or family, however large, generally associate and build together; so
that their towns and villages are usually divided by palisades into separate
districts.

We received considerable advantage from the natives coming to live with us;
for, every day, some of them were occupied in catching fish, a good share of
which we generally procured by exchanges. Besides fish, we had other
refreshments in abundance. Scurvy Grass, celery, and portable soup, were boiled
every day with the wheat and pease; and we had spruce beer for our drink. Such
a regimen soon removed all seeds of the scurvy from our people, if any of them
had contracted it. But indeed, on our arrival here, we had only two invalids in
both ships.

We were occasionally visited by other natives, besides those who lived close
to us. Their articles of traffic were fish, curiosities, and women; the two
first of which were speedily disposed of, but the latter did not come to a good
market, as our crew had conceived a dislike to them. Captain Cook observes upon
this occasion, that he connived at a connection with women, because he could
not prevent it; but that he never encouraged it, because he dreaded its
consequences. Among our occasional visitors was a chief called Kahoora, who
headed the party that cut off Captain Furneaux's people. He was far from being
beloved by his countrymen, some of whom even importuned Captain Cook to kill
him, at the same time expressing their disapprobation of him in the severest
terms. A striking proof of the divisions that prevail among these people
occurred to us; for the inhabitants of each village, by turns, solicited our
Commodore to destroy the other.

Captain Cook, on the 15th, went in a boat to search for grass, and visited the
hippah, or fortified village, at the south-west point of the island of Motuara.
He observed no inhabitants at this village, though there were evident marks of
its having been lately occupied, the houses and palisades being in a state of
good repair. Not the smallest vestage remained of the English gardenseeds which
had been planted at this hippah in 1773, during Captain Cook's second voyage.
They had probably been all rooted out to make room for buildings; for, at the
other gardens then planted, we found radishes, onions, leeks, cabbages,
purslain, potatoes, etc. Though the natives of New-Zealand are fond of the
lastmentioned root, they had not planted a single one, much less any of the
other articles we had introduced among them.

Early in the morning of the 16th, the Captains Cook and Clerk, and several of
the officers and sailors, accompanied by Omai and two New-Zealanders, set out,
in five boats, to collect fodder for the cattle. Having proceeded about three
leagues up the Sound, they landed on the east side, where they cut a sufficient
quantity of grass to load the two launches. On their return down the Sound,
they paid a visit to Grass Cove, the place where Captain Furneaux's people had
been massacred. They here met with Captain Cook's old friend Pedro, who is
mentioned by him in the history of his second voyage. He, and another
New-Zealander, received them on the beach, armed with the spear and patoo,
though not without manifest signs of fear. Their apprehensions, however, were
quickly dissipated by a few presents, which brought down to the shore two or
three others of the family.

During the continuance of our party at this place, the Commodore, being
desirous of enquiring into the particular circumstances relative to the
massacre of our countrymen, fixed upon Omai as an interpreter for that purpose,
as his language was a dialect of that of New-Zealand. Pedro, and the other
natives who were present, none of whom had been concerned in that unfortunate
transaction, answered every question without reserve. Their information
imported, that while our people were at dinner, some of the natives stole, or
snatched from them, some fish and bread, for which offense they received some
blows; a quarrel immediately ensued, and two of the savages were shot dead, by
the only two muskets that were firred; for, before a third was discharged, the
natives rushed furiously upon our people, and being superior in number,
destroyed them all. Pedro and his companions also pointed out the very spot
where the fracas happened, and the place where the boat lay, in which a black
servant of Captain Furneaux had been left to take care of it.

According to another account, this negro was the occasion of the quarrel; for,
one of the natives stealing something out of the boat, the black gave him a
violent blow with a stick. His countrymen hearing his cries at some distance
imagined he was killed, and immediately attacked our people, who, before they
could reach the boat, or prepare themselves against the unexpected assault,
fell a sacrifice to the fury of the exasperated savages.

The former of these accounts was corroborated by the testimony of many other
natives, who could have no interest in disguising the truth. The latter account
^ests upon the authority of the young New-Zealander, who quitted his country
for the sake of going away with us, and who, therefore, could not be supposed
to be inclined to deceive us. As they all agreed, that the fray happened while
the boat's crew were at dinner, both the accounts may be true; for it is by no
means improbable, that, while some of the islanders were stealing from the man
who had been left to guard the boats, others might take equal liberties with
those who were on shore.

It appears, that there was no premeditated plan of bloodshed, and that, if
these thefts had not been rather too hastily resented, all mischief would have
been avoided; for Kahoora's greatest enemies acknowledged, that he had no
previous intention of quarrelling. With regard to the boat, some said, that it
had been pulled to pieces and burnt; while others asserted, that it had been
carried off by a party of strangers.

Our party continued at Grass Cove till the evening, and then embarked to
return to the ships. They had scarcely left the shore, when the wind began to
blow violently at north-west, so that it was not without great difficulty that
they could reach the ships, where some of the boats did not arrive till the
next morning; and it was very fortunate that they got on board then, for soon
afterward a perfect storm arose. Toward the evening, however, the wind
veering to the east, brought on fair weather. On Tuesday the 18th, Pedro and
his whole family came to reside near us. The proper name of this chief was
Matahouah; but some of Captain Cook's people had given him the appellation of
Pedro in a former voyage. On the 20th we had another storm, of less duration
than the former, but more violent; in consequence of which, both our ships
struck their yards and top-masts. These tempests are frequent here; and the
nearer the shore, the more sensible are their effects.

On Friday the 21st, a tribe or family of about thirty persons came from the
upper part of the sound to visit us. Their chief was named Tomatongeauooranuc:
he was about the age of forty-five, and had a frank, cheerful countenance; and,
indeed, the rest of his tribe were, upon the whole, the handsomest of all the
New-Zealanders that Captain Cook had ever seen. By this time upwards of
two-thirds of the natives of Queen Charlotte's Sound had settled near us,
numbers of whom daily resorted to the ships, and our encampment on shore; but
the latter was most frequented, during the time when our people there were
making seal blubber; for the savages were so fond of train oil, that they
relished the very dreg of the casks, and skimmings of the kettle, and
considered the pure stinking oil as a most delightful feast.

When we had procured a competent supply of hay, wood, and water, we struck our
tents, and the next morning, which was the 24th, weighed out of the Cove. But
the wind not being so fair as we could have wished, we were obliged to cast
anchor again near the Isle of Motuara. While we were getting under sail,
Tomatongeau^oranuc, Matahouah, and many others of the natives, came to take
leave of us. These two chiefs having requested Captain Cook to present them
with some hogs and goats, he gave to Tomatongeauooranuc two pigs, a boar and a
sow; and to Matahouah two goats, a male and female, after they had promised not
to destroy them. As for the animals, which Captain Furneaux had left ^ere,
Captain Cook was now told, that they were all dead; but he was afterward
informed, by the two New-Zealand youths who went away with us, that Tiratou a
popular chief, had in his possession many cocks and hens, besides a sow.

Before we had been long at anchor near Motuara, several canoes, filled with
natives, came toward us, and we carried on a brisk trade with them for the
curiosities of this place. In one of these canoes was Kahoora, whom Omai
immediately pointed out to Captain Cook, and solicited him to shoot that chief;
he also threatened to be himself his executioner, if he should ever presume to
pay us another visit. These menaces of Omai had so little influence upon
Kahoora, that he returned to us the next morning, accompanied with his whole
family. Omai, having obtained Captain Cook's permission to ask him to come on
board, introduced him into the cabin, saying, "There is Kahoora; dispatch him."
But, fearing perhaps that he should be called upon to put his former threats in
execution, he instantly retired. He soon, however, returned; and perceiving
that the chief was unhurt, he earnestly remonstrated to Captain Cook on the
subject, saying, that if a man killed another in England, he was hanged for it;
but that Kahoora had killed ten, and therefore justly deserved death. These
arguments, however plausible, had no weight with our Commodore, who desired
Omai to ask the New-Zealand chief, why he had destroyed Captain Furneaux's
people? Kahoora, confounded at this question, hung down his head, folded his
arms, and seemed in expectation of immediate death: but, as soon as he was
assured of safety, he became cheerful. He appeared, however, unwilling to
answer the question which had been put to him, till after repeated promises
that no violence should be offered him. He then ventured to inform us, that one
of the natives having brought a stone hatchet for the purpose of traffic, the
person to whom it was offered took it, and refused either to return it, or give
any thing in exchange; upon which the owner of it seized some bread by way of
equivalent; and this gave rise to the quarrel that ensued. He also mentioned,
that he himself, during the disturbance, had a narrow escape; for a musket was
levelled at him, which he found means to avoid by skulking behind the boat; and
another man, who happened to stand close to him, was shot dead: upon which
Kahoora attacked Mr. Row, the officer who commanded the party, who defended
himself with his hanger, with which he gave the chief a wound in the arm, till
he was overpowered by superiority of numbers. Mr. Burney, whom Captain Furneaux
dispatched the next day with an armed party in search of his people who were
missing, had, upon discovering the melancholy proofs of this catastrophe, fired
several vollies among the natives who were still on the spot, and were probably
partaking of the horrid banquet of human flesh. It was reasonable to suppose
that this firing was not ineffectual; but upon inquiry it appeared, that not a
single person had been killed, or even hurt, by the shot which Mr. Burney's
people had discharged.

Most of the natives we had met with, expected that Captain Cook would take
vengeance on Kahoora for his concern in the massacre; and many of them not only
wished it, but testified their surprise at the Captain's forbearance and
moderation. As the chief must have known this, it was a matter of astonishment
that he so often put himself in the power of our Commodore. His two last
visits, in particular, were made under such circumstances, that he could not
have flattered himself with a prospect of escaping, had the Captain been
inclined to detain him: and yet, when his first fears, on being questioned, had
subsided, so far was he from entertaining uneasy sensations, that, on seeing in
the cabin a portrait of a New-Zealander, he desired that his own likeness might
be taken, and sat till Mr. Webber had finished his portrait, without the
smallest token of impatience. Captain Cook admired his courage, and was pleased
with the confidence which he reposed in him; for he placed his whole safety in
the uniform declarations of the Captain, that he had always been a friend to
the natives, and would continue in the same sentiments till they gave him
reason to behave otherwise; that he should think no more of their barbarous
treatment of our countrymen, as that transaction had happened long ago; but
that, if they should ever venture to make a second attempt of that kind, they
might rest assured of meeting with an adequate punishment.

Before our arrival in New-Zealand, Omai had expressed a desire of taking one
of the natives with him to his own country. He soon had an opportunity of
gratifying his inclination, for a youth named Taweiharooa, the only son of a
deceased chief, offered to accompany him, and took up his residence on board.
Captain Cook caused it to be made known to him and all his friends, that if the
youth departed with us, he would never return. This declaration, however, had
no effect. The day before we quitted the Cove, Tiratouton, his mother, came to
receive her last present from Omai; and the same evening she and her son
parted, with all the marks of the tenderest affection. But she said she would
weep no more, and faithfully kept her word; for the next morning, when she
returned to take her last farewell of Taweiharooa, she was quite cheerful all
the time she remained on board, and departed with great unconcern. A boy of
about ten years of age accompanied Taweiharooa as a servant; his name was
Kokoa. He was presented to Captain Cook by his own father, who parted with him
with such indifference, as to strip him, and leave him entirely naked. The
Captain having in vain endeavored to convince these people of the great
improbability of these youths ever returning home, at length consented to their
going.

The inhabitants of New-Zealand seem to live under continual apprehensions of
being destroyed by each other; most of their tribes having, as they think,
sustained injuries from some other tribe, which they are ever eager to revenge:
and it is not improbable, that the desire of a good meal is frequently a great
incitement. They generally steal upon the adverse party in the night, and if
they chance to find them unguarded, which is seldom the case, they kill every
one without distinction, without sparing even the women and children: when they
have completed the inhuman massacre, they either gorge themselves on the spot,
or carry off as many dead bodies as they can, and feast on them at home, with
the most horrid acts of brutality. If they are discovered before they have time
to execute their sanguinary purpose, they usually steal off again, and
sometimes they are pursued and attacked by the adverse party, in their turn.
They never give quarter, or take prisoners, so that the vanquished must trust
to flight alone for safety. From this state of perpetual hostility, and this
destructive mode of carrying it on, a New-Zealander derives such habitual
vigilance and circumspection, that he is scarce ever off his guard: and,
indeed, these people have the most powerful motives to be vigilant, as the
preservation of both soul and body depends on it; for it is a part of their
creed, that the soul of the man whose flesh is devoured by his enemies, is
condemned to an incessant fire; while the soul of him whose body has been
rescued from those that slew him, as well as the souls of those who die a
natural death, ascend to the mansions of the gods. Captain Cook having asked
them, whether they eat the flesh of such friends as had lost their lives in
war, but whose bodies had been prevented from falling into the enemy's hands,
they answered in the negative, and expressed their abhorrence of the idea.

Their ordinary method of disposing of their dead is to commit their bodies to
the earth; but when they have more of their slain enemies than they can
conveniently eat, they throw them into the sea. There are no morais, or other
places of public worship, among them; but they have priests, who pray to the
gods for the success of their temporal affairs. The principles of their
religion, of which we know but little, are strongly instilled into them from
their infancy. We observed a remarkable instance of this in a youth, who
abstained from eating during the greatest part of the day, merely on account of
his hair being cut, though every method was practiced that could induce him to
change his resolution. He said that the eatooa, or deity, would kill him if he
eat any thing on that day. Toward the evening, however, his religious scruples
gave way to the importunate cravings of appetite, and he eat, though sparingly.

Notwithstanding the divided state in which these people live, traveling
strangers, whose designs are honorable, are well received and entertained; but
it is expected that they will remain no longer than their business requires. It
is thus that a trade for green talc, which they call poenammoo, is carried on.
They informed us, that none of this stone is to be found, except at a place
which bears its name, near the head of Queen Charlotte's Sound. We were told
many fabulous and improbable stories concerning this stone, one of which is,
that it is originally a fish, which they strike with a gig in the water, and
having tied a rope to it, drag it to the shore, to which they fasten it, and it
afterward hardens into a stone. As it is fished out of a large lake, it is
probable that it may be brought from the mountains, and deposited in the water,
by means of the torrents. This lake is called by the inhabitants Tavai
Poenammoo, or the water of green talc.

The New-Zealanders have adopted polygamy among them; and it is common for one
man to have two or three wives. The women are ripe for marriage at an early
age; and those who are unmarried, find difficulty in procuring subsistence.

These people seem perfectly contented with the small degree of knowledge they
possess, for they make no attempts to improve it. They are not remarkably
curious, nor do new objects strike them with much surprise, for they scarce fix
their attention for a moment. Omai, indeed, being a great favorite with them,
would sometimes attract a circle about him; but they listened to his speeches
with very little eagerness.

On our inquiring of Taweiharooa, how many ships, resembling ours, had ever
arrived in Queen Charlotte's Sound, or in its neighborhood, he gave us an
account of one entirely unknown to us. This vessel, he said, had put into a
harbor on the north-west coast of Teerawitte, a few years before Captain Cook
arrived in the Sound in the Endeavor. He further informed us, that the Captain
of her, during his continuance here, had cohabited with a female of the
country, who had borne him a son that was still living. He also mentioned, that
this ship first introduced the venereal disease among the natives of
New-Zealand. This dreadful disorder is now but too common among them. The only
method they put in practice as a remedy, is to give the patient the use of a
kind of hot bath, produced by the steam of certain green plants placed over hot
stones.

Taweiharooa's intelligence induced us to believe, that a ship had really been
at Teerawitte previous to Captain Cook's arrival in the Endeavor, as it
corresponded with what the Captain had formerly heard; for, toward the latter
end of 1773, some of the natives informed him of a ship's having put into a
port on the coast of Teerawitte.

We had another piece of information from Taweiharooa, importing that their are
here snakes and lizard of an enormous size. The latter were described by him as
being eight feet long, and equal to a man's body in circumference. He said that
they burrow in the ground; that they sometimes seize and devour men, and are
killed by making fires at the mouths of their holes. We could not misunderstand
him with respect to the animal; for, in order to show us what he meant, he
drew, with his own hand, very good representations of a lizard and snake on a
piece of paper.

Though much has been said concerning this country and its inhabitants, in the
accounts of Captain Cook's two former voyages, yet the remarks of Mr. Anderson,
being the result of accurate observation, must not be considered as altogether
superfluous. The reader will find them in the succeeding chapter.

The longitude of Ship-cove, by lunar observations, is 174 25 15 east; its
latitude 41 6 south.

CHAP. VIII.
The Country near Queen Charlotte's Sound described -- The Fertility of the
Soil -- Temperature of the Climate -- Rain and Wind -- Plants -- Birds -- Fish
-- Animals -- Description of the Persons of the Inhabitants -- Dress --
Ornaments -- Buildings -- Canoes or Boats -- Food, and Method of Cookery --
Arts -- Weapons -- Horred Cruelty to their Enemies, whose Bodies they mangle
and eat -- Various other Customs.

ABOUT Queen Charlotte's Sound the land is uncommonly mountainous, rising
immediately from the sea into large hills. At remote distances are valleys,
terminating each toward the sea in a small cove, with a pebbly or sandy beach;
behind which are flat places, where the natives usually built their huts. This
situation is the more convenient, as a brook of fine water runs through every
cove, and empties itself into the sea.

The bases of these mountains, toward the shore, are constituted of a brittle
yellowish sand-stone, which acquires a blueish cast where it is laved by the
sea. At some places it runs in horizontal, and, at others, in oblique strata.
The mould or soil by which it is covered resembles marle, and is, in general, a
foot or two in thickness.

The luxuriant growth of the productions here, sufficiently indicates the
quality of the soil. The hills, except a few toward the sea, are one continued
forest of lofty trees, flourishing with such uncommon vigor, as to afford an
august prospect to the admirers of the sublime and beautiful works of nature.

This extraordinary strength in vegetation is, doubtless, greatly assisted by
the agreeable temperature of the climate; for, at this time, though answering
to our month of August, the weather was not so warm as to be disagreeable; nor
did it raise the thermometer, higher than 66. The winter also seems equally
mild with respect to cold; for in the month which corresponds to our December,
the mercury was never lower than 48, the trees at the same time retaining their
verdure, as if in the height of summer. It is supposed their foliage remains,
till pushed off in spring by the succeeding leaves.

Though the weather is generally good, it is sometimes windy, with heavy rain;
which, however, is never excessive, and does not last above a day. In short,
this would be one of the finest countries upon earth, were it not so extremely
hilly; which, supposing the woods to be cleared away, would leave it less
proper for pasturage than flat land, and infinitely less so for cultivation,
which could never be effected here by the plough.

The large trees on the hills are principally of two sorts. One of them, of the
size of our largest ^irs, grows nearly after their manner. This supplied the
place of spruce in making beer; which we did, with a decoction of its leaves
fermented with sugar or treacle; and this liquor was acknowledged to be little
inferior to American spruce-beer. The other sort of tree is like a maple, and
often grows very large, but is fit only for fuel; the wood of that, and of the
preceding, being too heavy for masts, yards, etc.

A greater variety of trees grow on the flats behind the beaches: two of these
bear a kind of plumb, of the size of prunes; the one, which is yellow, is
called karraca, and the other, which is black, called maitao; but neither of
them had a pleasant taste, though eaten both by our people and the natives.

On the eminences which jut out into the sea, grows a species of philadelphus,
and a tree bearing flowers almost like myrtle. We used the leaves of the
philadelphus as tea, and found them an excellent substitute for the oriental
sort.

A kind of wild celery, which grows plentifully in almost every cove, may be
reckoned among the plants that were useful to us; and another that we used to
call scurvy grass. Both sorts were boiled daily with wheat ground in a mill,
for the people's breakfast, and with their pease-soup for dinner. Sometimes
also they were used as salled, or dressed as greens. In all which ways they are
excellent; and, together with the fish, with which we were amply supplied, they
formed a most desirable refreshment.

The known kinds of plants to be found here are bindweed, nightshade, nettles,
a shrubby speed-well, sow-thistles, virgin's bower, vanelloe, French willow,
euphorbia, crane's-bill, cudweed, rushes, bulrushes, flax, all-heal, American
nightshade, knot-grass, brambles, eyebright, and groundsel; but the species
of each are different from any we have in Europe.

There are a great number of other plants, but one in particular deserves to be
noticed here, as the garments of the natives are made from it. A fine silky
flax is produced from it, superior in appearance to any thing we have in this
country, and, perhaps, as strong. It grows in all places near the sea, and
sometimes a considerable way up the hills, in bunches or tufts, bearing
yellowish flowers on a long stalk.

It is remarkable that the greatest part of the trees and plants were of the
berry-bearing kind; of which, and other seeds, Mr. Anderson brought away about
thirty different sorts.

The birds, of which there is a tolerable good stock, are almost entirely
peculiar to the place. It would be difficult and fatiguing to follow them, on
account of the quantity of underwood, and the climbing plants; yet any person,
by continuing in one place, may shoot as many in a day as would serve seven or
eight persons. The principal kinds are large brown parrots, with gray heads,
green parroquets, large wood-pigeons, and two sorts of cuckoos. A gross-beak,
about the size of a thrush, is frequent; as is also a small green bird, which
is almost the only musical one to be found here; but his melody is so sweet,
and his notes so varied, that any one would imagine himself surrounded by a
hundred different sorts of birds, when the little warbler is exerting himself.
From this circumstance it was named the mocking-bird. There are also three or
four sorts of smaller birds, and, among the rocks, are found black sea-pies
with red bills, and crefted shags of a leaden color. About the shore, there
are a few sea-gulls, some blue herons, wild ducks, plovers, and some
sand-larks. A snipe was shot here, which differs but little from that of Europe.

Most of the fish we caught by the seine were elephant-fish, mullets, soles,
and flounders; but the natives supplied us with a sort of sea-bream, large
conger eels, and a fish of five or six pounds weight, called a mogge by the
natives. With a hook and line we caught a blackish fish, called cole-fish by
the seamen, but differing greatly from that of the same name in Europe. We also
got a sort of small salmon, skate, gurnards, and nurses. The natives sometimes
furnished us with hake, paracutas, parrot-fish, a sort of mackarel, and leather
jackets; besides another, which is extremely scarce, of the figure of a
dolphin, a black color, and strong bony jaws. These, in general, are excellent
to eat; but the small salmon, cole-fish, and mogge, are superior to the others.

Great quantities of excellent muscles inhabit among the rocks; one sort of
which exceeds a foot in length. Many cockles are found buried in the sand of
the small beaches; and, in some places, oysters, which, though very small, have
a good flavor. There are also perriwincles, limpets, wilks, sea-eggs,
star-fish, and some beautiful sea-ears, many of which are peculiar to the
place. The natives also furnished us with some excellent cray-fish.

Insects here are not very numerous; we saw some butterflies, two sorts of
dragon-flies, some small grasshoppers, several sorts of spiders, some black
ants, and scorpion flies innumerable, with whose chirping the woods resounded.
The sand-fly, which is the only noxious one, is very numerous here, and is
almost as disagreeable as the musquitoe. The only reptiles we saw here, were
two or three sorts of inoffensive lizards.

In this extensive land, it is remarkable that there should not even be the
traces of any quadruped, except a few rats, and a kind of fox dog, which is
kept by the natives as a domestic animal.

They have not any mineral deserving notice, but a green jasper or serpent
stone, of which the tools and ornaments of the inhabitants are made. This is
held in high estimation among them; and they entertain some superstitious
notions about the mode of its generation, which we could not comprehend; they
say it is taken from a large river far to the southward; it is disposed in the
earth in detached pieces like flints, and, like them, the edges are covered
with a whitish crust.

The natives, in general, are not so well formed, especially about the limbs,
as the Europeans, nor do they exceed them in stature. Their sitting so much on
their hams, and being deprived, by the mountainous disposition of the country,
of using that kind of exercise which would render the body straight and
well-proportioned, is probably the occasion of the want of due proportion. Many
of them, indeed, are perfectly formed, and some are very large boned and
muscular; but very few among them were corpulent.

Their features are various, some resembling Europeans, and their color is of
different casts, from a deepish black to an olive or yellowish tinge. In
general, however, their faces are round, their lips rather full, and their
noses (though not flat) large toward the point. An aquiline nose was not to be
seen among them: their eyes are large, and their teeth are commonly broad,
white, and regular. The hair, in general, is black, strong, and straight; it is
commonly cut short on the hinder part, and the rest tied on the crown of the
head. Some, indeed, have brown hair, and others a sort that is naturally
disposed to curl. The countenance of the young is generally free and open; but,
in many of the men, it has a serious or sullen cast. The men are larger than
the women; and the latter are not distinguished by peculiar graces, either of
form or features.

Both sexes are clothed alike; they have a garment, made of the silky flax
already mentioned, about five feet in length, and four in breadth. This appears
to be their principal manufacture, which is performed by knotting. Two corners
of this garment pass over the shoulders, and they fasten it on the breast with
that which covers the body: it is again fastened about the belly with a girdle
made of mat. Sometimes they cover it with dog-skin or large feathers. Many of
them wear mats over this garment, extending from the shoulders to the heels.
The most common covering, however, is a quantity of the sedgy plant
abovementioned, badly manufactured, fastened to a string, and thrown over the
shoulders, whence it falls down on all sides to the middle of the thighs. When
they sat down in this habit, they could hardly be distinguished from large gray
stones, if their black heads did not project beyond their coverings.

They adorn their heads with feathers, combs of bone or wood, with pearl shell,
and the inner skin of leaves. Both men and women have their ears slit, in which
are hung beads, pieces of jasper, or bits of cloth. Some have the septum of the
nose bored in its lower part, but we never saw any ornament worn in that part;
though a twig was passed through it by one of them, to show that it was
occasionally used for that purpose.

Many are stained in the face with curious figures, of a black or dark blue
color; but it is not certain whether this is intended to be ornamental, or as
a mark of particular distinction: the women are marked only on their lips and
chins; and both sexes besmear their heads and faces with a greasy reddish
paint. The women also wear necklaces of shark's teeth, or bunches of long
beads; and a few of them have small triangular aprons, adorned with feathers or
pieces of pearl shells, festened about the waist with a double or treble set of
cords.

They live in the small coves already mentioned, sometimes in single families,
and sometimes in companies of perhaps forty or fifty. Their huts, which are in
general most miserable lodging places, are built cont^guous to each other. The
best we saw was built in the manner of one of our country barns, and was about
six feet in height, fifteen in breadth, and thirty-three in length. The inside
was strong and regular, well fastened by means of withes, etc. and painted red
and black. At one end it had a hole serving as a door to creep out at, and
another considerably smaller, seemingly for the purpose of letting out the
smoke. This, however, ought to be considered as one of their palaces, for many
of their huts are not of half the size, and seldom are more than four feet in
height.

They have no other furniture than a few small bags or baskets, in which they
deposit their fishing hooks and other trifles. They sit down in the middle
round a small fire, and probably sleep in the same situation, without any other
covering that what they have worn in the day.

Fishing is their principal support, in which they use different kinds of nets,
or wooden fish-hooks pointed with bone; but made in so extraordinary a manner,
that it appears astonishing how they can answer such a purpose.

Their bo^^s consist of planks raised upon each other, and fastened with long
withes. Many of them are fifty feet long. Sometimes they fasten two together
with rafters, which we call a double canoe: they frequently carry upwards of
thirty men, and have a large head, ingeniously carved and painted, which seems
intended to represent a man enraged. Their paddles are narrow, pointed, and
about five feet long. Their sail, which is very little used, is a mat formed
into a triangular shape.

They dress their fish by roasting, or rather baking them, being entirely
ignorant of the art of boiling. It is thus they also dress the root of the
large fern-tree, in a hole prepared for that purpose: when dressed, they split
it, and find a gelatinous substance within, somewhat like sago powder. The
smaller fern-root seems to be their substitute for bread, being dried and
carried about with them, together w^^h great quantities of dried fish, when
they go far from their habitations.

When the weather will not suffer them to go to sea, muscles and sea-ears
supply the place of other fish. Sometimes, but not often, they kill a few
penguins, rails, and shags, which enable them to vary their diet. Considerable
numbers of their dogs are also bred for food; but they depend principally on
the sea for their subsistence, by which they are most bountifully supplied.

They are as filthy in their feeding as in their persons, which often emit a
very offensive effluvia, from the quantity of grease about them, and from their
never washing their clothes: their heads are plentifully stocked with vermin,
which they sometimes eat. Large quantities of stinking train oil, and blubber
of seals, they would eagerly devour. When on board the ships, they not only
emptied the lamps, but actually swallowed the cotton with equal voracity.
Though the inhabitants of Van Diemen's Land would not even taste our bread,
these people devoured it with the greatest eagerness, even when it was rotten
and moldy.

In point of ingenuity, they are not behind any uncivilized nations under
similar circumstances: for, without the assistance of metal tools, they make
every thing by which they procure their subsistence, clothing, and warlike
weapons, with neatness, strength, and convenience. Their principal mechanical
tool is formed in the manner of an adze, and is made of the serpent-stone or
jasper: their chissel and gouge are furnished from the same material, though
they are sometimes composed of black solid stone. Carving, however, is their
masterpiece, which appears upon the most trifling things; the ornaments on the
heads of their canoes not only display much design, but execution. Their
cordage for fishing lines is not inferior to that in this country, and their
nets equally good. A shell, a bit of flint, or jasper, is their substitute for
a knife; and a shark's tooth fixed in the end of a piece of wood, is their
auger. They have a saw made of some jagged fishes teeth, fixed on a piece of
wood nicely carved; but this is used for no other purpose than to cut up the
bodies of those whom they kill in battle.

Though no people are more ready to resent an injury, yet they take every
opportunity of being insolent, when they apprehend there is no danger of
punishment; whence it may be concluded, that their eagerness to resent
injuries, is rather an effect of a furious disposition than genuine bravery.
They are naturally mistrustful, and suspicious, for such as are strangers never
venture immediately to visit our ships, but keep at a small distance in their
boats, observing our motions, and hesitating whether they should risk their
safety with us. They are to the last degree dishonest, and steal every thing
within their reach, if they suppose they can escape detection; and, in trading,
they seem inclined to take every possible advantage; for they never trust an
article out of their hands for examination, and seem highly pleased if they
have overreached you in a bargain.

Such conduct indeed is not surprising, when it is considered that there
appears to be but little subordination, and few, if any, laws for the
punishment of transgressors. No man's authority extends beyond his own family;
and when they join, at any time, for mutual defense or safety, those among them
who are most eminent for valor and prudent conduct, are directors.

Their public contentions are almost perpetual, for war is their principal
profession, as appears from their number of weapons, and their dexterity in
using them. Their arms are spears, patoos and halberts, and sometimes stones,
The first are from five to thirty feet long, made of hard wood and pointed. The
patoo is about eighteen inches long, of an elliptical shape, with a handle made
of wood, stone, etc. and appears to be their principal dependence in battle.
The halbert is about five or six feet in length, tapering at one end with a
carved head, and broad or flat, with sharp edges, at the other.

Before the onset, they join in a war song, keeping the exactest time; and, by
degrees, work themselves into a kind of frantic fury, accompanied with the most
horrid distortions of their tongues, eyes and mouths, in order to deter their
enemies. To this succeeds a circumstance that is most horrid, cruel, and
disgraceful to human nature, which is mangling and cutting to pieces (even when
not perfectly dead) the bodies of their enemies; and, after roasting them,
devouring the flesh with peculiar pleasure and satisfaction.

It might naturally be supposed, that those who could be capable of such excess
of cruelty, must be totally destitute of every humane feeling; and yet they
lament the loss of their friends in a manner the most tender and affectionate.
Both men and women, upon the death of their relations or friends, bewail them
with the most miserable cries; at the same time cutting large gashes in their
cheeks and foreheads, with shells, or pieces of flint, till the blood flows
copiously, and mixes with their tears. They also carve a resemblance of an
human figure, and hang it about their necks, as a memorial of those who were
dear to them. They also perform the ceremony of lamenting and cutting for joy,
at the return of a friend who has been some time absent.

The practices of the fathers, whether good or bad, their children are, at an
early age, instructed in; so that you find a child of either sex, of the age of
nine or ten years, able to imitate the frightful motions and gestures of the
men. They also sing, and with some degree of melody, the traditions and actions
of their forefathers, with which they are immoderately delighted, and pass much
of their time in these amusements, accompanied sometimes with a kind of flute.

Their language is neither harsh nor disagreeable. Whatever qualities are
requisite to make a language musical, obtain to a considerable degree in this,
if we may judge from the melody of their songs. It is not, indeed, so
comprehensive as our European languages, which owe their perfection to long and
gradual improvement.

A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK II. CONTAINING OUR ADVENTURES FROM OUR
DEPARTURE FROM NEW-ZEALAND, TILL OUR ARRIVAL AT OTAHEITE, OR THE SOCIETY
ISLANDS.
CHAP. I.
Course of the Voyage -- Behavior of the two New-Zealand Youths on board --
The Island of Mangeea discovered -- Account of the Persons and Dress of the
Inhabitants -- Mourooa and his Companion described -- Figure of a Mangeean
Canoe -- The Coast of the Island examined -- Impracticability of landing --
Transactions with the Natives -- Description of the Island -- Disposition and
Manners of the Mangeeans.

IN the morning of the 25th of February, we left the Sound, and made sail
through Cook's Straits. On the 27th, Cape Palli^er bearing west about seven
leagues distant, we had a fine gale, and steered toward the north-east. As
soon as we had lost sight of land, our two young New-Zealanders heartily
reperted of the adventurous step they had taken. Though we endeavored, as far
as lay in our power, to sooth them, they wept, both in public and private; and
gave vent to their sorrows in a kind of song, which seemed to express their
praises of their country and people, from which they were now, in all
probability, to be for ever separated. They continued in this state for several
days, till, at length, the agitation of their minds began to subside, and their
sea-sickness, which had aggravated their grief, wore off. Their lamentations
then became less and less frequent; their native country, their kindred and
friends, were gradually forgotten, and they appeared to be firmly attached to
us.

On the 28th at noon, being in the latitude of 41 17 south, and in the
longitude of 177 17 east, we tacked about and stood to the south-east, with a
gentle breeze at east north-east, which afterward veered to north-east, in
which point the wind remained two days, sometimes blowing a fresh gale with
squalls and rain. On the 2d of March it shifted to north-west, and afterward
to south-west, between which point and the north it continued to blow,
sometimes very moderately, and at other times a strong gale. With this wind we
steered north-east by east and east, with all the sail we could carry, till
Tuesday the 11th, when it veered to north-east and south-east; we then stood to
the north and the north-east, as the wind would permit, till the 16th, when
having a gale from the north, we stood to the east. The next day we proceeded
to the north-east; but, as the wind frequently veered to east and
east-north-east, we often made no better than a northerly course. The hopes,
however, of the wind coming more southerly, or from the westward, a little
without the Tropic of Capricorn, encouraged the Commodore to continue this
course. It was indeed necessary that we should run all hazards, as our
proceeding to the north this summer, in prosecution of the principal object of
the expedition, entirely depended on our having a quick passage to Otaheite, or
the Society Isles.

We crossed the Tropic on the 27th, the wind, for a considerable time before,
having remained almost invariably fixed at east south-east. In all this run, we
observed nothing that could induce us to suppose we had sailed near any land,
except occasionally a tropic bird. In the latitude of 34 20, longitude 199, we
passed the trunk of a tree, which appeared much weather-beaten, and was covered
with barnacles. On the 29th, as we were standing to the north-east, the
Discovery made a signal of seeing land. We soon found it to be a small island,
and stood for it till the evening, when it was at the distance of two or three
leagues. The next morning, at daybreak, we bore up for the west side of the
island, and saw several people wading to the reef, where, as they observed the
ship leaving them quickly, they remained. But others, who soon appeared,
followed her course; and some of them assembled in small bodies, making great
shouts.

Upon our nearer approach to the shore, we saw many of the natives running
along the beach, and, by the assistance of our glasses, could perceive that
they were armed with long spears and clubs, which they brandished in the air
with signs of threatening, or, as some of us supposed, with invitations to
land. Most of them were naked, except having a kind of girdle, which was
brought up between their thighs; but some of them wore about their shoulders
pieces of cloth of various colors, white, striped, or chequered; and almost
all of them had about their heads a white wrapper, in some degree resembling a
turban. They were of a tawny complexion, robust, and about the middle size.

A small canoe was now launched from the most distant part of the beach, and a
man getting into it, put off, as with a view of reaching the ship; but his
courage failing, he quickly returned toward the beach. Another man soon after
joined him in the canoe; and then both of them paddled toward us. They seemed,
however, afraid to approach, till their apprehensions were partly removed by
Omai, who addressed them in the language of Otaheite. Thus encouraged, they
came near enough to receive some nails and beads, which, being tied to some
wood, were thrown into the canoe. They however put the wood aside without
untying the things from it, which may perhaps have proceeded from superstition;
for we were informed by Omai, that when they observed us offering presents to
them, they requested something for their Eatooa. On Omai's asking them whether
they ever eat human flesh, they replied in the negative, with equal abhorrence
and indignation. One of them, named Mourooa, being questioned with regard to a
scar on his forehead, said it was the consequence of a wound he had received in
fighting with the natives of an island lying toward the north-east, who
sometimes invaded them. They afterward laid hands on a rope, but would not
venture on board, telling Omai, that their countrymen on shore had suggested to
them this caution; and had likewise directed them to enquire whence our ship
came, and to procure information of the name of the Captain. Their chief, they
said, was called Orooaeeka. Upon our enquiring the name of the island, they
told us it was Mangya, or Mangeea, to which they sometimes added nooe, nai,
naiwa.

The features of Mourooa were agreeable, and his disposition, to all
appearance, was no less so; for he exhibited some droll gesticulations, which
indicated humor and goodnature. He also made others of a serious kind, and
repeated some words with an air of dev^tion, before he would venture to take
hold of the rope at the stern of the ship. He was (...) and well made, though
not ta^^ (...) as nearly of the (...) cast with that of the (...) of the most
(...) parts of Europe. (...) companion was (...) handsome. They both had
strong, straight, black hair, ^ied together on the top of their heads with a
piece of white cloth. They had long beards; and the inside of their arms from
the elbow to the shoulder, and some other parts, were tatooed or punctured. The
lobe of their ears was slit to such a length, that one of them stuck their a
knife and some beads, which we had given them. The same person had hung about
his neck, by way of ornament, two polished pearl-shells, and a bunch of human
hair, loosely twisted together. They wore a kind of girdles, which we found
were a substance manufactured from the morus papyrifera, and glazed like those
used in the Friendly Islands. They had on their feet a sort of sandals, made of
a grassy substance interwoven, which we observed were also worn by those whom
we had seen on the beach. The canoe in which they came was the only one we saw.
It was very narrow, and not above ten feet long, but strong and neatly made.
The lower A MAN of MANGEA. A WOMAN of EAOO.
part was of white wood; but the upper part was black, and their paddles were
made of wood of the same color: these were broad at one end, and blunted, and
about three feet long. The fore part had a flat board fastened over it, which
projected out, to prevent the water from getting in. It had an upright stern,
five feet high, which terminated at the top in a kind of fork. They paddled
indifferently either end of the canoe forward.

As soon as the ships were in a proper station, Captain Cook sent out two boats
to endeavor to find a convenient place for landing. In one of them he went
himself, and had no sooner put off from the ship, than the two men in the canoe
paddled toward his boat; and when they were come along-side, Mourooa, without
hesitation, stepped into her. Omai, who was with the Captain, was desired to
enquire of the islander where we could land; upon which he directed us to two
places. But we soon observed, with regret, that the attempt at either place was
impracticable, on account of the surf, unless at the risque of having our boats
destroyed. Nor were we more successful in our search for anchorage, as we could
find no bottom till within a cable's length of the breakers, where we met with
from forty to twenty fathoms depth, over sharp rocks of coral.

While we thus reconnoitred the shore of Mangeea, the natives thronged down
upon the reef, all armed. Mourooa, who still remained in the boat with Captain
Cook, thinking, perhaps, that this warlike appearance deterred us from landing,
commanded them to retire. As many of them complied, we imagined, that he was a
person of some consequence: indeed, if we did not misunderstand him, he was
brother to the king of the island. Several of them, instigated by curiosity,
swam from the shore to the boats, and came on board them without reserve. We
even found some difficulty in keeping them out, and could scarce prevent their
pilfering whatever they could lay hands upon. At length, when they observed us
returning to the ships, they all left us except Mourooa, who, though not
without manifest indications of fear, accompanied the Commodore on board the
Resolution. The cattle and other new objects that he saw there, did not strike
him with much surprise; his mind, perhaps, benig too much occupied about his
own safety, to allow him to attend to other things. He seemed very uneasy, and
gave us but little new intelligence; and therefore, after he had continued a
short time on board, Captain Cook ordered a boat to carry him toward the land.
In his way out of the cabin, happening to stumble over one of the goats, he
stopped, looked at the animal, and asked Omai what bird it was; but not
receiving an immediate answer from him, he put the same question to some of the
people who were upon deck. The boat having conveyed him near the surf, he
leaped into the water, and swam ashore. His countrymen, eager to learn from him
what he had seen, flocked round him as soon as he had landed; in which
situation they remained when we lost sight of them. We hoisted in the boat as
soon as she returned, and made sail to the northward. Thus were we obliged to
leave this fine island unvisited, which seemed capable of supplying all our
necessities. It is situate in the longitude of 210 53 east, and in the latitude
of 21 57 south.

Those parts of the coast of Mangeea which fell under our observation, are
guarded by a reef of coral rock, against which a heavy surf is continually
breaking. The island is about five leagues in circumference, and though of a
moderate and pretty equal height, may be seen in clear weather at the distance
of ten leagues. In the interior parts, it rises into small hills, whence there
is an easy descent to the shore, which, in the south-west part, is steep,
though not very high, and has several excavations made by the dashing of the
waves against a brownish sand-stone, of which it consists. The descent here
abounds with trees of a deep green, which seem to be all of one sort, except
nearest the shore, where we observed numbers of (...) species of dracoena found
in the woods of New-Zealand. The shore, on the north-west part, terminates in a
sandy, beach, beyond which the land is broken into small chasms, and has a
broad border of trees which resemble tall willows. Further up, on the ascent,
the trees were of the deep green abovementioned, which some of us imagined to
be the rima, intermixed with cocoa-palms, and a few other sorts. Some trees of
a higher sort were thinly scattered on the hills, the other parts of which were
either covered with something like fern, or were bare, and of a reddish color.
The island, upon the whole, has a pleasing appearance, and might, by proper
cultivation, be made a beautiful spot.

The natives appearing to be both numerous and well-^ed, it is highly probable
that such articles of provision as the island produces are found in great
abundance. Our friend Mourooa informed us, that they had no hogs nor dogs,
though they had heard of both those animals; but that they had plaintains,
taro, and bread-fruit. The only birds we observed, were some terns, noddies,
white egg-birds, and one white heron.

The language of the Mangeeans is a dialect of that of Otaheite; but their
pronunciation is more guttural. They resemble the inhabitants of Otaheite and
the Marquesas in the beauty of their persons; and their general disposition
also seems to correspond with that of the first-mentioned people; for they are
not only lively and cheerful, but are acquainted with all the lascivious
gesticulations practiced by the Otaheiteans in their dances. We had likewise
reason to suppose, that they have similar methods of living: for, though we had
not an opportunity of seeing many of their habitations, we observed one house
near the beach, which, in its mode of construction, differed little from those
of Otaheite. It appeared to be seven or eight feet high, and about thirty in
length, with an open end, which represented an ellipse, or oval, transeversely
divided. It was pleasantly situated in a grove.

These people salute strangers by joining noses, and taking the hand of the
person whom they accost, which they rub with some force upon their mouth and
nose. It is worthy of remark, that the inhabitants of the Palaos, New
Philippine, or rather Caroline Islands, though at the distance of near 1500
leagues from Mangeea, have a similar method of salutation.

CHAP. II.
An Island named Watecoo discovered -- Visits from the Inhabitants on board the
Ships -- Their Persons and Dress described -- The coast of the Island examined
-- Lieutenants Gore and Burney, Mr. Anderson and Omai, sent on Shore -- Mr.
Anderson's Account of their Reception -- They are introduced to three Chiefs --
Dance of twenty young Women described -- Omai's Apprehensions of being roasted
-- The Islanders send Provisions on board -- Further Description of the Natives
-- Of their double Canoes -- Trees and Plants -- Omai's Expedient to prevent
being detained on Shore -- He meets with three of his Countrymen -- Account of
their distressful Voyage -- Additional Remarks relative to Wateeoo.

WE quitted Mangeea in the afternoon of the 30th of March, and proceeding on a
northerly course, we again discovered land, on the 31st, at the distance of
nine or ten leagues. -- The next morning we were abrest of its north end,
within four leagues of it. It now appeared to us to be an island nearly of the
same extent with that which we had just left. Another island, much smaller, was
also descried right ahead. Though we could soon have reached this, we
preferred the larger one, as being most likely to furnish food for the cattle.
We therefore made sail to it; but there being little wind, and that
unfavourable, we were still about two leagues to leeward at eight o'clock the
succeeding morning. The Commodore, soon after, dispatched three armed boats,
under the command of Mr. Gore, his First Lieutenant, in search of a
landing-place and anchoring-ground. Mean while we plied up under the island
with the ships. As our boats were putting off, we saw several canoes coming
from the shore, which repaired first to the Discovery, as that ship was the
nearest. Not long after, three of these canoes, each conducted by one man, came
along-side of the Resolution. They are long and narrow, and are supported by
out-riggers: the head is flat above, but prow-like below; and the stern is
about four feet high. We bestowed on our visitors, some knives, beads, and
other trifles; and they gave us some cocoa-nuts, in consequence of our having
asked for them; but they did not part with them by way of exchange, as they
seemed to have no idea of barter or traffic. One of them, after a little
persuasion, came on board; and the other two soon followed his example. They
appeared to be perfectly at their ease, and free from all apprehension. After
their departure, a man arrived in another canoe, bringing a bunch of plantains
as a present to Captain Cook, who gave him, in return, a piece of red cloth and
an axe. We were afterward informed by Omai, that this present had been sent
from the king of the island. Soon after, a double canoe, containing twelve of
the islanders, came toward us. On approaching the ship, they recited some
words in concert, by way of chorus, one of them first giving the word before
each repetition. Having finished this solemn chant, they came along-side, and
asked for the chief. As soon as Captain Cook had made his appearance, a pig and
some cocoa-nuts were conveyed into the ship; and the Captain was also presented
with a piece of matting, by the principal person in the canoe, when he and his
companions had got on board.

These new visitors were introduced into the cabin, and conducted to other
parts of the ship. Though some objects seemed to surprise them, nothing could
fix their attention. They were afraid to venture near the cows and horses, of
whose nature they could form no conception. As for the sheep and goats, they
gave us to understand, that they knew them to be birds. It is a matter of
astonishment, that human ignorance could ever make so ridiculous a mistake, as
there is not the smallest resemblance between any winged animal and a sheep or
goat. But these people seemed unacquainted with the existence of any other
terrestrial animals, than hogs, dogs, and birds; and as they saw that our goats
and sheep were very different from the two former, they absurdly inferred, that
they must belong to the latter class, in which they knew there was a great
variety of species. Though the Commodore bestowed on his new friend what he
supposed would be the most acceptable present, yet he seemed somewhat
disappointed. The Captain was afterward informed, that he eagerly wished to
procure a dog, of which kind of animals this island was destitute, though the
natives knew that the race existed in other islands of the Pacific Ocean.
Captain Clerk had received a similar present, with the same view, from another
man, who was equally disappointed in his expectations.

The islanders whom we had seen in those canoes were in general of the middle
stature, and not unlike the Mangeeans. Their hair either flowed loosely over
their shoulders, or was tied on the crown of the head; and though in some it
was frizzled, yet that, as well as the straight sort, was long. Some of the
young men were handsome. Like the inhabitants of Mangeea, they were girdles of
glazed cloth, or fine matting, the ends of which were brought between their
thighs. -- Their ears were bored, and they wore about their necks, by way of
ornament, a sort of broad grass, stained with red, and strung with berries of
the nightshade. Many of them were curiously marked or tatooed from the middle
downwards, particularly upon their legs; which made them appear as if they wore
boots. Their beard^ were long^ and they had a kind of sandals on their feet.
They were frank and cheerful in their deportment, and very friendly and
good-natured.

Lieutenant Gore returned from his excursion in the afternoon, and informed
Captain Cook, that he had examined the west side of the island, without being
able to find a place where the ships could ride in safety, or a boat could
land, the shore being bounded by a steep coral rock, against which a continual
surf broke with extraordinary violence. But as the inhabitants seemed extremely
friendly, and as desirous of our landing as we ourselves were, Mr. Gore was of
opinion, that they might be prevailed upon to bring off to the boats beyond the
surf, such articles as we were most in need of. As we had little or no wind,
the delay of a day or two was of small consideration; and therefore the
Commodore resolved to try the experiment the next morning. We observed, soon
after daybreak, some canoes com^ng toward the ships; one of which directed
its ^ourse to the Resolution. There were in it some ^ocoa-nuts and plantains,
and a hog, for which ^he natives demanded a dog from us, refusing ^very other
thing that we offered by way of ex^hange. Though one of our gentlemen on board
(...) a dog and a bitch, which were great nui^^nces in the ship, and which
might have served (...) propagate a race of so useful an animal in this (...),
yet he could not be prevailed upon to part with them. However, to gratify these
people, Omai gave them a favorite dog he had brought from Great Britain; with
which acquisition they were highly pleased.

The same morning, which was the 3d of April, Captain Cook detached Mr. Gore
with three boats, to make trial of the experiment which that officer had
proposed. Two of the natives, who had been on board, accompanied him; and Omai
served as an interpreter. The ships being a full league from the island when
the boats put off, and the wind being inconsiderable, it was twelve o'clock
before we could work up to it. We then perceived our three boats just without
the surf, and an amazing number of the islanders on the shore, abreast of them.
Concluding from this, that Lieutenant Gore, and others of our people had
landed, we were impatient to know the event. With a view of observing their
motions, and being ready to afford them such assistance as they might
occasionally require, the Commodore kept as near the shore as was consistent
with prudence. He was convinced, however, that the reef was a very effectual
barrier between us and our friends who had landed, and put them completely out
of the reach of our protection. But the natives, in all probability, were not
so sensible of this circumstance as we were. Some of them, now and then,
brought a few cocoa-nuts to the ships, and exchanged them for whatever was
offered them. These occasional visits diminished the Captain's solicitude about
our people who had landed; for, though we could procure no intelligence from
our visitors, yet their venturing on board seemed to imply, that their
countrymen on shore had made no improper use of the confidence reposed in them.
At length, toward the evening, we had the satisfaction of seeing the boats
return. When our people got on board, we found that Mr. Gore, Mr. Anderson, Mr.
Burney, and Omai, were the only persons who had landed. The occurrence of the
day were now fully reported to the Commodore by Mr. Gore. Mr. Anderson's
account of their transactions, which was very circumstantial, and included some
observations, on the island and it is inhabitants, was to the following purport.

They rowed toward a sandy beach, where a great number of the natives had
assembled, and came to an anchor at the distance of an hundred yards from the
reef. Several of the islanders swam off, bringing cocoa-nuts with them; and
Omai gave them to understand, that our people were desirous of landing. Soon
after, two canoes came off; and to inspire the natives with a greater
confidence, Mr. Gore and his companions resolved to go unarmed. Mr. Anderson
and Lieutenant Burney went in the canoe, a little before the other; and their
conductors watching with great attention the motions of the surf, landed them
safely on the reef. A native took hold of each of them, with a view of
supporting them in walking over the rugged rocks to the beach, where several
others, holding in their hands the green boughs of a species of mimosa, met
them, and saluted them by the junction of noses. They were conducted from the
beach amidst a vast multitude of people, who flocked around them with the most
eager curiosity; and being led up an avenue of of cocoa palms, soon came to a
number of men, arranged in two rows, and armed with clubs. Proceeding onward
among these, they found a person, who appeared to be a chief, sitting
cross-legged on the ground, and cooling himself with a kind of triangular fan,
made from the leaf of the cocoa-palm, with a polished handle of black wood. He
wore in his ears large bunches of beautiful feathers of a red color; but had
no other mark to distinguish him from the rest of the people. Our two
countrymen having saluted him as he sat, marched on among the men armed with
clubs, and came to a second chief, adorned like the former, and occupied, like
him, in fanning himself. He was remarkable for his size and corpulence, though
he did not appear to be above thirty years of age. They were conducted in the
same manner to a third chief, who seemed older than the two former: he also was
sitting, and was ornamented with red feathers. After they had saluted him as
they had done the others, he desired them both to sit down: which they
willingly consented to, being greatly fatigued with walking, and with the
extreme heat they felt amidst the surrounding multitude.

The people being ordered to separate, Messrs. Anderson and Burney saw, at a
small distance, about twenty young women, adorned like the chiefs with red
feathers, engaged in a dance, which they performed to a slow and solemn air,
sung by them all. Our two gentlemen rose up, and walking forward to see these
dancers, who, without paying them the smallest attention, still continued their
dance. They seemed to be directed by a man, who, in the capacity of a prompter,
mentioned the several motions they were to make. They never changed the spot,
as Europeans do in dancing, and though their feet were not entirely at rest,
this exercise consisted more in moving their fingers very nimbly, holding their
hands at the same time in a prone position near the face, and occasionally
clapping them together The dances here described, bear a great resemblance to
those of the natives of the Caroline Islands.
. Their dancing and singing were performed in the exactest concert. They had
probably been instructed with extraordinary care, and selected for this
ceremony, being superior in beauty to most of those who were in the crowd. They
were, in general, rather stout, and of an olive complexion, with black hair
flowing in ringlets down their necks. Their shape and limbs were elegantly
formed; for, their dress consisting only of a piece of glazed cloth tied round
the waist, which scarcely reached so low as the knees, our gentlemen had an
opportunity of observing almost every part. Their features were rather too full
to constitute a perfect beauty. Their eyes were of a deep black, and their
countenances expressed a great degree of modesty and complacency.

Before these beauteous females had finished their dance, our two countrymen
heard a noise, as if some horses had been galloping toward them; and on
turning their eyes aside, they saw the people armed with clubs, who had been
desired to entertain them, as they supposed, with an exibition of their mode of
fighting; which they now did, one party pursuing another who ran away.

Lieutenant Burney and Mr. Anderson began now to look about for Mr. Gore and
Omai, whom they at length found coming up, as much incommoded by the crowds of
people as themselves had been, and introduced in the same manner to the three
chiefs; the names of whom were Otteroo, Taroa, and Fatouweera. Each of these
expecting a present, Mr. Gore gave them such things as he had brought with him
for that purpose; after which he informed the chiefs of his views in coming on
shore, but was desired to wait till the next day before he should have what was
wanted. They now seemed to endeavor to separate our gentlemen from each other,
every one of whom had his respective circle to surround, and gaze at him. Mr.
Anderson was, at one time, upwards of an hour apart from his friends; and when
he told the chief, who was near him, that he wished to speak to Omai, his
request was peremptorily refused. At the same time he found that the people
pilfered several trifling things which were in his pocket; and on his
complaining of this treatment to the chief, he justified their behavior. From
these circumstances, Mr. Anderson began to apprehend, that they designed to
detain our party among them. In this situation he asked for something to eat;
upon which they brought him some cocoa-nuts, bread-fruit, and a sort of sour
pudding; and when he complained of the heat, occasioned by the multitude of
people, the chief himself condescended to fan him.

Mr. Burney going to the place where Mr. Anderson was, the latter informed him
of his suspicions; and to try whether they were well founded or not, they both
attempted to get to the beach: but they were soon stopped by some of the
natives, who said they must return to the place which they had left. On their
coming up they found Omai under the same apprehensions; but he had, as he
imagined, an additional motive of terror; for, having observed that they had
dug a hole in the ground for an oven, which they were then heating, he could
assign no other reason for it, than that they intended to roast and devour our
party: he even went so far as to ask them whether that was their intention, at
which they were much surprised, asking, in return, whether that custom
prevailed among us.

Thus were Mr. Anderson and the others detained the greatest part of the day,
being sometimes separated, and sometimes together; but continually in a crowd,
who frequently desired them to uncover parts of their skin, the sight of which
struck the islanders with admiration. They at the same time rifled the pockets
of our countrymen; and one of them snatched from Mr. Gore a bayonet, which hung
by his side. This being represented to one of the chiefs, he pretended to send
a person in search of it, but probably countenanced the theft; for Omai, soon
after, had a dagger stolen from his side in the same manner. They now brought
some green boughs as emblems of friendship, and sticking the ends of them in
the ground, desired that our party would hold them as they sat, giving them to
understand, that they must stay and eat with them. The sight of a pig lying
near the oven which they had prepared and heated, removed Omai's apprehensions
of being put into it himself, and made him think it might be intended for the
repast of him and his three friends. The chief also sent some of his people to
provide food for the cattle, and they returned with a few plantain trees, which
they conveyed to the boats. In the mean time, Messrs. Burney and Anderson made
a second attempt to get to the beach; but, on their arrival, they found
themselves watched by people who seemed to have been stationed there for that
purpose; for, when Mr. Anderson endeavored to wade in upon the reef, one of
them dragged him back by his clothes. They also insisted upon his throwing down
some pieces of coral that he had picked up, and on his refusal to comply, they
took them from him by force. Nor would they suffer him to retain some small
plants which he had gathered. They likewise took a fan from Mr. Burney, which
on his coming ashore he had received as a present. Finding that obedience to
their will was the only method of procuring better treatment, the gentlemen
returned to the place they had quitted; and the natives now promised, that
after they had partaken of a repast which had been prepared for them, they
should be furnished with a canoe to carry them off to their boats. Accordingly,
the second chief to whom they had been presented, having seated himself on a
low stool, and directed the multitude to form a large ring, made them sit down
by him. A number of cocoa-nuts were now brought, with a quantity of baked
plantains, and a piece of the pig that had been dressed was placed before each
of them. Their fatigue, however, had taken away their appetites; but they eat a
little to please their entertainers. It being now near sunset, the islanders
sent down to the beach the remainder of the provisions that had been dressed,
to be carried to the ships. Our gentlemen found a canoe prepared to put them
off to their boats, which the natives did with great caution; but as they were
pushing the canoe into the surf, one of them snatched a bag out of her, which
contained a pocket-pistol belonging to Mr. Anderson, who calling out to the
thief with marks of the highest displeasure, he swam back to the canoe with the
bag. The islanders then put them on board the boats, with the cocoa-nuts,
plantains, and other provisions; and they immediately rowed back to the ships.

The restrained situation of these gentlemen gave them very little opportunity
of observing the country: for they were seldom a hundred yards from the place
where they had been introduced to the chiefs, and consequently were confined to
the surrounding objects. The first thing that attracted their notice was the
number of people, which must have been at least two thousand. Except a few,
those who had come on board the ships were all of an inferior class; for a
great number of those that our gentlemen met with on shore, had a superior
dignity of demeanor, and their complexion was much whiter. In genneral, they
had their hair, which was long and black, tied on the crown of the head. Many
of the young men were perfect models in shape, and of a delicate complexion.
The old men were, many of them, corpulent; and they as well as the young, had a
remarkable smoothness of skin. Their general dress consisted of a piece of
cloth wrapped about the waist, but some had pieces of mats, very curiously
variegated with black and white, formed into a kind of a jacket without
sleeves; while others wore conical caps made of the core of a cocoa-nut,
interwoven with beads. In their ears, which were pierced, they hung pieces of
the membraneous part of some plant, or stuck there some odoriferous flower. The
chiefs, and other persons of rank, had two little balls, with a common base,
made of bone; which they hung round their necks with small cord. Red feathers
are here considered as a particular mark of distinction; for none but chiefs,
and the young women who danced, assumed them. Some of the men were punctured
all over the sides and back, and some of the women had the same ornament (if it
deserves that name) on their legs. The elderly women had their hair cropped
short, and many of them were cut all over the fore part of the body in oblique
lines. The wife of a chief appeared with her child, laid in a piece of red
cloth, which had been presented to her husband; she suckled the infant much
after the manner of our women. Another chief introduced his daughter, who was
young, beautiful, and modest. No personal deformities were observed in either
sex, except in a few individuals who had scars of broad ulcers remaining on the
face and other parts.

Many of the natives were armed with spears and clubs, the latter of which were
generally about six feet long, made of a hard black wood, neatly polished. The
spears were formed of the same wood, simply pointed, and were in general twelve
feet long; but some were so short as to seem intended for darts.

They preserved their canoes from the sun under the shade of various trees. Our
gentlemen saw eight or ten of them, all double ones; that is, two single ones
fastened together by rafters lashed across. They were about four feet deep, and
in length about twenty feet, and the sides were rounded with a plank raised
upon them. Two of these canoes were ^uriously stained all over with black, in
innumerable small figures, as triangles, squares, etc. and were far superior to
any thing of the kind Mr. Anderson had ever seen at any other island in the
South Sea. The paddles were almost elliptical, and about four feet long.

Most of the trees observed by Mr. Anderson, were cocoa-palms, some species of
hibiscus, a sort of euphorbia, and many of the same kind he had seen at
Mangeea. The latter are tall and slender, resembling a cypress; and are called
by the natives etoa. He also saw a species of convolvulus, and some
treacle-mustard; besides which there are doubtless other plants and fruit trees
which he had not an opportunity of seeing. The soil, toward the sea, is
nothing more than a bank of coral, generally steep and rugged, which, though it
has probably been for many centuries exposed to the weather, has suffered no
further change than becoming black on its surface. The reef or rock, with which
the shore is lined, runs to different breadths into the sea, where it resembles
a high steep wall: it is of a brownish color, and nearly even with the surface
of the water; and though its texture is rather porous, it is capable of
withstanding the washing of the surf which constantly breaks upon it.

Though the landing of our gentlemen was the means of enriching the narrative
of the voyage with the preceding particulars, the principal object in view was
partly unattained; for we scarce procured any thing worth mentioning from the
island.

It has been already observed, that Omai was sent upon this expedition as Mr.
Gore's interpreter; which, perhaps, was not the only service he performed this
day. He was questioned by the natives concerning us, our country, our ships and
arms; in answer to which, he told them, among many other particulars, that our
country had ships as large as their island, on board of which were implements
of war (describing our guns) of such dimensions, as to contain several people
within them; one of which would demolish the island at one shot. As for the
guns in our two ships, he acknowledged they were but small in comparison with
the former; yet even with these, he said we could with great ease, at a
considerable distance destroy the island and every soul in it. On their
enquiring by what means this could be done, Omai produced some cartridges from
his pocket, and having submitted to inspection the balls, and the gunpowder by
which they were to be set in motion, he disposed the latter upon the ground,
and, by means of a piece of lighted wood, set it on fire. The sudden blast, the
mingled flame and smoke, that instantaneously succeeded, filled the natives
with such astonishment, that they no longer doubted the formidable power of our
weapons. Had it not been for the terrible ideas they entertained of the guns of
our ships, from this specimen of their mode of operation, it was imagined that
they would have detained the gentlemen the whole night; for Omai assured them,
that, if he and his friends did not return on board the same day, they might
expect that the Commodore would fire upon the island.

Though this island had never before been visited by Europeans, there were
other strangers now residing in it; and it was entirely owing to Omai's
accompanying Mr. Gore, that this remarkable circumstance came to our knowledge.
He had scarcely landed on the beach, when he found among the crowd, three of
his own countrymen, natives of the Society Isles. At the distance of about two
hundred leagues from those islands, an immense ocean intervening, with such
miserable sea-boats as their inhabitants make use of, such a meeting, at such a
place, so accidentally visited by us, may be considered as one of those
extraordinary and unexpected situations, which strike a curious observer with
wonder and amazement. The mutual surprise and pleasure with which Omai and his
countrymen engaged in conversation, may easily be imagined. Their story, as
related by themselves, is a very affecting one. About twenty persons, male and
female, had embarked in a canoe at Otaheite, with an intention of crossing over
to Ulietea; but they were prevented by contrary winds from reaching the latter,
or returning to the former island. Their stock of provisions being soon
exhausted, they suffered inconceivable hardships. They passed many days without
sustenance, in consequence of which their number gradually diminished, worn out
by famine and fatigue. Only four men survived, when their canoe was overset.
The destruction of this small remnant now seemed inevitable; however, they
continued hanging by the side of the vessel, during some of the last days, till
they providentially came in sight of the inhabitants of this island, who sent
out canoes and brought them on shore. One of these four had since died. The
other three were so well satisfied with the generous treatment they met with
here, that they refused the offer made them by our gentlemen, at the request of
Omai, of taking them on board our ships, and restoring them to their native
islands. They had arrived upon this coast at least twelve years ago. Their
names were Tavee, Otirreroa, and Orououte: the former was born at Huahenie, the
second at Ulietea, and the latter at Otaheite. The application of the preceding
narrative is obvious. It will serve to explain, in a more satisfactory manner
than the flimsy conjectures of some speculative reasoners, how the detached
parts of the world, and, in particular, the islands of the Pacific Ocean, may
have been first peopled; those especially which lie at a considerable distance
from each other, or from any inhabited continent.

The natives of this island call it by the name of Wateeoo. It is situated in
the longitude of 201 45 east, and in the latitude of 20 1 south; and is about
six leagues in circuit. It is a beautiful spot, with a surface covered with
verdure, and composed of hills and plains. The soil, in some parts, is light
and sandy: but, further up the country, we saw from the ship, by the assistance
of our glasses, a reddish cast on the rising grounds. There the islanders build
their houses, for we could perceive several of them, which were long and
spacious. Its produce is nearly the same with that of Mangeea Nooe Nainaiwa,
the island we had last quitted.

If we may depend on Omai's report of what he learned from his three countrymen
in the course of conversation, the manners of the people of Wateeoo, their
general habits of life, and their method of treating strangers, greatly
resemble those that prevail at Otaheite, and its neighboring islands. There is
also a great similarity between their religious opinions and ceremonies. From
every circumstance, indeed, it may be considered as indubitable, that the
inhabitants of Wateeoo derive their descent from the same stock which has so
remarkably diffused itself over the immense extent of the Southern Ocean. Omai
assured us that they dignified their island with the pompous appellation of
Wenooa no te Eatoa, implying a land of Gods; esteeming themselves a kind of
divinities, possessed with the spirit of the Eatoa. T^eir language was equally
well understood by Omai, and by our two New Zealanders who were on board: its
peculiarites, when compared with the other dialects we cannot point out; for
the memorandum-book, in which Mr. Anderson had put down a specimen o^ it, was
stolen by the natives.

CHAP. III.
Otakootaia visited -- Description of the Island, and its Produce -- Birds --
Fish -- Visit H^rvey's Island -- Discover it to be inhabited -- The Inhabitants
refuse to come on board -- Their propensity to Theft -- Their Manners, Persons,
Dress, Canoes, etc. -- Make a fruitless attempt to land -- Bear away for the
Friendly Islands -- Two Islets of Palmerston's Island touched at -- Description
of the Islets, their Produce, etc. -- Refreshments procured there -- Proceed to
the Friendly Islands.

CALMS and light airs having alternately prevailed all the night of the 3d. of
April, before daybreak the easterly swell and carried the ships some distance
from Wateeoo; but having failed of procuring, at that place, some effectual
supply, there appeared no reason for our continuing there any longer; we
therefore willingly quitted it, and steered for the island which we had
discovered three days before.

We got up with it about ten o'clock in the morning, when Captain Cook
immediately dispatched Mr. Gore with two boats, to see if he could land, and
get subsistence for our cattle. Though a reef surrounded the land here, as at
Wateeoo, and a considerable surf broke against the rocks, our boats no sooner
reached the west side of the island, but they ventured in, and Mr. Gore and his
attendants arrived safe on shore. Captain Cook, seeing they had so far
succeeded, sent a small boat to know if farther assistance was required. She
waited to take in a lading of the produce of the island, and did not return
till three o'clock in the afternoon: being cleared, she was sent again for
another cargo; the jolly boat was also dispatched upon the same business, with
orders for Mr. Gore to return vith the boats before night, which orders were
punctually observed.

The supply obtained here was about two hundred cocoa-nuts for ourselves, and
for our cattle some grass, and a quantity of the leaves and branches of young
cocoa trees, and the pandanus.

This island lies about three or four leagues from Wateeoo, the inhabitants of
which call it Otakootaia. It is in the latitude of 19 15 south, and ^he
longitude of 201 37 east, and is supposed not to exceed three miles in circuit.

This island is entirely destitute of water. Cocoa-palms were the only common
trees found there, of which there were several clusters, and great quantities
of the wharra, or pandanus. There were also the callophyllum, suriana, with a
few other shrubs; also a sort of bind-weed, treacle-mustard, a species of
spurge, and the morinda citrifolia; the fruit of which is sometimes eaten by
the natives of Otaheite. Omai, who landed with the party, dressed some of it
for their dinner, but they thought it very indifferent.

A beautiful cuckoo, of a chestnut brown, variegated with black, was the only
bird seen amongst the trees; but, upon the shore, were a small sort of curlew,
blue and white herons, some egg-birds* and great numbers of noddies.

One of the company caught a lizard running up a tree; though small it had a
most forbidding aspect. Many of another sort were also seen. Infinite numbers
of a kind of moth, elegantly speckled with black, white, and red, frequented
the bushes toward the sea. Some other sorts of moths and pretty butterflies
were seen.

At this time there were no fixed inhabitants upon the island; but we
discovered a few empty huts, which convinced us of its being, at least
occasionally visited. Monuments, consisting of several large stones, were also
erected under the shade of some trees: there were also some smaller ones, with
which several places were enclosed, where we supposed their dead had been
buried. We found in one place a great many cockle-shells of a particular sort,
finely grooved, and larger than the fist; from which it was conjectured, that
the island had been visited by persons who sometimes feed on shellfish. Mr.
Gore left some nails and a hatchet in one of the huts, for the use of those who
might visit the island in future.

The boats being hoisted in, we made sail again to the northward, resolving to
try our fortune at Hervey's island, which was discovered by Captain Cook in
1773, during his last voyage, We got sight of it about day break in the morning
of the 6th, at the distance of about three leagues. We approached it about
eight o'clock, and observed several canoes coming from the shore toward the
ships. We were rather surprised at this circumstance, as no traces or signs of
inhabitants were seen when the island was first discovered: this indeed, might
be owing to a brisk wind that then blew, and prevented their canoes venturing
out.

Advancing still toward the island, six or seven double canoes immediately
came near us, with from three to six men in each of them. At the distance of
about a stone's throw from the ship they stopped, and it was with difficulty
that Omai prevailed on them to come along side; but they could not be induced
to trust themselves on board. They attempted to steal some oars out of the
Discovery's boat, and struck a man for endeavoring to prevent them. They also
cut away a net containing meat, which hung ov^r the stern of that ship, and at
first would not restore it, though they afterward permitted us to purchase it
from them. Those who were about the Resolution behaved equally disorderly and
daring; for, with a sort of hooks made of a long stick, they openly endeavored
to rob us of several things, and actually got a frock belonging to one of our
people. It appeared that they had a knowledge of bartering, for they exchanged
some fish for some of our small nails, of which they were extravagantly fond,
and called them goore. Pieces of paper, or any other trifling articles that was
thrown to them, they caught with the greatest avidity; and if what was thrown
fell into the sea, they immediately plunged in to swim after it.

Though the distance between Hervey's Island and Wateeoo is not very great, the
inhabitants differ greatly from each other, both in person and disposition. The
color of the natives of Hervey's Island is of a deeper cast, and several of
them had a fierce savage aspect, like the natives of New-Zealand, though some
were fairer. Their hair was long and black, either hanging loose about their
shoulders, or tied in a bunch on the top of the head. Some few, indeed, had it
cropped short, and, in two or three of them, it was of a red or brownish
color. Their clothing was a narrow piece of mat, bound several times round the
lower part of the body, and passing between the thighs. We saw a fine cap of
red feathers lying in one of the canoes, and some amongst them were ornamented
with the shell of a pearl-oyster, polished, and hung about the neck.

The mode of ornament, so prevalent among the natives of this ocean, of
puncturing or tatooing their bodies, not one of them had adopted; but though
they were singular in this respect, their being of the same common race is not
to be doubted. Their language more resembled the dialect of Otaheite, than that
of Mangeea or Wateeoo. Like the natives of those islands, they enquired from
whence we came, whither bound, the ship's name, the name of our chief, and the
number of men on board. Such questions as we proposed to them, they very
readily answered. They informed us, among other things that they had before
seen two large ships like ours, but had not spoken to them as they passed.
These were, doubtless, the Resolution and Adventure. They acquainted us, that
the name of their island was Terouggemou Atooa; and that they were subject to
Teerevatooeah, King of Wateeoo.

Their food, they said, consisted of cocoa-nuts, fish, and turtle; being
destitute of dogs and hogs, and the island not producing bread fruit or
plantains. Their canoes (near thirty of which appeared one time in sight) are
tolerably large, and well built, and bear some resemblance to those of Wateeoo.

We drew near the north-west part of the island about one o'clock. This seemed
to be the only part where we could expect to find anchorage, or a landing-place
for our boats. Captain Cook immediately dispatched Lieutenant King, with two
armed boats, to sound and reconn^^tre the coast. The boats were no sooner
hoisted out, than our new visitors suspended their traffic with us, pushing for
shore as fast as possible, and came no more near us.

The boats returned at three o'clock, and Mr. King informed Captain Cook that
he could find no anchorage for the ships; and that the boats could advance no
farther than the outer edge of the reef, which was almost a quarter of a mile
from the dry land. That a number of the natives came upon the reef, armed with
clubs and long pikes, meaning, as he supposed, to oppose his landing; though,
at the same time, they threw cocoa-nuts to our people, and requested them to
come on shore; and notwithstanding this seeming friendly treatment, the women
were very active in bringing down a fresh supply of darts and spears.

Captain Cook considered that as we could not bring the ships to an anchor, the
attempt to procure grass here would be attended with delay and danger. Being
thus disappointed in all the islands after our leaving New-Zealand, and having,
from variety of circumstances, been unavoidably retarded in our progress, it
was in vain to think of doing any thing this year in the high latitudes of the
nothern hemisphere, from which we were then so far distant, though it was then
the season for our operations there. Thus situated, it was necessary to pursue
such measures as appeared best calculated to preserve our cattle, and save the
stores and provisions of the ships; the better to enable us to prosecute our
nothern discoveries, which could not now commence till a year later than was
intended.

If we could fortunately have procured a supply of water and grass, at any of
the islands we had lately visited, Captain Cook intended to have stood back to
the south till he had got a westerly wind. But, without such a supply, the
certain consequence of doing this, would have been the loss of the cattle
before it was possible for us to reach Otaheite, without gaining a single point
of advantage respecting the grand object of our voyage.

The Captain, therefore, determined to bear away for the Friendly Islands,
where he knew he could be well supplied with everything he wanted: and, it
being necessary to run night and day, he ordered Captain Clerk to keep a
league ahead of the Resolution; because his ship could best claw of the land,
which we might possibly fall in with in our passage.

We steered west by south, with a fine breeze. Captain Cook proposed to proceed
first to Middleburgh, or Eooa, thinking we might, perhaps, have provision
enough for the cattle, to last till we should arrive at that island. But the
next day about noon, those faint breezes that had so long retarded us, again
returned; and we found it necessary to get into the latitude of Palmerston's
and Savage Islands, which Captain Cook discovered in 1774; that, in case of
necessity, recourse might be had to them.

In order to save our water, Captain Cook ordered the still to be kept at work
a whole day; during which time we procured about fifteen gallons of fresh water.

These light breezes continued till Thursday the 10th, when the wind blew some
hours fresh from the north, and north north-west. In the afternoon we had some
very heavy rain, attended with thunder squalls. We collected as much rainwater
as filled five of our puncheons. When these squalls had blown over, the wind
was very unsettled, both in strength and in position, till the next day at
noon, when it fixed at north-west, and north north-west, and blew a fresh
breeze.

We were thus persecuted with a wind in our teeth, and had the additional
mortification to find those very winds here, which we had reason to expect
farther south. At day break, however, on the 13th, we perceived Palmerston's
Island, bearing west by south, at the distance of about five leagues; but did
not get up with it till the next morning at eight. Captain Cook then dispatched
three boats from the Resolution, and one from the Discovery, with a proper
officer in each, to search for a convenient landing place; we being now under
an absolute necessity of procuring here some provender for our cattle, or we
must certainly have lost them.

What is called Palmerston's Island, consists of a group of small islets, about
nine or ten in number, connected together by a reef of coral rocks, and lying
in a circular direction. The boats first examined the most south easterly
islet; and not succeeding there, ran down to the second, where they immediately
landed. Captain Cook then bore down with the ships, till we were abreast of
the place, where we kept standing off and on, there being no bottom to be found
to anchor upon. This, however, was of no material consequence, as there were no
human beings upon the island, except the party who had landed from our boats.

At one o'clock one of the boats returned, laden with scurvy grass and young
cocoa-trees, which was, at this time, a most excellent repast for our animals
on board. A message was also brought from Mr. Gore, who commanded the party
upon this expedition, acquainting us that the island abounded with such
produce, and also with the wharra-tree and cocoa-nuts. In consequence of this
information, Captain Cook resolved to get a sufficient supply of these articles
before he quitted this station, and accordingly went ashore in a small boat,
accompanied by the Captain of the Discovery. The island does not exceed a mile
in circumference, and is not elevated above three feet beyond the level of the
sea. It consisted almost entirely of a coral sand, with a small mixture of
blackish mould, which appeared to be produced from rotten vegetables.

This poor soil is, however, covered with the same kind of shrubs and bushes as
we had seen at Otakootia or Wenooa-ette, though not in so great variety. We
perceived a great number of man of war birds, tropic birds, and two sorts of
boobies, which were then laying their eggs, and so exceedingly tame as to
permit us to take them off their nests, which consists only of a few sticks
loosely put together. These tropic birds differ essentially from the common
sort, being of a beautiful white, slightly tinged with red, and having two long
tail feathers of a deepish crimson. Our people killed a considerable number of
each sort, which, though not the most delicate kind of food, were highly
acceptable to us, who had been for a long time confined to a salt diet. We saw
plenty of red crabs creeping about among the trees; and caught several fish,
which, when the sea retreated, had been left in holes upon the reef.

At one part of the reef, which bounds the lake within, almost even with the
surface, there was a large bed of coral, which afforded a most enchanting
prospect. Its base, which was fixed to the shore, extended so far that it could
not be seen, so that it appeared to be suspended in the water. The sea was then
unruffled, and the refulgence of the sun exposed the various sorts of coral, in
the most beautiful order; some parts luxuriantly branching into the water;
others appearing in vast variety of figures; and the whole greatly heightened
by spangles of the richest colors, glowing from a number of large clams,
interspersed in every part. Even this delightful scene was greatly improved by
the multitude of fishes, that gently glided along, seemingly with the most
perfect security. Their colors were the most beautiful that can be imagined;
blue yellow, black, red, etc. far excelling any thing that can be produced by
art. The richness of this submarine grotto was greatly increased by their
various forms; and the whole could not possibly be surveyed without a pleasing
transport, accompanied, at the same time, with regret, that a work so
astonishingly elegant should be concealed in a place so seldom explored by the
human eye.

Except a piece of a canoe that was found upon the beach, no traces were
discoverable of inhabitants having ever been here; and probably that may have
been drifted from some other island. We were surprised, however, at perceiving
some small brown rats on this little island; a circumstance, perhaps, not
easily accounted for, unless we admit the possibility of their being imported
in the canoe, of which we saw the remnant.

The boats being laden, Captain Cook returned on board, leaving Mr. Gore and
his party to pass the night on shore, to be ready for business early the next
morning.

The 15th. like the preceding day, was spent in collecting subsistence for the
cattle, consisting principally of tender branches of the wharra tree,
palm-cabbage, and young cocoa-nut trees. A sufficient supply of these having
been procured by sunset, Captain Cook ordered all the people on board: but
having very little wind, he determined to employ the next day, by endeavoring,
from the next island to leeward, to get some cocoa-nuts for our people: for
this purpose, we kept standing off and on all the night; and, about nine
o'clock in the morning, we went to the west side of the islands, and landed,
from our boats, with little difficulty. The people immediately employed
themselves in gathering cocoa-nuts, which we found in the greatest plenty; but
it was a tedious operation to convey them to our boats, being obliged to carry
them half a mile over the reef, up to the middle in water. Omai, who
accompanied us, presently caught, with a scoop-net, as many fish as supplied
the party on shore for dinner, besides sending a quantity to each ship. Men of
war, and tropic-birds, were found here in abundance; so that we fared most
sumptuously. In these excursions to the uninhabited islands, Omai was of the
greatest service to us. He caught the fish, and dressed them, as well as the
birds we killed, after the fashion of his country, with a dexterity and
cheerfulness that did him honor. Before night the boats had made two trips,
and were each time heavy laden: with the last, Captain Cook returned on board,
leaving his Third Lieutenant, Mr. Williamson, with a party, to prepare another
lading for the boats against the next morning.

Accordingly, Capt. Cook dispatched them about seven o'clock, and, by noon,
they returned laden. No delay was made in sending them back for another cargo,
with orders for all to be on board by sunset. These orders being punctually
obeyed, we hoisted in the boats, and sailed to the westward, with a light air
from the north.

The islet we last came from is somewhat larger than the other, and almost
covered with cocoa-palms. The other productions were the same as at the first
islet. On the beach were found two pieces of board, one of which was rudely
carved* and an elliptical paddle. These were, perhaps, a part of the same
canoe, the remains of which we had seen on the other beach, the two islets
being within half a mile of each other. There were not so many crabs here as at
the last place, but we found some scorpions and other insects, and a much
greater number of fish upon the reefs. Among the rest were some beautiful large
spotted eels, which would raise themselves out of the water, and endeavor to
bite their pursuers. There were also snappers, parrot-fish, and a brown spotted
rock-fish, not larger than a haddock, so tame, that it would remain fixed, and
gaze at us. If we had been really in want, a sufficient supply might easily
have been had, for thousands of the clams stuck upon the reef, many of which
weighed two or three pounds. There were also some other sorts of shellfish;
and, when the tide flowed, several sharks came with it, some of which were
killed by our people; but their presence rendered it, at that time, unsafe to
walk into the water.

Mr. Williamson and his party, who were left on shore, were much pestered in
the night with musquitoes. Some of them shot two curlews, and saw some plovers
upon the shore; one or two cuckoos, like those at Wenooa-ette, were also seen.

The islets comprehended under the name of Palmerston's Island, may be said to
be the summits of a reef of coral-rock, covered only with a thin coat of sand;
though clothed with trees and plants, like the low grounds of the high islands
of this ocean.

Having left Palmerston's Island, we steered west, in order to proceed to
Annamooka. We had variable winds, with squalls, some thunder, and much rain.
The showers being very copious, we saved a considerable quantity of water; and,
as we could procure a greater supply in one hour, by the rain, than by
distilation in a month, we laid the still aside, as being attended with more
trouble than advantage.

The heat, which had continued in the extreme for about a month, became much
more disagreeable in this close rainy weather, and we apprehended it would soon
be noxious. It is however, remarkable, that there was not then a single person
sick on board either of the ships.

We passed Savage Island, which Captain Cook discovered in 1774, in the night
between the 24th and 25th; and on the 28th, about ten o'clock in the morning,
we saw the islands to the eastward of Annamooka, bearing north by west about
five leagues distant. We steered to the south, and then hauled up for
Annamooka. At the approach of night, the weather being squally, with rain, we
anchored in fifteen fathoms water.

CHAP. IV.
Barter with the Natives of Komango and other Islands, for Provisions, etc. --
Arrival at Annamooka -- Variety of Transactions there -- A Visit received from
Feenou, a principal Chief from Tongataboo -- His reception in the island --
Dines frequently on board the Resolution -- Several Instances of the pilfering
Disposition of the Natives -- Punishments inflicted on them -- Account of
Annamooka -- Proceed on to Hapaee.

WE had not long anchored, when two canoes paddled toward us, and came along
side without delay or hesitation: there were four men in one of the canoes, and
three in the other. They brought with them some sugar-cane, bread-fruit,
plaintains, and cocoa-nuts, which they bartered with us for nails. After these
canoes had left us, we were visited by another; but as night was approaching,
he did not long continue with us. The island nearest to us was Komango, which
was five miles distant, this shows how these people disregard trouble or
danger, to get possession of a few of our most trifling articles.

At four o'clock the next morning, Captain Cook dispatched Leutenanat King with
two boats to Komango, in order to procure refreshments; and at five made the
signal to weigh, to proceed to Annamooka.

As soon as daylight apppeared, we were visited by six or seven canoes,
bringing with them two pigs, some fowls, several large wood-pidgeons, small
rails, and some violet colored coots, besides fruits and roots of various
kinds; which they exchanged with us for nails, hatchets, beads, etc. They had
other articles of commerce, but Captain Cook gave particular orders that no
curiosities should be purchased, till the ships were supplied with provisions,
and till they had obtained permission from him.

About noon Mr. King's boat returned with seven hogs, some fowls, a quantity of
fruit and roots; and also some grass for our animals. His party was treated
with great civility at Komango. The inhabitants did not appear to be numerous:
and their huts, which almost joined to each other, were but indifferent.
Tooboulangee, the chief of the island, and another, named Taipa, came on board
with Mr. King. They brought a hog, as a present to Captain Cook, and promised
to bring some more the next day.

The boats being a-board, we stood for Annamooka; and, having little wind, we
intended to go between Annamooka-ette Little Annamooka.
, and the breakers at the south-east; but, on drawing near, we met with very
irregular soundings, which obliged us to relinquish the design, and go to the
southward. This carried us to leeward, and we found it necessary to spend the
night under sail. It was dark and rainy, and we had the wind from every
direction. The next morning at daylight, we were farther off than we had been
the preceding evening; and the wind was now right in our teeth.

We continued to ply, to very little purpose, the whole day, and, in the
evening, anchored in thirty-nine fathoms water; the west point of Annamooka
bearing east north-east, four miles distant. Tooboulangee and Taipa, agreeable
to their promise, brought off some hogs for Captain Cook: we obtained others,
by bartering, from the different canoes that followed us, and a large quantity
of fruit. It is remarkable, that those who visited us from the island on that
day, would hardly part with any of their commodities to any one but Captain
Cook.

At four the next morning, Captain Cook ordered a boat to be hoisted out, and
the master to sound the south-west side of Annamooka. When he returned, he
reported, that he had founded between Great and Little Annamooka, where he
found ten and twelve fathoms depth of water; that the place was very well
sheltered from winds; but that no fresh water was to be had but at a
considerable distance inland, and that, even there, it was neither plentiful
nor good. For this very sufficient reason, Captain Cook resolved to anchor on
the north side of the island, where, in his last voyage, he had found a
convenient place for watering and landing.

Though not above a league distant, we did not reach it till about five o'clock
in the afternoon, being retarded by the quantity of canoes that crowded round
the ships, laden with abundant supplies of the produce of their island. Several
of the canoes, which were double, had a large sail, and carried between forty
and fifty men each. Several women too appeared in the canoes, incited, perhaps,
by curiosity to visit us; though they were as earnest in bartering as the men,
and used the paddle with equal skill and dexterity. We came to an anchor in
eighteen fathoms water, the island extending from east to south-west, about
three quarters of a mile distant. Thus Captain Cook resumed the station, which
he had occupied when he visited Annamooka three years before; and probably
where Tasman, who first discovered this island, anchored in 1643.

The next day, during the preparations for wa^ering, Captain Cook went ashore,
in the forenoon, accompanied by Captain Clerk, and others, to fix on a place
for setting up the observatories, the natives having readily granted us
permission. They showed us every mark of civility, and accommodated us with a
boat-house, which answered the purpose of a tent. Toobou, the chief of the
island, conducted Captain Cook and Omai to his house, situated on a pleasant
spot, in the center of his plantation. It was surrounded with a grass-plot,
which he said was for the purpose of cleaning their feet, before they entered
his habitation. Such an attention to cleanliness we had never observed before,
wherever we had visited in this ocean; though we afterward found it to be
very common at the Friendly Islands. No carpet in an English drawing room could
be kept neater, than the mats which covered the floor of Toobou's house.

While we were on shore, we bartered for some hogs and fruit; and, when we
arrived on board, the ships were crowded with the natives. As very few of them
came empty-handed, we were speedily supplied with every refreshment.

In the afternoon, Captain Cook landed again, with a party of marines, and such
of the cattle as were in a weakly state, were sent on shore with him. Having
settled every thing to his satisfaction, he returned to the ship in the
evening, leaving Mr. King in command upon the island. Taipa was now become our
trusty friend, and, in order to be near our party, had a house carried a
quarter of a mile, upon men's shoulders, and placed by the side of the shed
which our party occupied.

Our various operations on shore began the next day. Some were busied in making
hay, others in filling our water-casks, and a third party in cutting wood. On
the same day, Messrs. King and Baily began to observe equal altitudes of the
sun, in order to get the rate of our time-keepers. In the evening, Taipa
harangued the natives, for some time; but we could only guess at the subject,
and supposed he was instructing them how to treat us, and advising them to
bring of the produce of the island to market. His eloquence had the desired
effect, and occasioned us to receive a plentiful supply of provisions the next
day.

On the 4th of May, the Discovery lost her small bower anchor, the cable being
cut in two by the rocks.

We were visited, on the 6th, by a chief from Tongataboo, whose name was
Feenou: he was introduced by Taipa, as King of all the Friendly Isles. Captain
Cook was now informed, that, on our arrival, a canoe had been immediately
dispatched to Tongataboo with the news; which occasioned his coming to
Annamooka. We were informed, by the officer on shore, that, on his arrival, all
the natives were ordered out to meet him, who saluted him by bowing their heads
as low as his feet, the soles of which they touched with the palms of each
hand, and afterward with the back part. A personage received with such
extraordinary marks of respect, could not be supposed to be any thing less than
a King.

Captain Cook in the afternoon, went to pay a visit to this great man, having
first received from him a present of two fish, brought on board by one of his
attendants. As soon as the Captain landed, Feenou came up to him. He was tall
and thin, and appeared to be about thirty years of age: his features were more
of the European cast than any we had seen here. After the first salutation,
Captain Cook requested to know if he was king; as he entertained some doubts on
that score, perceiving that he was not the man whom he remembered to have seen
in that character during his former voyage. Taipa eagerly answered for him, and
mentioned no less than one hundred and fifty three islands, of which he was the
sovereign. Soon after, our grand visitor, attended by five or six servants,
accompanied us on board. Captain Cook made them suitable presents, and
entertained them in a manner which he thought would be most agreeably to them.

Toward the evening, the Captain attended them on shore in his boat, into
which, by order of the chief, three hogs were conveyed, as a return for
presents he had received. We were then informed of an accident, the relation of
which will convey some idea of the extent of the authority exercised here over
the inferior people. While Feenou was on board the Resolution, an inferior
chief ordered all the natives to retire from the post we occupied. Some of
them, however, having ventured to return, he beat them most unmercifully, with
a large stick. One, in particular, received so violent a blow on the side of
the face, that the blood gushed from his mouth and nostrils: and, after lying
motionless for some time, he was removed from the place in convulsions. The
person who gave the blow, on being told that he certainly had killed the man,
only laughed at the circumstance; and, indeed, it was very evident, that he did
not grieve for what had happened. We had afterward the satisfaction of hearing
that the poor sufferer was out of danger.

On the 7th, the Discovery having found her small bower anchor, shifted her
birth; but not till after her best bower cable had met with the fate of the
other. This day, Feenou dined with Captain Cook; and also on the next, when he
was attended by Taipa, Toobou, and some other chiefs. None but Taipa, however
was permitted to sit at table with Feeuou, or even to eat in his presence. The
Captain was highly pleased on account of this etiquette; for before the arrival
of Feenou, he had generally a larger company than he chose, his table being
overflowed with visitors of both sexes. For though, at Otaheite, the females
are denied the privilege of eating in company with the men, this is not the
practice at the Friendly Islands.

A large junk axe having been stolen out of the ship by one of the natives on
the first day of our arrival at Annamooka, application was made to Feenou to
exert his authority to get it restored; who gave orders for this purpose, which
exacted such implicit obedience, that it was brought on board before we had
finished our dinner. We had, indeed, many opportunities of remarking, how
expert these people were in thievery. Even some of their chiefs were not
ashamed of acting in that profession. On the 9th of May, one of them was
detected carrying out of the ship, the bolt belonging to the spun-yarn winch,
which he had carefully concealed under his clothes. For this offense Captain
Cook sentenced him to receive a dozen lashes, and to be confined till he paid a
hog for his liberty. Though, after this circumstance, we were troubled with no
more thieves of rank, their servants or slaves were constantly employed in this
dirty business; and they received a flogging with as much seeming indifference,
as if it had been upon the mainmast. When any of them were caught in the act of
thieving, instead of interceding in their behalf, their masters would often
advise us to kill them. This being a punishment we were not fond of inflicting,
they usually escaped without any kind of punishment; they were alike insensible
of the shame and torture of corporal chastisement. At length, however, Captain
Clerk contrived a mode of treatment, which we supposed had some effect.
Immediately upon detection, he ordered their heads to be completely shaved, and
thus pointed them out as objects of ridicule to their countrymen, and put our
people upon their guard, to deprive them of future opportunites for a
repetition of their thefts.

Feenou was so fond of our company, that he dined on board every day, though he
did not always partake of our fare. On the 10th, his servants brought him a
mess, which had been dressed on shore, consisting of fish, soup, and yams;
cocoa-nut liquor had been used instead of water, in which the fish had been
boiled or stewed, (perhaps in a wooden vessel with hot stones) and it was
carried on board on a plantain leaf. Captain Cook tasted of the mess, and was
so well pleased with it, that he afterward ordered some fish to be dressed in
the same way; though his cook succeeded tolerably well, it was much inferior to
the dish he attempted to imitate.

Having, in a great measure, exhausted the island of almost every article of
food, on Sunday the 11th of May, we removed, from the shore, the observatories,
horses, and other things that we had landed; intending to sail as soon as the
Discovery should have found her best bower anchor. Feenou, hearing that the
Captain meant to proceed to Tongataboo, earnestly entreated him to alter his
plan; expressing as much aversion to it, as if, by diverting him from it, he
wished to promote some particular interest of his own. He warmly recommended a
group of islands, called Hapaee, lying to the north-east; where, he assured us,
we could be easily and plentifully supplied with every refreshment; and even
offered to attend us thither in person. In consequence of his advice, Hapaee
was made choice of; and, as it had not been visited by any European ships, the
surveying it became an object to Captain Cook.

On Tuesday the 13th, Captain Clerke's anchor was happily recovered; and, on
the morning of the 14th, we got under sail, and left Annamooka.

Though this island is somewhat higher than the other small isles that surround
it, yet it is lower than Mangeea and Wateeoo; and even those are but of a
moderate height. The shore, where our ships lay, consists of a steep, rugged,
coral rock, about nine or ten feet high, except two sandy beaches, which were
defended from the sea, by a reef of the same sort of rock. In the center of the
island there is a salt water lake, about a mile and an half in breadth, round
which the ground rises with a gradual ascent; and we could not trace its having
any communication with the sea. On the rising parts of the island, and
especially toward the sea, the soil is either of a blackish loose mould, or a
reddish clay; but there is not a stream of fresh water to be found in any part
of the island.

The land here is well cultivated, except in a few places; and, though some
parts appear to lie waste, they are only left to recover the strength exhausted
by constant culture; for we often saw the natives at work upon these spots, in
order to plant them again. Yams and plantains form their principal plantations;
many of which are very extensive, and enclosed with fences of reed about six
feet high. Fences of less compass were often seen within these, surrounding the
houses of the principal people. The bread-fruit and cocoa-nut-trees are
interspersed without any regular order, but principally near the habitations of
the natives. The other parts of the island, especially toward the sea, and
round the lake, are covered with luxuriant trees and bushes; among which there
are a great many mangroves and faitanoo-trees. All the rocks and stones about
the island are of coral, except in one place, to the right of the sandy beach,
where there is a rock of about twenty five feet in height, of a calcareous
stone, and of a yellowish color; but, even here, some large pieces are to be
seen of the same coral rock as that which compose the shore.

We sometimes amused ourselves in walking up the country and shooting wild
ducks, resembling our widgeon, which are very numerous on the salt lake, as
well as on the pool where we procured our water. We found, in these excursions,
that the inhabitants frequently deserted their houses to repair to the trading
place, without entertaining the least suspicion that strangers would take away
or destroy any property that belonged to them. From this circumstance it might
be supposed, that most of the natives were sometimes collected on the beach,
and that there would be no great difficulty in forming an accurate computation
of their number; but the continual resort of visitors, from the other islands,
rendered it impossible. However, as we never saw more than a thousand persons
collected at one time, it may be reasonably supposed, that there are about
twice that number upon the island.

In the direct track to Hapaee, whither we were now bound, to the north and
north-east of Annamooka, a great number of small isles are seen. Amidst the
rocks and shoals adjoining to this group, we were doubtful whether there was a
free passage for ships of such magnitude as ours; though the natives sailed
through the intervals in their canoes; therefore, when we weighed anchor from
Annamooka, we steered to go to the westward of the above islands, and north
north-west toward Kao, and Toosoa, two islands remarkable for their great
height, and the most westerly of those in sight. Feenou, with his attendants,
remained in the Resolution till about noon, and then entered the large sailing
canoe, which had brought him from Tongataboo, and stood in amongst the cluster
of islands, of which we were now abreast.

They are scattered at unequal distances, and most of them are as high as
Annamooka. Some of them are two or three miles in length, and others only half
a mile. Many of them have steep rocky shores, like Annamooka; some have reddish
cliffs, and others have sandy beaches, extending almost their whole length. In
general, they are entirely clothed with trees, among which are many
cocoa-palms, each having the appearance of a beautiful garden placed in the
sea. The serene weather we now had, contributed greatly to heighten the scene;
and the whole might convey an idea of the realization of some fairy land. It
appears, that some of these islands have been formed, as Palmerston's island
was supposed to have been; for one of them is now entirely sand, and another
has but a single bush or tree upon it.

In the afternoon, about four o'clock, we steered to the north, leaving Toofoa
and Kao on our larboard. We intended to have anchored for the night, but it
arrived before we could find a place, in less than fifty fathoms water; and we
rather chose to spend the night under sail, than come to in such a depth.

In the afternoon, we had been within two leagues of Toofoa, and observed the
smoke of it several times in the day. There is a volcano upon it, of which the
Friendly islanders entertain some superstitious notions, and call it Kollofeea,
saying, it is an Otooa, or divinity. We were informed, that it sometimes throws
up very large stones, and the crater is compared to the size of a small islot,
which has not ceased smoking in the memory of the inhabitants; nor have they
any traditions that it ever did. We sometimes saw the smoke from the center of
the island, even at Annamooka, the distance of at least ten leagues. We were
told that Toofoa was but thinly inhabited, but that the water upon it was
excellent.

At daybreak, on the 15th, we were not far from Kao, which is a large rock of
a conic figure; we steered to the passage between Footooha and Hafaiva, with a
gentle breeze at south-east. About ten o'clock, Feenou came on board, and
continued with us all day. He brought with him a quantity of fruit and two
hogs; and, in the course of the day, several canoes came to barter quantities
of the former article, which was very acceptable to us, as our stock began to
be low. At noon, our latitude was 19 49 45 south, and we had made seven miles
of longitude from Annamooka.

After having passed Footooha, we met with a reef of rocks, and, there being
but little wind, it was attended with some difficulty to keep clear of them.
Having passed this reef, we hauled up for Neeneeva, a small low isle in the
direction of east-north-east from Footooha, in hopes of finding an anchorage,
but were again disappointed; for notwithstanding we had land in every
direction, the sea was unfathomable. We plainly saw, in the course of this
night, flames issuing from the volcano upon Toofoa.

At daybreak on the 16th, we steered with a gentle breeze at south-east, for
Hapaee, which was now in sight; and perceived it to be low land, from the trees
only appearing above the water. At nine o'clock we saw it plainly forming three
islands nearly equal in size; and, soon after, a fourth appeared to the
southward of these, as large as any of the others. Each of these islands
appeared to be of a similar height and appearance, and about six or seven miles
in length. The most northern of them is called Haanno, the next Foa, the third
Lefooga, and the fourth Hoolaiva; but they are all four included under the
general name of Hapaee.

By sunset, we got up with the nothernmost of these isles, where we
experienced the same distress for want of anchorage, that we did the two
preceding evenings; having another night to spend under sail, with land and
breakers in every direction. Feenou, who had been on board all day, went
forward to Hapaee in the evening, and took Omai with him in the canoe. He was
not unmindful of our disagreeable situation, and kept up a good fire the whole
night, by way of a landmark.

At the return of daylight, on the 17th, being then close in with Foa, we
perceived it was joined to Haanno, by a reef running from one Island to the
other, even with the surface of the sea. Captain Cook dispatched a boat to look
for anchorage; and a proper place was found abreast of a reef which joins
Lefooga or Foa, having twenty-four fathoms depth of water. In this station the
nothern point of Hapaee bore north, 16 east. We were not above three quarters
of a mile from the shore; and, as we lay before a creek in the reef, it was
convenient landing at all times.

CHAP. V.
Arrival at Hapaee -- Friendly Reception there -- Taipa harangues the People --
Exhorts them not to steal, etc. -- Presents and Solemnities -- Entertainment --
Single Combats with Clubs -- Wrestling -- Boxing -- Female Boxing -- Marines
exercised -- A Dance by Men -- Fire Works -- Night Entertainments, consisting
of Singing and Dancing by Men and Women.

AS soon as we had anchored, we were surrounded by a multitude of canoes, and
our ships were presently filled with the natives. They brought with them hogs,
fowls, fruit, and roots, which they exchanged for cloth, knives, beads, nails,
and hatchets. Feenou and Omai having come on board, early the next morning, in
order to introduce Captain Cook to the people of the island, he soon
accompanied them on shore for that purpose.

The Chief conducted the Captain to a hut, situated close to the sea-beach,
which was brought thither but a few minutes before for his reception. In this
Feenou, Omai, and Captain Cook, were seated. The other chiefs, and the
multitude, appeared fronting them on the outside; and they also seated
themselves. Captain Cook being asked how long he intended to stay, answered
five days. Taipa was, therefore, ordered to sit by him, and declare this to the
people. He then harangued them in words nearly to the following purport, as we
afterward were informed by Omai. He exhorted both old and young, to look upon
Captain Cook as a friend, who meant to continue with them a few days; and that,
during his stay among them, they would not steal any thing from him or offend
him in any other manner. He informed them, that it was expected they should
bring hogs, fowls, fruit, etc. to the ships; for which they would receive in
exchange, such articles as he enumerated. Soon after Taipa had delivered his
address to the assembly, Feenou left them; on which Captain Cook was informed
by Taipa, that it was necessary he should make a present to Earoupa, the chief
of the island. The Captain being not unprepared for this gave him such articles
as far exceeded his expectation. This liberality created similar demands from
two chiefs of other isles who were present, and even from Taipa himself. Soon
after he had made the last of these presents, Feenou returned, and expressed
his displeasure with Taipa for suffering me to be so lavish of my favors. But
this was, doubtless, a finesse, as he certainly acted in concert with the
others.

Feenou now resumed his seat, ordering Earoupa to sit by him, and harangue the
people as Taipa had done, which he did nearly to the same purpose.

These ceremonies over, the Chief, at the Captain's request, conducted him to
three stagnant pools of what he called fresh water; in one of which the water
was indeed tolerable, and the situation convenient for filling our casks. On
his return to his former station, he found a baked hog and some yams, smoking
hot, ready to be conveyed on board for his dinner. He invited Feenou and his
friends to partake of the repast, and they embarked for the ship, though none
but himself sat down with us at table. Dinner being over, the Captain conducted
them on shore; and, before he returned, received, as a present from the chief,
a fine large turtle, and a quantity of yams. We had a plentiful supply of
provisions, for in the course of the day we got, by bartering with the natives,
about twenty small hogs, together with a large quantity of fruit and roots.

On Sunday the 18th, early in the morning, Feenou and Omai, who now slept on
shore with the Chief, came on board, to request Captain Cook's presence upon
the island. He accompanied them, and, upon landing, was conducted to the place
where he had been seated the preceding day, and where he beheld a large
concourse of people already assembled. Though he imagined that something
extraordinary was in agitation, yet he could not conjecture what, nor could
Omai give him any information.

Soon after he was seated, about an hundred of the natives appeared and
advanced, laden with yams, plantains, bread-fruit, cocoa-nuts, and sugarcanes;
their burdens were deposited on our left. A number of others arrived soon
after, bearing the same kind of articles, which were collected into two piles
on the right side. To these were fastened two pigs, and half a dozen fowls; and
to those upon the left, six pigs and two turtles. Earoupa seated himself before
the articles on the left side, and another chief before those upon the right;
they being, it was supposed, the two chiefs who had procured them by order of
Feenou, who was as implicitly obeyed here, as he had been at Annamooka, and who
had probably laid this tax upon the chiefs of Hapaee for the present occasion.

When this munificent collection of provisions was placed in order and
advantageously disposed, the bearers of it joined the multitude, who formed a
circle round the whole. Immediately after, a number of men, armed with clubs,
entered this circle, or area; where they paraded about for a few minutes and
then one half of them retired to one side, and the other half to the other
side, seating themselves before the spectators. Presently after, they
successively entertained us with single combats; one champion from one side
challenging those of the other side, partly by words but more by expressive
gestures, to send one of their party to oppose him. The challenge was, in
general, accepted; the two combatants placed themselves in proper attitudes,
and the engagement began, which continued till one of them yielded, or till
their weapons were broken. At the conclusion of each combat, the victor
squatted himself down before the chief, then immediately rose up and retired.
Some old men who seemed to preside as judges, gave their plaudit in a very few
words; and the multitude, especially those on the side of the conqueror,
celebrated the glory he had acquired in two or three loud huzzas.

This entertainment was sometimes suspended for a short space, and the
intervals of time were filled up with wrestling and boxing-matches. The first
were performed in the method practiced at Otaheite, and the second differed
very little from the English manner. A couple of stout wenches next steped
forth, and without ceremony, began boxing with as much dexterity as the men.
This contest, however, was but of short duration, for in the space of half a
minute, one of them gave it up. The victorious heroine was applauded by the
spectators, in the same manner as the successful combatants of the other sex.
Though we expressed some disapprobation at this part of the entertainment, it
did not hinder two A BOXING-MATCH in HAPAEE.
other females from entering the lists; who seemed to be spirited girls, and,
if two old women had not interposed to part them, would probably have given
each other a good drubbing. At least three thousand spectators were present
when these combats were exhibited, and every thing was conducted with the most
perfect good humor on all sides; though some of the champions, of both sexes,
received blows which they must have felt the effect of for some time after.

The diversions being finished, the chief informed Captain Cook that the
provisions on our right hand were a present to Omai; and that those on our left
(making about two-thirds of the whole quantity) were intended for him, and that
he might suit his own convenience in taking them on board.

Four boats were loaded with the munificence of Feenou, whose favors far
exceeded any that Captain Cook had ever received from the sovereigns of any of
the islands which he had visited in the Pacific Ocean. He, therefore, embraced
the first opportunity of convincing Feenou that he was not insensible of his
liberality, by bestowing upon him such commodities as he supposed were most
valuable in his estimation. Feenou was so highly pleased with the return that
was made him, that he left the Captain still indebted to him by sending him two
large hogs, some yams, and a considerable quantity of cloth.

Feenou having expressed a desire to see the marines perform their exercise,
Captain Cook ordered them all ashore on the morning of the 20th of May. After
they had gone through various evolutions, and fired several vollies; which
seemed to give pleasure to our numerous spectators, the chief, in his turn,
entertained us with an exhibition, which was performed with an exactness and
dexterity, far surpassing what they had seen of our military maneuvers. It was
a kind of dance, performed by men, in which one hundred and five persons were
engaged; each having an instrument in his hand, resembling a paddle, two feet
and an half long, with a thin blade, and a small handle. With these instruments
various flourishes were made, each of which was accompanied with a different
movement, or a different attitude of the body. At first, the dancers ranged
themselves in three lines and so changed their stations by different
evolutions, that those who had been in the rear came into the front. At one
part of the performance, they extended themselves in one line; afterward they
formed themselves into a semi circle; and then into two square columns. During
the last movement, one of them came forward, and performed an antic dance
before Captain Cook, with which the entertainment ended.

The music that accompanied the dances was produced by two drums, or rather
hollow logs of wood, from which they forced some varied notes by beating on
them with two sticks. The dancers, however, did not appear to be much assisted
or directed by these sounds; but by a chorus of vocal music, in which all the
performers joined. Their song was rather melodious, and their corresponding
motions were so skilfully executed, that the whole body of dancers appeared as
one regular machine. Such a performance would have been applauded even on an
European theater. It far exceeded any attempt that we had made to entertain
them; insomuch that they seemed to plume themselves on their superiority over
us. They esteemed none of our musical instruments, except the drum, and even
thought that inferior to their own. They held our French horns in the highest
contempt, and would not pay the smallest attention to them, either here or at
any other of the islands.

To give them a more favorable opinion of the amusements and superior
seize of the English, Captain Cook ordered some fireworks to be
prepared; and, after it was dark exhibited them in the presence of Feenou, and
a vast multitude of people. They were highly entertained with the performance
in general: but our water and skyrockets, in particular, astonished them beyond
all conception. They now admitted that the scale was turned in our favor.

This, however, served only as an additional stimulus to urge them to proceed
to fresh exertions of their singular dexterity. As soon as our fireworks were
ended, a succession of dances, which Feenou had prepared for our entertainment,
began.

A band of music, or chorus consisting of eighteen men, seated themselves
before us, in the center of a circle formed by the numerous spectators. About
four or five of the performers had each pieces of large bamboo, from three to
six feet in length, each played on by one man, who held it almost vertically;
the upper end of which was open, but the other closed by one of the joints.
They kept constantly striking the ground, though slowly, with the close end,
and thus produced variety of notes, according to the different lengths of the
instruments, but all were of the base or hollow kind; which was counteracted by
a person who struck nimbly a piece of the same substance, split and lying upon
the ground; furnishing a tone as acute, as the others were grave and solemn.
The whole of the band (including those who performed upon the bamboos) sung a
slow soft air, which so finely tempered the harsher notes of the instruments,
that the most perfect judge of the modulation of sweet sounds could not avoid
confessing the vast power, and pleasing effect of this simple harmony.

About a quarter of an hour after the concert began, twenty women entered the
circle, whose A NIGHT DANCE by WOMEN in HAPAEE.
heads were adorned with garlands of crimson-flowers; and many of their persons
were decorated with leaves of trees, curiously scolloped, and ornamented at the
edges. They encircled those of the chorus, with their faces toward them, and
began by singing a soft air, to which responses were made by the chorus; and
those were alternately repeated. The women accompanied their song with many
graceful motions of their hands, and continually advancing and retreating with
one foot, while the other remained fixed. After this, they turned their faces
to the assembly, and having sung some time, retreated slowly in a body, and
placed themselves opposite the hut, where the principal spectators sat. One of
them next, advanced from each side, passing each other in the front, and
progressively moving till they came to the rest. On which two advanced from
each side, two of whom returned, but the other two remained; and to these, from
each side, came on by intervals, till they all had, once more, formed a circle
about the chorus.

Dancing to a quicker measure now succeeded, in which the performers made a
kind of half-turn by leaping; then clapping their hands, and snapping their
fingers, repeated some words in unison with the chorus. As they proceeded in
the dance, the rapidity of their music increased; their gestures and attitudes
were varied with wonderful dexterity; and some of their motions would, by an
European, be thought rather indecent; though, perhaps, they meant only to
display the astonishing variety of their movements.

This female ballet was succeeded by one performed by fifteen men; and, though
some of them were old, time seemed to have robbed them of but little of their
agility. They were disposed in a sort of circle, divided at the front.
Sometimes they sung slowly in concert with the chorus, making several graceful
motions with their hands but differing from those of the women; at the same
time inclining the body alternately to either side, by raising one leg outward,
and resting on the other; the arm of the same side being also stretched upward.
Then they recited sentences, which were answered by the chorus; and
occasionally increased the measure of the dance, by clapping the hands, and
quickening the motions of the feet. Toward the conclusion, the rapidity of the
music and dancing so much increased, that the different movements were hard to
be distinguished.

This dance being ended, after a considerable interval, twelve other men
advanced, placing themselves in double rows, fronting each other. On one side
was stationed a kind of prompter, who repeated several sentences, to which
responses were made by the performers and the chorus. They sung and danced
slowly; and gradually grew quicker, like those whom they had succeeded.

The next who exhibited themselves were nine women, who sat down opposite the
hut where the chief had placed himself. A man immediately rose, and gave the
first of these women a blow on the back with both his fists joined. He treated
the second and third in the same manner; but when he came to the fourth, he
struck her upon the breast. Upon seeing this, a person instantly rising up from
among the crowd, knocked him down with a blow on the head, and he was quietly
carried away. But this did not excuse the other five women from so
extraordinary a discipline; for they were treated in the same manner by a
person who succeeded him. When these nine women danced, their performance was
twice disapproved of, and they were obliged to repeat it again. There was no
great difference between this dance and that of the first women, except that
these sometimes raised the body upon one leg, and then upon the other,
alternately, by a sort of double motion.

Soon after a person unexpectedly entered, making some ludicrous remarks on the
fireworks that had been exhibited, which extorted a burst of laughter from the
crowd. We had then a dance by the attendants of Feenou: they formed a double
circle of twenty-four each round the chorus, and joined in a gentle soothing
song, accompanied with motions of the head and hands. They also began with slow
movements, which gradually became more and more rapid, and finally closed with
several very ingenious transpositions of the two circles.

The festivity of this memorable night concluded with a dance, in which the
principal people assisted. In many respects it resembled the preceding ones,
but they increased their motions to a prodigious quickness, shaking their heads
from shoulder to shoulder, insomuch that they appeared in danger of dislocating
their necks. This was attended with a clapping of the hands, and a kind of
savage holla! or shriek. A person on one side, repeated something in a truly
musical recitative, and with an air so graceful, as might put some of our
applauded performers to the blush. He was answered by another, and this was
repeated several times by the whole body on each side; and they finished, by
singing and dancing, as they had begun.

The two last dances were universally approved by all the spectators. They were
perfectly in time, and some of their gestures were so expressive, that it might
justly be said, they spoke the language that accompanied them.

The theater for these performances was an open space among the trees,
bordering on the sea, with lights, placed at small intervals, round the inside
of the circle. Though the concourse of people was pretty large, their number
was much inferior to that assembled in the forenoon, when the marines performed
their exercise. At that time (...) DANCE by MEN, in HAPAEE.
many of our gentleman supposed there might be present five thousand persons,
or upwards; but Captain Cook supposes that to be rather an exaggerated account.

CHAP. VI.
Captain Cook makes an excursion into Lefooga -- Description of that Island --
Occurrences there -- A false Report propagated -- A Female Oculist -- Singular
Method of shaving -- The Ships are removed to another Station -- A remarkable
artificial Mount and Stone -- Description of Hoolaiva -- Account of Poulaho,
King of the Friendly Isles -- The Commodore accompanies him on Shore --
Departure from the Hapaee Islands -- Kotoo described -- The Ships return to
Annamooka -- Meeting of Poulaho and Feenou -- Both the ships strike on the
Rocks -- Arrival at Tongataboo.

THE next day, which was the 21st of May, Captain Cook made an excursion into
the Island of Lefooga, on foot, which he found to be, in some respects,
superior to Annamooka, the plantations being not only more numerous, but also
more extensive. Many parts of the country, near the sea, are still waste; owing
perhaps to the sandiness of the soil. But, in the internal parts of the island,
the soil is better; and the marks of considerable population, and of an
improved state of cultivation, are very conspicuous. Many of the plantations
are enclosed in such a manner, that the fences, running parallel to each other,
form spacious public roads. Large spots covered with the paper mulberry-trees,
were observed; and the plantations in general, were abundantly stocked with
such plants and fruit trees as the island produces. To these the Commodore made
some addition, by sowing the seeds of melons, pumpkins, Indian corn, etc. At
one place was a house, about four times as large as the ordinary ones, with an
extensive area of grass before it, to which the people probably resort on some
public occasions. Near the landing place we observed a mount two or three feet
high, on which stood four or five little huts, wherein the bodies of some
persons of distinction had been in^erred. The island is but seven miles in
length; and its breadth, in some places, is not above three miles. The
east side has a reef, projecting considerably, against which the sea breaks
with great violence. It is a continuation of this reef that joins Lefooga to
Foa, which is but half a mile distant; and, at low water, the natives can walk
upon this reef from one island to the other. The shore is either a sandy beach,
or a coral rock.

When the Captain returned from his excursion, and went on board, he found a
large sailing canoe fastened to the stern of the Resolution. In this canoe was
Latooliboula, whom the Commodore had seen, during his last voyage, at
Tongataboo, and who was then supposed by him to be the king of that island In
Captain Cook's narrative of that voyage the name of this chief is said to be
Kohagee-too Fallangou, which is totally different from Latooliboula. This may
perhaps be accounted for by supposing one to be the name of the person, and the
other the description of his rank or title.
. He could not be prevailed upon to come on board, but continued sitting in his
canoe with an air of uncommon gravity. The islanders call him Areekee, which
signif^es King; a title which we had not heard any of them give to Feenou,
however extensive his authority over them had appeared to be. Latooliboula
remained under the stern till the evening, and then departed. Feenou was on
board the Resolution at that time; but neither of these chiefs took the
smallest notice of the other.

The next day, some of the natives stealing a tarpaulin and other things,
Captain Cook applied to Feenou, desiring him to exert his authority, for the
purpose of getting them restored; but this application was of no effect. On the
23d, as we were preparing to leave the Island, Feenou and his prime-minister
Taipa came along-side in a canoe, and informed us that they were going to
Vavaoo: an island situate, as they said, about two days sail to the northward
of Hapaee. They assured us, that the object of their voyage was to procure for
us an additional supply of hogs, besides some red-feathered caps for Omai to
carry with him to Otaheite; and desired us not to sail till their return, which
would be in four or five days; after which Feenou would accompany us to
Tongataboo. Captain Cook consented to wait the return of this chief, who
immediately set out for Vavaoo. On the 24th, a report was industriously spread
about by some of the islanders, that a ship resembling ours had arrived at
Annamooka since we left it, and was now at anchor there. It was also reported,
that Toobou, the chief of that island, was hastening thither to receive these
new visitors. After enquiry, however, it appeared, that this report was totally
void of foundation. It is difficult to conjecture, what purpose the invention
of this tale could answer; unless we suppose it was contrived with a view of
getting us removed from one island to the other.

On Sunday the 25th, Captain Cook went into a house where a woman was dressing
the eyes of a child, who seemed blind. The instruments used by this female
oculist were two slender wooden probes, with which she brushed the eyes so as
to make them bleed. In the same house he found another woman shaving a child's
head with a shark's tooth, stuck into the end of a stick: she first wetted the
hair with a rag dipped in water, and then making use of her instrument, took
off the hair as close as if a razor had been employed. Captain Cook soon after
tried upon himself one of these remarkable instruments, which he found to be an
excellent substitute. The natives of these islands however, have a different
method of shaving their beards, which operation they perform with two shells;
one of which they place under a part of the beard, and with the other, applied
above, they scrape off that part: in this manner they can shave very close,
though the process is rather tedious. There are among them some men who seem to
profess this trade: for it was as common for our sailors to go ashore to have
their beards scraped off after the mode of Hapaee, as it was for their two
chiefs to come on board to be shaved by our barbers.

Captain Cook finding that little or nothing of what the island produced was
now brought to the ships, determined to change his station, and to wait
Feenou's return in some other anchoring-place, where we might still meet with
refreshments. We accordingly, on the 26th, made sail to the southward along the
reef of the island, and having passed several shoals, hauled into a bay, that
lies between the north end of Hoolaiva, and the south of Lefooga, and there
anchored. We had no sooner cast anchor, than Mr. Bligh, Master of the
Resolution, was sent to sound the bay where we were now stationed; and Captain
Cook, accompanied by Lieutenant Gore, landed on the southern part of Lefooga,
to look for fresh water, and examine the country. On the west side of the
island, they observed an artificial mount of considerable antiquity, about
forty feet high, and measuring fifty feet in the diameter of its summit. At the
bo^tom of this mount was a stone fourteen feet high, two and a half thick, and
four broad, hewn out of a coral rock; and they were informed by the islanders,
that not more than half its length was to be seen above ground. They called it
Tangata Areekee Tangata, in the language of these people, is man; Areekee, king.
; and said it had been set up, and the mount raised, in memory of one of their
kings. On the approach of night, the Captain and Mr. Gore returned on board,
and Mr. Bligh came back from sounding the bay, in which he found from fourteen
to twenty fathoms water with a bottom principally of sand.

Lefooga and Hoolaiva are separated from each other by a reef of coral rocks,
dry at low water. Some of our gentlemen, who landed in the last mentioned
island, found not the smallest mark of cultivation or habitation upon it,
except a single hut, in which a man employed to catch fish and turtle resided.
It is remarkable that it should remain in this desolate condition, since it
communicates so immediately with Lefooga, which is so well cultivated. The west
side of it has a bending, where there seems to be good anchorage; and the east
side has a reef, as well as Lefooga. Uninhabited as Hoolaiva is, an artificial
mount has been raised upon it, equal in height to some of the surrounding trees.

On Tuesday the 27th, at break of day, the Commodore made the signal to weigh;
and as he intended to attempt, in his way to Tongataboo, a passage to
Annamooka, by the south-west, among the intermediate isles, he sent Mr. Bligh
in a boat to sound before the ships. But before we got under sail, the wind
became so variable and unsettled, as to render it unsafe to attempt a passage
with which we were so little acquainted: we therefore lay fast, and made signal
for the Master to return. He and the Master of the Discovery were afterward
sent, each in a boat to examine the channels. Toward noon, a large ^ailing
canoe came under our stern, in which was a person named Poulaho, or Futtafaihe,
or both; who was said, by the natives then on board, to be king of Tongataboo,
Annamooka, Hapaee, and all the neighboring islands. We were surprised to find
a stranger dignified with this title, which we had been taught to believe
appertained to another: but they persisted in their assertions, that the
supreme dignity belonged to Poulaho; an^ now for the first time acknowledged,
that Feenou was not the king, but a subordinate chief, though of great power.
Poulaho was now invited by the Captain on board, where he was not an unwelcome
guest, as he brought with him two fat hogs, by way of present. This great
personage, though not very tall, was extremely unwieldy, and almost shapeless
with corpulence. He appeared to be about forty; his hair was straight, and his
features considerably different from those of the majority of his people. We
found him to be a man of gravity and good sense. He viewed the ship, and the
various new objects, with particular attention; and asked many pertinent
questions. When he had gratified his curiosity in looking at the cattle, and
other novelties, he was requested to walk down into the cabin; to which some of
his retinue objected, saying, that, if he should go down thither, it would
doubtless happen that people would walk over his head; a circumstance that
could not be permitted. Though the Captain offered to obviate this objection,
by ordering that no one should presume to walk over the cabin, Poulaho waved
all ceremony, and went down without any previous stipulation. He now appeared
to be no less solicitous than his people were, to convince us that he was
sovereign, and not Feenou. He sat down to dinner with us, but eat and drank
very little; and afterward desired our Commodore to accompany POULAHO. KING of
the FRIENDLY ISLANDS. AN OPOSSI^^ (...) VOL. 1. P. 55.
him on shore. Omai was asked to be one of the party; but he was too faithfully
attached to Feenou, to show much respect to his competitor, and therefore
declined the invitation. Captain Cook attended the chief in his own boat,
having first made him such presents as exceeded his expectations; in return for
which, Poulaho ordered two more hogs to be sent on board. The chief was then
carried out of the boat, by his own subjects, on a board resembling a
hand-barrow; and immediately seated himself in a small house near the shore. He
placed the Captian at his side, and his attendants formed a semicircle before
them, on the outside of the house. An old woman sat close to the chief, with a
kind of fan in her hand, to prevent his being incommoded by the flies. The
various articles which his people had procured by trading on board the ships,
being now displayed before him, he attentively looked over them all, inquired
what they had given in exchange, and, at length, ordered every thing to be
returned to the respective owners, except a glass-bowl, which he reserved for
himself. Those who brought these things to him, first squatted themselves down
before him, then deposited their purchases, and instantly rose and retired.
They observed the same ceremony in taking them away; and not one of them
presumed to speak to him standing. His attendants, just before they left him,
paid him obeisance, by bowing their heads down to the sole of his foot and
touching it with the upper and under side of the fingers of each hand. Captain
Cook was charmed with the decorum that was maintained on this occasion, having
scarce seen the like any where, even among more civilized nations.

When the Captain arrived on board, he found me Master returned from his
expedition, who informed him, that, as far as he had proceeded, there was a
passage for the ships, and tolerable anchorage; but that toward the south and
south-east, he observed numerous shoals, breakers, and small isles. In
consequence of this report, we relinquished all thoughts of a passage that way;
and being resolved to return to Annamooka by the same route which we had so
lately experienced to be a safe one, we should have sailed the next morning,
which was the 28th, if the wind had not been very unsettled. Poulaho came early
on board, bringing a red-feather'd cap as a present to Captain Cook. These caps
were greatly sought after by us, as we knew they would be highly valued at
Otaheite: but not one was ever brought for sale, though very large prices were
offered nor could a person in either ship make himself the proprietor of one,
except the two Captains and Omai. They are composed of the tail feathers of the
tropic bird, intermixed with the red feathers of the paroquet; and are made in
such manner, as to tie on the forehead without any crown, and have the form of
a semicircle, whose radius is eighteen or twenty inches. But the best idea of
them will be conveyed by Mr. Webber's representation of Poulaho, ornamented
with one of these caps or bonnets. The chief left the ship in the evening; but
his brother, whose name also was Futtafaihe, and some of his attendants,
remained all night on board.

On the 29th, at daybreak, we weighed with a fine breeze at east north-east,
and made sail to the westward, followed by several sailing canoes, in one of
which was Poulaho the king, who, getting on board the Resolution, enquired for
his brother, and the others who had continued with us all night. We now found
that they had staid without his permission, for he gave them such a reprimand
as brought tears from their eyes: however, he was soon reconciled to their
making a longer stay; for, on his departure from the ship, he left his brother,
and five attendants, on board. We were also honored with the company of a
chief named Tooboueitoa, just then arrived from Tongataboo; who, as soon as he
came, sent away his canoe, declaring, that he, and five others who came with
him, would sleep on board; so that Captain Cook now had his cabin filled with
visitors. This inconvenience he the more willingly endured, as they brought
with them plenty of provisions as presents to him, for which they met with
suitable returns.

In the afternoon the easterly wind was succeeded by a fresh breeze at south
south-east. Our course being now south south-west, we were obliged to ply to
windward, and barely fetched the northern side of Footooha, by eight o'clock in
the evening. The next day we plied up to Lofanga, and got soundings, under the
lee or north-west side of forty fathoms water; but the bottom being rocky and a
chain of breakers lying to leeward, we stretched away for Kotoo, expecting to
find better anchorage there. It was dark before we reached that island, where
finding no convenient place to anchor in, we passed the night in making short
boards. On the 31st, at break of day, we stood for the channel which is between
Kotoo, and the reef of rocks lying to the westward of it; but, on our approach
we found the wind insufficient to lead us through. We therefore bore up on the
outside of the reef, and stretched to the south-west till near twelve o'clock,
when, perceiving that we made no progress to windward, and being apprehensive
of losing the islands while we had so many of the natives on board, we tacked
and stood back, and spent the night between Footooha and Kotoo. The wind now
blew fresh, with squalls and rain; and, during the night, the Resolution, by a
small change of the wind, fetching too far to the windward was very near
running full upon a low sandy isle, named Pooto Pootooa, encompassed with
breakers. Our people having fortunately been just ordered upon deck, to put the
ship about, and most of them being at their respective stations, the necessary
movements were performed with judgment and alertness; and this alone preserved
us from destruction. The Discovery, being astern, incurred no danger.

This narrow escape so alarmed the natives who were on board, that they were
eagerly desirous of getting ashore: accordingly, on the return of daylight, a
boat was hoisted out, and the officer who commanded her was ordered, after
landing them at Kotoo, to sound for anchorage along the reef that projects from
that island. During the absence of the boat, we endeavored to turn the ships
through the channel between the reef of Kotoo and the sandy isle; but meeting
with a strong current against us, we were obliged to desist, and cast anchor in
fifty fathoms water, the sandy isle bearing east by north, about the distance
of one mile. Here we remained till the 4th of June, being frequently visited by
the king, by Tooboueitoa, and by people who came from the neighboring islands
to traffic with us. Mr. Bligh was, in the mean time dispatched to sound the
channels between the islands situate to the eastward; and Captain Cook himself
landed on Kotoo, to take a survey of it. This island, on account of the coral
reefs that environ it, is scarcely accessible by boats. Its north-west end is
low; but it rises suddenly in the middle, and terminates at the south east: end
in reddish clayey cliffs. It produces the same fruits and roots with the
adjacent islands, and is tolerably cultivated, though thinly inhabited. It is
about two miles in length. While the Commodore was walking all over it, our
people were occupied in cutting grass for the cattle; and we planted some melon
seeds. On our return to the boat, we passed by some ponds of dirty brackish
water, and saw a burying-place, which was considerably neater than those of
Hapaee.

We weighed in the morning of the 4th, and with a fresh gale at east
south-east, made sail toward Annamooka, where we anchored the next morning,
nearly in the same station which we had so lately occupied. Captain Cook soon
after went on shore, and found the islanders very busy in their plantations,
digging up yams for traffic. In the course of the day, about two hundred of
them assembled on the beach, and traded with great eagerness. It appeared, that
they had been very diligent, during our absence, in cultivating; for we now
observed several large plantain fields, in places which, in our late visit, we
had seen lying waste. The yams were now in the highest perfection: and we
obtained a good quantity of them, in exchange for iron. Before the Captain
returned on board, he visited the several places where he had sown melon and
cucumber seeds; but found to his great regret, that most of them had been
destroyed by vermin; though some pineapple plants, which he had also left,
were in a thriving condition.

On Friday the 6th, about noon, Feenou arrived from Vavoo, and informed us,
that several canoes, laden with hogs and other provisions, had sailed with him
from that island, but had been lost in the late tempestuous weather, and every
person on board of them had perished. This melancholy tale did not gain much
credit with us, as we were by this time sufficiently acquainted with the
character of the relater. The truth perhaps was, that he had been unable to
procure at Vavoo the expected supplies; or, if he obtained any there, that he
had left them at Hapaee, which lay in his way back, and where he must have
heard that Poulaho had come to visit us; who therefore, he knew, would, as his
superior, reap all the merit and reward of procuring these supplies, without
having had any participation of the trouble. The invention, however, of this
loss at sea, was not ill managed; for we had lately had very stormy weather. On
the succeeding morning Poulaho, and some other chiefs, arrived; at which time
Captain Cook happened to be ashore with Feenou, who now appeared to be sensible
of the impropriety of his conduct, in arrogating a character to which he had no
just claim; for he not only acknowledged Poulaho as sovereign of Tongataboo and
the adjacent isles, but affected to insist much on it. The Captain left him,
and went to pay a visit to the King, whom he found sitting with a few of the
natives before him; but great numbers hastening to pay their respects to him,
the circle increased very fast. When Feenou approached, he placed himself among
the rest that sat before Poulaho, as attendants on his majesty. He at first
seemed to be somewhat confused and abashed; but soon recovered from his
agitation. Some conversation passed between these two chiefs, who went on board
with the Captain to dinner; but only Poulaho sat at table. Feenou, after having
made his obeisance in the usual mode, by saluting the foot of his sovereign
with his head and hands, retired from the cabin, and it now appeared, that the
could neither eat nor drink in the king's presence.

On the 18th, we weighed anchor, and steered for Tongataboo, with a gentle
breeze at north-east. We were accompanied by fourteen or fifteen sailing
vessels belonging to the Islanders, every one of which outran the ships. The
royal canoe was distinguished from the rest by a small bundle of grass, of a
red color, fastened to the end of a pole, and fixed in the stern of the canoe
in the same manner as our ensign staffs. At five in the afternoon we descried
two small islands, at the distance of four leagues to the westward; one was
called Hoonga Hapaee, and the other Hoonga Tonga. They are situated in the
latitude of 20 36 south, about ten leagues from the western point of Annamooka.
According to the information of two islanders who had been sent on board by
Feenou as pilots, only five men resided on Hoonga Hapaee, and Hoonga Tonga had
no inhabitants. We still proceeded on a south-west course, and on the 9th saw
several little islands, beyond which Eooa and Tongataboo appeared. We had at
this time twenty-five fathoms water, the bottom consisting of broken coral and
sand; and the debth gradually decreased, as we approached the abovementioned
small isles. Steering, by the direction of our pilots, for the widest space
between those isles, we were insensibly drawn upon a large flat, on which lay
innumerable rocks of coral below the surface of the sea. Notwithstanding our
utmost care and attention to avoid these rocks, we were unable to prevent the
ship from striking on one of them: nor did the Discovery, though behind us,
keep clear of them. It fortunately happened, that neither of the ships stuck
fast, nor sustained any damage. We still continued our course; and the moment
we found a place where we could anchor with any degree of safety, we came to;
and the Masters were dispatched, with the boats, to ^ound. Soon after we had
cast anchor, several of the natives of Tongataboo came to us in their canoes;
and they, as well as our pilots, assured us, that we should meet with deep
water further in, free from rocks. Their intelligence was true; for, about four
o'clock, the boats made a signal of having found good anchoring ground. We
therefore weighed, and stood in till dark, when we anchored in nine fathoms
water, with a clear sandy bottom. During the night, we had some rain; but early
in the morning, the wind becoming southerly, and bringing on fair weather, we
weighed again, and worked toward the shore of Tongataboo. While we were plying
up to the harbor, the King continued sailing round us in his canoe; and at the
same time there was a great number of small canoes about the ships. Two of
these not getting out of the way of his royal vessel, he ran quite over them,
with the greatest unconcern. Among these who came on board the Resolution, was
Otago, who had been so useful to Captain Cook when he visited Tongataboo in his
last voyage; and one Toobou, who had, at that time, attached himself to Captain
Furneaux. Each of them brought some yams and a hog, in testimony of friendship;
for which they received a suitable return.

We arrived at our intended station about two o'clock in the afternoon of the
10th of June. It was a very convenient place, formed by the shore of Tongataboo
on the south-east, and two little isles on the east and north-east. Here both
our ships anchored over a sandy bottom, where the depth of water was ten
fathoms. Our distance from the shore exceeded a quarter of a mile.

CAAP. VII.
Favorable Reception at Tongataboo -- Distribution of Pork, Yams, and Kava
among the King's Attendants -- The Ships supplied with Water -- The Observatory
erected -- The Natives stock to our People from all Quarters -- Excursion of
our Captains to see Mareewagee -- Their Disappointment -- Description of the
Village where the chiefs reside -- Interviews with Mareewagee and Toobou --
Presents from the King's Son -- A curious Work of Art -- Process of
manufacturing Cloth -- A grand Haiva giving by Mareewagee -- Exhibition of
Fireworks -- Wrestling -- Boxing -- Presents of Animals to the Chiefs --
Poulaho, Feenou, etc. confined -- The King's present, and Haiva.

WE had not been long at anchor off Tongataboo, when Captain Cook landed on the
island, accompanied by some of the officers and Omai. They found the King
waiting for them on the beach, who conducted them to a small neat house near
the woods, with an extensive area before it, and told the Captain, that it was
at his service during his continuance in the island. Before they had been long
in the house, a large circle of the natives assembled before them, and seated
themselves upon the area. A root of the kava plant being brought to the king he
commanded it to be split into pieces, and distributed to several people, of
both sexes, who began to chew it and soon prepared a bowl of their favorite
liquor. Mean while a baked hog, and a quantity of baked yams, were produced,
and divided into ten portions. These shares were given to some of those who
were present, except one, which remained undisposed of, and which was probably
reserved for the King himself. The liquor was next served out; and the first
cup being brought up to his majesty, he ordered it to be given to a person who
sat near him: the second was also brought to him, which he kept: the third was
given to Captain Cook; but, their mode of preparing the liquor having given him
a distaste for it, it was brought to Omai. The remainder of it was distributed
to different people; and one of the cups being carried to Poulaho's brother, he
retired with this, and with his share of the provisions. Some others also
withdrew from the circle with their portions, because they could neither eat
nor drink in his majesty's presence: but there were others of an inferior rank,
of both sexes, who both eat and drank before POULAHO. KING of the FRIENDLY
ISLANDS. DRINKING KAVA.
him. Soon afterward, the greater part of them went away, carrying with them
what they had not eat of their share of the feast. It is worthy of remark, that
the servants, who distributed the meat and the kava, delivered it sitting, not
only to the king, but to the others.

Captain Cook, before he returned on board, went in search of a watering place,
and was conducted to some ponds, in one of which the water was tolerable, but
it was at some distance inland. Being informed that the small island of
Pangimodoo, near which the ships were stationed, could better supply this
important article, he went over to it the next morning, and found there a pool
containing fresher water than any he had met with amongst these islands. This
pool being extremely dirty, he caused it to be cleaned; and here it was that we
filled our water-casks. The same morning, a tent was pitched near the house
which the king had assigned for our use. The horses, cattle, and sheep, were
then landed, and a party of marines stationed there as a guard. The observatory
was set up at an inconsiderable distance from the other tent; and Mr. King took
up his residence on shore, to direct the observations, and superintend all
other necessary business. A party was occupied in cutting wood for fuel, and
planks for the ships; and the gunners were appointed to conduct the traffic
with the inhabitants, who flocked from all parts of the island with hogs, yams,
cocoa-nuts, and other articles, insomuch, that our land station resembled a
fair, and our ships were remarkably crowded with visitants. Feenou residing in
our neighborhood, we had daily proofs of his opulence and generosity, by the
continuance of his valuable donations. Poulaho was equally attentive to us in
this respect, as scarcely a day passed without his savouring us with
cosiderable presents. We were now informed, that a person of the name of
Mareewagee was of very high rank in the island, and was treated with great
reverence; nay, if our interpreter Omai did not misunderstand his informers,
that, he was superior to Poulaho himself; but that, being advanced in years, he
lived in retirement, and therefore was not inclined to pay us a visit. This
intelligence exciting the curiosity of Captain Cook, he signified to Poulaho
his intention of waiting upon Mareewagee; and the king having agreed to
accompany him, they set out the next morning in the pinnace, Captain Clerk
joining them in one of his own boats. They proceeded to the eastward of the
little isles which form the harbor, and then, turning toward the south,
entered a spacious bay, upon which they rowed about three miles, and landed
amidst a great concourse of people, who received them with shouts and
acclamations. The crowd instantly separated, that Poulaho might pass, who took
our gentlemen into a small enclosure, and changed the piece of cloth he wore,
for a new piece, very neatly folded: an old woman assisted in dressing him, and
put a large mat over his cloth. Being now asked where Mareewagee was, he said,
to the great surprise of the gentlemen, that he was gone down to the ships.
However, he requested them to accompany him to a malaee, or house of public
resort; and when they came to a large area before it, he seated himself in the
path, while they, at his desire, walked up to the house, and sat down in the
front. After waiting a little while, they repeated their enquiries, by the
medium of Omai, whether they were to be introduced to Mareewagee? But receiving
no satisfactory answer, and being inclined to suspect that the aged chief was
purposely concealed from them, they returned to their boats much piqued at
their disappointment. It afterward appeared, that Mareewagee had not been
there; and that, in this affair, some gross mistakes had been made, Omai either
having been misinformed, or having misunderstood what was told him concerning
the old chief.

The place our gentlemen went to was a very pleasant village, delightfully
situated on the banks of the bay or inlet* where most of the principal persons
of the island reside. Each of these has his house in the midst of a small
plantation, with a kind of outhouses, and offices for servants, These
plantations are neatly fenced round, and, in general, have only one entrance,
which is by a door fastened on the inside with a prop of wood. Between each
plantation there are public roads and narrow lanes. A considerable part of some
of these enclosures is laid out in grass-plots, and planted with such things as
seem less adapted for use than for ornament. In such other plantations as were
not the residence of persons of high rank, every article of the vegetable
produce of the island was in great plenty. Near the public roads are some large
houses, with spacious grass-plots before them, which are said to belong to the
king, and are probably the places where their public meetings are held.

On Friday the 13th, about twelve o'clock, Mareewagee came within a small
distance of our post on shore, attended by a great number of people of all
ranks. In the course of the afternoon, the two Captains, and others of our
gentlemen, accompanied by Feenou, went ashore to visit him. They found a person
sitting under a tree, with a piece of cloth, about forty yards long, spread
before him, round which numbers of people were seated. They imagined that this
was the great personage, but were undeceived by Feenou, who informed them, that
another, who was sitting on a piece of mat, was Mareewagee. To him they were
introduced by Feenou; and he received them very graciously, and desired them to
sit down by him. The chief, who sat under the tree, was named Toobou, whom we
shall for the future call Old Toobou, to distinguish him from his namesake, who
has been already mentioned as Captain Furneaux's friend. Both he and Mareewagee
were venerable in their appearance. The latter was slender in his person, and
seemed to be near seventy years of age. Old Toobou was somewhat corpulent, and
almost blind from a disorder in his eyes; he was younger than Mareewagee.
Captain Cook not expecting on this occasion to meet with two chiefs, had
brought on shore a present for one only: this therefore he was obliged to
divide between them; but, as it happened to be considerable, both of them
appeared to be satisfied, our party now entertained them about an hour with the
performance of two French horns and a drum; but the firing of a pistol that
Captain Clarke had in his pocket, ^eemed to please them most. Before our
gentlemen took their leave of the two chiefs, the large piece of cloth was
rolled up, and presented to Captain Cook, together with a few cocoa-nuts. The
next morning, Old Toobou came on board to return the Commodore's visit; he also
visited Captain Clarke; and if our former present was not sufficiently
considerable, the deficiency was now supplied. In the mean time, Mareewagee
went to see our people who were stationed on ^hore; and Mr. King showed him
whatever we had there. He was struck with admiration at the sight of the
cattle; and the cross-cut saw rivetted his attention. Toward noon, Poulaho
came on board, bringing with him his son, who was about twelve years of age. He
dined with Captain Cook; but the son, though present, was not permitted to sit
down with him. The Captain found it very convenient to have him for his guest;
for whenever he was present, (which was frequently the case) every other native
was excluded from the table, and few of them would continue in the cabin:
whereas, if neither he nor Feenou were on board, the chiefs of inferior rank
were very importunate to be of the dining party, or to be admitted at that time
into the cabin, which became consequently very much crowded. The king was soon
reconciled to our cookery, and was fond of our wine. He now resided at the
malaee near our tent, where he this evening entertained our people with a
dance, in which he himself, though so corpulent and unwieldy, engaged.

On the 15th, Captain Cook received a message from Old Toobou, importing, that
he was desirous of seeing him on shore. He and Omai accordingly waited on that
chief, whom they found sitting, like one of the ancient patriarchs, under the
shade of a tree, with a large piece of cloth, the manufacture of the island,
spread out before him. He desired them to place themselves by him; after which
he told Omai, that the cloth, with some cocoa-nuts, and red feathers,
constituted his present to Captain Cook. The latter thanked him for the
donation, and requested him to go on board with him. Omai, being sent for by
Poulaho, now left the Captain, who was informed by Feenou, that young
Fattafaihe, the king's son, desired to see him. He immediately obeyed the
summons, and found the young prince and Omai seated under a canopy of fine
cloth, with a piece of a coarser kind, seventy-six yards long, and seven and a
half broad, spread before them and under them. On one side was a quantity of
cocoa-nuts; and, on the other, a large boar. A multitude of people sat round
the cloth; and among them was Mareewagee, with other persons of rank. The
Captain was requested to seat himself by the prince; and then Omai informed
him, that he had been instructed by Poulaho to tell him, that as his majesty
and the Captain were friends, he hoped that his son Fattafaihe might be
comprehended in this friendship; and that the Captain, as a testimony of his
consent, would accept of the prince's present. Captain Cook readily agreed to
this proposal, and invited them all to dine with him on board. Accordingly, the
young prince, Old Toobou, Mareewagee, three or four subordinate chiefs, and two
old ladies of high rank, accompanied the Commodore to the ship. Mareewagee was
dressed in a new piece of cloth, with six patches of red feathers on the skirts
of it. This dress was probably made on purpose for this visit; for, as soon as
he arrived on board, he put it off, and presented it to Captain Cook. When
dinner was served up, not one of them would even sit down, or eat a morsel of
any thing, as they were all taboo, they said; which word, though it has a very
comprehensive meaning, generally signifies that a thing is prohibited. Why they
were thus restrained at present, was not accounted for. Having made presents to
them all, and gratified their curiosity by showing them every part of the ship,
the Captain conducted them ashore. When the boat had reached the land, Feenou
and several others immediately stepped out; and the young prince following
them, was called back by Mareewagee, who now paid the heir apparent the same
obeisance which the king was accustomed to receive; and when Old Toobou, and
one of the old ladies, had honored him with the same marks of respect, he was
suffered to land. After this ceremony, the old people stepped out of the boat
into a canoe, which was waiting to convey them to their place of residence.
Capt. Cook was pleased at being present on this occasion, as he was thus
furnished with the most convincing proofs of the supreme dignity of Poulaho and
his son. By this time, indeed, he had gained some certain information with
regard to the relative situation of several of the chiefs. He now knew, that
old Toobou and Mareewage were brothers. Both of them were men of very
considerable property, and in high estimation with the people: Mareewagee, in
particular, had obtained the honorable appellation of Motooa Tonga, which
implies father of Tonga, or of his country. We also now understood, that he was
the king's-father-in-law, Poulaho having espoused, one of his daughters, by
whom he had young Fattafaihe: so that Mareewagee was grandfather to the prince.
As for Feenou, he was one of the sons of Mareewagee, and Tooboueitoa was
another.

Captain Cook, on his landing found Poulaho in the house adjoining to our tent,
who immediately made him a present of a quantity of yams and a hog. Toward
evening a number of the islanders came, and having seated themselves in a
circle, sung in concert with the music of bamboo-drums, which were placed in
the center. Three of them were long ones, and two were short. With these they
struck the ground end-wise. There were two others that lay side by side on the
ground, one of which was partly split: on these a person continued beating with
two sticks. They sung three songs while the Captain staid; and the
entertainment lasted, after he left them, till ten o'clock. They burned the
leaves of the wharra palm for a light.

In the mean time, Mr. Anderson, with several others, made an excursion into
the country, which furnished him with observations to the following effect.
Westward of the tent, the country for about two miles is entirely uncultivated,
though covered with trees and bushes growing naturally with the greatest
vigor. Beyond this a pretty large plain extends itself, on which are
cocoa-trees, and some small plantations. Near the creek, which runs west of the
tent, the land is perfectly flat, and partly overflowed every tide by the sea.
When the water retires, the surface is seen to consist of coral-rock,
interspersed with holes of yellowish mud; and near the edges, where it is
rather more firm, are vast numbers of little openings, whence issue innumerable
small crabs, which swarm upon the spot, but are so very nimble, that, when
approached, they instantaneously disappear, and baffle all the dexterity of the
natives who endeavor to catch them. At this place is a work of art, which
testifies some degree of ingenuity and perseverance: on one side is a narrow
causeway, which, gradually increasing in breadth, rises with a gentle ascent to
the height of ten feet, where its breadth is five paces, the whole length being
about seventy-four paces. Adjacent to this is a kind of circus, thirty paces in
diameter, about one or two feet higher than the causeway that joins it; and in
the middle of this circus some trees are planted. On the opposite side, another
causeway descends, which is partly in ruins, and not above forty paces in
length. The whole is built of large coral-stones, with earth on the surface,
which is overgrown with shrubs and low trees. From its decaying in several
places, it is probably of some antiquity. It seems to be of no service at
present, whatever may have been its use in former times. All the intelligence
concerning it, that Mr. Anderson could procure from the natives, was, that it
was called Etchee, and belonged to the king.

In the morning of the 16th, Captain Cook and Mr Gore took a walk into the
country; in the course of which they met with an opportunity of seeing the
whole process of making cloth, the principal manufacture of these islands, as
well as of many others in the South Sea. An account of this operation, as
performed here, may not improperly be subjoined. The manufacturers, who are of
the female sex, take the slender stalks or trunks of the paper mulberry, which
rarely grows more than seven feet in height, and about thickness of four
fingers. From these stalks they strip the bark, and scrape off the exterior
rind: after which the bark is rolled up, and macerated for some time in water;
it is then beaten with a square instrument of wood, full of coarse grooves, but
sometimes with a plain one. The operation is often repeated by another person
or the bark is solded several times, and beat longer, which is probably
intended to close rather than divide its texture. It is then spread out to dry:
the pieces being from four, to six or seven feet in length, and about half as
broad. These pieces are joined by smearing part of them with the glutinous
juice of a berry called tooo; and, after being thus lengthened, they are placed
over a large piece of wood, with a sort of stamp, composed of a fibrous
substance, laid beneath them. The manufacturers then take a bit of cloth, and
having dipped it in a juice extracted from the bark of a tree called kokka, rub
it briskly ^ver the piece that is making. This leaves upon the surface a dry
gloss, and a dull brown color; and the stamp makes, at the same time, a slight
impression. Thus they proceed, joining and staining by degrees, till a piece of
cloth, of the requisite length and breadth, is produced. They generally leave a
border, about a foot broad, at the sides, and rather longer at the ends,
unstained. If any parts of the original pieces have holes, or are too thin,
they give spare bits upon them, till their thickness equals that of the rest.
Whenever they are desirous of producing a black color, they mix the juice of
the kokka with the soot procured from an oily nut called dooedooe. They assert,
that the black cloth, which is usually most glazed, makes a cold dress, but the
other a warm one.

The Commodore and Mr. Gore, meeting with Feenou on their return from their
excursion, took him, and another chief, on board to dinner; which being served
up, neither of them would eat a morsel, alleging that they were taboo avy; but
when they found, that, in dressing a pig and some yams no avy (water) had been
made use of, they both sat down, and eat very heartily, and drank some wine, on
being assured that there was no water in it. From this circumstance we
inferred, that they were at this time, for some particular reason, forbidden to
use water; or that, perhaps, they did not like the water we then used, it being
taken out of one of the places where the islanders bathed.

The following day, which was the 17th, was fixed upon by Mareewagee for giving
a grand haiva, or entertainment, at which we were all invited to attend. Before
the temporary hut of this chief, near our land station, a large space had been
cleared for that purpose. In the morning, vast numbers of the natives came in
from the country, every one of whom bore on his shoulder a long pole, at each
end of which a yam was suspended. These poles and yams being deposited on each
side of the open space, or area, formed two large heaps, decorated with small
fish of different kinds. They were Mareewagee's present to the Captains Cook
and Clerk. The necessary preparations being made, the islanders began, about
eleven o'clock, to exhibit various dances, which they call may. The band of
music at first consisted of seventy men as a chorus, amidst whom were placed
three instruments that we called drums, though they did not much resemble them.
They are cylindrical pieces of wood, from three to four feet in length, some of
them twice as thick as a man of ordinary size, and some not so large. They are
entirely hollow, but close at each end, and open only by a chink, about the
breadth of three inches, running nearly the whole length of the drums. By this
opening, the rest of the wood is hallowed; which must be an operation of some
difficulty. This instrument is called by the natives naffa; and, having the
chink turned toward them, they sit and beat vigorously upon it, with two
cylindrical pieces of wood, as thick as the wrist, and about a foot in length;
by which means a^rude, but loud and powerful sound, is produced. They
occasionally vary the strength and rate of their beating: and likewise change
the tones, by beating toward the end, or in the middle of the instrument.

There were four ranks, of twenty-four men each, in the first dance. These held
in their hands a small thin wooden instrument, above two feet in length,
resembling in its shape an oblong paddle. With these instruments, which are
called pagge, they made many different motions; such as pointing them toward
the ground on one side, and inclining their bodies that way at the same
instant: then shifting them to the opposite side in the same manner; passing
them with great quickness from one hand to the other, and twirling them about
with remarkable dexterity; with various other maneuvers. Their motions, which
were slow at first, quickened as the drums beat faster; and they repeated
sentences the whole time in a musical tone, which were answered by the chorus;
but in a short time, they all joined, and ended with a shout. After a cessation
of a few minutes, they began as before, and continued, with short intervals,
upwards of a quarter of an hour; and then the rear rank dividing, moved slowly
round each end, met in the front, and formed the first rank: during which time
the whole number continued to recite sentences. The other ranks successively
did the same, till that which was foremost became the rear; and this evolution
did not cease till the last rank regained its former situation. A much quicker
dance, though slow at first, was then begun, and they sung for ten minutes,
when the whole body, in a two-fould division, retreated, and then advanced,
forming a kind of circular ugure, which concluded the dance; the chorus
retiring, and the drums being removed, at the same time.

In the second dance, there were forty men as a chorus, with only two drums;
and the dancers (or rather actors) consisted of two ranks, the foremost of
which had seventeen persons, and the other fifteen. Feenou was in the middle of
the first rank, which is considered, on these occasions, as the principal
place. They danced and repeated sentences, with very short intervals, for half
an hour, sometimes slowly, and at other times quickly, with the highest degree
of exactness and regularity. Toward the close, the rear-rank divided, came
round, and occupied the place of the front, which afterward resumed its
pristine situation. This dance being finished, the drums were taken away, and
the chorus retired, as in the preceding dance.

Three very large drums were now brought in, and seventy men served as a chorus
to the third dance. This consisted of two ranks, of sixteen men each, having
young Toobou at their head, who was splendidly ornamented with a kind of
garment covered with red feathers. These persons danced, sung, and twirled the
pagge, so as to meet with the continual applauses of the spectators, who were
particularly pleased with a motion in which they held the face aside as if
ashamed, with the pagge before it. The hindmost rank closed before the front
one, which soon after resumed its place, as in the first and second dances:
then beginning again, they formed a triple row, divided, retreated to each end
of the area, and left the ground in a great measure clear. Two men rushing in
at that instant, began to exercise the clubs which they make use of in battle.
They first twirled them in their hands, and made circular strokes before them
with great quickness, managing with such skill, that, though they stood close
to each other, they never interfered. They shifted the clubs, with uncommon
dexterity, from one hand to the other; and, after some time, kneeled down, and
made various motions, tossing up their clubs in the air, and catching them as
they fell. They then retired as hastily as they had entered. They had pieces of
white cloth about their heads, fastened at the crown with a wreath of foliage
round their foreheads, and, that they might be free from all encumbrance, they
had only a very small piece of cloth tied round the waist. A man, armed with a
spear, then rushed in, and put himself in a menacing attitude as if he intended
to strike with his weapon at one of the people in the crowd; at the same time
bending the knee a little, and trembling as it were with fury. He continued in
this position near a minute, and then moved to the other side, where having
stood in the same posture, he hastily retreated from the area. During all this
time the dancers, who had divided themselves into two parties, continued to
repeat something slowly; and they now came forward, and joined again,
concluding the dance with general applause. This dance was probably considered
as a capital performance, as some of the principal people were engaged in it;
one of the drums being beat by Futtafaihe, the king's brother, another by
Feenou, and the third by Mareewagee himself.

In the fourth and last dance, there were forty men as a chorus, with two
drums. The performers were sixty men, arranged in three rows having twenty-four
in front. Before they commenced, we were entertained with a preliminary
harangue, in which the whole number made responces to an individual speaker.
They recited sentences alternately with the chorus, and made with the pagge
many quick motions. They divided into two parties, with their backs to each
other; formed again, shifted their ranks (as in the preceding dances) divided,
and retreated, being succeeded by two men who exercised their clubs, as before,
after whom came two others; the dancers in the mean time repeating in their
turns with the chorus: they then advanced, and terminated the dance.

These amusements continued from eleven o'clock till near three. The number of
islanders who attended as spectators, together with those who were round the
trading-place at the tent, or straggling about, amounted to at least ten
thousand, all within the compass of a quarter of a mile. If we had understood
what was spoken in this entertainment, we might probably have gained much
information with regard to the genius and customs of these people. Though the
spectators constantly applauded the different motions, when well made, a
considerable share of the pleasure they received, seemed to arise from the
sentimental part, or what the performers recited. However, the mere acting part
well deserved our notice, on account of the extensiveness of the plan, the
variety of the motions, and the exact unity, ease, and gracefulness, with which
they were performed.

In the evening we were entertained with the bomai, or night dances, on a large
area before the temporary dewlling place of Feenou. They continued three hours*
during which time about twelve of them were performed, nearly in the same
manner as those at Hapaee. In two of them, which were performed by women, a
party of men came and formed a circle within their's. In another, which
consisted of twenty-four men, many motions that we had not before seen, were
made with the hands, and met with great applause. The music was once changed in
the course of the evening; and in one of the dances, Feenou himself appeared at
the head of fifty men: he was well dressed in linen, and some small pictures
were hung round his neck.

Though the whole entertainment was conducted with better order than could
reasonably have been expected, yet our utmost care and attention could not
prevent our being plundered by the natives, in the most daring and insolent
manner. There was scarcely any thing which they did not endeavor to steal.
They once, in the middle of the day, attempted to take an anchor from off the
Discovery's bows; but without effect. The only violence of which they were
guilty, was, the breaking the shoulder bone of one of our goats; in consequence
of which she died soon after. On Wednesday the 18th, an islander got out of a
canoe into the Resolution, and stole a pewter-bason; but being detected, he was
pursued, and brought along-side the ship. Upon this occasion, three old women
in the canoe made loud lamentations over the prisoner. beating their faces and
breasts with the palms of their hands in a very violent manner, but without
shedding a tear. This mode of expressing sorrow occasions the mark which most
of th^se people bear on the face over their cheek-bones; for the repeated blows
inflicted by them on this part, abrade the skin, and cause some blood to flow
out; and when the wound is recent, it looks as if a hollow circle had been made
by burning. On some occasions, they cut this part of the face with an
instrument.

The same day Captain Cook bestowed some presents on Mareewagee, in return for
those which had been received from that chief the preceding day; and as the
entertainments then exhibited called upon us to make some exhibition in return,
he ordered all the marines to go through their exercise, on the spot where the
late dances had been performed; and, in the evening* some fireworks were also
played off at the same place. The King, the principal chiefs, and a vast
multitude of people, were present. The platoon fiiring seemed to please them;
but, when they beheld our water-rockets, they were filled with astonishment and
admiration. They did not much regard the fife and drum, or French horns, that
were playing during the intervals. Poulaho sat behind every one, no person
being permitted to sit behind him; and, that his view might receive no
obstruction, none sat immediately before him; but a lane, as it were, was made
by the spectators from him, quite down to the space allotted for playing off
the fireworks.

While the natives were in expectation of this evening's exhibition, they
engaged, for the greatest part of the afternoon, in wrestling and boxing. When
a person is desirous of wrestling, he gives a challenge by crossing the ground
in a kind of measured pace, and clapping smartly on the elbow joint of one arm,
which is bent, and sends forth a hollow sound. If no opponent steps forth, he
returns and sits down; but if an antagonist appears, they meet with marks of
the greatest goodnature, generally smiling, and deliberately adjusting the
piece of cloth that is fastened round the waist. They then lay hold of each
other by this cloth, and he who succeeds in drawing his opponent to him,
instantly endeavors to lift him upon his breast, and throw him on his back;
and if he can turn round with him in that position two or three times, before
he throws him, he meets with great applause for his dexterity. If they are more
equally matched, they quickly close, and attempt to throw each other by
entwining their legs, or raising each other from the ground; in which struggles
they display an extraordinary exertion of strength. When one of them is thrown,
he immediately retires; while the conqueror sits down for near a minute then
rises, and goes to the side from which he came, where the victory is proclaimed
aloud. After sitting for a short time, he rises again, and challenges; and if
several antagonists appear, he has the privilege of choosing which of them he
pleases to engage wit^* he may also, if he should throw his competitor,
challenge again, till he himself is vanquished; and then the people on the
opposite side chant the song of victory in favor of their champion. It
frequently happens, that five or six rise from each side, and give challenges
together; so that it is not uncommon to see several sets engaged on the field
at the same time. They preserve great temper in this exercise, and leave the
spot without the least displeasure in their countenances. When they find that
they are too equally matched, they desist by mutual consent; and if it does not
clearly appear which of them has had the advantage, both sides proclaim the
victory, and then they engage again. But no one, who has been vanquished, is
permitted to engage a second time with his conqueror.

Those who intend to box advance side-ways, changing the side at every pace,
having one arm stretched out before, the other behind; and holding in one hand
a piece of cord, which they wrap closely about it, when they meet with an
opponent. This is probably intended to prevent a dislocation of the hand or
fingers. Their blows are dealt out with great quickness and activity, and are
aimed principally at the head. They box equally well with either hand. One of
their most dexterous blows i^, to turn round on the heel, just after they have
struck their adversary, and to give him another pretty violent blow with the
other hand backward. In boxing-matches, unless a person strikes his antagonist
to the ground they never sing the song of victory; which shows, tha^ this
diverson is less approved among them than wrestling. Not only boys engage in
both these exercises; but it not unfrequently happens, that little girls box
with great obstinacy. On all these occasions, they do not consider it as any
disgrace to be overcome; and the vanquished person sits down with as much
indifference as if he had never engaged. Some of our people contended with them
in both exercises, but were generally worsted.

Captain Cook intending to leave behind him some of the animals he had brought,
thought proper to make a distribution of them before his departure. He
therefore, on the 10th, assembled the chiefs before our house, and marked out
his intended presents to them. To the king he gave a bull and a cow; to
Mareewagee, a Cape ram, and two ewes; and to Feenou, a horse and a mare. He
instructed Omai to tell them, that no such animals existed within several
months sail of their island; that he had brought them, with a great degree of
trouble and expense, for their use; that, therefore, they ought to be careful
not to kill any of them till they had multiplied considerably; and, finally,
that they and their posterity ought to remember, that they had received them
from the natives of Britain. Omai also explained to them their respective uses,
as far as his limited knowledge in such points would permit him. The Captain
had intended to give old Toobou two or three goats; but finding that chief
indifferent about them, he added them to the share of Poulaho. It soon
appeared, that some of the natives were dissatisfied with the allotment of our
animals; for, the next morning, two of our turkey-cocks, and one kid, were
missing. Our Commodore being determined to get them restored, seized on three
canoes that were along-^^de the ships; then went on shore, and having found his
majesty, his brother, Feenou, and some other chiefs, in our house, he
immediately appointed a guard over them, and intimated to them, that they must
continue under restraint, till not only the turkeys and the kid, but the other
things of which he had been plundered at various times, were restored to us.
They assured him, that the things in question should all be returned; and then
sat down to drink kava, with an appearance of unconcern. Soon afterward, an
axe, and an iron wedge, were brought to us. Some armed natives, in the mean
time, began to assemble behind the house; but they dispersed when a part of our
guard marched against them; and the chiefs, at the instigation of the
Commodore, gave orders that no more should appear. When he invited them to dine
with him on board, they readily consented. Some of them having afterward
objected to Poulaho's going, he rose up immediately, and declared that he would
be the first man. Accordingly, the chiefs went on board with Captain Cook, and
remained in the ship till near four o'clock. He then conducted them ashore;
and, not long after, the kid and one of the turkeys were restored to him. On
their promising that the other turkey should be brought back the next morning,
he released both them and the canoes.

Captain Cook now walked out with Omai, with a view of observing how the
natives in our neighborhood fared; for this was the usual time of their meals.
He found that they were, in general, ill supplied; a circumstance not to be
wondered at, since most of the yams, and other provisions that they brought
with them, were disposed of to us; and they were unwilling to return to their
own habitations, while they could procure any sustenance near our post. That
particular part of the island, where our station was, being uncultivated, there
were none of the natives who had a fixed residence within half a mile of us.
Those therefore who were at our post, were obliged to live under trees and
bushes, or in temporary shades; and the cocoa-trees were stripped of their
branches, for the purpose of erecting huts for the chiefs.

Omai and the Captain, in the course of their walk, found six or seven women at
supper together, two of whom were fed by the others. On their asking the the
reason of this circumstance, the women replied, taboo mattee. Upon further
enquiry it appeared, tha^ one of them, about two months before, had washed the
corpse of a chief, on which account she was not allowed to handle any food for
five months; and that the other had performed the same office to the dead body
of a person of inferior rank, and was therefore under a similar restriction
though not for so long a space.

On Saturday the 21st, early in the morning, Poulaho came on board, to invite
Captain Cook to an baiva or entertainment, which he designed to give the same
day. He had already had his head besmeared with red pigment, in order to
communicate a red color to his hair, which was naturally of a dark brown. The
Captain, after breakfast, attended him to the shore, and found the islanders
very busy in two places, fixing, in a square and upright position, four very
long posts, at the distance of near two feet from each other. They afterward
filled up with yams the space between the posts; and fastened sticks across,
from one post to another, at the distance of every four feet, to prevent the
posts from separating, by the weight of the enclosed yams, and also to ascend
by. As soon as the yams had reached the summit of the first posts, they
continued to fasten others to them, till each pile was thirty feet or more in
height. They placed, on the top of one of the piles, two bakedhogs; and, on the
top of the other, a living one: and they tied another by the legs halfway up.
The facility and dispatch with which these two piles were raised, were
remarkable. After they had completed them, they accumulated some other heaps of
yams, and also of bread-fruit, on each side of the area; to which a turtle, and
a great quantity of excellent fish, were added. The whole of this, with some
red feathers, a mat, and a piece of cloth, composed the king's present to
Captain Cook. About one o'clock the may, or dances, were begun. The first of
these very nearly resembled the first that was performed at Mareewagee's
entertainment. The second was conducted by young Toobou; and in this, four or
five women were introduced, who equalled the men in the exactness and
regularity of their motions. Near the end, the performers divided, in order to
leave room for two champions, who exercised their clubs. In the third dance,
which was the last, two other men, with clubs, exibited their skill and
activity. The dances were succeeded by boxing and wrestling; and one man
entered the lists with a kind of heavy club, made from the stem of a
cocoa-leaf, but could meet with no opponent to engage him in so rough a
diversion. Toward the evening, the bomai, or night-dances, began, in which the
king himself, apparelled in English manufacture, was a performer: but neither
these, nor the dances in the daytime, were so capital as those of Feenou, or
Mareewagee.

The Commodore, in order to be present the whole time, dined on shore. Poulaho
sat down with him, but neither eat nor drank, which was owing to the presence
of a female, who had been admitted, at his request, to the dining party, and
who, as we were informed in the sequel, was of superior rank to himself. This
lady had no sooner dined, then he walked up to Poulaho, who applied his hands
to her feet; after which she reretired. He immediately dipped his fingers into
a glass of wine, and then all her attendants paid him obeisance. At his desire,
some of our fireworks were played off in the evening: but being damaged, they
did not answer the expectations of the spectators.

CHAP. VIII.
Some Officers plundered of their Muskets, and other Articles by the Natives --
Omai complains to the King of this Outrage -- Consequences that it was probable
might attend it -- A visit to Poulaho -- Description of a Fialooka -- Country
Entertainment at Poulaho's House -- His Mourning Ceremony -- Beastly method of
preparing Kava -- Account of Onevy -- Messrs. King and Anderson visit
Futtafaihe -- Entertained by him -- Method of dressing Hogs, and carving them
-- Manner of passing the Night -- Observations on the Country -- Prepare for
Departure -- Description of the Island, its Animals, Vegetables, etc.

NO more entertainments being expected on either side, and the curiosity of the
populace being in a great degree satisfied, most of them deserted us the day
after Poulaho's haiva. Still, however, we had thieves among us, and had
continual instances of their depredations.

Some of the officers of both ships, who had made an excursion into the
interior parts of the island, returned the 22d of June in the evening after an
absence of two days. They had taken their muskets and necessary ammunition with
them, besides several small articles of the favorite commodities; the whole of
which the natives had the dexterity to steal from them, in the course of their
short journey. Inconvenient consequences were likely to have attended this
affair; for, when our plundered travelers returned, they employed Omai,
without consulting Captain Cook, to complain to the king of the treatment they
had received. He, not knowing how the Captain would proceed in this affair, and
apprehending that he might again lay him under restraint, set off early the
next morning, and Feenou followed his example; so that not a chief of authority
was now remaining in our neighborhood. The Captain was offended at this
business, and reprimanded Omai for having presumed to interfere in it. This
reprimand induced him to endeavor to bring back his friend Feenou, and he
succeeded in his negotiation, by assuring him that no violent measures would be
pursued to oblige the natives to return what they had stolen. Trusting to this
declaration, Feenou came back in the evening, and was favorably received.
Poulaho also favored us with his company the next day.

Upon this occasion, the two chiefs very justly observed to Captain Cook, that,
whenever any of his people wanted to take an excursion into the country, they
ought to be made acquainted with it, that they might order proper people to
attend them, to prevent such outrages. And, had this precaution been taken, it
is not to be doubted but that a man and his property would have been as safe
here, as in other parts of the more civilized world. Though the Captain did not
afterward endeavor to recover the articles taken upon this occasion, the
whole of them were returned through the interposition of Feenou, except one
musket, and a few other insignificant articles. By this time also, we recovered
the tools and other matters, that had been stolen from our workmen.

On Wednesday the 25th of June, two boats, which Captain Cook had sent in
search of a commodious channel to sea, returned. The commanders of them
reported, that the channel to the north, through which we came in, was
imminently dangerous, being full of coral rocks; that there was a good channel
to the eastward, though contracted, in one place, by the small islands;
consequently a westerly wind would be necessary to get through it. We had now
recruited our ships, and repaired our sails, and had little more to expect of
the produce of the island; but as an eclipse of the sun was to happen on the
5th of July, the Captain determined to stay till that time, to have a chance of
observing it.

Having now some leisure before us, Captain Cook, and a party of us accompanied
by Poulaho, set out the next morning, in a boat, for Mooa, a kind of village,
where he and the other men of consequence, usually reside. Rowing up the inlet,
we saw fourteen canoes fishing in company; in one of which was Poulaho's son.
They had then taken some fine mullets, about a dozen of which they put into a
boat. They showed us their whole method of fishing, which appeared to be an
effectual one.

Taking leave of the prince and his fishing party, we were rowed to the bottom
of the bay, and landed where we had done before, when we went to see
Mareewagee. As soon as we got on shore we were conducted to one of Poulaho's
houses; which, though tolerably large, seemed to be his private place of
residence, and was situated within a plantation. The king seated himself at one
end of the house, and those who came to visit him, sat down in a semicircle at
the other end. A bowl of kava was immediately prepared for us, and directions
were given to bake some yams. While these were getting ready, some of us,
together with a few of the king's attendants, and Omai as our interpreter, went
to take a view of a ^
^atooka, or burying-place, at a small distance from the habitation, it
belonged to the king, and consisted of three largish houses situated on a
rising ground, with a small one not far off, all ^anged longitudinally. The
largest of the three ^^rst was the middle house, which was placed in a ^quire,
twenty-four paces by twenty-eight, and ^aised about three feet. The other
houses where placed on little mounts. On the floors of these houses, as also on
the tops of the mounts, where fine loose pebbles; and the whole was enclosed by
large flat stones of coral rock. One of the houses was open on one side, and
two wooden ^usts of men, rudely carved, were within it. We enquired of the
natives who followed us, (but durst not enter here) what these images were; who
informed us, that they were memorials of some chiefs who had been buried there,
and not meant as the representatives of any deity* ^^ch monuments, it is
presumed, are seldom ^^sed; for these appeared to have been erected ^^ny ages.

We were informed that dead bodies had been (...) in each of these houses, but
no marks of (...) were to be distinguished. The carved head ^an Otaheite canoe,
which had been driven ^ore on their coast, was deposited in one of (...). On
the rising ground was a grass-plot, (...) which different large trees were
planted; among which were several of those called etoa. They greatly resemble
the cypress, and had a very solemn effect. A row of low palms was also planted
near one of the houses.

After refreshing ourselves with some provisions which we had brought from our
ships, we took a pretty large circuit into the country, attended by one of the
king's ministers, who would not suffer any of the rabble to follow us, and
obliged those whom we met upon our progress, to sit down while we were passing;
a mark of respect due only to their sovereigns. The greatest part of the
country was cultivated, and most of their plantations fenced round. Some parts,
indeed, lay fallow, and others in a state of nature; the latter afforded large
quantities of timber.

We found many public and well-^^aten paths, leading to different parts of the
island. Traveling here was, indeed, very commodious, the roads being
excellent, and the country level. We were conducted to several pools and
springs of water, but they were, in general, either brackish or stinking.

In the dusk of the evening, we returned from or walk, and found our supper in
readiness. It consisted of some fish and yams, and a baked hog in which all the
culinary arts of the island had been displayed. There being nothing to amuse us
after supper, we lay down to sleep, according to the custom of the country, on
mats spread upon the floor, and had a covering of cloth. The king, who became
happy with some wine and brandy which we had brought, also slept in the house,
as did several others of the natives. Before daybreak, they all rose, and
entered into conversation by moonlight. As soon as it was day they dispersed
different ways, but it was not long before they all returned, accompanied by
several of their countrymen.

While they were preparing a bowl of kava, Captain Cook went to pay a visit to
Toobou, Captain Furneaux's friend, who had a house not far distant, which for
size and neatness was hardly exceeded in the place. Here also we found a
company preparing a morning draught. The chief made a present to the Captain of
a living hog, and one that was baked; also a quantity of yams, and a large
piece of cloth. Returning to the king, we found him and his attendants drinking
the second bowl of kava. That business being performed, he informed Omai that
he was immediately going to perform a morning ceremony, called tooge, in memory
of a son who had been some time dead, and desired us to accompany him.
Naturally expecting to see somewhat new or curious, we readily complied with
the request.

The king stepped out of the house, attended by two old woman, and put on a new
clothing, over which was placed an old ragged mat, which might probably have
served his grandfather upon a similar solemn occasion. His attendants were
habited in the same manner, excepting that, in point of antiquity, none of
their mats could vie with that of their master. Thus equipped, we marched off,
preceded by eight or ten persons in the same uniform, each of them having
likewise a green bough about his neck. Poulaho, who held his bough in his hand
till he approached the place of rendezvous, then also put it about his neck. We
now entered a small enclosure, wherein was a neat house, and a man sitting
before it. As the company entered, they took the branches from their necks, and
threw them away. The king seated himself, and the others sat before him in the
usual manner. By the arrival of other persons, the circle increased to upwards
of an hundred, principally old men, all dressed in the manner above described.
The company being assembled, a large root of kava was produced by one of the
king's servants, and a capacious bowl that would contain five or six gallons.
Many persons now began to chew the root, and the bowl that was filled with
liquor up to the brim. Others were employed in making drinking-cups of plantain
leaves. The first cup that was filled, being presented to the king, he ordered
it to be given to another person; the second was also presented to him, and he
drank it; the third was offered to Captain Cook. Afterward a cup was given to
several others, till the liquor was exhausted; and though not half the company
partook of it, no one appeared in the least dissatisfied. Each cup, as it was
emptied, was thrown upon the ground, whence it was taken up, and carried to be
filled again. All this time the chief, and his whole circle, sat with a great
deal of gravity hardly speaking a syllable to each other.

All this while we were in expectation of seeing the mourning ceremony begin,
when, to our great surprise, as soon as the kava was drank out, they all rose
up and dispersed; and Poulaho informed us, he was now ready to attend us to the
ships.

We had sometimes seen the drinking of kava at other islands, but no where so
frequently as here. The kava is a species of pepper, which they esteem a
valuable article, and cultivate for this purpose, carefully defending the young
plants from any injury; and it is usually planted about their houses. It does
not often exceed the height of a man, though they are sometimes seen (...)
higher. It has large heart-shaped leaves, and jointed stalks.

Only the root of the kava is used at the Friendly Islands: after being dug up,
it is given to the servants; who, breaking it in pieces, scrape the dirt off,
and each chews his portion, which he afterward spits into a piece of plantain
leaf. Those, who are to prepare the liquor, collect these mouthfuls together,
and deposit them in a large wooden bowl, adding a sufficient quantity of water
to make it of a proper strength. It is then well mixed up with the hands, and
wrung hard, in order to make it productive of as much liquid as possible.

About a quarter of a pint of this beverage is usually put into each cup. It
has no perceptible effect upon these people, who use it so frequently: but, on
some of ours, it operated like our spirits, occasioning intoxication, or rather
stupefaction.

The mourning ceremony being over, we left Mooa, and set out on our return to
the ships. Rowing down the inlet, we met with two canoes returning from
fishing. Poulaho ordered them to approach him, and took from them every fish
and shell. He afterward stopped two other canoes, searched them, and found
nothing. He gave us some of the fish, and the rest were sold by his servants on
board the ship. Proceeding down the inlet, we overtook a large sailing canoe,
when every person on board her sat down till we had passed; even the man who
steered, though he could not possibly manage the helm, but in a standing
posture.

Having been informed, by Poulaho and others, that there was some good water at
Onevy, a small island, about a league off the mouth of the inlet; we landed
there, in order to taste it, but found it to be extremely brackish. This island
is quite in a natural state, and only frequented as a fishing-place; having
nearly the same productions as Palmerston's island.

When we returned to the ship, Captain Cook was informed that every thing had
been quiet during his absence; not a single theft having been committed; of
which Feenou, and Futtafaihe, the king's brother, who had undertaken the
management of his countrymen in the Captain's absence, boasted not a little.
This evinces what power the chiefs have, when they are inclined to execute it;
which is not often to be expected; for whatever was stolen from us, was
generally conveyed to them.

The next day, six or eight of the natives, assaulted some of our people who
were sawing planks; in consequence of which they were fired on by the sentry;
one of them was supposed to be wounded, and three were taken. The latter were
confined till night, when they were punished, and set at liberty. After this
their behavior was very decent and circumspect; occasioned, as we imagined, by
the man being wounded: for, till this time, they had only heard of the effect
of firearms, but now they had felt it. We were not mistaken in our conjecture,
for Mr. King, and Mr. Anderson, in an excursion they took into the country, met
with the very man, and found indubitable marks of his having been wounded with
a musket-ball.

Nothing worthy of notice happened at the ships for two days; we shall
therefore fill up that interval with an account of Mr. Anderson's excursion,
above mentioned. On Monday the 30th of June, Mr. King, and he accompanied
Futtafaihe as visitors to his house, which is not far from that of his brother
Poulaho, at Mooa. Soon after they arrived, a largish hog was killed, which was
effected by repeated strokes upon the head. The hair was then curiously scraped
off, with the sharp edge of pieces of split bamboo, and the entrails taken out
by the same simple instrument. Previous to this an oven had been prepared,
which is a large hole dug in the earth, the bottom of which is covered with
stones, about the size of a man's fist, which are made red hot by kindling a
fire over them; then they wrapped up some of these stones in leaves of the bread
fruit tree, with which they filled the hog's belly; stuffing in a quantity of
leaves to prevent their falling out, and thrusting a plug of the same kind in
the anus. This being done, the carcass was placed upon some sticks laid across
the stones, and covered with plantain-leaves. The earth was afterward dug up
all round; and the oven being thus effectually closed, the operation of baking
required no farther aid.

They afterward amused themselves by walking about the country, but saw
nothing remarkable, except a fiatooka of about thirty feet high. At a small
distance, there, was a number of etooa-trees, on which were vast quantities of
Ternate bats, making a most horrible noise. Not having their muskets, at this
time, they could not kill any of them, but some, taken at Annamooka, measured
almost a yard, when the wings were extended.

On their return to Futtafaihe's house, the baked hog was produced, accompanied
with some cocoa-nuts, and several baskets of baked yams. The person who
prepared the hog in the morning, now cut it up in a very masterly manner, with
a knife made of split bamboo. Though the weight of it was at least fifty
pounds, the whole was placed before them; when they took a small part, and
desired the rest might be partaken of by the people sitting round. Fattafaihe
could hardly be prevailed upon to eat a morsel.

Dinner being ended, they went, with him, and his attendants, toward the spot
where Poulaho's mourning-ceremony was performed. They saw nothing but a kind of
continuation of the same solemn rites, by way of condolence. Upon enquiring
upon whose account it was now transacted, they were informed, that it was in
memory of a chief who had long since died at Vavaoo, that they had practiced it
ever since, and should continue to do so for a considerable length of time to
come.

They were entertained in the evening, with a pig for supper, dressed like the
hog, and, like that accompanied with yams and cocoa-nuts. When the supper was
over, a large quantity of cloth was brought for them to s^eep in; but they were
disturbed in their repose, by a singular instance of luxury, in which their men
of consequence indulge themselves; that of being thumped or beat while they are
asleep. Two women, who sat by Futtafaihe, performed this operation, which they
call tooge tooge, by striking his body and legs, with both fists, till he fell
asleep, and, with some intervals, continued it the whole night. The person
being fast asleep, they abate a little of the strength and briskness of the
beating; but, if they observe any appearance of his awaking, they resume it. In
the morning they were informed, that Futtafaihe's women relieved each other,
and went alternately to sleep. Such a practice as this in any other country,
would be supposed to be destructive of all rest; but here it operates like an
opiate, and strongly shows what habit may effect.

They set out with Futtafaihe the next morning, and walked to the point, down
the east side of the bay. The country all along this side appeared to be well
cultivated, but not so much enclosed as at Mooa. They found, that, in
traveling, Futtafaihe exercised a power, which showed the great authority the
principal men are invested with. To one place, he sent for fish; and to
another, for yams; and his orders were as readily obeyed, as if he had been
absolute master of all the people's property.

They crossed the bay, in the evening, to their station, in a canoe procured by
Futtafaihe, by exercising his authority in calling to the first that appeared;
he had also a large hog at this place, and wanted them to accept of a bundle of
cloth; but, the boat being small, they objected; and he ordered it to be taken
to them the next day. Thus ends Mr. Anderson's account of his excursion.

Captain Cook had prolonged his stay at this island, on account of the
approaching eclipse; but, on looking at the micrometer, (on the 2d of July) he
found some accident had happened to it, and that it was rendered useless, till
repaired; which could not be done before the time it was intended to be used.
We therefore got on board, this day, all the cattle and other animals, except
those that were destined to remain. The Captain designed to have left a
turkey-cock and hen, but two hens being destroyed by accident, and wishing to
carry the breed to Otaheite, he reserved the only remaining pair for that
purpose.

We took up our anchor the next day, and moved the ships behind Pangimodoo, to
be ready for the first favorable wind to take us through the narrows. The
king, who this day dined with us, took particular notice of the plates; which
the Commodore observing, made him an offer of one, either of pewter, or of
earthen ware. He made choice of the first, and mentioned the several uses to
which he intended to apply it; two of which were so very extraordinary that
they deserve to be related.

Whenever he should visit any of the other islands, he said he would leave this
plate behind him at Tongataboo, as his representative, that the people might in
his absence, pay it the homage due to himself in person. On being asked, how he
had usually been represented in his absence, before he was in possession of
this plate, he informed us, that this singular honor had always been conferred
on a wooden bowl, in which he washed his hands. The other use to which he meant
to apply the plate instead of the bowl, was to discover a thief. When any thing
had been stolen, and the thief not detected, the people were assembled before
him, when he washed his hands in this vessel. After this it was cleaned, and
every man advanced, and touched it with his hand, in the same manner that they
touch his foot when they offer him obeisance. If touched by the guilty person,
he dropped down dead immediately; and, if any one refused to touch, it, such
refusal was considered as a sufficient proof of his guilt.

In the morning of Saturday the 5th of July, the day of the eclipse, the
weather was cloudy, with some showers of rain. About nine o'clock, the sun
broke out at small intervals for about half an hour, but was totally obscured
just before the beginning of the eclipse. The sun again appeared at intervals
till about the middle of the eclipse; but was seen no more during the remainder
of the day, so that we could not observe the end. This disappointment was the
less to be lamented, as the longitude was sufficiently determined by lunar
observations.

The eclipse being over, we packed up the instruments, and every thing was
conveyed on board. None of the natives having taken any care of the three sheep
allotted to Mareewagee, the Commodore ordered them to be carried back to the
ships. He was apprehensive that, if they had been left there, they would
probably be destroyed by dogs. These animals did not exist upon the island in
1773, when the Commodore first visited it; but there is now a plenty of them;
partly from the breed left by him, and partly from some imported from an
island, called Feejee. At present, however, the dogs have not got into any of
the Friendly Islands, except Tongataboo.

Mr. Anderson has given us the following description of this island. Amsterdam,
Tongataboo, or Tonga (as it is sometimes called by the natives) is about twenty
leagues in circumference, rather oblong, though broadest at the east end, and
its greatest length is from east to west. The south-shore is straight,
consisting of coral-rocks of about eight or ten feet high, terminating
perpendicularly, except in some few places, where there are sandy beach^* The
west end is about five or six miles broad, and has a shore like that of the
south side; but the north-side is environed with shoals and islands; and the
east side is, most probably, like the south.

This island may, with propriety, be called a low one; the only eminent part,
to be observed from a ship, is the south-east point, though many gently rising
and declining grounds are perceivable by those who are on shore. Though the
general appearance of the country does not exhibit that beautiful kind of
landscape, produced by a variety of hills and valleys, rivulets, and lawns, yet
it conveys an idea of the most exuberant fertility. The surface, at a distance,
seems entirely clothed with trees of various sizes: but the tall cocoa-palms
raise their tufted heads high above the rest, and are a noble ornament to any
country that produces them. The boogo, which is a species of the fig, is the
largest sized tree upon the island: and the most common bushes and small trees,
on the uncultivated spots, are the pandanus, the faitanoo, several sorts of
hibiscus, and a few others.

The climate of Tongataboo, from the situation toward the tropic, is more
variable than in countries far within that line; though that might, perhaps, be
occasioned by the season of the year which was now the winter solstice. The
winds are generally from some point between south and east. The wind, indeed,
sometimes veers to the north-east, or even north-west, but never continues
long, nor blows strong from thence, though often accompanied by heavy rain, and
close sultry weather.

The vegetable productions are never so much affected, respecting the foliage,
as to shed it all at once; but every leaf, as it falls, is succeeded by another,
which causes the appearanee of universal spring.

A coral rock appears to be the basis of the island, that being the only sort
that presents itself on the shore. There was not the appearance of any other
stone, except some small blue pebbles about the fiatookas and the smooth black
stone, of which the natives make their hatchets; and these have, perhaps, been
brought from other islands in the neighborhood. Though, in many places, the
coral projects above the surface, the soil is, in most parts, of a considerable
depth. In cultivated places, it is generally of a loose black color, seemingly
produced by the rotten vegetables.

The principal of the cultivated fruits in this island, are plantains, of which
they have fifteen varieties; the jambu, and the eeevee: the latter being a kind
of plum; and vast quantities of shaddocks, as often found in a natural state as
planted.

Of yams there are two sorts; one black and so large as to weigh from twenty to
thirty pounds; the other white and long, seldom exceeding a pound in weight.
There is a large root, called kappe; another like our white potatoes, called
mawhaha; the tal^, and the jeejee.

They have vast numbers of cocoa-nut-trees, and three other sorts of palms. One
is called beeoo, growing almost as high as the cocoa-tree, and having very
large leaves plaited like a fan. The other is a kind of cabbage-tree, much
resembling the cocoa, but rather thicker. A third sort is called ongo ongo; it
seldom grows higher than five or six feet. Plenty of excellent sugarcane is
cultivated here; also gourds, bamboo, turmeric, and a species of fig, called
matte; but the catalogue of uncultivated plants is too large to be enumerated.

There are no quadrupeds in this island, but hogs, dogs, and a few rats. Fowls
of a large breed, are domesticated here.

Among the birds, are parrots, and parroquets, cuckoos, king-fishers, and a
bird of the thrush kind, of a dull green color, which is the only singing-bird
we could find here; but it compensates, in a great degree, for the want of
others, by the force and melody of its voice.

Among the other land birds are rails about the size of a pigeon, of a
variegated gray color; a black sort with reddish eyes: large violet coots,
with red bald crowns; two sorts of fly-catchers; a small swallow; and three
sorts of pigeons.

Of waterfowl, are the ducks seen at Annamooka; tropic birds; blue and white
herons; noddies; white terns; a new species of a leaden color; a small bluish
curlew; and a large spotted plover.

Among the animals of the reptile, or insect tribe, are sea snakes, (though
often seen on shore) about three feet long, with alternate black and white
circles; some scorpions, and centipedes; also green guanoes, about eighteen
inches long, and two smaller sorts. Here are some beautiful moths and
butterflies, and some very large spiders; together with others, making in the
whole, about fifty different sorts of insects.

Though the sea abounds with fish, the variety is less than might be imagined:
those in the greatest plenty are mullets, silver fish, old wives, parrot fish,
soles, leather jackets, albicores, bonnetos, eels like those about Palmerston's
Island, rays, a sort of pike, and some devil fish.

There are an endless variety of shell fish about the reefs and shoals; among
which are the hammer oyster; a large indentated oyster, and many others; but
none of the common sort; gigantic cockle; panamas; cones; pearl-shell oysters,
etc. Also several sorts of sea-eggs; many curious star fish; crabs: cray-fish,
etc. and several sorts of sponge.

CHAP. IX.
Strange Solemnity at Mooa, called Natche, in Honor of the King's Son.
Description of many extraordinary Processions and Ceremonies during the first
Day. Manner of supping and spending the Evening at the King's house.
Description of the second Day's Ceremony. Captain Cook ventures himself in the
midst of the Assembly. His Reception there. Arrival at Eooa. Some Account of
that Island. Weigh Anchor and turn through the channel.

THOUGH we were now ready to sail, we had not sufficient daylight to turn
through the narrows; the morning flood falling out too early and the evening
flood too late. We were therefore under a necessity of waiting two or three
days, unless we should be fortunate enough to have a leading wind.

This delay gave us an opportunity to be present at a public solemnity, to
which the king had invited us, and which was to be performed on the 8th. He and
all the people of consequence repaired to Mooa on the 7th, where the solemnity
was to be exhibited. Several of us followed them the next morning. Poulaho had
informed us, that his son was now to be initiated into certain privileges; one
of which was, that of eating with his father; an honor he had not hitherto
enjoyed.

About eight o'clock in the morning we arrived at Mooa, where we found the
king, with a number of attendants sitting before him, within a small dirty
enclosure. They were, as usual, busied in preparing a bowl of kava. As this was
not liquor for us, we went to pay a visit to some of our friends, and to
observe what preparations were making for the ceremony, which was soon expected
to begin.

About ten o'clock, the people assembled in a large area before the malace, or
great house. At the end of a road, opening into this area, stood several men
with spears and clubs, incessantly reciting short sentences, in mournful
accents, which conveyed an idea of distress. This was contined about an hour;
during which time, many people came down the road, each having a yam tied to
the middle of a pole, which they laid down before those who continued repeating
the sentences. At length, the king and prince arrived, and seated themselves
upon the area; and we were requested to sit down by them, to take off out hats
and to untie our hair. The bea^ers of the yams having all entered, each pole
was taken up between two men, who carried it over their shoulders. They
afterward formed themselves into companies, of ten or twelve each, and marched
across the place, with a rapid pace, each company headed by a man who had a
club or spear, and defended, on the right, by several others, armed with
different weapons. About two hundred and fifty persons walked in the
procession, which was closed by a man carrying on a perch a living pigeon.

Omai was desired by Captain Cook to ask the chief where the yams were to be
carried, with so much solemnity; but he seemed unwilling to give us the
information we required; some of us, therefore, followed the procession,
seemingly contrary to his inclination.

They stopped before a morai or fiatooka of one house standing upon a mount,
about a quarter of a mile from where they first assembled. Here they deposited
the yams, and gathered them into bundles; but for what purpose, we could not
possibly learn. Our presence seeming to give them offense or uneasiness, we
quitted them, and returned to Poulaho, who advised us to amuse ourselves by
walking about, as nothing would be done for a considerable time. The fear of
losing the sight of any part of the ceremony prevented our being long absent.
When we returned to the king, he desired Captain Cook to order the boat's crew
not to presume to stir from the boat, for every thing would, very soon, be
taboo; and if any of our people, or of there own, should be seen walking about,
they would certainly be knocked down with clubs; nay mateed, that is, killed.
He also informed us that we could not be present at the ceremony; but that we
should be placed in such a situation, as to be able to see every thing that
passed. Our dress was particularly objected to, and we were told, that, to
qualify us to be present, we must be naked as low as the breast, and our hats
must be taken off and our hair untied. Omai readily agreed to conform to these
requisites, and immediately began to strip; but other objections were then
started, and he was excluded equally with ourselves.

Not relishing this restriction, the Captain stole out, to see what might now
be going forward. Very few people, however, were to be seen, except those who
were dressed to attend the ceremoney; some having in their hands small poles,
about four feet in length, to the under part of which were fastened two or
three other small sticks, about six inches long. These men were going toward
the morai. Captain Cook took the same road, and was frequently stopped by them,
all crying out taboo. However, he ventured to go forward till he came in sight
of the morai, and of the people sitting before it. He was now strongly urged to
go back, and, not knowing what might be the consequence of a refusal, he
complied. He had observed, that those who carried the poles, passed the morai;
and guessing, from this circumstance, that something was transacting beyond it,
he had some thoughts of advancing, by making a round for this purpose; but he
was so narrowly observed by three men, that he had no opportunity of putting
his design in execution. In order to shake off these fellows, he returned to
the malaoo, where he had parted from the king, and afterward made an elopement
a second time; but he instantly met with the same three men, who had doubtless
received instructions to watch him. He paid no attention to them, till he came
within sight of the king's principal ^atooka or morai; before which a great
number of people were sitting, being those whom he had just before seen pass by
the other morai, from which this was but a little distant. Seeing that he could
observe the proceedings of this company from the king's plantation, he repaired
thither, accompanied by several of his people.

The number of persons at the fiatooka continued increasing for some time, and
at length they quitted their sitting posture, and marched off in procession.
They walked in pairs, every pair carrying between them, one of the small poles
on their shoulders. We were informed, that the small pieces of sticks fastened
to the poles, were yams; it is therefore probable, that they were meant to
represent this root emblematically. The hindmost man of each couple placed one
of his hands to the middle of the pole, as if it were not strong enough to
carry the weight that hung to it, and under which they all seemed to bend, as
they proceeded. This procession consisted of one hundred and eight pairs, and
principally men of rank.

Having seen them all pass, we repaired to Poulaho's house, and saw him going
out. We were not permitted to follow him; but were immediately conducted to the
place allotted to us, behind a fence adjoining to the area of the fiatooka
where the yams had been deposited in the morning.

Arriving at our station, we saw two or three hundred people sitting on the
grass, near the end of the road opening into the area of the morai; and others
were continually joining them. At length, arrived a few men, each carrying some
small poles and branches, or leaves of the cocoanut tree. As soon as they
appeared, an old man seated himself in the road, and pronounced a long oration
in a serious majestic tone. He then retired, and the others advancing to the
middle of the area, began to erect a small shed or hut; employing, for that
purpose* the materials already mentioned. Their work being finished, they all
squatted down, for a moment, before it, then rose up and joined the rest of the
company. Poulaho's son arrived soon after, preceded by four or five men. After
them appeared about twelve or fourteen women of the first rank, advancing
slowly in pairs, each pair carrying between them a narrow piece of white cloth,
about two or three yards in length. They approached the prince, squatted down
before him, and wrapped some of the pieces of the cloth round his body; they
then rose up and retired in the same order, to some distance on his left, where
they seated themselves. Poulaho now made his appearance, preceded by four men,
walking two and two abreast, and sat down on his son's left hand, at a small
distance from him. The young prince then quitted his first position, and seated
himself under the shed, with his attendants; many others placed themselves on
the grass before this royal canopy. The prince sat facing the people, with his
back to the morai. Three companies, of about ten or a dozen men in each,
started up from among the crowd, soon after each other, and, running hastily to
the opposite side, sat down for a few seconds; and then returned, in the same
manner, to their former stations. To them succeeded two men, each having a
small green branch in his hand, who rose and advanced toward the prince,
sitting down, for a few seconds, three different times, as they approached; and
retired in the same manner, inclining there branches to each other as they sat.
Afterward two others repeated the same ceremony.

The grand procession, which marched from the other morai, now began to come
in. As they entered the area, they proceeded to the right of the shed, and
having prostrated themselves on the grass, deposited their pretended heavy
burdens (the poles), and faced round to the prince. They then rose up, and
retired in the same order, closing their hands with the most serious aspect,
and seated themselves along the front of the area. While this numerous band
where entering, and depositing their poles, three men who sat with the prince
continued pronouncing separate sentences, in a mournful melancholy tone.

A profound silence then ensued for a short time, after which a man who sat in
the front of the area, began a kind of oration, during which, at several
different times, he broke one of the poles which had been brought in. Having
concluded his oration, the people, sitting before the shed separated to make a
lane through which the prince and his attendants passed, and the assembly
closed.

Satisfied with what they had already seen, some of our party now returned to
the ships; but Captain Cook, and some more of the officers, remained at Mooa,
to see the conclusion of the solemnity, which was not to be till the day
following. The small poles, which had been brought by those who walked in
procession, being left on the ground, after the crowd had dispersed, the
Commodore examined them, and found that, to the middle of each, two or three
small sticks were tied, as has been related. They were probably intended as
only artificial representations of small yams.

Our supper, consisting of fish and yams, was got ready about seven o'clock.
The king supped with us and drank so freely of brandy and water, that he
retired to bed with a sufficient dose. We continued the whole night in the same
house with him and his attendants.

All, except Poulaho himself, rose at daybreak; soon after which, a woman, one
of those who gennerally attended upon the chief, came in, and, sitting down by
him, immediately began the same operation which had been practiced upon
Futtafaihe, tapping or beating gently, with her clinched fists, on his thighs.
This, instead of adding to his repose, had the contrary effect, and he awoke.

Captain Cook and Omai now paid a visit to the prince, who had parted from us
early the preceding evening; for he did not lodge with the king, but in
apartments of his own, at some distance from his father's house. We found him
with a circle of boys, about his own age, sitting before him; and an old man
and woman. There were others, of both sexes, employed, about their necessary
affairs, who, probably, belonged to his household.

We then returned to the king, who had a crowded levee before him, consisting
principally of old men. While a bowl of kava was preparing, a baked hog and
yams, smoking hot, were introduced; the greatest part of which fell to our
share, for th^^e people, especially the kava drinkers, eat very little in a
morning.

We afterward walked out, and visited several other chiefs; all of whom were
taking their morning draught, or they had already taken it. Returning to the
king, we found him asleep in a retired hut, with two women tapping or striking
on his breech. About eleven o'clock he arose again, and ate some fish and yams,
and again lay down to sleep. We now left him, and waited on the prince, with a
present of cloth beads, and other articles. There was a sufficient quantity of
cloth to make him a complete suit, and he was immediately clad in his new
habiliments. Proud of his dress, he first went to exhibit himself to his
father, and then conducted Captain Cook to his mother, with whom were about a
dozen other women of a very respectable appearance. Here the prince changed his
apparel, and made Captain Cook a present of two pieces of the cloth which had
been manufactured in the island.

It was now about noon, when, by appointment, the Captain repaired to the
palace to dinner; which was soon after served up, and consisted of two pigs and
some yams. The drowsy monarch was rouzed to partake of what he had appointed,
for our entertainment. Two mullets, and some shellfish, were introduced, as if
intended for his separate portion. But he added it to our fare, sat down with
us, and made a very hearty meal.

Dinner being over, we were informed that the ceremony would soon begin, and
were strictly enjoined not to venture out. The Commodore had resolved, however,
to peep no longer from behind the curtain, but, if possible to mix with the
actors themselves. With this view he walked toward the morai, the scene of the
solemnity. He was frequently desired to return, but he paid no regard to the
admonitions he received, and was permitted to pass on. When arrived at the
morai, he saw a number of men seated on the side of the area. A few were also
sitting on the opposite side, and two men in the middle, with their faces
turned to the morai. When Captain Cook had got into the midst of the first
company, he was desired to sit down, which he accordingly did. Where he sat,
there were lying a number of small bundles, composed of cocoa-nut leaves, and
fastened to sticks made into the form of hand-borrows. All the information he
could get concerning them was, that they were taboo. From time to time, one or
another of the company turned to those who were coming to join us, and made a
short speech, in which we remarked, that the word arekee (king) was generally
mentioned. Something was said by one man that produced loud bursts of laughter
from all around; others, of the speakers, were also much applauded. The Captain
was frequently desired to leave the place; but at length, finding him
determined to stay, they requested him to uncover his shoulders as theirs were.
This he readily complied with, and then they no longer seemed uneasy at his
presence.

The prince, the woman, and the king, at length appeared, as they had done the
preceding day. The prince being placed under the shed, two men, each with a
piece of mat, came, repeating something in a very serious strain, and put them
about him. The people now began their operations, and different companies ran
backward and forward across the area, as in the former day. Presently
afterward, the two men, in the middle of the area, made a short speech, and
then the whole company rose up and placed themselves before the shed in which
the prince, and three or four men were seated. One of the company who seemed
very desirous of obliging Captain Cook, procured him such a situation, that if
he could have made use of his eyes, nothing could have escaped him. But it was
necessary to have a demure countenance and downcast looks.

The procession soon after arrived as on the preceding day; a pole, with a
cocoa-nut leaf plaited round the middle of it being carried on the shoulders of
every two persons. These were deposited with the same ceremonies as on the day
before. After this succeeded another procession, composed of men who brought
baskets, made of palm-leaves, such as are generally used by this people to
carry provisions in. A third procession followed, in which a variety of small
fish, each placed at the end of a forked stick, were brought. An old man, who
sat on the prince's right hand, without the shed, received the baskets; each of
which he kept in his hand, making a short speech or prayer; then laying that
aside, (...) called for another, repeating the same kind of prayer; he
proceeded in this manner till he had gone through the whole number of baskets.
Two men, who, till this time, had in their hands green branches, and were
seated on the left, received the fish one by one, as they were presented to
them on the forked sticks. The first fish they laid down on their right, and
the second on their left. The third being presented, a stoutish man, who was
seated behind the other two, endeavored to seize it, as did also the other two
at the same time. Thus every fish was contended for; but the man behind, on
account of his disadvantageous situation, got only pieces; for he never quitted
his hold till the fish was torn out of his hand. What the others got, were laid
on the right and left. At last the person behind got possession of a whole
fish, the other two not even touching it. Upon this, the word mareeai (very
good) was pronunced in a low voice throughout the whole crowd. It appeared,
that he had now done all that was expected from him; for he did not contend for
the other fish. The persons who brought in these baskets and fish, delivered
them sitting; and in the same manner, the poles, carried in the first
procession, had been placed upon the ground. At the close of the last
procession, there was some speaking or praying by different persons. Then, on a
signal being given, we all rose up, ran several paces, and sat down, with our
backs to the prince. The Commodore was requested not to look behind him; but he
was not discouraged by this injunction, from facing about. The prince had now
turned his face to the morai, and from that moment he was admitted to the
honor of eating with his father; and a piece of roasted yam was presented to
each of them for that purpose.

Soon after, we all turned about, forming a kind of semicircle before the
prince, and leaving an open space between us. Presently some men advanced
toward us, two and two, bearing large poles upon their shoulders, waving their
hands as they proceeded, and making a noise like singing. When they came near
us, they made a show of walking quick, without advancing a single step. Several
men, armed with large sticks, immediately started from the crowd, and ran
toward the new visitors, but they instantly made off having thrown down the
poles from their shoulders. The others attacked the poles, and having beat them
most unmercifully, returned to their places. The former, as they ran off, gave
the challenge used here in wrestling; and, in a short time, some lusty fellows
came from the same quarter, repeating the challenge as they approached. These
were resisted by a company, who arrived at that instant from the opposite side.
Both parties, however, returned to their own quarter, after having paraded
about the area for some minutes. Afterward, for the space of half an hour,
wrestling and boxing-matches succeeeded. Speeches were then delivered by two
men, who seated themselves before the prince, with which the solemnity ended,
and the whole assembly broke up.

In vain did we endeavor to find out the purport of the solemnity, called
Natche. All the answer we received to our enquiries, was taboo; which as has
been already observed, is applied to many things. There was a mysterious
solemnity in the whole transaction; and from the manner of performing it, as
well as the place where it was performed, it was evident, that there was a
mixture of religion in the institution. Upon no occasion had they regarded our
dress and deportment; but now it was required, that our hair should slow about
our shoulders; that we should be uncovered to the waist; sit cross-legged; and
have our hands locked together. It should be observed also that none but the
chief people and those who were concerned in the ceremony, were admitted to
assist in the celebration of it. All these circumstances evidently pointed out
that they supposed themselves acting under the inspection of a Supreme Being,
upon this occasion.

From the above account of the present Natche, it may be considered as merely
figurative. The few yams, which were seen the first day, could not be meant as
a general contribution; and it was intimated to us, that they were a portion
consecrated to the Otooa, or Divinity.

We were however, informed that, in the space of three months, there would be
represented a more important solemnity; on which occasion, the tribute of
Tongataboo, Hapaee, Vavaoo, and all the other islands, would be brought to the
chief, and more awfully confirmed, by sacrificing ten human victims from
amongst the people. A horrid solemnity indeed! On our enquiring into the
occasion of so barbarous a practice, we were informed, that it was a necessary
part of the Natche; and that, if omitted, the Deity would destroy their king.

The day was far spent, before the breaking up of the assembly; and as we were
at some distance from the ships, we were impatient to set out from Mooa. Taking
leave of Poulaho, he pressed us earnestly to stay till the next day, in order
to be present at a funeral ceremony. The wife of Mareewagee, his mother-in-law,
had lately died: and, on account of the Natche, her corpse had been carried on
board a canoe in the lagoon. Poulaho told Captain Cook, that when he had paid
the last offices to her, he would attend him to Eooa; but if he did not choose
to wait, that he would follow him thither. He would gladly have seen this
ceremony, had not the tide been now favorable. The wind too, which had been
very boisterous, was now moderate and settled. Besides, we were informed that
the funeral ceremonies would continue five days, which, as the ships lay in
such a situation, that we could not get to sea at pleasure, was too long a time
to stay. The Captain, however, assured the king, that if he did not immediately
sail, he would visit him again the next day. Whereupon we all took leave of
him, and arrived at our ships about eight o'clock in the evening.

While the Commodore was attending the Natche, at Mooa, he ordered the horses,
bull, and other cattle, to be brought thither, thinking they would be safer
there, than at a place that would be, in a great measure, deserted, the moment
after our departure. Besides, we had left with our friends here, a young
English boar, and three young English sows. They were exceedingly desirous of
them, naturally supposing that they would greatly improve their own breed,
which is but small. Feenou also got two rabbits from us, a buck and do, from
which young ones were produced before we sailed. If the cattle succeed, the
acquisition to these islands will be great; and as Tongataboo is a fine level
country, the horses will be extremely useful.

We weighed anchor on the 10th, about eight o'clock in the morning, and, with a
steady gale, turned through the channel, between the small isles called
Makkahaa and Monooafai. The flood, at first, set strong in our favor, till
leading up to the lagoon, where the eastward flood meets that from the west.
This, with the indraught of the lagoon, and of the shoals before it, occasions,
strong riplings and whirlp^ols. Besides these disadvantages, the depth of the
channel exceeds the length of a cable; consequently there can be no anchorage,
except close to the rocks, in forty and forty-five fathoms water, where a ship
would be exposed to the whirlpools. The Captain, therefore, abandoned the
design he had formed of coming to an anchor, when we were through the narrows,
and afterward of making an excursion to see the funeral. He rather chose to be
absent from that ceremony, than to leave the ships in so dangerous a situation.
We plied to windward, between the two tides, till it was near high water,
without either gaining or losing an inch, when we suddenly got into the
influence of the eastern tide, where we expected the ebb to run strong to the
eastward in our favor. It proved, however, very inconsiderable. Convinced that
we could not get to sea before it was dark, we anchored under the shore of
Tongataboo, in forty-five fathoms water. The Discovery dropped anchor under our
stern; but drove off the bank before the anchor took hold, and did not recover
it till about midnight.

After remaining in this station till eleven o'clock the next day, we weighed,
and plied to the eastward. At ten o'clock at night we weathered the east end of
the island, and stretched away, for Middleburg, or Eooa (as the inhabitants
call it) where we anchored,, about eight the next morning, in forty fathoms
water; being nearly the same place where the Captain took his station in 1773,
when he named it English Road.

As soon as we had anchored, Taoofa the chief, and several of the natives
visited us on board, and seemed rejoiced at our arrival. This Taoofa had been
Captain Cook's Tayo when he was here in 1773, and therefore they were not
strangers to each other. The Captain accompanied him on shore in search of
fresh water, the procuring of which was the chief object that brought him to
Eooa. He had heard at Tongataboo of a stream here, which ran from the hills
into the sea; but this was not the case at present. He was conducted to a
brackish spring, among rocks, between low and high water mark. When they
perceived that we did not approve of this we were shown a little way into the
island; where, in a deep chasm, we found some excellent water; which, though
attended with some trouble, might be conveyed to the shore, by means of spouts
or troughs, that might be provided for that purpose: but rather than undertake
that tedious task, the Captain contented himself with the supply the ships had
received at Tongataboo.

Before he returned on board, he began a traffic for hogs and yams. Of the
former we could not procure many; but of the latter, plenty. At this island we
landed the ram and two ewes, of the Cape of Good Hope breed, and committed them
to the care of Taoofa, who seemed delighted with his charge. It was, perhaps, a
fortunate circumstance that Mareewagee, to whom they had been given, as before
related, slighted the present: as Eooa had no dogs upon it at present, it
seemed to be a fitter place for the rearing of sheep than Tongataboo.

While we were lying at anchor, this island had a very different aspect from
any that we had lately seen, and formed a most pleasing landscape. It is the
highest of any we had seen since we had left New-Zealand, and from its top,
which appears to be almost flat, declines gradually toward the sea. The other
isles, which form this cluster, being level, the eye cannot discover any thing
except the trees that cover them, but here the land, rising gently upwards,
presents an extensive prospect, where groves of trees in beautiful disorder,
are interspersed at irregular distances. Near the shore, it is quite shaded
with a variety of trees, among which are erected the habitations of the
natives; and to the right of where we were stationed, was one of the most
extensive groves of cocoa-palms that we had ever seen.

In the afternoon of the 13th, a party of us ascended the highest part of the
island, a little to the right of our ships, to have a perfect view of the
country. Having advanced about half way up, we crossed a deep valley, the
bottom and sides of which were clothed with t^ees. We found plenty of coral
till we approached the summits of the highest hills; the soil near the top is,
in general, a reddish clay; which in many places, is very deep. On the most
elevated part of the island we saw a round platform, supported by a wall of
coral stones. Our conductors informed us that this mount had been raised by the
direction of their chief; and that they met there, occasionally, to drink kava.
They called it Etchee; by which name an erection was distinguished which we had
seen at Tongataboo. At a small distance from it was a spring of most excellent
water; and, about a mile lower down, a stream, which, we were told, ran into
the sea when the rains were copious. We also discovered water in several small
holes; and supposed that plenty might be found by digging.

From this elevation we had a complete view of the whole island, except a small
part to the south. The south-east side, from which the hills we were now upon
are not far distant, rises with great inequalities, immediately from the sea;
so that the plains and meadows lie all on the north-west side; which being
adorned with tufts of trees, intermixed with plantations, form a most
delightful landscape in every point of view. While Captain Cook was surveying
this enchanting prospect, he enjoyed the pleasing idea, that some future
navigators might, from the same eminence, behold these meadows stocked with
cattle, brought by the ships of England; and that the completion of this single
benevolent purpose, exclusive of all other considerations, would sufficiently
prove that our voyages had not been useless. We found, on this height, besides
the plants common on the neighboring isles, a species of acrosticum,
melastoma, and fern-tree.

All, or most of the land on this island, we were told, belonged to the chiefs
of Tongataboo; the inhabitants being only tenants, or vassals, to them. This
seemed, indeed, to be the case at all the neighboring isles, except Annamooka,
where some of the chiefs seemed to act with some kind of independence. Omai,
who was much esteemed by Feenou, and many others, was tempted with the offer of
being appointed a chief of this island, if he would continue among them; and he
seemed inclinable to have accepted the offer, had he not been advised to the
contrary by Captain Cook, though not because he thought he would do better for
himself in his native isle.

Returning from our country excursion, we heard that a party of the natives, in
the quarter where our people traded, had struck one of their own people with a
club, which fractured his skull, and afterward broke his thigh with the same
instrument. No signs of life were remaining, when he was carried to a
neighboring house, but, in a short time, he recovered a little. On our
desiring to know the reason of such severity we were informed, that he had been
discovered in an indelicate situation with a woman who was taboo'd, we soon
understood, however, that she was no otherwise taboo'd than by belonging to
another person, who was superior in rank to her gallant. We discovered from
this circumstance, how these people punish such infidelities. But the female
sinner, as we were informed, has a much milder punishment for her misdemeanour,
and only receives a remonstrance and a very slight beating.

Captain Cook, the next morning, planted a pineapple, and sowed the seeds of
melons and other articles, in the chief's plantation. He had reason, indeed to
suppose, that his endeavors of this kind would not be fruitless; for a dish o^
turnips was, this day, served up at his dinner, which was the produce of the
seeds he had left here in 1773.

The Captain having fixed upon the 15th for sailing, Taoofa pressed him to stay
a little longer, in order to receive a present which he had prepared for him.
His entreaties, together with the daily expectation of receiving a visit from
some of his friends at Tongataboo, induced him to defer his departure. The next
day he received from the chief the present; consisting of two little heaps of
yams, and a quantity of fruit, which seemed to be collected as at the other
isles. On this occasion the greatest part of the inhabitants of the island had
assembled; and, as we had many times experienced on such numerous meetings
among their neighboring islanders, gave us no small trouble to prevent their
pilfering. Cudgelling, wrestling and boxing, were exhibited for our
entertainment; and in the latter, combatants, of both sexes engaged. The
diversions were intended to have been finished with the bomai or night-dance;
but an accident happened that either put a total stop to it, or, at least,
prevented our staying on shore to see it. One of our people was surrounded by
twenty or thirty of the natives, some of whom knocked him down, stripped him,
and carried off all his clothes. Hearing of this, the Commodore seized two
canoes, and a large hog; and insisted on the chief's not only causing the
apparel to be restored, but also on the offenders being delivered up to him.
Taoofa seemed greatly concerned at what had happened, and took the necessary
steps to satisfy him. The people who were assembled were so alarmed at this
affair, that most of them immediately fled. However, when they were informed
that the Captain meant to take no other measures to revenge the insult, they
returned. One of the delinquents was soon delivered up to him, and a shirt and
at pair of trowsers restored. The remainder of the stolen goods not coming in
before the evening, the Commodore was obliged to leave them, in order to go
aboard; the sea running so high, that it was extremely difficult for the boats
to get out of the creek even with daylight, and would be attended with much
more danger in the dark. He came ashore again the next morning, bringing with
him a present for Taoofa, in return for what he had received from him. Being
early, there were but few people at the landing-place, and even those few not
without their fears and apprehensions; but on the Captain's desiring Omai to
assure them, that we did not mean to injure them; and having restored the
canoes, and released the offender, who had been delivered up to him, they
resumed their usual cheerfulness, and a large circle was presently formed, in
which the chief and the principal men of the island took their respective
places.

The remainder of the cloths were at length brought in, but, having been torn
off the man's back by pieces, they were not thought worth carrying on board.
Taoofa shared the present he had received, with three or four other chiefs,
reserving a small part only for himself. This donation so far exceeded their
expectation, that a venerable old chief told the Captain, they were not
deserving of it, considering how little he had received from them, and the ill
treatment one of his people had met with. Captain Cook continued with them,
till they had emptied their bowl of kava; and then, after paying for the hog,
which he had taken the day before, returned on board, in company with Taoofa,
and one of Poulaho's servants, by whom he sent a piece of bar iron, as a
parting mark of his esteem for that chief, that being as valuable a present a
any he could possibly make.

We weighed soon after and with a light breeze at south-east, stood out to sea,
when Taoofa, and some other natives, left us. We found, on heaving up the
anchor, that the cable had been much injured by the rocks. Besides this, we
experienced, that a most astonishing swell rolls in there from the south-west.
Presently we observed a sailing canoe entering the creek before which we had
anchored our ships. A few hours after, a small canoe, conducted by four men,
came off to us: for, having but very little wind, we were still at no
considerable distance from the land. We were informed, by these men, that the
sailing canoe, which we had seen arrive, had brought directions to the people
of Eooa, to furnish us with hogs; and that the king, and other chiefs, would be
with us in the space of two or three days. They requested, therefore, that we
would return to our former station. There was no reason to doubt the truth of
this information; but being now clear of the land, it was not a sufficient
inducement to bring us back: especially, as we had, already, a sufficient stock
of fresh provisions to last us in our passage to Otaheite. Besides Taoofa's
present, we received a large quantity of yams at Eooa, in exchange for nails,
etc. and added considerably to our supply of hogs. Finding that we would not
return, these people left us in the evening, as did some others who had come
off in two canoes, with cocoa-nuts and shaddocks, to barter for what they could
get; their eagerness to possess more of our commodities, inducing them to
follow us out to sea, and to continue their intercouse with us even to the last
moment.

CHAP. X.
Quit the Friendly islands with regret -- Time not misemployed in visiting the
Friendly islands -- Variety of Refreshments to be procured there -- Number of
islands, among which are Keppel's and Boscawen's Islands -- Account of Vavao^,
Hamoa, and Feejee -- Method of calculating Distances by Time -- Omai incapable
of giving exact information -- Persons of the Inhabitants described -- their
diseases -- Character -- Manner of wearing the Hair in both Sexes -- Of
puncturing and painting their Bodies -- Their Habits -- Ornaments, etc.

WE have now taken leave of the Friendly Islands, and their inhabitants, after
a cordial intercourse with the latter for between two and three months. Some
differences, indeed, occasionally happened on account of their natural
propensity to thieving, though too frequently encouraged by the negligence and
inattention of our people. These differences, however, were never attended with
any fatal consequences; and few, belonging to our ships, parted from their
friends without some regret. The time we continued here was not thrown away;
and as we, in a great measure, subsisted upon the produce of the islands, we
expended very little of our sea provisions. We carried with us a sufficient
quantity of refreshments, to supply us till our arrival at another station,
where we could again recruit. The Commodore rejoiced at having ^^d an
opportunity of serving these poor people by leaving some useful animals among
them; and that those intended for Otaheite, had acquired fresh strength in the
pastures of Tongataboo. The advantages we received by touching here, were
great, and they were received without retarding the prosecution of our great
object; the season for proceeding to the north being lost, before we formed the
resolution of visiting these islands.

Iron tools are the best articles for traffic here. Axes, hatchets, nails of
all sizes, knives, rasps, and files, are much demanded. Red cloth, white and
colored linen; looking-glasses and beads, are also in great estimation; but,
of the latter, those which are blue are preferred to all others especially the
white ones. A hog might, at any time, be purchased, by a string of large blue
beads; it should, nevertheless, be observed, that articles, merely ornamental,
may be highly esteemed at one time, and disregarded at another. On our first
arrival at Annamooka, the people were unwilling to take them in exchange for
fruit; but when Feenou arrived, his approbation of them brought them into
vogue, and stamped them with the value abovementioned.

In return for the commodities just enumerated, all the refreshments that the
islands produce may be procured. The yams, produced by the Friendly Islands,
are excellent, and, when grown to perfection, preserve well at sea: but their
pork, plantains, and bread-fruit, are inferior in quality to the same articles
at Otaheite.

Good water is scarce in these islands. It may be found, indeed, in all of
them, but not to serve the purposes of navigators; for either the situations
are too inconvenient, or the quantities too inconsiderable. Whilst we lay at
anchor under Kotoo, we were informed, that there was a stream of water at Kao,
which ran from the mountains into the sea, on the south-west side of the
island. This intelligence may probably deserve the attention of future
navigators.

We must include, under the denomination of Friendly Islands, not only the
group at Hapaee, but also those which have been discovered to the north, nearly
under the same meridian, as well as some others under the dominion of
Tongataboo which is the capital, and seat of government.

From the best information we could receive, this archipelago is very
extensive. One of the natives enumerated one hundred and fifty islands: and Mr.
Anderson procured all their names. Sixty-one of them are marked upon our chart
of the Friendly Islands, and upon the sketch of the harbor of Tongataboo.
Keppel's and Boscawen's Islands, two of Captain Wallis's discoveries in 1765,
are doubtless comprehended in Mr. Anderson's list.

But the most considerable islands that we heard of in this neighborhood, are
Hamoa, Vavaoo, and Feejee; each of which is larger than Tongataboo; but it does
not appear that any European has ever yet seen any one of them.

Hamoa lies two days sail north-west from Vavaoo. It is said to be the largest
of all their islands; affords harbors and good water, and produces, in
abundance, all the articles of refreshment that are found at the places we
visited. Poulaho frequently resides upon this island; and the people here are
in high estimation at Tongataboo.

Feejee lies in the direction of north-west by west, about three days sail from
Tongataboo. It abounds with hogs; dogs, fowls, and such fruits and roots as are
to be found in any of the others and is much larger that Tongataboo; but not
subjec^ its dominion, as the other islands of this archipelago are. Feejee and
Tongataboo often engage in war against each other; and the inhabitants of the
latter are often so much afraid of this enemy, that they bend the body forward,
and cover the face with their hands, to express the sense of their own
inferiority to the Feejee men. This is, indeed, no matter of surprise, for
those of Feejee have rendered themselves formidable, by their dexterity in the
use of bows and slings; but more so, by their savage practice of eating such of
their enemies as they kill in battle.

It has been insisted on, that extreme hunger first occasioned men to feed on
human flesh; but where could be the inducement for the Feejee people to
continue the practice in the midst of plenty? It is held in detestation by the
inhabitants of Tongataboo, who seem to cultivate the friendship of their savage
neighbors of Feejee through fear; though they, occasionally, venture to
skirmish with them on their own territory, and carry off large quantities of
red feathers as trophies. When a profound peace reigns between the two islands,
they have frequent intercourse together; though, it is probable they have not
long been known to each other; or, it might be supposed that Tongataboo, and
its neighboring islands, would, before this time, have been supplied with a
breed of dogs, which are numerous at Feejee, and were not introduced at
Tongataboo, when Captain Cook first visited it, in 1773.

The color of the natives of Feejee was, at least, a shade darker than that of
the inhabitants of the other Friendly Islands. We saw one of the natives of
Feejee, who had his left ear slit, and the lobe so stretched, that it almost
extended to his shoulder; which singularity had been observed by Captain Cook
at other islands of the South Sea, during his second voyage. The Feejee men
were much reverenced here; not only on account of their power and cruelty in
war, but also for their ingenuity; for they greatly excel the inhabitants of
Tongataboo in workmanship. Specimens were shown us of their clubs and spears,
which were ingeniously carved. We were also shown some of their beautifully
chequered cloth, variegated mats, earthen pots, and other articles, all of
which displayed superiority in the execution.

Feejee, as has been already mentioned, is three days sail from Tongataboo;
these people having no other method of discovering the distance from island to
island, but by mentioning the time required for the voyage in one of their
canoes. That this might be ascertained with some precision, Captain Cook sailed
in one of their canoes, and by repeated trials with the log, found that she
went close hauled in a gentle gale, seven miles in an hour. He supposed from
this that they will sail, with such breezes as in general blow in their seas
seven or eight miles an hour on an average. Each day, however, is not to be
reckoned at twenty-four hours; for when they talk of one days sail, they mean
no more than from the morning to the evening, or ten or twelve hours at the
most. From the morning of the first day till the evening of the second, is,
with them, two days sail. In the day, they are guided by the sun; and, in the
night, by stars. When these are obscured, they can only have recourse to the
points from whence the winds and waves come upon the vessel. If, at that time
the winds and the waves should shift they are quit bewildered, often missing
their intended port, and being never heard of more. The story of Omai's
countrymen, who where driven to Wateeoo, convinces us however, that those who
are not heard of, are not always lost.

The harbor and anchoring-place of Tongataboo, is superior to any we have met
with among these islands, as well from its great security, as its capacity, and
goodness of bottom. The risk we ran in entering it from the north, should
caution every future commander from attempting that passage again, especially
with a ship of burden, since that, by which we left it, may be pursued with
greater ease and safety.

Though the harbor of Tongataboo has the preference, its water is exceeded in
goodness, by that at Annamocka, and yet this cannot be reckoned good. Tolerable
water may nevertheless, be procured, by digging holes near the side of the
pond. Besides, Annamooka being nearly in the center of the group, is the best
situated for procuring refreshments from the others. There is a creek in the
reef on the north side of the islands, wherein two or three ships may lie
securely.

Those who are desirous of having a more particular description of the Friendly
Islands, must have recourse to the chart, where every thing is delineated as
accurately as circumstances would permit. To the same chart, recourse may also
be had for tracing the several stations of the ships, and their route.

What may have been here omitted; concerning the geography of these islands,
will be found in the history of Captain Cook's last voyage Cook's Voyage, Vol.
I p. 211.213.
; to which narrative the reader is referred Ibid. p. 213.225.
, for such particulars as he had then observed. At present, we shall only
relate such interesting circumstances, as either were omitted in that account,
or were imperfectly and incorrectly represented.

After living among them between two and three months, it is reasonable to
expect, that we should be able to clear up every difficulty, and to give a
tolerably good account of their manners, customs, and institutions, civil as
well as religious; particularly as we had a person with us, who, by
understanding their language as well as ours, might be enabled to act as an
interpreter. But Omai was not qualified for that task. Unless we had before us
the object or thing, concerning which we wanted information, we found it
difficult to obtain a competent knowledge from his explanations. Omai was
certainly more liable to make mistakes than we were: for having no curiosity,
he never troubled himself with making remarks; and when he attempted to explain
matters to us, his ideas were apparently so limited, and, probably, differed so
much from ours, that his confused accounts, instead of instructing, often only
perplexed us. Besides, we could seldom find a person, among the natives, who
had both the ability and inclination to give us the information we required.
And many of them, we observed, appeared offended at being asked, what they,
perhaps, deemed frivolous questions. At Tongataboo, where we continued the
longest, our situation was likewise unfavourable; being in a part of the
country, where, except fishers, there were but few inhabitants. With our
visitors, as well as those we visited, it was always holiday; so that we could
not observe, what was really the domestic way of living among the natives. That
we could not, therefore, in this situation, bring away satisfactory accounts of
many things, is not the least surprising. Some of us, indeed, endeavored by
diligent observation, to remedy those disadvantages; and we are indebted to Mr.
Anderson, for a considerable share of what is related in this and the following
chapter.

The friendly islanders seldom exceed the common stature, (though some here
were above six feet in height) and are strong and well proportioned. Their
shoulders are, in general, broad; and we saw several who were really handsome,
though their muscular disposition rather conveyed the idea of strength than of
beauty. Their features are so various, that, unless it be a fullness at the
point of the nose, which is common it is impossible to fix any general likeness
by which to characterize them. On the other hand many genuine Roman noses, and
hundreds of European faces, were seen amongst them. They have good eyes and
teeth; but the latter are neither so well set, nor so remarkably white, as
among the Indian nations. Few of them, however have that uncommon thickness
about the lips, so frequent in other islands.

The women are less distinguished from the men by their features, than by their
general form, which seems destitute of that strong fleshly firmness that
appears in the latter. Though the features of some are very delicate, and a
true index of their sex, laying claim to a considerable share of beauty and
expression, yet the rule is not, by any means, so general, as in many other
countries. This is generally, however, the most exceptionable part; for the
bodies of most of the females are usually well proportioned; and some are
absolutely perfect models, of a beautiful figure. But the extraordinary
smallness and delicacy of their fingers, which may be put into competition with
any in Europe, seems to be the most remarkable distinction in the women.

The general color among the natives is a cast deeper than the copper brown;
but several of both sexes, have a true olive complexion. Some of the women are
even much fairer; owing, perhaps, to their being less exposed to the sun; as a
tendency to corpulence, in some of the principal people, seems to be the
natural consequence of a more indolent life: a softer and clearer skin is
almost frequently observed among the latter. Among the major part of the
people, the skin is generally of a dull hue, with some degree of roughness,
particularly the parts that are uncovered, occasioned, perhaps, by some
cutaneous disease. We saw a man at Hapaee, perfectly white, and a child equally
so at Annamooka. In all black nations, such phenomena are found, but their
color, it is imagined, proceeds from a disease.

Upon the whole, however, few natural defects or deformities are to be seen
among them; though we observed two or three with their feet bent inwards.
Neither are they exempt from some diseases. Vast numbers of them are effected
with the tetter or ringworm, which leaves whitish serpentine marks behind it.
But they have another disease of a more mischievous consequence, which is also
very frequent, and appears on every part of the body, in large broad ulcers,
discharging a thin, clear pus, some of which had a very virulent appearance,
particularly on the face. Some, however, appeared to be cured of it, and others
mending; but it was generally attended with the loss of the nose, or a
considerable part of it. It being certainly known, and even acknowledged by
themselves, that the natives were subject to this disease before they were
visited by the English, it cannot be the effect of venereal contagion,
notwithstanding the similarity of the symptoms; unless we adopt the
supposition, that the venereal disorder was not introduced here by our people,
in 1773. It certainly was amongst them at this time; for, soon after we arrived
there, some of our people received the infection; and Captain Cook had the
mortification to learn from hence, that all the care he took in 1773, to
prevent the communication of this dreadful disease, had proved ineffectual.
They do not seem, however, to regard it much; and, as we did not see many
instances of its destroying effects, perhaps the climate, and the way of living
of these people, may abate its virulence. Two other diseases are common amongst
them; one of which is a firm swelling, which effects the legs and arms, the
other is a tumor in the testacles, which sometimes exceed the size of the two
fists. In other respects, they are remarkably healthy, not a single person
having, during our stay, being confined to the house by any kind of sickness.
Their strength and activity are, in every respect, answerable to their muscular
appearance; and they exert both, in such a manner, as to prove, that they are,
as yet, little debilitated by the numerous diseases that are the natural
consequences of indolence.

The graceful mien and firmness of step with which they walk, are obvious
proofs of their personal accomplishments. They consider this as a thing so
necessary to be acquired, that their laughter was excited when they saw us
frequently stumbling upon the roots of trees, or other inequalities, in walking.

The mildness or goodnature which they abundantly possess, is depicted on
their countenance, which are totally free from that savage keenness, which
always marks the nations that are in a barbarous state. We might almost be
induced to suppose, that they had been reared under the severest restrictions,
to acquire so settled an aspect, such a command of their passions, and such a
steadiness of conduct. At the same time, they are open, cheerful, and
good-humoured; though, in the presence of their chiefs, they sometimes assume a
degree of gravity, which has the appearance of reserve.

Their pacific disposition is thoroughly evinced, from their friendly reception
of all strangers. Instead of attacking them openly,, or clandestinely, they
have never appeared, in the smallest degree, hostile; but, like the most
civilized nations, have even courted an intercourse with their visitors, by
bartering; a medium which unites all nations in a degree of friendship. So
perfectly do they understand barter, that, at first we supposed they had
acquired the knowledge of it by trading with the neighboring islands; but it
afterward appeared, that they had hardly any traffic, except with Feejee. No
nation, perhaps, in the world, displayed, in their traffic, more honesty and
less distrust. We safely permitted them to examine our goods, and they had the
same implicit confidence in us. If either party became dissatisfied with his
bargain, a re-exchange was made with mutual consent and satisfaction. They
seem, upon the whole, to possess many of the most excellent qualities that
adorn the human mind.

A propensity to thieving, seems to be the only defect to sully their fair
character. Those of all ages, and both sexes, were addicted to it in an
uncommon degree. It should be considered, however, that this exceptionable part
of their conduct existed merely with respect to us; for, in their general
intercourse with each other, thefts are not, perhaps, more frequent than in
other countries, where the dishonest practices of individuals should not
authorize any indiscriminate censure on the people at large. Allowances should
be made for the foibles of these poor islanders, whose minds we overpowered
with the glare of new and captivating objects. Stealing, among civilized
nations, denotes a character deeply stained with moral turpitude. But at the
Friendly Islands, and others which we visited, the thefts committed by the
natives, may have been occasioned by less culpable motives. They were
stimulated solely by curiosity and desire to possess something new, and the
property of a sort of people so different from themselves. And, perhaps, if a
set of beings, seemingly as superior to us, as we appear to be to them, should
make their appearance among us, it might be possible that our natural regard to
justice would not be able to restrain many from being guilty of the same error.
That this is the true motive for their propensity to this practice, is evident
from their stealing every thing indiscriminately. The thieving disposition of
these islanders, was the means, however, of affording us some information as to
their ingenuity and their quickness of intellects. For their petty thefts were
managed with much dexterity; and those of greater consequence, with a settled
plan or scheme, adapted to the importance of the objects.

The hair of these islanders is in general, thick, straight, and strong; though
some have it bushy or frizzled. The natural color appears to be black, but
many of the men, and some of the women, stain it of a brown, or purple color;
and a few give it an orange cast. The first of these colors is produced by
applying a sort of plaster of burnt coral mixed with water; the second, by the
raspings of a reddish wood, mixed into a poultice, and laid over the hair; and
the third is said to be the effect of turmeric root.

They are so whimsical in their fashions of wearing their hair, that it is
difficult to say which is most in vogue. Some have none on one side of the
head, while it remains long on the other side; some have only a part cut short,
others have parted with the whole, except a single lock on one side. Some
permit it to grown to its full length, without any of these mutilations. The
women usually wear it short. The beards too are cut short, and both sexes strip
the hair from their armpits. The men are stained with a deep blue color from
the middle of the belly, to half way down the thighs. This is effected with a
flat bone instrument, full of fine teeth, which by a stroke of a bit of stick
introduce^ the juice of do do into the skin, by whi^^ means indeliable
marks are made. Lines and figures are thus traced, which, in some, are very
elegant. The women have only some small lines, thus imprinted, in the inside of
their hands. As a mark of distinction, their kings are excepted from this
custom. The men are not circumcised, but rather supercised; the operation
consists in cutting off only a piece of the foreskin in the upper part, which
is thus rendered incapable of ever covering the glans. They have no other aim
in this operation, and only practice it from a notion of cleanliness.

The dress of both sexes is the same; consisting of a piece of cloth or
matting, about two yards in breadth, and two yards and a half in length. It is
double before, and, like a petticoat, hangs down to the middle of the leg. That
part of the garment which is above the girdle, is plaited into several folds,
which extended is sufficient to draw up and wrap round the shoulders. This as
to form, is the general dress: but the fine matting, and long pieces of cloth,
are worn only by the superior class of people. The inferior sort are contented
with small pieces and very often, have only a covering made of leaves of
plants, or the maro, a narrow piece of cloth, or matting, like a sash. They
pass this between the thighs and round the waist. It is seldom used but by the
men. In their haivas, or grand entertainments, they have various dresses,
which, though the same in form, are embellished, more or less, with red
feathers.

Both men and women occasionally defend their faces from the sun with little
bonnets, made of various sorts of materials.

The ornaments, worn by those of either sex, are the same. Those which are most
common are necklaces, made of the fruit of the pandanus, and various
sweet smelling flowers, known by the general name of kabulla. Others consist of
small shells, shark's teeth, the wing and leg-bones of birds, etc. all which
are pendant upon the breast. In this manner, they often wear a polished
mother-of-pearl shell, or a ring, o^ ^he upper part of the arm; rings of
tortoise-shell on the fingers; and several of these, joined together, formed
into bracelets on the wrists.

Two holes are perforated in the lobes of the ears, in which they wear
cylindrical bits of ivory. of the length of three inches, introduced at one
hole, and drawn out of the other; or bits of reeds, filled with a yellow
pigment. This appears to be a fine powder of turmeric, which the women rub all
over their bodies, in the same manner as the European ladies use their dry
rouge upon their cheeks.

Personal cleanliness is their delight, to produce which, they bathe frequently
in the ponds. Though the water has an intolerable stench in most of them, they
always prefer them to the sea; and they are so sensible that their skin is
injuried with salt water, that, when they are obliged to bathe in the sea, they
have fresh water poured over them to wash off its bad effects. They are
extravagantly fond of cocoa-nut oil; a great quantity of which they pour upon
their head and shoulders, and rub the body all over with a smaller quantity.

CHAP. XI.
Various Employment of the women of the friendly Islands -- Occupations of the
Men -- Agriculture -- Manner of building their Houses -- Their Furniture --
Canoes -- Working Tools -- Cordage -- Fishing Tackle -- Instruments of Music --
Weapons -- Vegetable and Animal Food -- Methods of Cooking -- Diversions --
Marriage -- Mourning Ceremonies -- Custom of cutting off their little Finger --
Their Deities -- Sentiments concerning the Soul, and a future State -- Their
Fiatookas -- Form of Government -- Power of the Chiefs -- Mode of paying Homage
to the King -- Taboo incurred by it -- Precaution against Famine -- Of the
Tammahas -- Language -- Tides.

THE domestic life of these people is neither so laborious as to be
disagreeable, nor so free from employment as to suffer them to degenerate into
indolence. Their country has been so favored by nature, that the first can
scarcely occur; and their disposition appears to be a sufficient bar to the
last. By this fortunate concurrence of circumstances, their necessary labor
seems to yield, in its turn, to their amusements and recreations, which are
never interrupted by the thoughts of being obliged to recur to business, till
they are induced by satiety to wish for that transition. The employments of the
women is not difficult: and is generally such as they can execute in the house.
The making of cloth is entirely entrusted to their care; the process of which
manufacture has been already described. Their cloth is of different degrees of
fineness: the coarser kind does not receive the impression of any pattern: but,
of the finer sort, they have various patterns, differently colored. The cloth,
in general, is able to resist water for some time; but that which has the
strongest glaze, is the least liable to be penetrated by that fluid.

Another manufacture which is also consigned to the women, is that of their
mats, which excel those of most other countries, both with respect to their
texture and their beauty. Of these mats there are seven or eight different
sorts, which they either wear or sleep upon; and many are merely ornamental.
The last are principally made from the rough, membraneous part of the stock of
the plantain-tree; those that they wear, are generally composed of the
pandanus; and the coarser kind, on which they sleep, are formed from a plant
called evarra. There are several other articles of less importance, that employ
their females; as combs, of which they make great quantities; and small baskets
made of the same substance as the mats, and others composed of the fibrous husk
of the cocoa-nut, either interwoven with beads, or plain; all which are
finished with extraordinary neatness and taste.

The province of the men is, as might reasonably be expected, far more
laborious and extensive than that of the other sex. Architecture,
boat-building, agriculture, and fishing, are the principal objects of their
care. As cultivated roots and fruits form their chief subsistence, they find it
necessary to practice husbandry, which they have brought by their diligence to
some degree of perfection. In planting yams and plantains they dig small holes
for their reception, and afterward root up the surrounding grass. The
instruments used by them for this purpose, are called hooo; and are nothing
more than stakes of various lengths, flattened and sharpened to an edge at one
end; and the largest ones have a short piece fixed transversely, by means of
which they press the implement into the ground with the foot. When they plant
the two abovementioned vegetables, they observe such particular exactness,
that, whichever way you turn your eyes, the rows present themselves complete
and regular.

The bread-fruit and cocoa-nut-trees are dispersed about, without any order;
and when they have arrived at a certain height, give them little or no trouble.
The same may be said of another large tree, which produces a roundish
compressed nut, called ecefee; and of a smaller tree being an oval nut, with
two or three triangular kernels. The kappe is in general, planted regularly and
in large spots but the mawhaha is interspersed among other things, as are also
the yams and jeejee. Sugar-cane is usually in small spots, closely crowded. The
mulberry, of which the cloth is made, is kept very clean, and has a good space
allowed for it. The pandanus is commonly planted in a row, close together, at
the sides of the fields.

They display very little taste or ingenuity in the construction of their
houses. Those of the lower class of people are wretched huts, scarce sufficient
to shelter them from the weather. Those of the better sort are larger, as well
as more commodious and comfortable. A house of a middling size is of following
dimensions, viz, about twelve in height, twenty in breadth, and thirty in
length. Their houses are, properly speaking, thatched roofs or sheds, supported
by rafters and posts. The floor is raised with earth smoothed, and covered with
thick matting. Some of their habitations are open all round: but the major part
of them are enclosed on the weather side with strong mats, or with branches of
the cocoa-nut tree, plated or interwoven with each other. A thick mat, about
three feet broad, bent into a semicircular form, and placed edgeways, with the
ends touching the side of the house, encloses a sufficient space for the master
and mistress to sleep in. The rest of the family sleep upon any part of the
floor, the unmarried men and women lying apart from each other. If the family
is large, there are little huts adjoining, in which the servants sleep. Their
whole furniture consists of some wooden stools, which serve them for pillows;
baskets of different sizes, in which they put their combs, fish-hooks, and
tools; two or three wooden bowls, in which they make kava; some cocoa-nut
shells, a few gourds, and a bundle or two of cloth.

They are very skillful in building their canoes which, indeed, are the most
perfect of their mechanical productions. The double ones are made sufficiently
large to carry about fifty persons, and sail at a great rate. Upon them they
generally fix a hut or shed, for the reception of the master and his family.
They are made of the bread-fruit tree, and the workmanship is extremely neat.
They appear on the outside as if they where composed of one solid piece; but,
upon close inspection, they are found to consist of a great number of pieces,
which fit each other exactly, and by means of a ledge on the inside are secured
together with cocoa-nut line. The single canoes are furnished with an
outrigger. The only tools which they make use of in the construction of these
boats, are hatchets, or adzes, of a smooth black stone; augers, made of shirk's
teeth; and rasps, composed of the rough skin of a fish, fastened on flat pieces
of wood. The same tools are all they have for other works, except shells, which
serve them for knives. Their cordage is made of the fibers of the cocoa-nut
husk, which; though not above ten inches long, they plait about the size of a
quill, to whatever length is required, and roll it up in balls; from which the
ropes of a larger size are made, by twisting several of those together. Their
fishing-lines are as strong and even as our best cord. Their small hooks
consist entirely of pearl-shell; but the large ones are only covered with it on
the back; and the points of both are, in general, of tortoise-shell. With the
large hooks they catch albicores, and bonnetos, by putting them to a
bamboo-rod, about twelve feet long, with a line of the same length. They have
also numbers of small seines, some of which are of the most delicate texture.

Their musical reeds or pipes, which resemble the syrinx of the ancients, have
eight or ten pieces placed parallel to each other, most of which are of unequal
lengths. Their flutes are made of a joint of bamboo, about eighteen inches
long, and are closed at both ends, having a hole near each end, and four
others; two of which, and only one of the first, are used by them in playing.
They close the left nostril with the thumb of the left hand, and blow into the
hole at one end with the other nostril. The forefinger of the right hand is
applied to the lowest hole on the right, and the middle finger of the left, to
the first hole on that side. In this manner, with only three notes, they
produce a pleasing, though simple, music. Their naffa, or drum, has been
already described.

Their warlike weapons are clubs, curiously ornamented, spears, and darts. They
also make bows and arrows; but these are intended for amusement, such as
shooting at birds, and not for the purposes of war. Their stools, or rather
pillows, are about two feet long, but only four or five inches in height, and
near four in breadth, inclining downwards toward the middle, with four strong
legs and circular feet; the whole composed of brown or black wood, neatly
polished, and sometimes inlaid with ivory. They likewise inlay with ivory the
handles of fly-flaps and, with a shark's tooth, shape bones into figures of
men, birds. etc.

Their vegetable diet principally consists of plantains, cocoa-nuts,
bread-fruit, and yams. Their chief articles of animal food are hogs, fish, and
fowls; but the common people frequently eat rats. The hogs, fowls, and turtle,
however, seem to be only occasional dainties, reserved for persons of rank.
Their food is, in general, dressed by baking, as at Otaheite; and they make,
from different sorts of fruit, several dishes, which are very good. They
sometimes boil their fish in the green leaves of the plantain-tree, which serve
as a bay to hold both fish and water: having tied them up, they wrap them again
in three or four other leaves, and place them upon stones heated for the
purpose: when they are sufficiently done, they not only eat the fish, but drink
the liquor or soup. They are not very cleanly either in their cookery, or their
manner of eating. Their usual drink at their meals is water, or cocoa-nut milk,
the kava being only their morning beverage. The food that is served up to the
chiefs, is generally laid upon plantain-leaves. The king, at his meals, was
commonly attended upon by three or four of the natives, one of whom cut large
pieces of the fish, or of the joint, another afterward divided it into
mouthfuls, and the rest stood by with cocoa-nuts, and whatever else he might
happen to want. We never observed a large company sit down to a sociable meal,
by eating from the same dish. The women are not excluded from taking their
meals with the men; but there are certain ranks that are not allowed either to
eat or drink together. This distinction begins with his majesty, but we know
not where it ends.

They rise at daybreak, and retire to rest as soon as it becomes dark. They,
for the most part, sleep also in the day time, when the weather is very hot.
They are fond of associating together; in consequence of which, it is not
uncommon to find several houses empty, and the possessors of them assembled in
some other house, or upon some convenient spot in the neighborhood, where they
relax themselves by conversation and other amusements. Their private diversions
chiefly consist of dancing, singing, and music. When two or three women snap
their fingers, and sing in concert, it is called oobai; but when there are
more, they form several parties, each of which sings in a different key, which
constitutes an agreeable melody, and is termed heeva or haiva. The songs are
generally accompanied with the music of their flutes. The dances both of the
men and women, are performed with an ease and grace which are difficult to be
described.

We could not determine with precision, whether their marriages were rendered
durable by any kind of solemn contract: it is certain, however, that the major
part of the people contented themselves with one wife. The chiefs, indeed,
commonly have several women, though there was only one who (as we thought) was
considered in the light of mistress of the family. Though female chastity
seemed to beheld in little estimation, not a single breach of conjugal fidelity
happened, to our knowledge, during our whole continuance at these islands; nor
were the unmarried women of rank more liberal of their favors. But there were
great numbers of a very different character.

The concern shown by these islanders for the dead, is a strong proof of their
humanity. Besides the tooge, which we have mentioned before, and burnt circles
and scars, they strike a shark's tooth into their heads till the blood flows
considerably, beat their teeth with stones, and thrust spears not only through
their cheeks into their mouths, but also into the inner part of their thighs,
and into their sides. The more painful operations, however, are only practiced
when they mourn the death of those who were most nearly connected with them.
When one of them dies, he is wrapped up in mats and cloth, and then interred.
The siatookas seem to be appropriated to the chiefs and other persons of
distinction, as their burial-places; but the inferior people have no particular
spot set apart for their interment. It is uncertain what part of the mourning
ceremony follows immediately afterward; but there is something besides the
general one which is continued for a considerable time, the funeral of
Mareewagee's wife being attended with ceremonies of five days duration. They
seem to consider death as a great evil, to avert which they practice a very
singular custom. When Captain Cook, during his second voyage, first visited
these islands, he observed that many of the natives had one on both of their
little fingers cut off; of the reason of which mutilation he could not then
obtain a satisfactory account. But he was now informed, that they perform this
operation when they are afflicted with some dangerous disorder, which they
imagine may bring them to the grave. They suppose that the little finger will
be accepted of by the Deity, as a kind of propitiatory sacrifice sufficiently
efficacious to procure their recovery. In cutting it off, they make use of a
stone-hatchet. There was scarcely one person in ten who was not thus mutilated;
and they sometimes cut so close, as to encroach upon that bone of the hand
which joins the amputated finger. It is also common for the lower class of
people to cut off a joint of their little finger, on account of the sickness of
the chiefs to whom they respectively belong.

When the rigid strictness with which they perform their mourning and religious
ceremonies is considered, it might be expected, that they endeavored thereby
to secure to themselves eternal happiness: but their principal object regards
things merely temporal; for they have apparently little conception of future
punishment for sins committed in the present life. They believe, however, that
they meet with just punishment upon earth; and, therefore, put every method in
practice to render their divinities propitious. They admit a plurality of
deities, all of them inferior to Kallafootonga, who they say is a female, and
the supreme author of most things, residing in the heavens, and directing the
wind, rain, thunder, etc. They are of opinion, that when she is much displeased
with them, the productions of the earth are blasted, many things consumed by
lightning, and themselves afflicted with sickness and death; but that when her
anger abates, every thing is immediately restored to its former state. Among
their surbordinate deities, they mention Futtafaihe, or Footasooa, who has the
administration of the sea, and its productions; Toofooa-boolootoo, god of the
clouds and fog; Talloteboo, Mattaba, Tareeava, and others. The same system of
religion does not extend all over the Friendly Islands; the supreme deity of
Hapaee, for instance, being called Alo Alo. They entertain very absurd opinions
relative to the power and various attributes of these beings, who, they
suppose, have no further concern with them after death. They have, however,
juster sentiments respecting the immortality and immateriality of the soul;
which they call life the living principle, or an O^ooa, that is, a divinity.
They imagine that, immediately after death, the souls of their chiefs are
separated from their bodies, and go to a delightful region called Boolootoo,
the god of which is named Gooleho. By this Gooleho they probably personify
death. His country, according to their mythology, is the general repository of
the dead; and those who are once conveyed thither, are no more subject to
death, but feast on all the favorite productions of their native soil, with
which this blissful abode is plentifully furnished. As for the souls of people
of an inferior class, they are supposed by them to suffer a kind of
transmigration; or are eaten up (they say) by a bird called loata, which walks
upon the graves with that intent.

They do nor worship any visible part of the creation, or any thing made by
their own hands. They make no offerings of dogs, hogs, and fruit (as is the
custom at Otaheite) unless emblamatically. But there seems to be no reason to
doubt of their offering up human sacrifices. Their fiatookas, or morais, are,
in general, burying-grounds and places of worship: some of them, however,
appeared to be appropriated only to the former purpose; but these were small
and greatly inferior to the rest.

We are very little acquainted with their form of government. A subordination,
resembling the feudal system of our ancestors in Europe, is established among
them; but of its subdivisions, and the constituent parts we are ignorant.
Though some of them informed us, that the king's power is unbounded, and that
he has the absolute disposal of the lives and properties of his subjects; yet
the few circumstances that offered themselves to our observation, contradicted,
rather than confirmed, the idea of despotic sway. Mareewagee, Feenou, and Old
Toobou, acted each the part of a petty sovereign, and not unfrequently
counteracted the measures of the king. Nor was his court superior in splendour,
to those of Old Toobou and Mareewagee, who, next to his majesty, were the most
potent chiefs in these islands; and, next after them, Feenou appeared to stand
highest in rank and authority. But however independent on the king the
principal men may be the inferior people are totally subject to the will of the
chiefs to whom they severally belong.

The island of Tongataboo is divided into numerous districts, each of which has
its peculiar chief, who distributes justice, and decides disputes, within his
own territory. Most of these chieftains have estates in other islands, whence
they procure supplies. The king, at stated times, receives the product of his
distant domains at Tongataboo, which is not only the usual place of his
residence, but the abode of most persons of distinction among these islands.
Its inhabitants frequently call it the Land of Chiefs, and stigmatize the
subordinate isles with the appellation of Lands of Servants.

The chiefs are stilled by the people lords of the earth, and also of the sun
and sky. The royal family assume the name of Futtafaihe, from the god
distinguished by that appellation, who is probably considered by them as their
tutelary patron. The king's peculiar title is simply Tooee Tonga. The order and
decorum observed in his presence, and likewise in that of the other chiefs, are
truly admirable. Whenever he sits down, all the attendants seat themselves
before him, forming a semicircle, and leaving a sufficient space between them
and him, into which no one, unless he has particular business, presumes to
come. Nor is any one suffered to sit, or pass, behind him, or even near him,
without his permission. When a person wishes to speak to his majesty, he comes
forward, and having seated himself before him, delivers in a few words what he
has to say; then, after being favored with an answer, retires. If the king
speaks to any one, the latter gives an answer from his seat, unless he is to
receive an order; in which case he rises from his place, and seats himself
cross-legged It may be proper to mention here, on the authority of Captain
King, that this posture is peculiar to the men* for the females always sit with
both their legs thrown a little on one side.
before his majesty. To speak to the king standing, would here be considered as
a glaring mark of rudeness.

None of the most civilized nations have ever exceeded these islanders in the
great order and regularity maintained on every occasion, in ready and
submissive compliance with the commands of their chiefs, and in the perfect
harmony that subsists among all ranks. Such a behavior manifests itself in a
remarkable manner, whenever their chiefs harrangue a body of them assembled
together, which frequently happens. The greatest attention and most profound
silence are observed during the harrangue; and whatever might have been the
purport of the oration, we never saw a single instance, when any one of those
who were present showed signs of his being displeased, or seemed in the least
inclined to dispute the declared will of the speaker.

It is a peculiar privilege annexed to the person of the king, not to be
punctured, nor circumcised, or rather supercised, as all his subjects are.
Whenever he walks out all who meet him must sit down till he has passed. No
person is suffered to be over his head; but, on the contrary, all must come
under his feet. The method of doing homage to him, and the other chiefs is as
follows: the person who is to pay obeisance, squats down before the great
personage, and bows the head down to the sole of his foot, which he taps or
touches with the under and upper side of the fingers of each hand; then rising
up, he retires. We had reason to think, that his majesty cannot refuse any one
who is desirous of paying him this homage, which is called by the natives more
moca; for the people would frequently think proper to show him these marks of
submission when he was walking; and he was on those occasions obliged to stop,
and hold up one of his feet behind him, till they had performed this respectful
ceremony. This, to so corpulent and unwieldy a man as Poulaho, must have been
painful and troublesome; and we have some times seen him endeavor, by running,
to get out of the way, or to reach a convenient place for sitting down. The
hands after having been thus applied, becomes, in some cases, useless for a
little time; for, till they are washed, they must not touch food of any sort.
This prohibition, in a country where water is far from being plentiful, would
be attended with inconvenience, if a piece of any juicy plant, which they can
immediately procure, being rubbed over the hands, did not serve for the purpose
of purification. When the hands are in this situation, they term it taboo rema;
the former word generally signifying forbidden, and the latter implying hand.
When the taboo is incurred, by doing homage to a person of rank, it may thus
easily be washed off; but, in several other cases, it must continue for a
certain period. We have often seen women, who have been taboo rema, not fed by
themselves, but by others. The interdicted person, after the limited time had
elapsed, washes herself in one of their bathes, which are, in general, dirty
ponds of brackish water. She then waits upon the sovereign, and, after having
paid the customary obeisance, takes hold of his foot, which she applies to her
shoulders, breast, and other parts: he then embraces her on both shoulders, and
she immediately retires, purified from her uncleanness. If it be always
necessary to have recourse to his majesty for this purpose (of which we are not
certain, though Omai assured us it was) it may be one reason for his traveling
very frequently from one island to another.

The word taboo has a great latitude of signification. They call human
sacrifices tangata taboo; and when any particular thing is prohibited to be
eaten, or made use of, they say it is taboo. They informed us, that, if the
king should go into a house belonging to one of his subject, that house would
in consequence become taboo, and could never be again inhabited by the owner of
it; so that, wherever his majesty travels, there are houses peculiarly assigned
for his accommodation. At this time, Old Toobou presided over the taboo; that
is, if Omai did not misunderstand those who gave him the intelligence, he and
his deputies had the inspection of all the produce of the island, taking care
that each individual should cultivate and plant his quota, and directing what
should, and what should not, be eaten. By so prudent a regulation, they take
effectual precautions against a famine; sufficient ground is employed in
raising provisions; and every article is secured from unnecessary consumption.
By another good regulation, an officer of rank is appointed to superintend the
police. This department was administered, while we continued among them, by
Feenou, whose business (as we were informed) it was, to punish all delinquents:
he was also generalissimo, or commander in chief of the forces of the islands.
Poulaho himself declared to us, that, if he should become a bad man, Feenou
would dethrone, and kill him; by which he doubtless meant, that, if he
neglected the duties of his high station, or governed in a manner that would
prove prejudicial to the public welfare, Feenou would be desired, by the other
chiefs, or by the collective body of the people, to depose him from his
sovereignty, and put him to death. A monarch thus subject to control and
punishment for abuse of power, cannot justly be deemed a despotic prince.

When we take into consideration the mumber of islands of which this state
consists, and the distance at which some of them are removed from the seat of
government, attempts to throw off the yoke of subjection might be apprehended.
But they informed us, that this circumstance never happens. One reason of their
not being thus embroiled in domestic commotions may be this; that all the
principal chiefs take up their residence at Tongataboo. They also secure the
dependence of the other isles, by the decisive celerity of their operations;
for if a seditious and popular man should start up in any of them, Feenou, or
whoever happens to hold his office, is immediately dispatched thither to put
him to death, by which means they extinguish an insurrection while it is yet in
embryo.

The different classes of their chiefs seemed to be nearly as numerous as among
us; but there are few, comparatively speaking, that are lords of extensive
districts of territory. It is said, that, when a person of property dies, all
his possessions devolve on the sovereign; but that it is customary to give them
to the eldest son of the deceased, with this condition annexed, that he should
provide, out of the estate, for the other children. The crown is hereditary;
and we know, from a particular circumstance, that the Futtafaihes, of which
family is Poulaho, have reigned, in a direct line, for the space of at least
one hundred and thirty-five years, which have elapsed between our present visit
to these islands, and Tasman's discovery of them. Upon our inquiring of them,
whether any traditional account of the arrival of Tasman's ships had been
preserved among them till this time, we found, that this history had been
delivered down to them, from their ancestors, with great accuracy: for they
said that his two ships resembled ours, and also mentioned the place where they
had lain at anchor, their having continued but a few days, and their quitting
that station to go to Annamoka; and for the purpose of informing us how long
ago this affair had happened, they communicated to us the name of the
Futtafaihe who reigned at that time and those who had succeeded him in the
sovereignty, down to Poulaho, who, is the fifth monarch since that period.

It might naturally be imagined, that the present sovereign of the Friendly
Isles had the highest rank of any person in his dominions. But we found it to
be otherwise; for Latoolibooloo, who has been already mentioned, and three
women, are superior, in some respects, to Poulaho himself. Th^se great
personages are distinguished by the title of Tammaha, which implies a chief.
When we made inquiry concerning them, we were informed that the late king,
father of Poulaho, left behind, him a sister of equal rank, and older than
himself; that she, by a native of Feejee, had a son and two Daughters; and that
these three persons, as well as their mother, are of higher rank than the king.
We endeavored to discover the reason of this pre-eminence of the Tammahas, but
without effect. The mother, and one of her daughters, named Tooeela-kaipa,
reside at Vavaoo. The other daughter, called Moungoulakaipa, and, Latoolibooloo
the son, dwell at Tongataboo. Moungoula-kaipa is the lady who has been
mentioned as having dined with Captain Cook on the 21st of June. Latoolibooloo
was supposed, by his countrymen, to be disordered in his senses. At Eooa, or
Middleburgh, they showed us a considerable quantity of land, which was said to
be his property; and we saw there a son of his, a child who was honored with
the same title that his father enjoyed.

The language of these islands bears a striking resemblance to that of
New-Zealand, of Otaheite, and the Society Isles. The pronunciation of these
people differs, indeed, in many instances, from that both of Otaheite and
New-Zealand; but, notwithstanding, that, a great number of words are either
very little changed, or exactly the same. The language, as spoken by the
Friendly Islanders, is sufficiently copious to express all their ideas; and,
besides being tolerably harmonious in common conversation, is easily adapted to
the purposes of music. They have terms to signify numbers as far as a hundred
thousand, beyond which they either would not, or could not, reckon.

The latitude of that part of Tongataboo where our observatory was erected,
which was near the middle of the north-side of the island, was, according to
the most accurate observations, 21 8 19 south; and its longitude was 184 55 18
east.

The tides are more considerable at the Friendly Islands than at any other of
Captain Cook's discoveries in this ocean, that are situated within either of
the tropics. At Annamooka the tide rises and falls about six feet, upon a
perpendicular. At Tongataboo, it rises and falls four feet and three quarters,
on the the full and change days, and three feet, and a half at the quadratures.

A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK III. OCCURRENCES AT OTAHEITE AND THE
SOCIETY ISLES; AND PROSECUTION OF THE VOYAGE TO THE COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
CHAP. I.
Heavy Squail -- The Island of Toobouai discovered -- Its Situation, Extent,
and Produce -- Description of the Persons, Dress, and Canoes, of its
Inhabitants -- Arrival in Oheitepeha Bay at Otaheite -- Omai's Reception -- His
imprudent Conduct -- Account of two Spanish Ships which had twice visited
Otaheite -- Great Demand for red Feathers -- Captain Cock visits a Chief, who
was said by Omai to be the God of Bolabola -- Account of the House erected by
the Spaniards -- Inscriptions -- Allowance of Grag lessened -- The Captain's
Interview with Waheiadooa -- Description of a Toopapaoo -- An Enthusiast -- The
Ships anchor in Malavia Bay.

WE had now taken our final leave of the Friendly Islands. On the 17th of July,
at eight o'clock in the evening. ^ooa bore northeast by north, distant three or
four leagues. The wind blew a fresh gale at east. We stood to the south, till
about six o'clock the next morning, when, from the same direction, a sudden
squall took our ship aback; and before we could trim the ships on the other
tack, the main-sail and the top-gallant sails were considerably torn.

On the 19th and 20th, the wind kept between the south-west, and south-east;
then it veered to the east, north-east, and north.

We stretched to the east south-east, without meeting with any thing
remarkable, till the 29th, at seven o'clock in the evening, when we had a very
heavy squall of wind from the north. We were, at this time, under single-reefed
topsails, courses, and stay-sails. Two of the latter were almost demolished by
the wind, and it was with the utmost difficulty that we saved the other sails.
This squall being over, we saw several lights moving about on board the
Discovery; whence we conjectured that something had given way; and, the next
morning, we perceived that her main-top-mast had been lost. Both wind and
weather remained very unsettled till noon, when the latter cleared up, and the
former settled in the north-west quarter. We were now in the latitude of 28 6
south, and our longitude was 198 23 east. We saw some pintado-birds, which were
the first we had seen since we left the land.

At noon, on the 31st, Captain Clerk made a signal to speak with Captain Cook;
and afterward informed him, that the head of the mainmast had sprung, and in
such a manner as to reader the rigging of another topmast extremely dangerous;
that he must therefore rig something lighter in its place. He further informed
him, that he had lost his main-top-gallant-yard: and had not another on board,
nor a spar to make one. Captain Cook sent him the Resolution's
sprit-sail-top-fail-yard, which supplied this want for the present. The next
day, by getting up a jury-top-mast, on which he set a mizen-top-sail, he was
enabled to keep way with the Resolution.

We steered east-north-east, and north-east, without meeting with any
remarkable occurrence till the morning of the 8th of August, at eleven o'clock;
when land was observed bearing north-north-east, about nine or ten leagues
distant. At first it appeared like so many separate islands; but, as we
approached, we found it was all connected, and formed one and the same island.
We steered directly for it with a fine gale, and, at half past six in the
afternoon, it extended from north by east, to north-north-east, distant three
or four leagues.

At daybreak, the next morning, we steered for the north-west side of the
island, and as we stood round its south-west part, we saw it guarded by a reef
of coral rock, extending, in some places, at least a mile from the land, and a
high surf breaking upon it. As we drew near, we saw people walking or running
along shore, on several parts of the coast, and, in a short time after, when we
had reached the lee-side of the island, we saw two canoes launched, in which
were about a dozen men who paddled toward us.

In order to give these canoes time to come up with us, as well as to sound for
anchorage, we shortened sail; and, at the distance of half a mile from the
reef, we found from forty to thirty-five fathoms water. The canoes, after
having advanced within pistol-shot of the ships, suddenly stopped. Omai was
desired, as was usual on such occasions, to endeavor to prevail upon the men
in them to come nearer; but no arguments could induce them to trust themselves
within our reach. They often pointed eagerly to the shore with their paddles,
at the same time calling to us to go thither; and many of their people who were
standing upon the beach, held up something white in their hands, which we
construed as an invitation for us to land. We could easily have accomplished
this, there being good anchorage without the reef, and an opening in it,
through which the canoes had passed, which had no surf upon it. But the Captain
did not choose to risk the advantage of a fair wind, in order to examine an
island, that appeared to be but of little consequence. We required no
refreshments, if we had been certain of meeting with them there, and therefore,
after making several unsuccessful attempts to prevail upon these people to come
near us, we made sail to the north, and left them; having first learned that
the name of their island was Toobouai. It is situated in the latitude of 23 25
south; and in 210 37 east longitude.

The greatest extent of this island, in any direction, is not above five or six
miles. Small, however, as it appears, there are hills in it of a considerable
elevation; at the foot of which, is a narrow border of flat land, extending
almost all round it, bordered with a white sand-beach. The hills were covered
with herbage, except a few rocky cliffs, with patches of trees interspersed to
their summits. This island, as we were informed by the men in the canoes, is
plentifully stocked with hogs and fowls; and produces the several kinds of
fruits and roots that are to be met with at the other islands in this
neighborhood.

From the conversation we had with those who came off to us, we discovered that
the inhabitants of Toobouai speak the Otaheite language; an indubitable proof
that they are of the same nation. Those whom we saw in the canoes were a stout
copper-coloured people; some wearing their hair (which was straight and black)
flowing about the shoulders, and others having it tied in a bunch on the crown
of the head. Their faces were roundish and full, but the features flat; and
their countenance expressed a degree of natural ferocity. Their covering was a
piece of narrow stuff wrapped round the waist, and passing between the thighs;
but some of those whom we beheld upon the beach, were completely clothed in
white. Some of our visitors in the canoes, had their necks ornamented with
pearl shells; and one of them continued blowing a large conchshell, to which a
reed, of about two feet long, was fixed; he began in a long tone, without any
variation; and afterward converted it into a kind of musical instrument.
Whether the blowing of the conch portended any thing, we cannot say, but we
never found it the messenger of peace.

The length of their canoes appeared to be about thirty feet, and they rose
about two feet above the surface of the water, as they floated. The forepart
projected a little; the after-part rose to the height of two or three feet,
with a gradual curve, and, like the upper part of the sides, was carved all
over. The rest of the sides were ornamented with flat white shells curiously
disposed. There were eight men in one of the canoes, and seven in the other.
They were conducted with small paddles, whose blades were almost circular; and
they sometimes paddled, with the two opposite sides so close together, that
they appeared to be but one boat; the rowers occasionally turning their faces
to the stern, and pulling that way, without paddling the canoes round. Seeing
we were determined to leave them, they stood up, and repeated something aloud;
but we knew not whether they were expressing their enmity, or friendship. It is
certain, however, that they had not any weapons with them; nor could we with
our glasses discover, that those on shore were armed.

Leaving the island, we steered to the north with a fresh gale, and, at
daybreak, on the 12th, we perceived the island of Maitea. Otaheite appeared
soon after; the point of Oheitepeha-bay bearing west, about four leagues
distant. We steered for this bay, intending to anchor there, in order to draw
some refreshments from the south-east part of the island, before we proceeded
to Matavia, where we expected our principal supply. We had a fresh gale till
two o'clock in the afternoon; when, at about a league from the bay the wind
suddenly died away. About two hours after, we had sudden squalls, with rain,
from the east. About nine o'clock, we were obliged to stand out, and spend the
night at sea.

As we drew near the island, we were attended by several canoes, each conducted
by two or three men. But, as they were of the lower class, Omai seemed to take
no particular notice of them, nor they of him. They did not even know, that he
was one of their countrymen, though they had for some time conversed with him.
At length a chief, whom Captain Cook had known before, named Ootee, and Omai's
brother-in-law, who happened to be now at this corner of the island, and three
or four others, all of whom knew Omai, before he embarked with Captain
Furneaux, came on board. Yet there was nothing in the least tender or striking
in their meeting, but, on the contrary, a perfect indifference on both sides,
till Omai, conducting his brother into the cabin, opened a drawer, and gave him
a few red feathers. This circumstance being soon communicated to the rest of
the natives on deck, Ootee, who before would hardly speak to him, now begged,
that they might be tayos (friends) and exchange names. Omai accepted of the
honor, and a present of red feathers ratified the agreement; and Ootee, by way
of recompense, sent ashore for a hog. It was evident, however, to all of us,
that it was not the man, but his property, that they esteemed. Had he not
exhibited his treasure of red feathers, a commodity highly estimated in the
island, it is a matter of great doubt whether they would have bestowed a single
cocoa-nut upon him. Such was Omai's first reception among his countrymen, and
we never expected it would be otherwise; but we supposed, that the valuable
cargo of presents, with which he had been loaded by the liberality of his
friends in England, would be the certain means of raising him into consequence
among the first persons throughout the extent of the Society Islands. This,
indeed, must have been the case, had he conducted himself with any degree of
prudence; but he paid little or no attention to the repeated advice of his
well-wishers, and laid himself open to every imposition.

We understood from the natives who came off to us, that since Captain Cook
last visited this island in 1774, two other ships had twice been in
Oheitepeha-bay, and had left animals there, like those we had on board. But, on
enquiry into the particulars, we found, that they consisted only of hogs, dogs,
goats, a bull, and the male of another animal, which they so imperfectly
described, that we could not conjecture what it was. These ships, they informed
us, had come from a place called Re^ma; which we supposed to be Lima, the
capital of Peru, and that these late visitors were consequently Spaniards. They
told us, that the first time they arrived, they built a house, and left behind
them two priests, a boy or servant, and a person called Mateema; taking away
with them, when they sailed, four of the natives; that about ten months
afterward, the same ships returned, bringing back only two of the natives, the
other two having died at Lima; and that, after a short stay, they took away the
people they had left; but that the house which they erected was left standing.

News having been propagated on shore, of red feathers being on board our
ships, we were early the next morning, surrounded by a multitude of canoes,
crowded with people, with plenty of hogs and fruits. A quantity of feathers,
which might be taken from the body of a tom-tit, would, at that time, purchase
a hog of forty or fifty pounds weight. But as the whole ships crew were
possessed of some of this precious article of trade, it decreased above five
hundred per cent. in its value in a few hours. However, the balance even then,
was considerably in our favor, and red feathers still preserved their
superiority over every other commodity. Some of the islanders would not dispose
of a hog, without receiving an axe in exchange; but nai^s, and beads, and many
other trinkets, which, during our former voyages, were held in high estimation
at this island, were now so much despised, that few would even deign to look at
them.

Not having wind in the morning, it was nine o'clock before we could anchor in
the bay, when we moored with the two bowers. We had not long anchored, before
Omai's sister came on board to congratulate him on his arrival. It was pleasing
to observe, that, to the honor of each of them, their meeting was marked with
expressions of the tenderest affection more easily conceived than described.

When this affecting scene was closed, and the ship properly moored, Omai
attended Captain Cook on shore. The Captain's first object was to pay a visit
to a man whom Omai represented as a very extraordinary personage indeed, saying
he was the God of Bolabola. They saw him seated under one of those awnings,
which are usually carried in their larger canoes. He was old, and had so far
lost the use of his limbs, that he was carried from place to place upon a
hand-barrow. By some, he was called Olla or Orra, which is the name of the God
of Bolabola; but his real name was Erary. From Omai's extraordinary account of
his person, the Captain expected to have seen religious adoration paid to him:
but he saw very little to distinguish him from their other chiefs. Omai
presented to him a tuft of red feathers, fastened to the end of a small stick;
but after a little conversation with this Bolabola man, his attention was
excited by the presence of his mother's sister, who was already at his feet,
and had bedewed them plentifully with tears of joy. The Captain left him with
the old lady in this situation, surrounded by a number of people, and went to
take a survey of the house said to have been erected by the strangers who had
lately landed here. He found it still standing at a small distance from the
beach. It was composed of wooden materials, which appeared to have been brought
hither, ready prepared, in order to set up as occasion might require; for the
planks were all numbered. It consisted of two small rooms, in the inner of
which, were a bedsted, a bench, a table, some old hats, and other trifles, of
which the natives seemed to be remarkably careful, as well as of the building
itself, which had received no injury from the weather, a kind of shed having
been erected over it. Scuttles, serving as air holes, appeared all round the
building; and perhaps, they were also meant for the additional purpose of
firing from with muskets, if necessity should require it. A wooden cross was
placed at a little distance from the front, on the transverse part of which
appeared the following inscription: Christus vincit. On the perpendicular part
(which confirmed our conjecture that the two ships were Spanish) was engraved,
Carolus III. imperat, 1774. And on the other side of the post, Captain Cook
very properly preserved the memory of the prior visits of the English, by
inscribing, Georgius tertius rex, Annis 1767, 1769, 1773, 1774, et 1777.

Near the foot of the cross the islanders pointed out to us the grave of the
Commodore of the two ships, who died here, while they lay in the bay, on their
first arrival. His name, as near as we could gather from their pronunciation,
was Or^ede. The Spaniards, whatever their intentions might be in visiting this
island, seemed to have taken infinite pains to have ingratiated themselves with
the natives; who, upon all occasions, mentioned them with the strongest terms
of esteem and veneration.

On this occasion, the Captain met with no chief of any considerable note
excepting the aged personage above described. Waheiadooa, king of Tiaraboo, (as
this part of the island is called by the natives) was now absent; and we were
afterward informed, that (though his name was the same) he was not the same
person as the chief whom Captain Cook had seen here in 1774; but his brother, a
youth of ten years of age, who had succeeded the elder Waheiadooa. We also
discovered, that the celebrated Oberea was dead; but that Otoo, and all our
other friends, were living.

When Captain Cook returned from the house erected by the Spaniards, he found
Omai haranguing a very large company; and could with difficulty disengage him
to accompany him aboard, where he had to settle a matter of importance.

Knowing that Otaheite, and the neighboring islands, could supply us
plentifully with cocoanuts, the liquor of which is a most excellent beverage,
he wished to prevail upon his people to consent to be abridged, for a short
time of their stated allowance of spirits to mix with water.

But as this, without assigning some powerful reason, might have occasioned a
general murmur, he assembled the ship's company, to communicate to them the
intent of the voyage, and the extent of our future operations. He took notice
of the generous rewards offered, by parliament, to such as shall first discover
a communication between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans in the Northern
Hemisphere, as well as to those who shall first penetrate beyond the 89th
degree of northern latitude. He said, that he did not entertain a doubt, that
he should find them ready to co-opperate with him in attempting to obtain one,
or both these rewards; but that it would be necessary to be strickly
oeconomical in the expenditure of our stores and provisions, as we had not a
chance of getting a supply after leaving these islands. He further observed,
that the duration of our voyage would exceed by a year, at least, what had been
originally supposed, by our having lost the opportunity of getting to the north
this summer. He begged them to consider the various obstructions, and
aggravated hardships, they must yet labor under, if they should be under the
necessity of being put to short allowance, of any species of provisions, in a
cold climate. He therefore submitted to them, whether it would not be the most
advisable to be prudent in time, and rather than run the risk of having their
spirits exhausted, when they might be most wanted, to consent to be without
their grog at present, when we could supply its place with so excellent, a
liquor as that of cocoa-nuts. He added nevertheless, that he would leave the
determination entirely to their own choice.

This proposal did not remain a moment under consideration, and Captain Cook
had the satisfaction to find that it was unanimously approved of. He ordered
Captain Clerk to make a similar proposal to his his people; which they also
readily agreed to. The serving of grog was therefore immediately stopped,
except on Saturday nights, when all the men had a full allowance of it, to
enable them to drink the healths of their female friends in England; lest,
amidst the pretty girls of Otaheite, they should be totally forgotten.

We began, the next day, some necessary operations; such as inspecting the
provisions in the main and fore-hold, getting the casks of beef and pork, etc.
out of the ground tier, and putting a quantity of ballast in their place- The
ship was ordered to be caulked, which she stood in much need of; having, at
times, made a considerable deal of water on our passage from the Friendly
Islands. Captain Cook also put his cattle on shore, and appointed two of his
men to look after them while grazing; not intending to leave any of them on
this part of the island.

It rained almost incessantly, the two following days; notwithstanding which,
we were visited by the natives from every quarter, the news of our arrival
having most rapidly spread. Waheiadooa, though at a considerable distance, had
been informed of it; and in the afternoon of the 16th, a chief, named Etorea,
who was his tutor, brought Captain Cook two hogs as a present from him;
acquainting him, at the same time, that he himself would attend him the day
after. He was punctual to his promise; for the Captain received a message from
him early the next morning, notifying his arrival, and requesting he would go
ashore to meet him. In consequence of this invitation, Omai and he prepared to
make him a formal visit. Omai, on this occasion, took some pains to dress
himself, not after the manner of the English, nor that of Otaheite, or
Tongataboo, or in the dress of any other country upon earth; but in a strange
medly of all the habiliments and ornaments he was possessed of.

Thus equipped, they got ashore, and first paid a visit to Etary; who, carried
on a hand-barrow, accompanied them to a large building, where he was set down;
Omai seated himself on one side of him, and Captain Cook on the other. The
Captain caused a piece of Tongataboo cloth to be spread, on which were placed
the presents he intended to make. The young Chief soon after arrived, attended
by his mother, and several principal men, who all seated themselves opposite to
us. A man who sat near, the Captain made a short speech consisting of separate
sentences; parts of which was dictated by those about him. Another, on the
opposite side, near the chief, spoke next; Etary after him, and then Omai, etc.
The subjects of these orations were Captain Cook's arrival, and his connexions
with them. Amongst other things, one of them told the Captain, that the men of
Reema (the Spaniards) desired they would not suffer him to come into Oheitepeha
Bay, if he should return again to the island, for that it was their property;
but that, so far from regarding this request, he was authorized now to
surrender to him the province of Tiaraboo, and every thing that was in it. It
was evident from this, that these people are no strangers to the policy of
accommodating themselves to present circumstances. The young chief, at length,
was directed, by his attendants, to embrace Captain Cook; and, as a
confirmation of this treaty of friendship, they exchanged names. After these
ceremonies were over, he and his friends accompanied the Captain, to dine with
him on board.

Omai had prepared, as a present for Otoo, the king of the whole island, a
maro, composed of red and yellow feathers; and, considering where we were, it
was a present of great value. Captain Cook endeavored to prevail on him not to
produce it now, wishing him to keep it till he had an opportunity of presenting
it to Otoo with his own hands. But he entertained too good an opinion of the
fidelity of his countrymen, to be guided by his advice. He was determined to
carry it ashore, on this occasion, and to give it to Waheiadooa, to be
forwarded by him to Otoo, and added to the royal maro. By this management, he
supposed he should oblige both chiefs; on the contrary, he highly disobliged
that whose favor was of the most consequence to him, without obtaining any
reward from the other. The Captain was prophetic upon this occasion; for
Waheiadooa, as he expected, kept the maro for himself, and only sent to Otoo
about a twentieth part of what composed the magnificent present.

On the 19th, Captain Cook received, from the young chief, a present of ten or
a dozen hogs some cloth, and a quantity of fruit. In the evening, we exhibited
some fire works, which both pleased and astonished the numerous spectators.

Some of our gentlemen, in their walks, discovered, as they thought, a Roman
Catholic chapel. They described the alter which they said they had seen, and
every other constituent part of such a place of worship. They mentioned,
however, at the same time, that two persons, who had the care of it, would not
permit them to go in; on which account the Captain imagined they were mistaken,
and had the curiosity to pay a visit to it himself. The supposed chapel
happened to be a toopapaoo, in which the body of the late Waheiadooa lay, in a
kind of state. It was in a pretty large house, enclosed with a low palisade.
The toopapaoo was remarkably neat, and resembled one of those little awnings
over their large canoes. It was hung and covered with clothes and mats of a
variety of colors, which had a beautiful effect. One piece of scarlet broad
cloth of the length of four or five yards, appeared conspicuous among the other
ornaments; which had probably been received as a present from the Spaniards.
This cloth, and some tassels of feathers, suggested to our gentlemen the idea
of a chapel; and their imagination supplied what ever else was wanting to
create a resemblance: hearing that the Spaniards had visited this place, might
also operate on their minds upon this occasion, and add to the probability of
its being a chapel. Small offerings of fruits and roots seemed to be daily made
at this shrine, some pieces being now quite fresh. These were deposited on a
kind of alter which stood without the palisades; within which we were not
permitted to enter. Two men constantly attended here, both night and day; as
well to watch over the place, as to dress and undress the toopapaoo. When
Captain Cook went to survey it, the cloth and its appendages were rolled up;
but at his request, the two attendants placed it in order, but not till after
they had dressed themselves, in clean white robes. The chief we were informed,
had been dead about twenty months.

Having provided a fresh supply of water, and finished all our necessary
operations, on the 22d we brought off our animals from shore, and made ready
for sea. While the ships were unmooring, Omai and Captain Cook landed, in the
morning of the 23d, to take leave of the young chief. While they were with him,
one of those persons, whom they called Eatooas, from a persuasion that they
possess the spirit of the divinity, presented himself before them. He had all
the appearances of insanity about him, and his only covering was a quantity of
planting leaves wrapped round his waist. He uttered what he had to say in a
low, squeaking voice, so as hardly to be understood. But Omai said he perfectly
comprehended him, and that he was advising Waheiadooa not to accompany Captain
Cook to Matavia, an expedition which he had never known that he intended, nor
had the Captain ever made such a proposal to him. The Eatooa also predicted,
that the ships would not arrive that day at Matavai. In this, however, he was
mistaken; though appearances, at that time, favored his assertion, as there
was not a single breath of wind in any direction. While he was delivering his
prophecy, a heavy shower of rain came on, which occasioned all to run for
shelter, except himself, who appeared to disregard it. He continued squeaking
about half an hour, and then retired. No attention was paid to what he uttered,
though some of the natives laughed at him.

Captain Cook asked the chief, whether he was an Earee or a Towtow? The answer
he received was, that he was toata eno, that is, a bad man. And yet,
notwithstanding this, and the little notice taken of the mad prophet,
superstition so far governs the natives, that they absolutely believe such
persons to be possessed with the spirit of the Eatooa. Omai seemed to be well
instructed concerning them. He said, that during the fits, with which they are
seized, they know nobody, and that if any one of them is a man of property, he
will then give away every moveable he possesses, if his friends do not put them
out of his reach; and when he recovers, he seems not to have the least
remembrance of what he had done during the time the fit was upon him.

Soon after the Captain got on board, a light breeze springing up at east, we
got under sail, and the Resolution anchored, the same evening at Matavai Bay;
but the Discovery did not get in till the next morning; consequently the man's
prophecy was half fulfilled.

CHAP II.
Interview with Otoo, King of Otaheite -- Imprudent Behavior of Omai --
Various Animals landed -- Occupations on Shore -- Visits from a Native who had
been at Lima -- Account of Oedidee -- False Report -- The Islanders make a
precipitate Retreat, but soon return -- a Rebellion in Eimeo -- Council of
Chiefs -- War with Eimeo resolved on -- A Human Sacrifice -- Circumstantial
Description of that Solemnity -- The great Morai of Attahooroo described --
Behavior of the Natives during the Ceremony -- Particular Customs.

ON Sunday the 24th, in the morning, Otoo, the king of the whole island,
accompanied by a great number of the natives in their canoes, came from Oparre,
his place of residence, and having landed on Matai Point, sent a messenger on
board, intimating his desire to see Captain Cook there. He accordingly went a
shore, attended by Omai, and some of the officers. They found a vast multitude
of people assembled on this occasion, in the midst of whom was the king, with
his father, his two brothers, and three sisters. The Captain went toward him
and saluted him, being followed by Omai, who kneeled and embraced his legs.
Though Omai had prepared himself for this ceremony, by dressing himself in his
best apparel, and behaved with great respect and modesty, yet very little
notice was taken of him. He made the king a present of two or three yards of
gold cloth, and a large piece of red feathers, and the Captain gave him a
gold-laced hat, a suit of fine linen, some tools, a quantity of read feathers,
and one of the bonnets worn at the Friendly islands.

This visit being over, the king, and all the royal family, accompanied Captain
Cook on board, followed by several canoes, plentifully laden with all kind of
provisions. Each of the family owned a part; so that the Captain had a present
from every one of them; and each received from him a separate present in
return. Not long after, the king's mother came on board, bringing with her some
provisions and cloth, which she divided between the Commodore and Omai. Though
the latter was but little noticed at first by his countrymen, they no sooner
gained information of his wealth, than they began to court his friendship.
Captain Cook encouraged them as far as lay in his power, being desirous of
fixing him with Otoo. intending to leave all his European animals at this
island, he thought Omai would be able to give the natives some instruction with
regard to their use, and the management of them. Besides, the Captain was
convinced, that the farther he was removed from his native island, the more he
would be respected. But unfortunately, Omai rejected his advice, and behaved in
so imprudent a manner, that he soon lost the friendship of Otoo, and of all the
most considerable persons at Otaheite. He associated with none but strangers
and vagabonds, whose sole intention was to plunder him: and, if the Captain had
not interfered, they would not have left him a single article of any
consequence. This conduct drew upon him the ill will of the principal chiefs;
who found that they could not obtain, from any one in either ship, such
valuable presents as were bestowed by Omai on the lowest of the people. After
dinner, a party of us accompanied Otoo to Oparre, taking with us some poultry,
consisting of a peacock and hen, a turky-cock and hen, three geese, one gander,
four ducks, and a drake. All these we left at Oparre, in the possession of
Otoo: and these geese and ducks began to breed before we sailed. We found there
a gander, that Captain Wallis had given to Oberea ten years before; we also met
with several goats, and the Spanish bull, whom they kept tied to a tree, near
the habitation of Otoo. We never beheld a finer animal of his kind. He now
belonged to Etary, and had been conveyed from Oheitepeha to this place, in
order to be shipped for Bolabola. The next day the Commodore sent to this bull
the three cows that he had on board; and the bull, which he had brought, the
horse, and mare, and sheep, were now put ashore at Matavai. Having thus
disposed of these animals, he found himself eased of the extraordinary trouble
and vexation that had attended the bringing this living cargo to such a
distance.

As Captain Cook intended to continue here a considerable time, we set up our
observatories on Matavai Point; and, adjoined to them, two tents were pitched,
for the reception of a guard, and of such people as might be left on shore, in
different departments. The command, at this station, was entrusted to Mr. King;
who also attended the astronomical and other observations. While we remained
here, the crews of both ships were occupied in many necessary operations. The
Discovery's mainmast was carried ashore, and made as good as it had ever been
before. Our sails and water-casks were repaired; both of our ships were
caulked; and the rigging was completely over-hauled. We likewise inspected the
bread that we had on board in casks, and found that but little of it was
damaged.

On the 26th, a piece of ground was cleared for a garden, and planted with
several articles; very few of which will, probably, be looked after by the
natives. Some potatoes, melons, and pineapple plants, were in a fair way of
succeeding before we quitted the place. We had brought, from the Friendly
Islands, several shaddock-trees, which we also planted here; and they will in
all probability succeed, unless their growth should be checked by the same idle
and premature curiosity which destroyed a vine planted at Oheitepeha by the
Spaniards. Many of the natives assembled to taste the first fruit it produced;
but the grapes being still sour, they considered it as a little better than
poison, and trod it under foot. In that state Omai accidentally found it, and
was rejoiced at the discovery; for he was confident, that if he had but grapes,
he could easily make wine. Accordingly, he had several slips cut off from the
tree, with an intention of carrying them away with him; and he pruned, and put
in order, the remains of it.

Before we had been two days at anchor in Matavai Bay, we were visited by all
our old friends, whose names are mentioned in the narrative of Captain Cook's
last voyage. Not one of them came with empty hands; so that we had an amazing
quantity of provisions, without any apprehensions of exhausting the island,
which presented to our eyes every mark of the most exuberant fertility and
abundance. Soon after we had arrived here, one of the islanders, whom the
Spaniards had carried with them to Lima, paid us a visit; but, in his exterior
appearance, he was not distinguishable from the rest of his countrymen. He
still remembered some Spanish words, among which the most frequent were, si
Sennor. He also found here the young man whom we called Oedidee, but whose real
name is Heete-heete. Captain Cook had carried him from Ulieta on board his ship
in 1773, and brought him back in the succeeding year, after he had visited the
Friendly Islands, New-Zealand, Easter Island, and the Marquesas. He had come
from Bolabola (of which he was a native) to Otaheite, about three months before
probably with the sole view of gratifying hid ^^riosity. He preferred the
modes, and even dress, of his countrymen to ours; for, though Captain Cook gave
him some cloths, which our board of admiralty had thought proper to send for
his use (to which he added a chest of tools, and several other articles, as a
present for himself) he, after a few days, declined wearing them. This
instance, as well as that of the person who had been at Lima, may be adduced as
a proof of the strong inclination of mankind in general to habits acquired at
an early age; and it is perhaps no unreasonable supposition, that even Omai,
who had imbibed almost the whole English manners, will in a short time after
being left by us, return, like Oedidee, and the visitor of Lima, to his own
native garments, and his original mode of life.

In the morning of the 27th, a man from Oheitepeha informed us, that two
Spanish ships had achored in that bay the preceding night; and to confirm this
intelligence, he produced some coarse blue cloth, which, he said, he had got
out of one of the ships. He further said, that Mateema was in one of the ships;
and that they would come to Matavai in two or three days. These and some other
circumstances, which he mentioned, gave the story so much the apperance of
truth, that the Commodore dispatched Lieutenant Williamson in a boat, to look
into Oheitepeha Bay; and, in the mean time, both our ships were put in a
posture of defense. For, though England and Spain were at peace when he left
England, he did not know but that a different scene might, by this time, have
opened. Upon enquiry, however, we had reason to imagine, that the relater of
the story had imposed upon us; and this was put beyond all doubt, when Mr.
Williamson returned the day following, who made his report to Captain Cook,
that he had been at Oheitepeha, and found that no ships were there at present,
nor had any been there since we left it. The people of this part of the island,
were we now were stationed, told us indeed, at first, that it was a fiction
invented by those of Tiaraboo. But what view they could have, we could not
conceive, unless they supposed that the report would induce us to quit the
island, and thus deprive the inhabitants of Otaheite-nooe of the advantages
they might otherwise reap from our ships remaining there; the natives of the
two parts of the island being inveterate enemies to each other.

Since we arrived at Matavai, the weather had been very unsettled till the
29th; before which day we were unable to get even altitudes of the sun for
ascertaining the going of the time-keeper. The caulking, and other repairs of
the ships, were also retarded by the same cause. In the evening of this day,
the islanders made a precipitate retreat, both from our land station, and from
on board the ships. We conjectured that this arose from their knowing that some
theft had been committed, and apprehending punishment upon that account. At
length, we became acquainted with the whole affair: one of the surgeon's mates
had made an excursion into the country to purchase curiosities, and had taken
with him four hatchets for the purpose of exchange. Having been so imprudent as
to employ a native to carry them, the fellow took an opportunity of running off
with so valuable a prize. This was the reason of the sudden flight, in which
Otoo himself, and all his family had joined; and it was with difficulty that
the Captain stopped them, after following them for the space of two or three
miles. As he had determined to take no measures for the recovery of the
hatchets, that his people for the future might be more upon their guard against
such negligence, every thing quickly resumed its former tranquillity.

The next morning some messengers arrived from Eimeo, with intelligence, that
the people of that island were in arms: and that Otoo's partisans there had
been obliged by the opposite party to retreat to the mountains. The quarrel
between the two islands, which began in 1774, had partly subsisted every since.
A formidable armament had sailed soon after Captain Cook left Otaheite in his
last voyage; but the malcontents of Eimeo had made so gallant a resistance,
that the fleet had returned without success; and now another expedition was
deemed necessary. On the arrival of these messengers, the chiefs assembled at
Otoo's house, where the Captain actually was at that time, and had the honor
of being admitted into their council. One of the messengers opened the business
with a speech of considerable length, the purport of which was to explain the
situation of affairs in Eimeo, and to excite the Otaheitean chiefs to arm on
the occasion. This opinion was opposed by others who were against commencing
hostilities; and the debate was, for some time, carried on with great order and
decorum. At length, however, they became very tumultuous, and the Captain began
to expect that their meeting would conclude like a Polish diet. But the
contending chiefs cooled as fast as they grew warm, and order was speedily
restored. In the end, the party for war prevailed; and it was resolved, though
not unanimously, that a strong force should be sent to Eimeo. Otoo said very
little during the whole debate. Those of the council, who were inclinable for
war, applied to the Captain for his assistance; and all of them were desirous
of knowing what part he would take, Omai was sent for to act as his
interpreter; but, as he could not be found, the Captain, being under a
necessity of speaking for himself, told them, as well as he could, that, as he
was not perfectly acquainted with the dispute, and as the natives of Eimeo had
never given him the least cause of offense, he could not think of engaging in
hostilities against them. With this declaration they either were, or appeared
to be, satisfied. The council was then dissolved; but, before the Captain
retired, Otoo desired him to come again in the afternoon, and bring Omai with
him.

A party of us accordingly waited upon him at the appointed time; and he
conducted us to his father, in whose presence the dispute with Eimeo was again
discussed. The Commodore being very desirous of effecting an accommodation,
sounded the old chief on that subject; but he was deaf to any such proposal,
and fully determined to carry on hostilities. On our enquiry into the cause of
the war, we were informed, that, several years ago, a brother of Waheiadooa, of
Tiaraboo, was sent to Eimeo, at the desire of Maheine, a popular chief of that
island, to be their king; but had not been there many days before Maheine,
having caused him to be put to death, set up for himself, in opposition to
Tierataboonooe, newphew of the deceased, who now became the lawful heir, or
perhaps had been appointed, by the people of Otaheite, to succeed to the
government on the death of the other.

Towha, who is related to Otoo, and chief of the district of Tettaha, and who
had been commander in chief of the armament sent against Eimeo in 1774,
happened not to be at Matavai at this time, and, therefore, was not present at
these consultations. It appeared, however, that he was no stranger to what was
transacted; and that he entered into the affair with great eagerness and
spirit. For, on the 1st of September, a messenger arrived from him to acquaint
Otoo, that he had killed a man to be sacrificed to the Fatooa, with the view of
imploring the assistance of the deity against Eimeo. This ceremony was to be
performed at the great morai, at Attahooroo; and Otoo's presence was necessary
on the occasion. Captain Cook was desirous of being present at this solemnity,
and therefore proposed to Otoo, that he might be permitted to accompany him. To
this the king readily consented; and they immediately set out in the Captain's
boat, with his old friend Potatou, Mr. Anderson, and Mr. Webber, while Omai
followed them in a canoe. In their way they landed upon a small island, lying
off Tettaha, where they found Towha and his attendants. After a little
conversation between the two chiefs, on the subject of the war, Towha addressed
himself to the Captain, soliciting his assistance. When he exclused himself,
Towha seemed displeased; thinking it rather extraordinary, that one who had
constantly declared himself the friend of their island, should now refuse to
fight against its enemies. Before they parted, Towha gave to Otoo two or three
red feathers, tied up in a tuft; our party then re-embarked, having taken on
board a priest, who was to assist at the solemnity.

As soon as they landed at Attahooroo, which was about two o'clock, Otoo
desired that the sailors might be ordered to continue in the boat; and that
Captain Cook, Mr. Anderson, and Mr. Webber, would take off their hats as soon
as they should come to the morai, to which they immediately proceeded, attended
by numbers of men, and some boys; but not one woman was present. They found
four priests, with their assistants, waiting for them. The dead body, or
sacrifice, was in a small canoe that lay on the beach, fronting the morai. Two
of the priests with several of their attendants, were sitting by the canoe; the
others at the morai. Our company stopped at the distance of twenty or thirty
paces from the priests. Here Otoo placed himself; our gentlemen, and a few
others, standing by him, while the majority of the people were removed at a
greater distance.

The ceremonies now commenced. One of the attendants of the priests brought a
young plantain-tree, and laid it down before the king. Another approached,
bearing a small tuft of red feathers, twisted on some fibers of the cocoa-nut
husk, with which he touched one of Otoo's feet, and afterward retired with it
to his companions. One of the priests who were seated at the morai, now began a
long prayer; and, at particular times, sent down young plantain-trees, which
were placed upon the sacrifice. During this prayer, an islander, who stood by
the officiating priest, held in his hands two bundles, in one of which, as we
aftewards found, was the royal maro; and the other, if we may be allowed the
expression, was the ark of the Eatooa. The prayer being finished, the priests
at the morai, with their assistants, went and sat down by those who were upon
the beach, carrying the two bundles with them. They here renewed their prayers*
during which the plantain-trees were taken, one by one, at various times, from
off the dead body, which, being wrapped up in cocoa-leaves and small branches,
was now taken out of the canoe, and laid upon the beach. The priests placed
themselves around it; some standing, and others sitting; and one, or more of
them, repeated sentences for about ten minutes. The body was now stripped of
the leaves and branches, and placed parallel with the seashore. Then one of
the priests, standing at the feet of the corpse, pronounced a long prayer, in
which he was occasionally joined by the others, each of them holding a tuft of
red feathers in his hand. During this prayer, some hair was pulled off the head
of the intended sacrifice, and the left eye was taken out; both which being
wrapped up in a green-leaf, were presented to the king; who, however did not
touch them, but gave, to the man who presented them the tuft of red feathers
which he had received from Towha. This, with the eye and hair, was taken to the
priests. Not long after, his majesty sent them another piece of feathers. In
the course of this last ceremony, a king-fisher making a noise in the trees,
Otoo turned to Captain Cook, saying, "That is the Eatooa;" and seemed to
consider it as a favorable prognostic.

The corpse was then carried a littie way, and laid under a tree; near which
were fixed three thin pieces of wood, variously carved. The bundles of cloth
were placed on a part of the morai; and the tufts of red feathers were laid at
the feet of the dead body, round which the priests stationed themselves; and
our gentlemen were now permitted to go as near as they pleased. He who seemed
to be the chief priest spoke for about a quarter of an hour, with different
tones and gestures; sometimes appearing to expostulate with the deceased; at
other times, asking several questions; then making various demands, as if the
dead person either had power himself, or interest with the deity, to engage him
to grant such requests; among which he desired him to deliever Eimeo, Maheine
its chief, the women, hogs, and other things of the island, into their hands;
which was, indeed, the express object of the sacrifice. He then prayed near
half an hour, in a whining tone, and two other priests joined in the prayer, in
the course of which a priest plucked some more hair from the head of the
corpse, and put it upon one of the bundles: The chief priest now prayed alone,
holding in his hand the feathers received from Towha. Having finished, he gave
them to another priest, who prayed in like manner; then all the tufts of
feathers were placed upon the bundles of the cloth, which concluded the
ceremony at this place.

The dead body was now carried to the most conspicuous part of the morai, with
the feathers and the two bundles of cloth, while the drums beat slowly. The
feathers and bundles were laid against the pile of stones, and the body at the
foot of them. The priests having again seated themselves round the corpse,
renewed their prayers, while some of their assistants dug a hole about the
depth of two feet, into which they threw the victim, and covered it over with
stones and earth. While they were committing the body to the grave, a boy
squeaked aloud, upon which Omai said to Captain Cook, that it was the Eatooa. A
fire having been made in the mean time, a lean half-starved dog was produced
and killed by twisting his neck. The hair was then singed off, and the entrails
being taken out, were thrown into the fire, where they were left to be
consumed; but the kidney, heart, and liver, were only roasted, by being put on
heated stones; and the carcass of the dog, after being rubbed over with the
blood, was, with the liver, etc. laid down before the priests, who were seated
round the grave praying. They for some time uttered ejaculations over the dog,
while two men, at intervals, beat very loud on two drums; and a boy screamed,
in a loud shrill voice, three times. This, they said, was to invite the Eatooa
to feast on the banquet that they had provided for him. When the priests had
finished their prayers, the body, heart, liver, etc. of the dog, were placed on
a whatta, or scaffold, about six feet in height, on which lay the remans of two
other dogs, and of two pigs, which had been lately sacrificed. The priests and
attendants now gave a kind of shout, which put an end to the ceremonies for the
present. The evening being arrived, our gentlemen were conducted to a house
belonging to Potatou, where they were entertained and lodged for the night.
Having been informed, that the religious rites were to be renewed the next
morning, they would not quit the place while any thing remained to be seen.
Some of them repaired to the scene of action early in the morning; and, soon
afterward, a pig was sacrificed, and laid upon the same scaffold with the
others. About eight o'clock, Otoo took our party again to the morai, where the
priests, and a great multitude of people, where by this time assembled. The two
bundles occupied the place where they had been deposited the preceding evening;
the two drums were in the front of the morai, and the priests were stationed
beyond them. The king placed himself between the drums, and desired Captain
Cook to stand by him.

The ceremony of this day began with bringing a young plantain-tree, and laying
it at his majesty's feet. A prayer was then repeated by the priests, holding in
their hands several tufts of red feathers, and also a plume of ostrich
feathers, which the Commodore had presented to Otoo on his first arrival. When
the priests had ended the prayer, they changed their station, and placed
themselves between our gentlemen and the morai. One of them, the same who had
performed the principal part the preceding day, began another prayer, which
continued near half an hour. During this prayer, the tufts of red feathers were
put, one by one, upon the ark of the Eatooa. Not long after, four pigs were
produced, one of which was immediately killed, and the three others were taken
to a neighboring sty.

One of the bundles was now untied; and it was found to contain the maro, with
which the Otaheiteans invest their kings. When taken out of the cloth, it was
spread on the ground, at full length, before the priests. It is a girdle about
fifteen feet in length, and one foot and a quarter in breadth, and is probably
put on in the same manner as the common maro, or piece of cloth, used by these
islanders to wrap round the waist. It was ornamented with yellow and red
feathers; but principally with the former. One end of it was bordered with
eight pieces, about the size and figure of a horse-shoe, whose edges were
fringed with black feathers. The other end was forked, having the points of
various lengths. The feathers were ranged in two rows, in square compartments,
and produced a pleasing effect. They had been first fixed upon some of the
cloth of the island, and then sewed to the upper end of the pendant which
Captain Wallis had left flying on shore, the first time of his arrival at
Matavai. The priests pronounced a long prayer, relative to this part of the
ceremony; and after it was ended, the badge of royalty was folded up with great
care, and put into the cloth.

The other bundle, which we have already mentioned under the name of the ark,
was next opened, at one end; but our party were not permitted to approach near
enough to examine its mysterious contents. The intelligence they obtained
respecting it was, that the Eatooa, (or rather what is supposed to represent
him) was concealed in it. This sacred repository is composed of the twisted
fibers of the husk of the cocoa-nut; and its figure is roundish, with one end
considerably thicker than the other.

The pig that had been killed was by this time cleaned, and its entrails taken
out. These happened to have many of those convulsive motions, which frequently
appear, in different parts, when an animal is killed; and this was considered
as a very favorable omen to the intended expedition. After being exposed for
some time, the entrails were carried and laid down before the priests. While
one of them prayed, another closely inspected the entrials, and continued
turning them gently with a stick. Having been sufficiently examined, they were
thrown into the fire. The sacrificed pig, and its liver, heart, etc. were now
put upon the scaffold were the dog had been deposited; and then all the
feathers, except the ostrich plume, being enclosed in the ark, an end was put
to the whole solemnity.

Four double canoes remained upon the beach, all the morning, before the place
of sacrifice. A small platform, covered with palm-leaves, fastened in
mysterious knots, was fixed on the fore part of each of these canoes; and this
also is called a morai. Some plantains, cocoa-nuts, bread-fruit, fish, and
other articles, lay upon each of these naval morais. The natives said, that
they belonged to the Eatooa, and that they were to attend the fleet that was to
be sent out against Eimeo.

The unfortunate victim, offered on this occation, was to appearance, a
middle-aged man, and was one of the lowest class of the people. But it did not
appear that they had fixed upon him on account of his having committed any
particular crime, that deserved death. It is certain, however, that they
usually select such guilty persons for their sacrifices, or else, vagabonds,
who have no visible way of procuring an honest livelihood. Our gentlemen having
examined the appearance of the body of the unhappy sufferer, now offered up to
the object of these people's worship, observed, that it was bloody about the
head and face, and much bruised upon the right temple, which denoted the manner
in which he had been killed. And they were informed, that he had been knocked
on the head with a stone.

The wretches, who are destined to suffer on these occasions, are never
previously apprized of their fate. Whenever any one of the principal chiefs
deems a human sacrifice necessary, on any great emergency, he fixes upon the
victim, and then dispatches some of his trusty servants, who fall upon him
suddenly, and either stone him to death, or beat out his brains with a club.
The sovereign is next acquainted with it, whose presence is said to be
absolutely requisite at the solemn rites that follow; and, indeed, on the late
occasion, Otoo bore a capital part. The solemnity itself is termed Poor Eree,
or the prayer of the chief; and the victim is called Taata-tahoo, or
consecrated man.

The morai, were the late sacrifice was offered, is always appropriated for the
burial of the king of the whole island, and likewise of his family, and some
other persons of distinguished rank. It differs little, except in extent, from
the common morais. Its principal part is a large oblong pile of stones, about
thirteen feet in height, and contracted toward the top, with a quadrangular
area on each side, loosely paved with pebbles, under which the bones of the
chiefs are deposited. Not far from the end nearest the sea, is the place of
sacrifice, where is a very large whatta, or scaffold, on which the offerings of
fruits, and other vegetables, are placed; but the animals are laid on a smaller
one, and the human sacrifices are interred under the pavement. There are
several relics scattered about the place; such as small stones raised in
various parts of the pavement, some with bits of cloth fastened round them,
others entirely covered with it; and, upon the side of the large pile, fronting
the area, are a great number of pieces of carved wood, in which their gods are
supposed to reside occasionally. There is a heap of stones, at one end of the
large scaffold, with a sort of platform on one side. On this they deposit all
the skulls of the human sacrifices, which they take up after they have remained
under ground for some months. Just above them, many of the carved pieces of
wood are placed; and here the maro, and the other bundle, which was supposed to
contain the God Ooro, were laid, during the celebration of the late solemn
rites.

It is probable, that this barbarous custom of offering human victims, prevails
in all or most of the islands of the Pacific Ocean, however distant from each
other some of them may be. And though we should suppose, that not more than one
person is sacrificed at one time, either at Otaheite, or other islands; yet
these occasions, in all probability, occur so frequently, as to make a terrible
havoc of the human species; for Captain Cook reckoned no less than forty-nine
skulls, of former victims, lying before the morai, at Attahooroo; and as none
of those skulls appeared to have suffered any considerable change, or decay,
from the weather, it may be inferred, that but a short time had elapsed since
these victims had been offered. This horrid practice, though no consideration
whatever can make it cease to be detestable, might, perhaps, be thought less
detrimental, in some respects, if it contributed to impress any awe for the
Deity, or veneration for religion, upon the minds of the spectators. But this
was so far from being the case on the late occasion, that though a vast
multitude of people had assembled at the morai, they showed very little
reverence for what was transacting. And Omai happening to arrive, after the
ceremonies had begun, many of the islanders thronged round him, and were
engaged, for the remaining part of the time, in making him recount some of his
adventures; to which they listened with great eagerness of attention,
regardless of the solemn offices which their priests were then performing.
Indeed, the priests themselves, except the one who sustained the principal
part, either from their being familiarized to such objects, or from their
reposing no great degree of confidence in the efficacy of their religous
institutions, maintained very little of that solemnity which is necessary to
give to acts of devotion their proper effect. Their habit was but an ordinary
one; they conversed together with great familiarity; and the only attempt they
made to preserve decorum, was by exerting their authority to prevent the
populace from encroaching on the very spot where the rites were performed, and
to suffer our gentlemen, as strangers, to come forward. They were, however,
very candid in the answers which they gave to any interrogatories that were put
to them, with regard to this inhuman institution. And, particularly, on being
asked, what was the design of it, they replied that it was an ancient custom
and was highly agreeable to their god, who came and fed upon the sacrifices; in
consequence of which, he granted their petitions. It was then objected, that he
certainly did not feed on these, as he was neither observed to do it, nor were
the bodies of the sacrificed animals soon consumed; and that as to the corpse
of a human victim, they prevented his feeding on that, by interring it. In
answer to these objections, they gave it as their opinion, that he came in the
night, invisibly, and fed only on the soul or immaterial part, which (these
people say) remain about the place of sacrifice, till the carcass of the victim
is totally wasted by putrefaction.

Human sacrifices are not the only barbarous custom that still prevails amongst
the inhabitants of Otaheite, though, in many other respects, they have emerged
from the brutal manners of savage life. Besides cutting out the jaw bones of
their enemies slain in battle, which they carry about with them as trophies,
they, in some measure, offer up their bodies to the Eatooa. Soon after an
engagement, in which they have come off victorious, they collect all the dead,
and bring them to the morai, where, with great form and ceremony, they dig a
large hole, and bury them all in it, as so many offerings to their divinities.

They treat, in a different manner, their own cheifs that fall in battle. Their
late king Tootaha, Tubourai-tamaide, and another chief, who were all slain in
an engagement with those of Tiaraboo, were brought to the morai at Attahooroo.
There the priests cut out the bowels before the great alter; and their dead
bodies were afterward interred in three different places, near the great pile
of stones abovementioned; and the common men, who lost their lives in the
battle, were all buried in one hole, at the foot of the same pile. This was
performed the day after the battle, with much pomp and formality, amidst a
numerous concourse of people, as a thanksgiving offering to the Deity, for the
victory they had obtained the preceding day. The vanquished, in the mean time,
had taken refuge in the mountains, where they remained upwards of a week, till
the fury of the victors began to abate. A treaty was then set on foot, by which
it was agreed, that Otoo should be proclaimed king of the whole island; and the
solemnity of investing him with the maro, or badge of royalty, was performed at
the same morai, with great magnificence.

CHAP. III.
Re-embark for Matavai -- Conference with Towha respecting the human Sacrifice
-- Description of the Heevas -- Dinner given by Omai -- Exhibition of
Fireworks -- Remarkable Method of making a Present of Cloth -- Manner of
preserving, for many Months, the dead Body of a Chief -- Another human
Sacrifice offered -- Riding on horseback, matter of great Astonishment to the
Natives -- Otoo's great Attention to prevent Thiefs, etc. -- Animals given to
him by Captain Cook -- Audience given to Etary, etc. -- Manner of fighting two
War Canoes -- Naval Power, etc.

AT the close of the very extraordinary scene, exhibited at the morai, and
particularly described in the last chapter, our party embarked about twelve
o'clock, in order to return to Matavai; and in their way, paid a visit to
Towha, who had continued in the little island, where they met him the preceding
day. Some conversation on public affairs passed between Otoo and him; and the
latter entreated Captain Cook, once more, to join them as an ally, in their war
against Eimeo. By his positive refusal he entirely lost the good opinion of
this chief.



Before they separated, he interrogated our gentlemen concerning the solemnity,
at which they had been present; and asked, particularly, if it answered their
expectations; what opinion they entertained of its efficacy; and whether such
acts of worship were frequent in their own country? They had been silent during
the celebration of the horrid ceremony; but, as soon as it was completed,
freely expressed their sentiments upon the subject, to Otoo, and his
attendants; consequently Captain Cook did not conceal his detestation of it, in
this conversation with Towha. Exclusive of the barbarity of the bloody custom,
he urged the unreasonableness of it, alleging that such a sacrifice, instead
of making the Eatooa propitious to their nation, would excite his vengeance;
and that, from this very circumstance, he concluded, that their intended
expedition against Maheine, would be unsuccessful. This was proceeding to great
lengths upon conjecture; but there was little danger of being mistaken; for
respecting this war, there were three parties in this island, one violent for
it, another perfectly indifferent about it; and the third avowed supporters of
Maheine, and his cause. Under these circumstances, it was not probable that
such a plan of military operations would be settled, as could insure success.
Omai acted as interpreter, in conveying the Captain's sentiments to Towha, on
the subject of the late horrid sacrifice; and he supported his arguments with
such spirit, that the chief appeared to be extremely angry; especially, on
being informed, that if he had taken away the life of a man in England, as he
had done here, his rank would not have protected him from an ignominious death.
Upon this, he exclaimed, maeno! maeno! (vile! vile!) and would not hear a
syllable more about it. Many of the natives were present at this debate;
particularly the attendants and servants of Towha; and when Omai mentioned the
punishment that would in England be inflicted upon the greatest man, if he
dared to kill the meanest servant, they listened very attentively; and perhaps,
on this subject, they thought differently from their master.

Leaving Towha, our gentlemen proceeded to Oparre, where Otoo solicited them to
pass the night. They landed in the evening; and, on their way to his
habitation, had an opportunity of observing how these people amuse themselves,
in their private heevas. They saw about a hundred of them sitting in a house:
in the midst of whom were two women, and an old man behind each of them,
beating gently upon a drum; and the women, at intervals, singing with great
softness and delicacy. The assembly were very attentive, and seemed, as it
were, absorbed in the pleasure the music gave them; few of them taking any
notice of the strangers, and the performers never once ceasing. When the party
arrived at Otoo's house, it was almost dark. Here they were entertained with
one of their public heevas, or plays, in which his three sisters represented
the principal characters. This they call a heeva raa, and no person is suffered
to enter the house or area, where it is exhibited. This is always the case,
when the royal sisters are the performers. Their dress on this occasion, was
truly elegant and picturesque, and they acquitted themselves in a very
distinguished manner; though some comic interludes, wherein four men were the
performers, seemed to afford greater entertainment to the audience, which was
numerous. The Captain and his companions proceeded, the next morning, to
Matavai, leaving Otoo at Oparre; but his mother, sisters, and many other women,
attended the Captain on board, and Otoo followed a short time after.

While Otoo and Captain Cook had been ^^sent from the ships, they had been
sparingly supplied with fruit, and had not many visitors. After their return we
had abundance of company and provision. On the 4th, a party of us, among whom
was Otoo, dined ashore with Omai, who provided excellent fare, consisting of
fish, fowls, pork, and puddings. Dinner being over, Captain Cook accompanied
Otoo back to his dewling, where he found all his servants busy in getting a
quantity of provision ready for him. Amongst other articles, there was a large
hog, which they killed in his presence. There was also a large pudding; the
whole process in making which the Captain saw. It was composed of bread-fruit,
plantains, taro, and plam or pandanus-nuts, each rasped, scraped, or beat up
fine, and baked by itself. A quantity of the juice of cocoa-nut-kernels, was
put into a kind of wooden tray. The other articles, hot from the oven, were put
into this vessel; together with some hot stones, in order to make the contents
simmer. Three or four persons were employed in stirring up the several
ingredients till they were perfectly incorporated, and the juice of the
cocoa-nut was, turned to oil; and the whole mass, at last, was nearly of the
consistency of a hasty-pudding. The hog being baked, and the pudding being
made, they, together with two living hogs, some bread fruit and cocoa-nuts,
were sent on board the Captain's ship in a canoe, followed by him and all the
royal family.

A young ram, of the Cape-bread, that had been lambed, and carefully brought up
on board Captain Cook's ship, was killed by a dog the following day. This was
the more to be regretted at it was the only one of that breed that we had; and
only one of the English breed was now remaining.

On the 7th, in the evening, we exhibited some fireworks before a vast
concourse of people, some of whom were highly entertained, but the greater
number were much terrified with the exhibition; insomuch, that they could
hardly be prevailed on to keep together to see the whole of the entertainment.
What concluded the business, was a table-rocket. It flew off the table and
dispersed the whole crowd in an instant; even the most resolute amongst them
now fled with precipitation.

A party of us dined, the next day, with Oedidee, on fish and pork. The hog,
which weighed about thirty pounds, was alive, dressed and upon the table within
the hour. Soon af^e^ we had dined, Otoo appeared, and enquired ^f Captain Cook,
if his belly was full? who answered in the affirmative. "Then come along with
me," said Otoo. The Captain accordingly attended him to his father's where he
saw several people employed in dressing two girls, with fine cloth, after a
very singular fashion. There were several pieces of cloth, and the one end of
each piece was held over the heads of the girls, while the remainder was
wrapped round their bodies, under the armpits. The upper ends were then
suffered to fall down, and hang in folds to the ground, over the other. Round
the outside of all, were then wrapped several pieces of cloth of various
colors, which considerably increased the size; it being five or six yards in
circuit; and the weight of this singular attire, was as much as the poor girls
could well support. To each were hung two taames, or breast-plates, in order to
embelish the whole, and give it a picturesque appearance. Thus equipped, they
were taken on board the ship, together with several hogs, and a quantity of
fruit, which, together with this cloth, was a present to Captain Cook from
Otoo's father. Those who are dressed in this manner, are called atee; but, this
ceremony is never performed, except where large presents of cloth are to be
made. We never saw it practiced upon any other occasion; but both Captain Cook
and Captain Clerk had cloth presented to them afterward, wrapped round the
bearers in the same manner. The next day, Captain Cook received a present of
five hogs, and some fruit, from Otoo; and one hog, and some fruit from each of
his sisters. Other provisions were also in great plenty. Great quantities of
mackarel had been caught here by the natives, for two or three successive days;
some of which were sold on board the ships.

Otoo was equally attentive to supply our wants, and contribute to our
amusement. On the 10th, he treated a party of us at Oparre, with a play. His
three sisters were the performers, and their dresses were new and elegant, much
more so than we had met with in any of these islands.

The principal object, however, that the Captain had now in view, in going to
Oparre, was to see an embalmed corpse, near the residence of Otoo. On enquiry,
he found it to be the remains of Tee, a chief whom he well knew, when he last
visited this island. It was lying in an elegant toopapaoo, in all respects
similar to that at Oheitepeha, in which the remains of Waheiadooa are
deposited. We found the body was under cover, within the toopapaoo, and wrapped
up in cloth. At the Captain's desire, the person who had the care of it,
brought it out, and placed it on a kind of bier, so as to give a perfect view
of it; but we were not admitted within the pales that enclosed the toopapaoo.
The corpse having been thus exhibited, he ornamented the place with mats and
cloths, disposed in such a manner as to produce a pleasing effect. The body was
entire in every part; and putrefaction seemed hardly to be begun, not the least
disagreeable smell proceeding from it; though this is one of the hottest
climates, and Tee had been above four months dead. There was, indeed, a
shrinking of the muscular parts and eyes, but the hair and nails were in their
original state, and the several joints were pliable. On enquiry into their
method of preserving their dead bodies, we were informed, that, soon after they
are dead, they are disembowelled, by drawing the intestines, and other viscera,
out at the anus, and the whole cavity is stuffed with cloth; and when any
moisture appeared, it was immediately dried up, and the bodies rubbed all over
with perfumed cocoa-nut-oil; which, frequently repeated, preserved them several
months; after which they moulder away gradually. Omai informed us, that the
bodies of all their great men, who die a natural death, are thus preserved; and
are exposed to public view for a very considerable time after. At first, they
are exhibited every fine day; afterward, the intervals become greater and
greater; and, at last, they are very seldom to be seen.

We quitted Oparre in the evening, leaving Otoo, and all the royal family. The
Captain saw none of them till the 12th; when all, except the chief himself,
honored him with a visit. He was gone, they said, at Attahooroo, to assist at
another human sacrifice, sent by the chief of Tiaraboo to be offered up at the
morai. This second instance, within so short a period, was a melancholy proof,
that the victims of his bloody superstition are very numerous amongst this
humane people. The Captain would have been present at this sacrifice also, had
he been earlier informed of it, but now it was too late. For the same reason,
he omitted being present at a public transaction, at Oparre, the preceding
day, when Otoo, with great solemnity, restored to the adherents of the late
king Tootaha, the lands and possessions, of which, after his death they had
been deprived.

Otoo returned the next evening, from exercising the most disagreeable of his
royal duties; A YOUNG WOMAN of OTAHEITE, bringing a PRESENT
and, the next day, being honored with his company, the Captains Cook and
Clerk, mounted on horseback, and rode round the plain of Matavai, to the
astonishment of a vast train of spectators. Once or twice, before this, Omai
had, indeed, attempted to get on a horse; but he had as often fallen off,
before he could contrive to seat himself properly; this was, therefore, the
first time they had seen any body on horseback. What the Captains had begun,
was repeated daily, by one or another of our people; and yet the curiosity of
the natives continued unabated. After they had seen the use that was made of
these animals, they were exceedingly delighted with them; and we were of
opinion, that they conveyed to them a better idea of the greatness of other
nations, than all the novelties that their European visitors had carried
amongst them.

The next day, Etary, or Olla, the God of Bolabola, removed from the
neighborhood of Matavai, to Oparre, attended by several sailing canoes. Otoo,
we were told, did not approve of his being so near our station, where his
people could more conveniently invade our property. Otoo, it must be
acknowledged, took every prudent method to prevent thefts and robberies; and it
was principally owing to his regulations, that so few were committed. He had
erected a small house or two, behind our post; and two others near our tents,
between the river and the sea. Some of his own people continually kept watch in
all these places; and, as his father usually resided at Matavai Point, we were,
in a manner, surrounded by them. They not only defended us in the night from
thieves, but they had an opportunity of observing every thing that passed in
the day; and were ready to receive contributions from such girls, as were
privately connected with our people, which was usually done every morning; so
that the measures he had taken to secure our safety, answered the more
essential purpose of enlarging his own profits.

Otoo acquainted Captain Cook, that his presence was required at Oparre, where
an audience was to be given to the great personage from Bolabola, and begged he
would accompany him thither. The Captain readily consented, expecting to meet
with something deserving his notice. Accordingly, they set out on the 16th,
attended by Mr. Anderson. Nothing, however, occurred, that was interesting or
curious. Etary and his followers presented some coarse cloth and hogs to Otoo,
with some ceremony, and a set speech. After this a consultation was held
between them and some other chiefs, about their expedition to Eimeo. Etary, at
first, disapproved of it; but his objections were at length overruled. It
appeared, indeed, the next day, that it was too late to deliberate upon this
business; for, in the evening, a messenger arrived with intelligence, that
there had been some skirmishes, but that the loss or advantage, on either side,
was inconsiderable.

Captain Cook, Mr. Anderson, and Omai, in the morning of the 18th, went again
to Oparre, accompanied by Otoo; taking with them the sheep which the Captain
intended to leave upon the island. They consisted of an English ram and ewe,
and three Cape ewes; all which he made a present of to Otoo. All the three cows
had taken the bull; he therefore thought it advisable to devide them, and
carry some to Ulietea. With this view, he ordered them to be brought before
him, and proposed to Etary, that if he would leave his bull with Otoo, he
should have this and one of the cows. To this proposal, Etary, at first,
started some objections; but, at last, agreed to it; however, as the cattle
were putting into the boat, one of Etary's followers opposed the making an
exchange whatever.

The Captain, upon this, suspecting that Etary had agreed to the arrangement,
for the present, only to please him, dropped the idea of an exchange; and
finally determined to leave them all with Otoo; whom he strictly enjoined not
to suffer them to be removed from Oparre, till he should have got a stock of
young ones; which he might then dispose of to his friends, or send to the
neighboring islands.

This matter being settled, our gentlemen left Etary and his party, and
attended Otoo to another place, not far distant, where they found the servants
of a chief, waiting with a hog, a pig, and a dog, as a present from their
master to the king. These were delivered with the usual ceremonies, and an
harangue, in which the speaker enquired after the health of Otoo, and of his
principle people. This compliment was re-echoed in the name of Otoo, by one of
his ministers; and then the dispute with Eimeo was formally discussed. The
deputies of this chief were advocates for prosecuting the war with vigor,
advising Otoo to offer a human sacrifice on the occasion. A chief, who
constantly attended the person of Otoo opposed it, seemingly with great
strength of argument. The Captain was now confirmed in his opinion, that Otoo
never entered heartily into the spirit of this war. He received repeated
messages from Towha, urging him to hasten to his assistance.

Having dined with Otoo, our party returned to Matavai, leaving him at Oparre.
This day, and the 19th, we were very sparingly supplied with fruit. Otoo being
informed of this, he and his brother, who had particularly attached himself to
Captain Clerk, came from Oparre, with a large supply for both ships. All the
royal family came the next day with presents, so that we now had more
provisions than we could consume.

Our water being all on board, and every thing put in order, the Captain began
to think of quitting the island, that he might have a sufficient time for
visiting others in this neighborhood. We therefore removed our observatories
and instruments from the shore, and bent the sails.

Early the next morning, Otoo came on board to inform Captain Cook, that the
war canoes of Matavai, and of three other districts, were going to join those
belonging to Oparre, and that part of the island; and that there would be a
general review there. The squadron of Matavai was soon after in motion; and
after parading for some time about the bay, assembled ashore, near the middle
of it. Captain Cook now went in his boat to take a survey of them.

What they call their war canoes, which are those with stages, on which they
sight, amount to about sixty in number; there are nearly as many more of a
smaller size. The Captain was ready to have attended them to Oparre; but the
chiefs soon after formed a resolution, that they would not move till the next
day. This appeared to be a fortunate delay, as it afforded him some opportunity
of getting some insight into their manner of fighting. He therefore desired
Otoo to give orders, that some of them should go through the necessary
maneuvers. Accordingly, two of them were ordered out into the bay; in one of
which Otoo Capt. Cook, and Mr. King, embarked, and Omai went on board the
other. As soon as they had got sufficient sea-room, they faced, advanced, and
retreated by turns, as quick as their rowers could paddle. In the mean time,
the warriors on the stages flourished their weapons, and played a variety of
anticks, which could answer no other purpose than that of rousing their
passions, to prepare them for the onset. Otoo stood by the side of one stage,
giving the necessary orders, when to advance, and when to retreat. Great
judgment, and a very quick eye, seemed requisite in this department, to seize
every advantage, and to avoid every disadvantage. At length, after several
times advancing to, and retreating from each other, the two canoes, clossed
stage to stage; and after a severe, though short conflict, all the troops on
Otoo's stage were supposed to be killed, and Omai and his associates boarded
them, when instantly Otoo, and all the paddlers in his canoe, leaped into the
sea, as if reduced to the necessity of preserving their lives by swimming.

According to Omai's information; their naval engagements are not always
conducted in this manner. They sometimes lash the two vessels together, head to
head, and fight till the warriors on one side or the other are killed. But this
close combat it never practiced, except when the contending parties are
determined to conquer or die. Indeed, one or the other must infallibly happen;
for they never give quarter, unless it be to reserve their prisoners for a more
cruel death the day following.

All the power and strength of these islands lie solely in their navies. A
general engagement on land we never heard of here; and all there decisive
battles are fought on the water. When the time and place of battle are fixed
upon by both parties, the preceding day and night are spent in feasting and
diversions. When the morning approaches, they launch the canoes, make every
necessary preparation, and, with the day, begin the battle; the fate of which,
in general, decides the dispute. The vanquished endeavor to save themselves by
a precipitate flight; and those who reach the shore fly, with their friends, to
the mountains; for the victors, before their fury abates, spare neither the
aged, nor women, or children. They assemble the next day, at the morai, to
return thanks to the Eatooa for the victory, and offer up the slain and the
prisoners, as sacrifices. A treaty is then set on foot; and the conquerors
usually obtain their own terms; by which large districts of land, and even
whole islands, sometimes change their owners. Omai said he was once taken a
prisoner by the men of Bolabola, and conducted to that island, where he and
many others would have suffered death the next day, had they not been fortunate
enough to escape in the night.

This mock-fight being over, Omai put on his suit of armor, mounted a stage in
one of the canoes, and, thus equipped, was paddled all along the shore of the
bay, that every one might have a perfect view of him. His coat of mail,
however, did not engage the attention of the multitude so much as was expected.
The novelty was in a great degree lost upon some of them, who had seen a part
of it before; and there were others, who had conceived such a dislike to Omai,
from his folly and imprudence at this place, that they would hardly look at any
thing that was exhibited by him, however singular and new.

THE END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN; FOR MAKING DISCOVERIES IN THE NORTHERN HEMISPHERE
PERFORMED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF Captains COOK, CLERK, and GORE, In the Years
1776, 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780.

BY Captain JAMES COOK, F.R.S. AND Captain JAMES KING, LL. D. and F.R.S.
ILLUSTRATED WITH ELEGANT PLATES, AND A LARGE CHART.

In FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. II.

NEW YORK: Printed by TIEBOUT and O'BRIEN: FOR BENJAMIN and JACOB JOHNSON, No.
147, HIGH STREET, PHILADELPHIA. -- 1796.

CONTENTS.
BOOK III. OCCURRENCES AT OTAHEITE AND THE SOCIETY ISLES; AND PROSECUTION OF
THE VOYAGE TO THE COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
CHAP. IV. Considerations about sailing -- A Peace or Truce with Eimeo on
disadvantageous Terms -- Otoo's Delay in sending Reinforcements censured -- A
Solemnity at the Morai on the peace -- Observations thereon -- Otoo's Address
and Art -- Omai receives a Present of a War Canoe -- Embellishes it with
Variety of Streamers -- Otoo's Present to his Majesty -- Account of the Modes
of Traffic, and the Friendly Treatment we received at Otaheite -- The
Expedition of some Spaniards -- Their Endeavors to inculcate a mean Opinion of
the English -- Omai jealous of another Traveller. Page 1 CHAP. V. Anchor at
Taloo in Eimeo -- The Harbors of Taloo and Parowroah described -- Visit from
Maheine, the Chief of Eimeo, who approaches with Caution -- Description of the
Person of Maheine -- Preparations made for sailing -- Detained by having a Goat
stolen -- That recovered, and another stolen -- Menaces used to occasion it to
be returned -- Expedition across the island, with a party, in search of the
Goat -- Houses and Canoes burnt, and other Hostilities threatened -- The Goat
returned -- The Island described, etc. Page. 21 CHAP. VI. The Ships arrive at
Huaheine -- Assembly of the Chiefs -- Omai's Harangue -- His Establishment in
this Island unanimously agreed to -- A House built for him -- Steps taken to
ensure his Safety -- The Ships infested with Cock-roaches -- Detection and
Punishment of a Thief -- He escapes from his Confinement -- Animals left with
Omai -- His European Weapons -- His Entertainments -- Inscription on his House
-- His Behavior at parting -- Remarks on his general Conduct -- His Character
-- Account of the two New-Zealanders who remained with him. Page 34 CHAP. VII.
Arrival at Ulietea -- One of the Marines deserts, but is brought back by
Captain Cook -- Intelligence from Omai -- Instructions to Captain Clerk -- Two
others desert -- The two Captains seek them in vain -- The Chief's Son,
Daughter, and her Husband, confined on board the Discovery -- Unsuccessful
Conspiracy of the Natives against the Captains -- The two Deserters are
recovered -- The Chief's family set at Liberty -- The Ships sail -- Remarks on
the Ulieteans -- Present and former State of their Island. Page 55 CHAP. VIII.
Proceed to Bolabola, accompanied by Oreo and others -- Application to Opoony
for Monsieur de Bougainvillo's Anchor -- Reasons for purchasing it -- Delicacy
of Opoony, in not accepting the Present -- Quit the Society Islands --
Description of Bolabola, and its Harbor -- Curious History of the Reduction of
the two Islands, Otaha and Ulietea -- Bravery of the Men of Bolabola -- Account
of the Animals left at Bolabola and Ulietea -- Process of salting Pork --
Cursory Observations respecting Otaheite, and the Society Islands. Page 71
CHAP. IX. Strictures on former Accounts of Otaheite -- The prevailing Winds --
Beauty and Fertility of the Country -- Land but little cultivated -- Produce --
Natural Curiosities -- Description of the Natives -- Delicacy of the women --
Their general Character -- Disposed to amorous Gratifications -- Their Language
-- Ignorance of Surgery and Physic -- Animal Food chiefly eaten by the superior
Class -- Pernicious Effects of Ava -- Account of their different Meals --
Connections between the two Sexes -- Circumcision -- Religion -- Notions
concerning Immortality -- Superstitions -- Strange Traditions about the
Creation -- The King almost deified -- Classes of the People -- Punishments --
Peculiarities of the adjacent Islands -- Limits of their Navigation. Page 83
CHAP. X. Prosecution of our Voyage, after our Departure from the Society Isles
-- Christmas Island Discovered -- Supplies of Fish and Turtle -- Solar Eclipse
-- Distress of two Seamen who had lost their Way -- Singular Mode of refreshing
himself practiced by one of those Stragglers -- Inscription left in a Bottle --
Soil of the Island described -- Trees and Plants -- Birds, and other Animals --
Further Particulars respecting Christmas Island. Page 127 CHAP. XI. Three
Islands discovered -- The Inhabitants of Atooi approach us in their Canoes --
Their Persons described -- Some of them venture on board -- Their Amazement on
that Occasion -- Precautions against importing the Venereal Disease into the
Island -- One of the natives killed -- The Ships cast Anchor -- The Commodore's
Reception on landing -- His Excursion into the Country, with Messrs. Webber and
Anderson -- Description of a Morai and its Obelisk -- The Custom of offering
human Victims prevalent among these People -- Curious feathered Cloaks and Caps
-- The Resolution driven from Atooi Road -- The Isle of Onecheow visited --
Some of our People are detained on Shore -- Animals and Seeds left at Oneheow
-- Customs of the Natives -- The Ships proceed to the northward. Page 128 CHAP.
XII. Situation of the Islands now discovered by us -- The Name of Sandwich
Islands given to the whole Group -- Atooi particularly described -- Its Soil --
Climate -- Vegetable Produce -- Birds -- Fish -- Domestic Animals -- The
Persons and Disposition of the Natives -- Estimate of their Number -- Their
Dress and Ornaments -- Houses -- Food -- Mode of Cookery -- Diversions --
Musical Instruments -- Manufactures -- Tools -- Their Acquaintance with Iron
accounted for -- Their Canoes described -- Agriculture -- Account of one of
their Chiefs, who visited Captain Clerk -- Their Weapons -- Affinity between
their Manners and those of the Society and Friendly Islanders -- Their Language
-- Advantageous Situation of the Sandwich Isles. Page 160 CHAP. XIII.
Observations on the Longitude, Tides, etc. -- Proceed on the Voyage -- Weather
remarkably mild as far as the Latitude 44 North -- Scarcity of Oceanic Birds in
the Nothern Hemisphere -- Beautiful Sea-Animals described, supposed by Mr,
Anderson to be a new species of Oniscus -- See the Coast of North America --
Description of the Country -- Difficulty at Cape Foulweather -- Stormy and
tempestuous Weather -- Strictures on Martin d' Aguilar's River -- Fallacy of
Juan de Fuca's pretended Strait -- An Inlet discovered -- The Ships anchor
there, and are visited by Numbers of the Natives -- Their Behavior. Page 194
BOOK IV. TRANSACTIONS WITH THE NATIVES OF NORTH AMERICA: DISCOVERIES ON THAT
COAST AND THE EASTERN EXTREMITY OF ASIA, AND RETURN SOUTHWARD TO THE SANDWICH
ISLANDS.
CHAP. I. Arrival at the Sound -- Moor in an excellent Harbor -- Visited by
great Numbers of the Natives, who are an inoffensive Race of People -- Variety
of Articles brought to Barter, particularly human Skulls -- Mischievous Thefts
committed -- The Observatories erected on a Rock -- Also a Forge erected --
Alarmed at seeing the Natives arm themselves -- Distant Tribes not permitted by
the Natives to traffic with us -- Tempestuous Weather -- A Survey of the Sound
-- Friendly Behavior of the Natives of one of the Villages -- Treatment
received from an inhospitable Chief -- Greeted with a Song by young Women- A
second Visit to one of the Villages -- Grass purchased -- Departure of the
Ships. Page 209 CHAP. II. Directions for sailing into the Sound -- The adjacent
Country described -- Remarks on the Weather and Climate -- Trees and other
vegetable Productions -- Racoons, Martins, Squirrels, and other Quadrupeds --
Variety of Skins brought for Sale -- Whales, and other Sea Animals -- The Sea
Otter described -- Birds -- Oceanic Birds -- Fish -- Shell Fish -- Snakes and
Lizards -- Insects -- Stones -- Description of the Natives -- Their Color --
Formation -- Dress and Ornaments -- Particular Dresses, and horrible wooden
Masks -- Leathern Mantle for War -- Their Disposition -- Songs -- Musical
Instruments -- Their Fondness for Metals, which they take every Opportunity of
stealing. Page 229 CHAP. III. Number of inhabitants at Nootka Sound -- Manner
of building their Houses -- Description of their Inside, Furniture, and
Utensils -- Their Filthiness -- Wooden Images, called Klumma -- Employments of
the Men -- Indolence of the young Men -- Of the Women, and their Employments --
Different Sorts of Food, and Manner of preparing it -- Bows -- Arrows -- Spears
-- Slings, and other Weapons -- Manufactures of Woollen, etc. -- Mechanic Arts
-- Design and Execution in Carving and Painting -- Canoes -- Implements used in
Hunting and Fishing -- Iron Tools common among them -- Manner of procuring
that, and other Metals -- Language etc. Page 252 CHAP. IV A Storm -- The
Resolution springs a Leak -- Progress of the Ships along the North-American
Coast -- An Inlet named Cross Sound -- Beering's Bay -- Cape Suckling --
Account of Kay's Island -- Our Ships anchor near Cape Hinchingbroke -- the
Natives visit us -- Their Fondness for Beads and Iron -- Their daring Attempt
to carry off one of our Boats -- They also attempt to plunder the Discovery --
Progress up the Sound -- Mr. Gore and the Master sent to examine its Extent --
Montague Island -- The Ships leave the Sound. Page 275 CHAP. V. Extent of
Prince William's Sound -- The Persons of its Inhabitants described -- Their
Dress -- Remarkable Custom of making an incision in the Underlip -- Their
various Ornaments -- Canoes -- Weapons -- Armor -- Domestic Utensils -- Their
skill in all manual Works -- Their Food -- A specimen of their Language --
Quadrupeds -- Birds -- Fish -- Trees Conjectures whence they procure Beads and
Iron. Page 300 CHAP. VI. Proceed along the Coast -- Cape Elizabeth -- Cape St.
Hermogenes -- Beering's Voyage and Chart very defective -- Point Banks --
Barren Isles -- Cape Douglas -- Cape Bid -- Mount St. Augustine -- Endeavor to
find a passage up an Inlet -- Both Ships make a Progress up it -- Convincing
Proofs of its being a River -- A Branch of it called River Turnagain -- The
great River named Cook's River -- The Ships return -- Several Visits from the
Natives -- Leiutenant King lands, displays a Flag, and takes possession of the
Country -- His Reception by the Natives -- The Resolution strikes upon a Bank
-- The high Tides accounted for. Page 317 CHAP. VII. Departure from Cook's
River -- Pass St. Hermogenes -- Cape Whitsunday -- Whitsuntide Bay -- Cape
Greville -- Cape Barnabas -- Two headed Point -- Trinity Island -- Beering's
Foggy Island -- Foggy Cape -- Pinnacle Point -- Description of a curious Bird
-- Account of the Schumagin Island -- A Russian Letter brought on board the
Discovery -- Various Conjectures concerning it -- Rock Point -- Halibut Island
-- Halibut Head -- A Volcano -- Escape providentially -- Arrival at Oonalashka
-- Traffic with the Natives there -- Another Russian Letter brought on board --
Description of the Harbor of Samganoodha. Page 339
VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK III. OCCURRENCES AT OTAHEITE AND THE SOCIETY
ISLES; AND PROSECUTION OF THE VOYAGE TO THE COAST OF NORTH AMERICA.
CHAP. IV.
Considerations about sailing -- A Peace or Truce with Eimeo on disadvantageous
Terms -- Otoo's Delay in sending Reinforcements censured -- A Solemnity at the
Morai on the p^ace -- Observations thereon -- Otoo's Address and Art -- Omai
re^eives a Present of a War Canoe -- Embellishes it with Variety of Streamers
-- Otoo's Present to his Majesty -- Account of the Modes of Traffic, and the
Friendly Treatment we received at Otaheite -- The Expedition of some Spaniards
-- Their Endeavors to inculcate a mean Opinion of the English -- Omai jealous
of another Traveller.

OTOO, and his father, came on board, in the morning of the 22d* to know when
Captain Cook proposed sailing. For, hearing that there was a good harbor at
Eimeo, he had informed them, that he should visit that island on his passage to
Hu^heine; and they proposed to accompany him, and that their fleet should sail
at the same time to reinforce Towha. Being ready to take his departure, he
submitted to them the appointment of the day; and the Wednesday following was
determined upon; when he was to receive on board Otoo, his father, mother, and
the whole family. These points being agreed on, the Captain proposed
immediately setting out for Oparre, where all the fleet was to assemble this
day, and to be reviewed.

As Captain Cook was getting into his boat, news arrived that a treaty had been
concluded between Towha and Maheine, and Towha's fleet had returned to
Attahooroo. From this unexpected event, the war canoes, instead of
rendezvousing at Oparre, were ordered to their respective districts. Captain
Cook, however, followed Otoo to Oparre, accompanied by Mr. King and Omai. Soon
after their arrival, a messenger arrived from Eimeo, and related the conditions
of the peace, or rather truce, it being only for a limited time. The terms
being disadvantageous to Otaheite, Otoo was severely censured, whose delay, in
sending reinforcements, had obliged Towha to submit to a disgraceful
accommodation. It was even currently reported, that Towha, resenting the
treatment he had received, had declared, that immediately after Captain Cook's
departure, he would join his forces to those of Tiaraboo, and attack Otoo. This
called upon the Captain to declare, that he was determined to espouse the
interest of his friend: and that whoever presumed to attack him, should
experience the weight of his displeasure, when he returned to their island.

This declaration, probably, had the desired effect, and, if Towha did
entertain any such hostile intention at first, we heard no more of the report.
Whappai, the father of Otoo, highly disapproved of the peace, and censured
Towha for concluding it. This old man wisely considered that Captain Cook's
going with them to Eimeo, might have been of singular service to their cause,
though he should not interfere in the quarrel. He therefore concluded, that
Otoo had acted prudently in waiting for the Captain; though it prevented his
giving that early assistance to Towha which he expected.

While we were debating on this subject at Oparre, a messenger arrived from
Towha, desiring the attendance of Otoo the next day, at the moria in
Attahooroo, to return thanks, to the Gods for the peace he had concluded.
Captain Cook was asked to attend; but being much out of order, chose rather to
decline it. Desirous, however, of knowing what ceremony might be exhibited on
so memorable an occasion, he sent Mr. King and Omai to observe the particulars,
and returned to his ship, attended by Otoo's mother, his three sisters, and
several other woman. At first, the Captain imagined that this numerous train
came into his boat, in order to get a passage to Matavai. But they assured him,
they intended passing the night on board, for the purpose of curing the
disorder he complained of; which was a rheumatic pain, extending from the hip
to the foot. He accepted the friendly offer, had a bed prepared for them upon
the cabin floor, and submitted himself to their directions. He was first
desired to lie down amongst them, when all those who could get near him, began
to squeeze him with both hands all over the body, but more particularly on the
parts complained of, till they made his bones crack, and his flesh became
almost a mummy. In short, after suffering this severe discipline about a
quarter of an hour, he was happy to get away from them. The operation, however,
gave him immediate relief, and encouraged him to a repetition of the same
discipline, before he retired to bed; and it was so effectual, that he found
himself pretty easy the whole night after. His female physicians very
obligingly repeated their prescription the next morning, before they left him,
and again in the evening, when they returned; after which, the cure being
perfected, they took their leave of the Captain the following morning. This is
called romee, among the natives, an operation far exceeding that of the
flesh-brush, or any external friction. It is universally practiced amongst
these islanders, and generally by women. If, at any time, a person appears
languid and tired, and sits down by any of them, they practice the romee upon
his legs; and it always has an excellent effect.

On Thursday the 25th of September, Otoo, Mr. King, and Omai, returned from
Attahooroo; and Mr. King gave a narrative of what he had seen to the following
effect: "At sunset, we embarked in a canoe, and left Oparre. About nine
o'clock we landed at that extremity of Tettaha, which joins to Attahooroo. The
meeting of Otoo and Towha, I expected, would be interesting. Otoo and his
attendants seated themselves on the beach, near the canoe in which Towha sat.
He was then asleep; but being awakened, and Otoo's name being metioned to him,
a plantain-tree and dog were immediately laid at Otoo's feet; and several of
Towha's people came and conversed with him. After I had been, for some time,
seated close to Otoo, Towha neither stirring from his canoe, nor saying any
thing to us, I repaired to him. He asked me if Toote was displeased with him; I
answered, No; and that he was his taio; and that I was ordered to go to
Attahooroo, to let him know it. Omai then entered into a long conversation with
this chief; but I could not gather any information from him. On my returning to
Otoo, he desired that I should go to eat, and then to sleep; in consequence of
which Omai and I left him. On questioning Omai on that head, he said, Towha was
lame, and therefore could not stir; but that Otoo and he would soon converse
together in private. This was probably true; for those we left with Otoo came
to us in a little time; and about ten minutes after, Otoo himself arrived, when
we all went to sleep in his canoe.

The kava was the next morning in great plenty. One man drank to such excess
that he lost his senses, and appeared to be convulsed. He was held by two men,
who busied themselves in plucking off his hair by the roots. I left this
spectacle to see a more affecting one. It was the meeting of Towha and his
wife, and a young girl, who was said to be his daughter. After the ceremony of
cutting their heads, and discharging plenty of blood and tears, they washed,
embraced the chief, and seemed perfectly unconcerned. But the young girl's
sufferings were not yet concluded. Terridiri (Oberea's son) arrived; and she,
with great composure, repeated those ceremonies to him which she had just
performed on meeting her father. Towha having brought a war-canoe from Eimeo, I
enquired if he had killed the people belonging to her; and was informed, that
there was not a person in her when she was captured.

About ten or eleven o'clock we left Tettaha, and landed close to the morai of
Attahooroo early in the afternoon. Three canoes lay hauled upon the beach,
opposite the morai, having three hogs in each. We expected the solemnity would
have been performed the same afternoon; but nothing was done, as neither Towha
nor Potatou had joined us. A chief came from Eimeo with a small pig, and a
plantain-tree, which he placed at Otoo's feet. They conversed some time
together, and the Eimeo chief often repeating the words Warry, Warry, "false."
Otoo was probably relating to him what he had heard, and the other contradicted
it.

The next day, Towha and Potatou, with seven or eight large canoes, arrived,
and landed near the morai. Several plantain-trees were brought to Otoo, on
behalf of different chiefs. Towha remained in his canoe. The ceremony was
commenced by the principal priest, who brought out the maro, wrapped up in a
bundle of a conic shape. These were placed at the head of what I supposed to be
a grave. Then three priests sat down, at the other end of the grave; having
with them a plantain-tree, a branch of some other kind of tree, and the sheath
of the flower of the cocoa-nut-tree.

The priests separately repeated sentences; and at intervals, two, and
sometimes all three, chanted a melancholy ditty, very little attended to by the
natives. This kind of recitative continued near an hour. Then, after a short
prayer, the chief priest uncovered the maro, and Otoo rose up, and warpped it
about him, holding in his hand a bonnet, composed of the red feathrs of the
tropic bird, mixed with other blackish feathers. He stooped opposite the three
priests, who continued their prayers for about ten minutes; when a man rising
suddenly from the crowd, said something ending with heiva! and the crowd echoed
back to him three times Earee! The company then repaired to the opposite side
of a large pile of stones, where is the kings morai; which is not much unlike a
large grave. Here the same ceremony was again performed, and with three cheers.
The maro was now warpped up, and ornamented by the addition of a small piece of
red feathers.

The people now proceeded to a large hut, near the morai, where they seated
themselves in solemn order. An oration was then made by a man of Tiaraboo,
which ended in about three minutes. He was followed by a man of Attahooroo;
Potatou spoke next, and with much more fluency and grace than any of them.
Tooteo, Otoo's orator, exhibited after him, and then a man from Eimeo. Some
other Speeches were made, but not attended to. Omai said, that the substance of
their speeches recommended friendship, and not fighting; but as many of the
speakers expressed themselves with great warmth, there were, perhaps, some
recriminations and protestations of their future good intentions. In the midst
of their harangues a man of Attahooroo rose up, having a sling fastened to his
waist, and a large stone upon his shoulder. After parading for about fifteen
minutes in the open space, and chanting a few short sentences, he threw the
stone down. This stone, together with a plantain-tree that lay at Otoo's feet,
were, at the conclusion of the speeches, carried to the morai; one of the
priests, and Otoo with him, saying something upon the occasion.

Returning to Oparre, the sea-breeze having set in, we were obliged to land,
and had a pleasant walk from Tettaha to Oparre. A tree, with two large bundles
of dried leaves suspended upon it, pointed out the boundary of the two
districts. We were accompanied by the man who had performed the ceremony of the
stone and sling. With him Otoo's father held a long conversation, and appeared
extremely angry. He was enraged, as I understood, at the part which Towha had
taken in the Eimeo business.

From what can be judged of this solemnity, as related by Mr. King, it had not
been only a thanksgiving, as Omai told us, but rather a confirmation of the
treaty. The grave, mentioned by Mr. King, appears to be the very spot where the
celebration of the rites began, when the human sacrifice was offered, at which
Captain Cook was present, and before which the victim was laid. It is here
also, that they first invest their kings with the maro. Omai, who had seen the
ceremony when Otoo was made king, described the whole solemnity, when we were
here; which is nearly the same as that now described by Mr. King; though,
perhaps, upon a very different occasion. The plantain-tree is always the first
thing introduced in all their religious ceremonies, as well as in all their
public and private debates; and, probably, on many other occasions. While Towha
was at Eimeo, he sent one or more messengers to Otoo every day. Every
messenger, at all times, carried a young plantain-tree in his hand, which he
laid at the feet of Otoo, before he mentioned his errand; then seated himself
before him, and related the particulars of his message. When two men are in
such high dispute that blows are expected to ensue, if one should lay a
plantain-tree before the other, they both become cool, and proceed in the
argument without further animosity. It is, indeed, the olive branch of these
people on all occasions.

As our friends knew that we were upon the point of sailing, they all paid us a
visit on the 26th, and brought more hogs with them than we wanted; for, having
no salt left to preserve any, we had fully sufficient for our present use.

Captain Cook accompanied Otoo, the next day, to Oparre; and before he left it,
took a survey of the cattle and poultry, which he had consigned to his friend's
care. Every thing was in a promising way; and seemed properly attended to. Two
of the geese, as well as two of the ducks, were sitting; but the pea-hen and
turkey-hen had neither of them begun to lay. He took four goats from Otoo, two
of which he intended to leave at Ulietea; and reserve the other two for the use
of any other islands he might touch at in his passage to the north.

The following circumstance concerning Otoo will show, that the people of this
island are capable of much address and art, to accomplish their purposes.
Amongst other things, which Captain Cook had, at different times, given to this
chief, was a spying-glass. Having been two or three days possessed of it, he,
perhaps grew tired of its novelty, or discovered that it could not be of any
use to him, he therefore carried it, privately, to Captain Clerk; telling him,
that, as he had shown great friendship for him, he had got a present for him,
which, he supposed, would be agreeable. "But, says Otoo, Toote must not be
informed of this, because he wanted it, and I refused to let him have it;"
accordingly, he put the glass into Captain Clerke's hands, assuring him, at the
same time that he came honestly by Captain Clerk, at first wished to be
excused from accepting it; but Otoo insisted upon it, that he should; and left
it with him. A few days after, he reminded Captain Clerk of the glass; who,
though he did not wish to have it, was yet desirous o^ obliging Otoo; and
thinking, that a few axes would be more acceptable, produced four to give him
in exchange. Otoo immediately exclaimed, " Toote offered me five for it." "Well
(says Captain Clerk) if that be the case, you shall not be the loser by your
friendship for me; and you shall have six axes." He readily accepted them; but
again desired, that Captain Cook might not be made acquainted with the
transaction. For the many valuable things which Omai had given away, he
received one good thing in return. This was a very fine double sailing canoe,
completely equipped. Some time before, the Captain had made up a suit of
English colors for him; but he considered them as too valuable to be used at
this time; and, therefore patched up a parcel of flags and pendants, to the
number of ten or a dozen, which he spread on different parts of his canoe.
This, as might be expected, drew together a great number of people to look at
her. Omai's streamers were a mixture of English, French, Spanish, and Dutch,
being all the European colors he had seen. He had completely stocked himself
with cloth and cocoa-nut oil, which are better and more plentiful at Otaheite,
than at any of the Society Islands; insomuch, that they are considered as
articles of trade. Omai would not have behaved so inconsistently, as he did in
many instances, had it not been for his sister and brother-in-law, who,
together with a few select acquaintances, engrossed him to themselves, in order
to strip him of every article he possessed. And they would certainly have
succeeded, if Captain Cook had not taken the most useful articles of his
property in his possession. This, however, would not have saved Om^i from ruin,
if he had permitted these relations of his to have accompanied him to his
intended place of settlement at Huaheine. This, indeed was their intention; but
the Captain disappointed their farther views of plunder, by forbidding them to
appear in that island, while he continued in that part of the world; and they
knew him two well not to comply.

Otoo came on board the 28th of September, and informed Captain Cook that he
had got a canoe, which he desired he would take with him as a present from him
to the Eree rahie no Pretane. The Captain was highly pleased with Otoo, for
this mark of his gratitude. At first, the Captain supposed it to have been a
model of one of their vessels of war; but it proved to be a small ivahab, about
sixteen feet long. It was double, and probably had been built for the purpose;
and was decorated with carved work, like their canoes in general. It being too
large for him to take on board, he could only thank him for his good intention;
but he would have been much better pleased, if his present could have been
accepted.

By calms, and gentle breezes from the west, we were detained here some days
longer than we expected. All this time, the ships were crowded with our friends
and surrounded by canoes; for none of them would quit the place, till we
departed. At length, on the 29th, at three o'clock in the afternoon, the wind
came at east, and we weighed anchor. The ships being under sail, to oblige
Otoo, and to gratify the curiosity of his people, we fired seven guns; after
which, all our friends, except him, and two or three more, took leave of us
with such lively marks of sorrow and affection, as sufficiently testified how
much they regretted our departure. Otoo expressing a desire of seeing the ships
sail, we made a stretch out to sea, and then in again immediately; when he also
took his last farewell, and went ashore in his canoe.

It was strictly enjoined to Captain Cook by Otoo, to request, in his name, the
Earee rahie no Pretane, to send him, by the next ship, some red feathers, and
the birds which produce them; also axes; half a doxen muskets; powder and shot;
and, by no means, to forget horses.

When these people make us a present, it is customary for them to let us know
what they expect in return; and we find it convenient to gratify them; by which
means our presents come dearer to us than what we get by barter. But, being
sometimes pressed by occasional scarcity, we could have recourse to our friends
for a supply as a present, when we could not get it by any other method. Upon
the whole, therefore, this way of traffic was full as advantageous to us as to
the natives. Captain Cook, in general, paid for each separate article as he
received it, except in his intercourse with Otoo. His presents where so
numerous, that no account was kept between him and the Captain. Whatever he
asked for, if it could be spared, the Captain never denied him, and he always
found him moderate in his demands.

Captain Cook would not have quited Otaheite so soon as he did, if he could
have prevailed upon Omai to fix himself there. There was not even a probability
of our being better supplied with provisions elsewhere, than we continued to be
here, even at the time of our leaving it. Besides, such a friendship and
confidence subsisted between us and the inhabitants, as could hardly be
expected at any other place; and it was rather extraordinary, had never been
once interrupted or suspended by any accident, or misunderstanding; nor had
there been a theft committed, worthy of notice. It is probable, however, that
their regularity of conduct resulted from their fear of interrupting a traffic,
which might procure them a greater share of our commodities, than they could
obtain by plunder or pilfering. This point, indeed, was, in some degree,
settled at the first interview with their chiefs, after our arrival. For
Captain Cook declared then to the natives, in the most decisive terms, that he
would not suffer them to rob us, as they had formerly done. Omai was singularly
useful in this business, being instructed by the Captain to point out to them
the happy consequences of their honest conduct, and the fatal mischiefs that
must attend a deviation from it. But the chiefs have it not always in their
power to prevent thefts; they are often robbed themselves; and complain of it
as the worst of evils. The most valuable things that Otoo received from Captain
Cook, were left in the Captain's possession till the day hefore we sailed; Otoo
declaring, at the same time, that they were no where so safe. From the
acquisition of new riches, the inducements to pilfering must certainly have
increased; and the chiefs are sensible of this, from their being so extremely
desirous of having chests. The few that the Spaniards left amongst them are
highly prized; and they were continually asking us for some. Captain Cook had
one made for Otoo, the dimensions of which were eight feet in length, five in
breadth, and about three in depth. Locks and bolts are not considered as a
sufficient security; but must be large enough for two people to sleep upon, and
consequently guard it in the night.

It may appear extraordinary, that we could never get any distinct account of
the time when the Spaniards arrived, the time they stayed, and when they
departed. The more we made enquiry into this matter, the more we were convinced
of the incapability of most of these people to remember, calculate, or note the
time, when past events happened; especially if for a longer period than
eighteen or twenty months. It however appeared, by the inscription upon the
cross, and by the information of the most intelligent of the natives, that two
ships came to Oheitepeha in 1774, not long after Captain Cook left Matavai,
which was in May the same year. The live stock they left here, consisted of one
bull, some goats, hogs, and dogs, and the male of another animal; which we were
afterward informed was a ram, and was, at this time at Bolabola.

The hogs are large; have already much improved the breed originally found by
us upon the island; and, on our late arrival, were very numerous. Goats are
also in plenty, there being hardly a chief without some. The dogs that the
Spaniards put ashore are of two or three sorts: if they had all been hanged,
instead of being left upon the island, it would have been better for the
natives. Captain Cook's young ram fell a victim to one of these animals. Four
Spaniards remained on shore when these ships left the island; two of whom were
priests, one a servant, and the other was much caressed among the natives, who
distinguish him by the name of Mateema. He seems to have so far studied their
language, as to have been able to speak it tolerably; and to have been
indefatigable in impressing the minds of the islanders with exalted ideas of
the greatness of the Spanish nation, and inducing them to think meanly of that
of the English. He even assured them, that we no longer existed as an
independent nation; that Prelane was but a small island, which they had
entirely destroyed; and as to Captain Cook, that they had met with him at sea,
and with the greatest ease that could be imagined, had sent his ship, and every
creature in her, to the bottom; so that his visiting Otaheite was, at this
time, very unexpected. Many other improbable falsehoods were propagated by this
Spaniard, and believed by the inhabitants; but Captain Cook's returning to
Otaheite was considered as a complete confutation of all that Mateema had
advanced. With what design the priests remained, cannot easily be conceived. If
it was their intention to convert the natives to the Cathalic faith, they
certainly have not succeeded. It does not appear, indeed, that they ever
attempted it; for the natives say, they never conversed with them, either on
this, or any other subject. The priests resided the whole time in the house at
Oheitepeha; but Mateema roved about continually, visiting many parts of the
island. After he and his companions had staid ten months, two ships arriving at
Oheitepeha, took them aboard, and sailed again in five days. Whatever design
the Spaniards might have had upon this island, this hasty departure shows they
have now laid it aside. They endeavored to make the natives believe, that they
still intended to return; and that they would bring with them houses, all kinds
of animals, and men and women who were to settle on the island. Otoo, when he
mentioned this to Captain Cook, added, that if the Spaniards should return,
they should not come to Mataiva Fort, which he said, was ours. The idea pleased
him; but he did not consider that the completion of it would deprive him of his
kingdom, and his people of their liberties. Though this shows how easily a
settlement might be made at Otaheite, it is, hoped that such a circumstance
will never happen. Our occasional visits may have been of service to its
inhabitants, but (considering how most European establishments are conducted
among Indian nations) a permanent establishment amongst them would, probably,
give them just cause to lament that our ships had ever discovered it. Indeed, a
measure of this kind can hardly ever be seriously thought of; as it can neither
answer the purposes of public ambition, nor of private avarice.

It has been already observed, that Captain Cook received a visit from one of
the two natives of this island, who had been taken to ^^ma by the Spaniards. It
is somewhat remarkable that he never saw him afterward, especially as the
Captain received him with uncommon civility. The Captain, however, supposed
that Omai had kept him at a distance from him, from motives of jealousy, he
being a traveller, that in some degree, might vie with himself. Our touching at
Teneriffe was a lucky circumstance for Omai; who prided himself in having
visited a place belonging to Spain, as well as this man. Captain Clerk, who
had seen the other man, spoke of him as a low fellow, a little out of his
senses; and his own countrymen entertained the same opinion of him. In short,
these two adventurers seemed to be held in little or no esteem. They had not
been so fortunate, indeed, as to return home with such valuable property as had
been bestowed upon Omai; whose advantages from going to England were so great,
that if he should sink into the same state of insignificance, he has only
himself to blame for it.

CHAP. V.
Anchor at Taloo in Eimeo -- The Harbors of Taloo and Parowroah described --
Visit from Maheine, the Chief of Eimeo, who approaches with Caution --
Description of the Person of Maheine -- Preparations made for sailing --
Detained by having a Goat stolen -- That recovered, and another stolen --
Menaces used to occasion it to be returned -- Expedition cross the island, with
a party, in search of the Coat -- Houses and Canoes burnt, and other
Hostilities threatened -- The Goat returned -- The Island described, etc.

ON the 30th of September, at daybreak, after leaving Otaheite, we stood for
the north end of the island of Eimeo. Omai, in his canoe, arrived there before
us, and endeavored, by taking some necessary measures, to show us the
situation. We were not, however, without pilots, having several natives of
Otaheite on board, and, among them, not a few women. Unwilling to rely entirely
upon these guides, Captain Cook dispatehed two boats to examine the harbor;
when, on a signal being made for safe anchorage, we stood in with both the
ships, and anchored in ten fathoms water.

Taloo is the name of this harbor: it is on the north side of the island, and
in the district of Oboonohoo, or Poonohoo. It runs above two miles between the
hills, south, or south by east. It is not inferior to any harbor that we have
met with in this ocean, both for security and goodness of bottom. It has also
this singular advantage, that a ship can sail in and out with the reigning
trade wind. Several rivers fall into it; one of which is so considerable, as to
admit boats a quarter of a mile up, were the water is perfectly fresh. The
banks, on the sides of this stream, are covered with what the natives call the
pooroo tree, on which they set no value, as it only serves for firing. So that
wood and water may be procured here with great facility.

The harbor of Parowroah, on the same side of the island, is about two miles
to the eastward, and is much larger within than that of Taloo; but the opening
in the reef lies to leeward of the harbor, and is considerably narrower. These
striking defects must give the harbor of Taloo a decided preference. There are
one or two more harbors on the south side of the island, but they are not so
considerable as those we have already mentioned.

As soon as we had anchored, great numbers of the inhabitants came aboard our
ships, from mere motives or curiosity, for they brought nothing with them for
the purposes of barter: but several canoes arrived, the next morning, from more
distant parts, bringing with them an abundant supply o^ bread-fruit,
cocoa-nuts, and a few hogs, which were exchanged for beads, nails, and
hatchets; red feathers not being so much demanded here as at Otaheite.

On Thursday the 2d of October, in the morning, Captain Cook received a visit
ftom Maheine, the chief of the island. He approached the ship with as great
caution and deliberation, as if he apprehended mischief from us, as friends of
the Otaheiteans; these people having no idea that we can be in friendship with
any one, without adopting his cause against his enemies. This chief was
accompanied by his wife, who, we were told, is sister to Oamo, of Otaheite,
whose death we heard of while we remained at this island. Captain Cook made
them presents of such articles as seemed most to strike their fancy; and, after
staying about half an hour they went on shore. They returned, soon after, with
a large hog, meaning it as a return for the Captain's favor; but he made them
an additional present to the full value of it; after which they went on board
the Discovery, to visit Captain Clearke.

Maheine, supported with a few adherents, has made himself, in some degree,
independent of Otaheite. He is between forty and fifty years of age, and is
bald-hended; which, at that age, is rather uncommon in these islends. He seemed
ashamed of showing his head, and wore a kind of turban to conceal it. Whether
they considered this deficiency of hair as disgraceful, or whether they
supposed that we considered it in that light, it is not easy to determine. The
latter, however, appears the most probable, from the circumstance of their
having seen us shave the head of one of the natives, whom we detecteed
stealing. They naturally concluded, therefore, that this was the kind of
punishment inflicted by us upon all thieves; and some of our gentlemen, whose
heads were but thinly covered with hair, were violently suspected, by them, of
being tetos.

Toward the evening, Captain Cook and Omai mounted on horseback, and rode
along the shore. Omai having forbid the natives to follow us, our train was not
very numerous; the fear of giving offense, having got the better of their
curiosity. The fleet of Towha had been stationed in this harbor, and though
the war was but of short duration, the marks of its devastation were every
where conspicuous. The trees had lost all their fruit, and the houses in the
neighborhood had been burnt, or otherwise destroyed.

Having made every preparation for sailing, we hauled the ship off into the
stream, in the morning of the 6th, intending to put to sea the next day, but a
disagreeable accident prevented it.

We had, in the day time, sent our goats ashore to graze; and, notwithstanding
two men had been appointed to look after them, one of them had been stolen this
evening. This was a considerable loss, as it interfered with the Captain's
views of stocking other islands with these animals: he therefore was
determined, if possible, to recover it. We received intelligence, the next
morning, that it had been conveyed to Maheine, who was, at that time, at
Parowroah harbor. Two elderly men offered their services to conduct any of our
people to him, in order to bring back the goat. Accordingly the Captain
dispatched some of his people in a boat, charged with a message to that chief,
and insisted on both the goat and the thief being immediately given up.

Maheine had, only the day before, requested the Commodore to give him two
goats; but, as he could not spare them, without depriving other islands, which
had none of these animals, and was informed that there were two already upon
this, he refused to gratify him. Willing, however, to assist his views, in this
respect, he desired an Otaheite chief, then present, to beg Otoo, in his name,
to convey two of these animals to Maheine; and, to induce him to comply with
this request, sent to Otoo, by the same chief, a quantity of red feathers,
equal in value to the two goats that were required. The Commodore expected that
Maheine, and all the other chiefs of the island, would have been perfectly
satisfied with this arrangement; but he was mistaken, as the event clearly
proves.

Little suspecting that any one would presume to steal a second, while the
necessary measure were taking to recover the first, the goats were again put
ashore this morning; and a boat as usual, was sent for them in the evening.
While our people were getting them into the boat, one was conveyed away
undiscovered. As it was immediately missed, we expected to recover it without
much trouble, as it could not have been carried to any considerable distance.
Several of the natives set out, different ways, to seek after it; for they all
endeavored to persuade us, that it must have strayed into the woods; not one
of them admitting that it was stolen. We were, however, convinced to the
contrary, when we perceived that not any of the pursuers returned: their
intention was only to amuse us, till their prize was safely deposited; and
night coming on, prevented all future search. At this instant, the boat
returned with the other goat, and one of the persons who had stolen it.

Most of the inhabitants, the next morning, were moved off, taking with them a
corpse, which lay opposite the ship, on a toopapaoo; and Maheine, we were
informed, had retired to the remotest part of the island. It now plainly
appeared, that a regular plan had been projected to steal what the Commodore
had refused to give; and that, having restored one, they were determined not to
part with the other, which was a female, and with kid: and the Commodore was
equally determined to have it back again; he therefore applied to the two
elderly men, who had been instrumental in recovering the first, who informed
him that this had been taken to a place on the south side of the island, called
Watea, by Hamoa, who was the chief of that place; but that it would be
delivered up if he would send for it. They expressed a willingness to conduct
some of his people to the spot; but finding that a boat might go and return in
one day, he sent one with two of his officers, Mr. Roberts, and Mr.
Shuttleworth; one to remain with the boat, if she could not get to the place,
while the other went with the guides, accompanied by some of our people. The
boat returned late in the evening, when we were informed by the officers, that,
after proceeded in the boat as far as rocks and shoals would permit, Mr.
Shuttleworth landed; a^^ attended with two marines, and one of the guides,
proceeding to the house of Hamoa, at Watea; where they where, for some time,
amused by the people, who pretended they had sent for the goat, and that it
would soon be produced. It, however, never arrived; and, night approaching, Mr.
Shuttleworth was obliged to return to his boat without it.

The Commodore lamented that he had proceeded so far in this business as he
could not retreat with credit, and without giving encouragement to other
islanders to rob us with impunity. Consulting with Omai, and the two old men,
what methods to take, they advised him, without hesitation, to go into the
country with a party of men, and shoot every person he should meet with. The
Commodore did not approve of this bloody counsel; but, early the next morning,
set out with thirty-five of his people, accompanied by Omai, one of the old
men, and three or four attendants. He also ordered Lieutenant Williamson round
the western part of the island, with three armed boats, to (...) us.

This party had no sooner landed, than the few remaining natives fled before
us. The first person we met with upon our march, was in a kind of perilous
situation; for Omai, the instant he beheld him, asked Captain Cook if he should
shoot him; so fully was he persuaded, that the advice he had given, was
immediately to be carried into execution. The Commodore then gave orders, both
to him and our guide, to let it be made known, that it was not our intention to
injure, much less to destroy, a single native. These joyful tidings soon
circulated, and prevented the flight of the inhabitants.

Ascending the ridge of hills, on our road to Watea, we were informed that the
goat had been carried the same way, and could hardly have passed the hills: we
therefore marched up in great silence, expecting to surprise the party who were
bearing off the prize; but, when we arrived at the uppermost plantation, we
were told, that the animal we were in search of, had, indeed, been kept there
the first night, but had been carried to Watea the next morning. We made no
further enquiry, till we came within sight of Watea, where we were directed to
Hamoa's house, by some people who also informed us, that the goat was there. We
therefore fully expected to obtain it on our arrival; but, when we reached the
house, the people we saw there, denied that they had ever seen it, or knew any
thing concerning it. Hamoa, himself appeared, and expressed himself to the same
effect.

On our first coming to Watea, several men were seen, running to and fro in the
woods, with clubs and darts in their hands; and Omai, who ran toward them, had
stones thrown at him. Hence it appeared, that they intended to oppose any
attempt that we might be induced to make, but on seeing the strength of our
party, had given up the design. We were confirmed in this opinion, by
observing, that all their houses were empty.

After collecting, a few of the natives together, Omai was directed to
expostulate with them on the absurdity of their conduct, and tell them that we
had received sufficient evidence that the goat was in their possession; and
that, if it was not immediately delivered up, we should burn all their houses
and canoes; but, notwithstanding this expostulation, they persisted in their
denial of having any knowledge of it, In consequence of which, the Commodore
set fire to six or eight of their houses, and two or three war canoes, which
were presently consumed. After this we marched off to join the boats, which
were, at that time, about seven or eight miles from us; and, in our road, burnt
six other war canoes, without any opposition. On the contrary, many of the
natives assisted us; more, perhaps, from fear, than any other motive. At length
Omai, who was at some distance before us, came back with information, that a
multitude of men were assembling to attack us. We prepared ourselves to receive
them, but, instead of enemies, they were petitioners, with plantain-trees in
their hands, which they laid down before us, entreating the Commodore to spare
a canoe that lay upon the spot, which he readily complied with.

About four o'clock in the afternoon, we arrived at Wharrarade, where our boats
were waiting for us. The district of Wharrarade belongs to Tiaratoboonoue; but
this chief together with the other principal people of the place, had fled to
the hills; though we made no attack upon their property, they being in amity
with Otoo. Here we remained about an hour, in order to rest ourselves, and
afterward set out for the ships, where we arrived at eight o'clock in the
evening; but no tidings of the goat had, at that time, been received; and, of
course, the operations of the day had been ineffectual.

Early on Friday morning, the 10th of October, the Captain dispatched one of
Omai's men to Maheine, charged with this peremptory message, that if he
persisted in his refusal to deliver up the goat, a single canoe should not be
left upon the island; and that hostilities should never cease, while the stolen
animal continued in his possession. That the messenger might perceive that the
Commodore was in earnest, he ordered the carpenter, in his presence, to break
up three or four canoes, that lay at the head of the harbor. The planks where,
by his direction, taken on board, to serve as materials for building a house
for Omai, at the place where he intended to reside. The Commodore, properly
attended, went afterward to the next harbor, where he destroyed seven or
eight more canoes, and returned on board about seven in the evening. On his
arrival, he was informed, that the goat had been returned about half an hour
before; and it appeared, from good intelligence, that it came from the very
place, where the inhabitants, the day before, declared they knew nothing about
it. But from the message delivered to the chief in the morning, he perceived
that the Commodore was not to be trifled with.

Thus ended this troublesome and unfortunate business; equally to be regretted
by the natives, and by Captain Cook. He was grieved to reflect, that, after
refusing to assist his friends at Otaheite, in the invasion of this island, he
should so soon be obliged to engage in hostilities against its inhabitants;
which, perhaps, were more injurious to them, than Towha's expedition.

Our intercourse with the natives was renewed the next morning; several canoes
bringing bread-fruit and cocoa-nuts to the ships to barter; whence it was
natural to conclude, that they were conscious they had merited the treatment
they had received; and that, the cause of Captain Cook's displeasure being now
removed, they apprehended no further mischief. We weighed, with a breeze, down
the harbor, about nine; but it was so faint and variable, that we did not get
out to sea till noon, when we steered for Huaheine, Omai attending in his canoe.

At Eimeo, the ships were abundantly supplied with firewood. We did not supply
ourselves with this article at Otaheite, as there is not a tree at Matavai but
what is useful to the inhabitants. We also received here a large supply of
refreshments in hogs, bread-fruit, and coco-nuts.

There is very little difference between the produce of this island, and that
of Otaheite; but the difference in their woman is remarkable. Those of Eimeo
have a dark hue, are low in stature, and have forbidding features.

The appearance of Eimeo bears not the least resemblance to that of Otaheite.
The latter being a hilly country, has little low land, except some deep
valleys, and the flat border that almost surrounds it near the sea. Eimeo has
steep rugged hills, running in different directions, leaving large valleys, and
gently rising grounds about their sides. The hills, though rocky, are generally
covered with trees, almost to the tops. At the bottom of the harbor of Taloo,
the ground gradually rises to the foot of the hills; but the flat border, on
the sides becomes quite steep at a small distance from the sea. This renders it
a prospect superior to any thing we saw at Otaheite. In the low grounds, the
soil is a yellowish stiff mould; on the lower hills it is blacker and looser,
and the stone which composes the hills, is of a bluish color, interspersed
with some particles of glimmer. Near the place where our ships were stationed,
are two large stones, concerning which some superstitious notions are
entertained by the natives. They consider them as brother and sister; that they
are Eatooas, or divinities, and that they came from Ulietea, by some
supernatural means.

CHAP. VI.
The Ships arrive at Huaheine -- Assembly of the Chiefs -- Omai's Harangue --
His Establishment in this Island unanimously agreed to -- A House built for him
-- Steps taken to ensure his Safety -- The Ships infested with Coch-roaches --
Detection and Punishment of a Thief -- He escapes from his Confinement --
Animals left with Omai -- His European Weapons -- His Entertainments --
Inscription on his House -- His Behavior at parting -- Remarks on his general
Conduct -- His Character -- Account of the two New-Zealanders who remained with
him.

ON the morning that succeeded our departure from Eimeo, we saw Huaheine
extending from south-west by west, to west by north. At twelve o'clock we
anchored at the northern entrance of Owharre harbor, situated on the west side
of the island. Omai, in his canoe, entered the harbor just before us, but did
not land. Though many of his countrymen crowded to see him, he did not take
much notice of them. Great numbers also came off to the ships, insomuch that we
were greatly incommoded by them. Our passengers immediately informed them of
our transactions at Eimeo, multiplying, by ten at least, the number of houses
and canoes that we had destroyed. Captain Cook was not much displeased at their
giving this exaggerated account, as he found that it made a considerable
impression upon all who heard it; so that he had hopes it would induce the
natives of this island to treat him in a better manner than they had done in
his prior visits.

The next morning, which was the 13th of October, all the principal people of
the island came to our ships. This was just what the Commodore wished, as it
was now high time to settle Omai; and he supposed, that the presence of these
chiefs would enable him to effect it in a satisfactory manner. Omai now seemed
inclined to establish himself at Ulietea; and if he and Captain Cook could have
agreed with respect to the mode of accomplishing that design, the latter would
have consented to adopt it. H^ father had been deprived by the inhabitants of
Bolabola, when they subdued Ulietea, of some land in that island; and the
Captain hoped he should be able to get it restored to the son without
difficulty. For this purpose, it was necessary that Omai should be upon
amicable terms with those who had become masters of the island; but he would
not listen to any such proposal, and was vain enough to imagine, that the
Captain would make use of force to re-instate him in his forfeited lands. This
preventing his being fixed at Ulietea, the Captain began to consider Huaheine
as the more proper place; and therefore determined to avail himself of the
presence of the chief men of that island, and, propose the affair to them.

The Captain now prepared to make a formal visit to Taireetareea, the Earee
rahie, or king of the island, with a view of introducing this business. Omai,
who was to accompany him, dressed himself very properly on the occasion, and
provided a handsome present for the chief himself, and another for his Eatooa.
Their landing drew most of the visitors from our ships, who, with many others,
assembled in a large house. The concourse of people became very great, the
major part of whom seemed stouter and fairer than those of Otaheite, and the
number of men who appeared to be of consequence was also much greater, in
proportion to the extent of the island. The Captain waited some time for
Taireetareea: but when the chief appeared, he found that his presence might
easily have been dispensed with, as he did not exceed ten years of age. Omai
began with making his offering to the gods, which consisted of cloth, red
feathers etc. Another offering succeeded, which was to be given to the gods by
the young chief; and, after that, several other tufts of red feathers were
presented. The different articles were laid before a priest, being each of them
delivered with a kind of prayer, which was spoken by one of Omai's friends,
though in a great measure dictated by himself, In these prayers he did not
forget his friends in England, nor those who had conducted him safe back to his
native country. The Earee rahie no Pretane (king of Great Britain), the Earl of
Sandwich, Toote, Tatee, (Cook and Clerk) were mentioned in every one of them.
These offerings and prayers being ended, the priest took each of the articles
in order, and after repeating a prayer, sent every one to the morai.

These religious rites having been performed, Omai seated himself by the
Captain, who bestowed a present on the young chief, and received another in
return. Some arrangements were next agreed upon, relative to the mode of
carrying on the intercourse between us and the islanders; and the Captain
painted out the mischievous consequences that would attend their plundering us,
as they had done on former occasions. The establishment of Omai was then
proposed to the chiefs who were assembled. He informed then, that we had
conveyed him into our country, where he was well received by the great King and
his Earees, (chiefs or nobles) and treated during his whole stay with all the
marks of regard and affection; that he had been brought back again, after
having been enriched, by our generosity, with a variety of articles, which
would be highly beneficial to his countrymen; and that, besides the two horses
which were to continue with him, many other new and useful animals had been
left at Otaheite, which would speedily multiply, and furnish a sufficient
number for the use of all the neighboring islands. He then gave them to
understand, that it was Captain Cook's earnest request, that they would give
his friend a piece of land, upon which he might build a house, and ^aise
provisions for himself and servants: adding, that, if he could not obtain this
at Huaheine either by donation or purchase, the Captain was resolved to carry
him to Ulietea, and establish him there. These topics were dictated to Omai by
Captain Cook, who observed, that what he concluded with, about going to
Ulietea, seemed to gain the approbation of all the chiefs; and he immediately
perceived the reason. Omai had vainly flattered himself, that the Captain would
use force in restoring him to his father's lands in Ulietea, and he had talked
at random, on this subject, to some of the assembly; who now expected that the
Captain would assist them in invading Ulietea, and driving the Bolabolans out
of that island. It being proper, therefore, that he should undeceive them, he
signified in the most decisive manner, that he would neither give them any
assistance in such an enterprise, nor would even suffer it to be put in
execution, while he remained in their seas; and that, if Omai established
himself in Ulietea, he ought to be introduced as a friend, and not forced upon
the people of Bolabola as their conqueror.

This preremptory declaraion immediately gave a new turn to the sentiments of
the council; one of whom expressed himself to this effect: that, the whole
island of Huaheine, and whatever it, contained, were Captain Cook's; and that,
consequently, he might dispose of what portion he, pleased to his friend. Omai
was pleased a^ hearing this; thinking that he would be very liberal, and give
him what was perfectly sufficient. But to make an offer of what it would have
been improper to accept, the Captain considered as offering nothing; and
therefore desired, that they would mark out the particular spot, and likewise
the exact quantity of land, which they intended to allot for the settlement.
Upon this, some chiefs, who had already retired from the assembly, ^^re sent
for; and, after a short consultation, the Commodore's request was unanimously
granted, and the ground immediately fixed upon, adjoining to the house where
the present meeting was held. It extended along the shore of the harbor, about
two hundred yards; its depth to the bottom of the hill was somewhat more; and a
proportional part of the hill was comprehended in the grant. This affair being
settled, a tent was pitched on shore, a post established, and the observatories
erected. The carpenters of each ship were also now enployed in building a small
house for Omai, in which he might secure the various European commodities that
he had in his possession; at the same time, some of our people were occupied in
making a garden for his use, planting vines, shaddocks, melons, pine apples,
and the seeds of other vegetable articles; all which were in a flourishing
state before our departure from the island.

Omai began now to pay a serious attention to his own affairs, and heartily
repented of his illjudged prodigality at Otaheite. He found at Huaheine, a
brother, a sister, and a brother-in-law, the sister having been married. But
these did not plunder him, as his other relations had lately done. It appeared,
however, that though they had too much honesty and goodnature to do him any
injury, they were of too little consequen^e in the island to do him any real
servi^es, having neither authority nor influence to protect his property o^ his
person. Thus circumstanced, he ran a great risque of being stripped of every
thing he had received from us, as soon as he should cease to be within the
reach of our powerful protection.

He was now upon the point of being placed in the very singular situation, of
being the only rich man in the community of which he was to be a member. And as
he had, by his connection with us, made himself master of an accumulated
quantity of a species of treasure which his countrymen could not create by any
art or industry of their own, it was natural to imagine, that while all were
desirous of sharing in this envied wealth, all would be ready to join in
attempts to strip its sole proprietor. As the most likely means of preventing
this, Captain Cook advised him to distribute some of his movables among two or
three of the principal chiefs; who, on being thus gratified themselves, might
be induced to favor him with their patronage, and shield him from the injuries
of others. He promised to follow this advice; and we heard, before we sailed,
that this prudent step had been taken. The Captain, however, not confiding
entirely in the operations of gratitude, had recourse to the more forcible and
effectual motive of intimidation, taking every opportunity of notifying to the
inhabitants, that it was his intention to make another visit to their island,
after being absent the usual time; and that, if he did not find his friend in
the same state of security in which he should leave him at present, all those
who should then appear to have been his enemies, might expect to become the
objects of his resentment. This menacing declaration will, probably, have some
effect; for our successive visits of late years have induced these islanders to
believe, that our ships are ^o return at certain periods, and while they
continue to entertain such a notion, which the Captain thought it a fair
stratagem to confirm, Omai has some prospect of being suffered to thrive upon
his new plantation.

While we remained in this harbor, we carried the bread on shore to clear it
of vermin. The number of cock-roaches that infested the ship at this time, is
almost incredible. The damage we sustained from them was very considerable; and
every attempt to destroy them proved fruitless. If any kind of food was exposed
for a few minutes, it was covered with these noxious insects, who soon pierced
it full of holes, so that it resembled an honeycomb. They proved particularly
destructive to birds, which had been stuffed for curiosities, and were so fond
of ink, that they eat out the writing on the labels, fastened to different
articles, and the only thing that preserved books from their ravages, was the
closeness of the binding, which prevented these devourers from insinuating
themselves between the leaves. According to Mr. Anderson, they were of two
sorts, the blatta orientalis, and germanica.

The intercourse of trade and friendly offices, between us and the inhabitants
of Huaheine, was undisturbed, by any accident, till the evening of the 22d,
when one of the natives found means to get into Mr. Bayly's observatory, and
carry off a sextent, unobserved. Captain Cook was no sooner informed of this
theft than he went ashore, and desired Omai to apply to the chiefs, to procure
restitution. He accordingly made application to them, but they took no steps
toward recovering the instrument, being more attentive to a heeva, that was
then exhibiting, till the Captain ordered the performers to desit. Being now
convinced that he was in earnest, they began to make some enquiry after the
delinquent, who was sitting in the midst of them, with such marks of unconcern,
that the Captain was in great doubt of his being guilty, particularly as he
denied it. Omai, however, assuring him that this was the person, he was sent on
board the ship and there confined. This raised an* universal ferment among the
assembled islanders, and the whole body fled with precipitation. The prisoner
being examined by Omai, was with some difficulty brought to confess where he
had concealed the sextent, and it was brought back, unhurt, the next morning.
After this, the natives recovered from their consternation, and began to gather
about us as usual. As the thief appeared to be a shameless villain, Captain
Cook punished him with greater severity than he had ever done any former
culprit. Besides having his head and beard shaved, he commanded that both his
ears should be cut off, and then dismissed.

This punishment, however, did not deter him from committing other offenses;
for early in the morning of the 25th, a general alarm was spread occasioned, as
was reported, by one of our goats being stolen by this very man; and though,
upon examination, we found every thing safe in that quarter, yet it appeared,
that he had destroyed and carried off from Omai's ground, several vines and
cabbage-plants; and he publicly threatened to put him to death, and set fire to
his house as soon as we should quit this place. To prevent his doing any
further mischief, the Captain ordered him to be seized, and confined again on
board the ship, with a view of carrying him off the island; and this intention
seemed to give general satisfaction to all the chiefs. He was a native of
Bolabola: but there were two many of the people here ready to cooperate with
him in all his designs. We had, indeed, always met with more troublesome
persons in Huaheine than in any other of the adjacent islands; and it was only
fear and the want of proper opportunities, that induced them to behave better
now. Anarchy and confusion seemed to prevail among them. Their Earce rahie, as
we have already observed, was but a child; and we did not find, that there was
any individual, or any set of men, who held the reins of government for him; so
that, whenever any misunderstanding occured between us, we never knew, with
sufficient precision, to whom it was necessary to apply, in order to effect an
accommodation, or procure redress.

Omai's house being now almost finished, many of his movables were carried
ashore on the 26th; amongst other articles was a box of toys, which greatly
pleased the gazing multitude. But, as to his plates, dishes, drinking mugs,
glasses, pots, kettles, and the whole train of domestic apparatus, scarce one
of his countrymen would even look at them. Omai, himself began to think that
they would be of no service to him; that a baked hog was more savory eating
than a boiled one; that a plantain leaf made as good a plate or dish as pewter;
and that a cocoa-nut shell was as convenient a goblet as one of our mugs. He
therefore disposed of most of these articles of English furniture among the
crew of our ships; and received from them, in return, hatchets, and other iron
implements, which had a more intrinsic value in this part of the world. Among
the numerous presents bestowed upon him in England, fireworks had not been
omitted; some of which we exhibited in the evening of the 28th, before a great
multitude of people, who beheld them with a mixture of pleasure and
apprehension. Those which remained were put in order, and left with Omai,
pursuant to their original destination.

On Thursday the 30th, early in the morning, the Bolabola-man whom we had in
confinement, found means to escape out of the ship, carrying with him the
shackle of the bilboo-bolt that had been put about his leg, which was taken
from him as soon as he arrived on shore, by one of the chiefs, and given to
Omai; who quickly came on board, to inform the Captain that his mortal enemy
was again let loose upon him.

We found, upon enquiry, that the sentry placed over the prisoner, and even the
whole watch in that part of the ship where he was confined, having fallen
asleep, he seized the favorable opportunity, took the key of the irons out of
the drawer into which he had seen it put, and set himself at liberty. This
escape convinced the Commodore, that his people had been very remiss in their
neight-duty; which rendered it necessary to chastize those who were now in
fault, and to establish some new regulations that might prevent similar
negligence in future. He was pleased at hearing, afterward, that the fellow
who had escaped, had gone over to Ulietea.

Omai was no sooner settled in his new habitation, than Captain Cook began to
think of departing from Huaheine, and got every thing off from the shore this
evening, except a goat big with kid, and a horse and mare; which were lest in
the possession of our friend, who was now to be finally separated from us. We
also gave him a boar and two sows of the English breed; and he had got two or
three sows of his own. The horse had covered the mare during our continuance at
Otaheite; so that the introduction of a breed of horses into these islands* has
probably succeeded, by this valuable present.

With regard to Omai's domestic establishment, he had procured at Otaheite,
four or five toulous, or people of the lower class; the two young
New-Zealanders remained with him; and his Brother, and several others, joined
him at Hauheine; so that his family now consisted of ten or eleven persons; if
that can justly be denominated a family, to which not one female belonged. The
house which our people erected for him was twenty-four feet by eighteen; and
about ten feet in height. It was composed of boards which were the spoils of
our military observations at Eimeo; and, in the construction of it, as few
nails as possible were used, lest there might be an inducement, from the desire
of iron, to pull it down. It was agreed upon, that, immediately after our
departure, he should erect a spacious house after the mode of his own country;
one end of which was to be brought over that which we had built, so as entirely
to enclose it for greater security. In this work, some of the chiefs of the
island promised to contribute their assistance; and if the intended building
should cover the ground which was marked out for it, few of the houses in
Huaheine will exceed it in magnitude.

Omai's European weapons consisted of a sowling-piece, two pair of pistols,
several swords or cutlasses, a musket, bayonet, and a cartouch-box. After he
had got on shore whatever appertained to him, he had the two Captains, and most
of the officers of both our ships, two or three times, to dinner; on which
occasions, his table was plentifully supplied with the best provisions that the
island could afford. Before we set sail, the Commodore caused the following
inscription to be cut upon the outside of his house: Georgigus Tertius, Rex, 2
Novembris, 1777. Naves Resolution, Jac. Cook, Pr. Naves Discovery, Car. Clerk,
Pr.


On Sunday, the 2d of November, at four o'clock, we took the advantage of an
easterly breeze, and sailed out of Owharre harbor. Most of our friends
continued on board till our vessels were under sail; when Captain Cook, to
gratify their curiosity, ordered five guns to be fired. Then they all left us,
except Omai, who remained till we were out at sea. We had come to sail by a
hawser fastened to the shore, which, in casting the ship, parted, being cut by
the rocks, and its outer end was left behind: it therefore became necessary to
dispatch a boat to bring it on board. In this boat, our friend Omai went
ashore, after having taken a very affectionate farewell of all the officers. He
sustained this parting with a manly fortitude, till he came to Captain Cook,
when, notwithstanding all his efforts, he was unable to suppress his tears; and
he wept all the time in going ashore, as Mr. King, who accompanied him in the
boat, afterward informed the Captain.

Though we had now, to our great satisfaction, brought him safe back to the
very spot from which he was taken, it is probable, that we left him in a
situation less desirable than that which he was in before his connection with
us: not that, having tasted the comforts of civilized life, he must become,
more wretched from being obliged to relinquish all thoughts of continuing them,
but merely because the advantages he received from us, have placed him in a
more hazardous situation, with respect to his personal safety. From being
greatly caressed in England, he had lost sight of his primary condition, and
did not consider in what manner his acquisitions, either of knowledge or of
wealth, would be estimated by his countrymen, at his return; which were the
only things whereby he could recommend himself to them now, more than before,
and on which he could lay the foundation either of his future happiness or
greatness. He appeared to have, in some measure, forgotten their customs in
this respect, and even to have mistaken their genius; otherwise he must have
been convinced of the extreme difficulty there would be in getting himself
admitted as a man of rank, where there is scarce a single instance of a
person's being raised from an inferior station even by the greatest merit. Rank
seems to be the foundation of all power and distinction here, and is so
pertinaciously adhered to, that, unless a person has some degree of it, he will
be contemned and hated, if he pretends to exercise any authority. This was
really the case, in a great measure, with Omai; though his countrymen were
rather cautious of expressing their sentiments while we continued among them.

If he had made a proper use of the presents he brought with him from
Great Britain, this, with the knowledge he had gained by traveling, might have
enabled him to form the most advantageous connections. But he exhibited too
many proofs of a weak inattention to this obvious means of promoting his
interest. He had formed schemes of a higher nature; it may indeed be said,
meaner; for revenge, rather than a desire of greatness, appeared to influence
him from the beginning. His father was, certainly, a man of considerable
property in Ulietea, when that island was subdued by the inhabitants of
Bolabola; and, with many others, fled for refuge to Huaheine, where he died,
and left Omai, with several other children, who thus became entirely dependent,
In this situation, Captain Furneaux took him up, and brought him to England.
Whether he expected, from the treatment he there met with, that any assistance
would be afforded him against the enemies of his father and his country, or
whether he had the vanity to suppose, that his own superiority of knowledge,
and personal courage, would be sufficient to dispossess the conquerors of
Ulietea, is uncertain; but, from the very commencement of the voyage, this was
his constant topic. He would not pay any attention to our remonstrances on such
an inconsiderate determinaton, but was displeased, whenever more reasonable
counsels were proposed for his benefit. Nay, he was so ridiculously attached to
his favorite scheme, that he affected to believe the Bolabolans would cetainly
quit the conquered island, as soon as they should have intelligence of his
arrival in Otaheite. As we proceeded, however, on our voyage, he began to
perceive his error; and, by the time of our arrival at the Friendly Islands,
had such apprehensions of his reception in his own country, that he was
inclined to have remained at Tongataboo, under the protection of his friend
Feenou. At these islands, he squandered away a considerable part of his
European treasure; and he was equally imprudent at Otaheite, till Captain Cook
put a stop to his profusion. He also formed such improper connections there,
that Otoo, though at first disposed to countenance him, afterward openly
expressed his disapprobation of his conduct. He might, however, have recovered
the favor of that chief, and have settled, to great advantage, in Otaheite, as
he had formely lived some years there, and was now honored with the notice of
Towha, whose valuable present of a large double canoe has been already
mentioned. But he continued undetermined to the last, and probably would not
have adopted the plan of settlement in Huaheine, if Captain Cook had not so
positively refused to employ force in restoring him to the possession of his
father's property.

Omai's greatest danger, in his present situation, will arise from the very
imprudent declarations of his antipathy to the Bolabolans. For these people,
from the motives of jealousy, will undoubtedly endeavor to render him
obnoxious to the inhabitants of Huaheine; as they are now at peace with that
island, and may easily accomplish their designs. This circumstance, he might,
with great ease, have avoided. For they were not only free from any aversion to
him, but the chief, whom we mentionned before, as a priest or god, even offered
to reinstate him in his father's lands. But he peremptorily refused this; and,
to the very last, continued fixed in this resolution to embrace the first
opportunity of satisfying his revenge in battle. To this he is perhaps not a
little stimulated by the coat of mail he brought from England; clothed in
which, and furnished with firearms, he idly imagines that he shall be
invincible.

The defects of Omai's character were considerably over-balanced by his great
goodnature, and docile, tractable dispositon. Captain Cook, during the whole
time he was with him, seldom had reason to be seriously displeased with his
general conduct. His grateful heart ever retained the highest sense of the
favors conferred on him in England; nor will he ever be unmindful of those who
honored him, while in that kingdom, with their friendship and protection.
Though he had a tolerable share of understanding, he showed little application
and perseverance in exerting it, so that he had but a general and imperfect
knowledge of things. He was not a man of any great degree of observation. There
were many elegant amusements, as well as useful arts, among the Friendly
Islanders, which he might have conveyed to his native country, where they, in
all probability, would have been readily adopted. But we never found that he
endeavored to make himself master of any one of them. Such indifference is,
indeed, the characteristic foible of his countrymen. Though they have been
visited by Europeans, at times, for these ten years past, we could not discern
the slightest vestige of any attempt to profit by this intercourse; nor have
they hitherto imitated us in any respect. It must not, therefore, be expected,
that Omai will be able to introduce among them many of our arts and customs, or
much improve those to which they have been familiarized by long habit. We
trust, however, that he will exert his endeavors to bring to perfection the
various fruits and vegetables that were planted by us; which will be no small
acquisition. But the principal advantage these islands are likely to receive
from the travels of Omai, will probably arise from the animals that have been
left upon them; which, perhaps, they never would have obtained, if he had not
come over to England. When these multiply, Otaheite, and the Society Isles,
will equal any place in the known world, with respect to provisions.

Omai's return, and the substantial proofs he carried back with him of British
liberality, encouraged many to offer themselves as volunteers to accompany us
to Pretane. Captain Cook took every opportunity of expressing his fixed
determination to reject all applications of that kind. Omai, who was ambitious
of remaining the only great traveller among them, being afraid lest the Captain
might be prevailed upon to place others in a situation of rivalling him,
frequently reminded him of the declaration of the Earl of Sandwich, that no
others of his countrymen were to come to England.

Had there been the smallest probability of any ship being again sent to
New-Zealand, the Commodore would have brought the two youths of that country
home with him, both of them being very desirous of continuing with us.
Taweiharooa, the eldest, was endowed with strong natural sense, was extremely
well disposed, and capable of receiving any instruction. He appeared to be
sensible of the inferiority of his own country to these islands, and resigned
himself, though perhaps not without reluctance, to end his days at Huaheine in
ease and plenty. But the other, named Kokoa, was so strongly attached to us,
that it became necessary to make use of force in carrying him ashore. He was a
smart witty boy; and, on that account, great notice had been taken of him on
board.

CHAP. VII.
Arrival at Ulietea -- One of the Marines deserts but is brought back by
Captain Cook -- Intelligence from Omai -- Instructions to Captain Clerk -- Two
others desert -- The two Captains seek them in vain -- The Chief's Son,
Daughter, and her Husband, confined on board the Discovery -- Unsuccessful
Conspiracy of the Natives against the Captains -- The two Deserters are
recovered -- The Chief's Family set at Liberty -- The Ships sail -- Remarks on
the Ulieteans -- Present and former State of their Island.

AS soon as the boat, in which Omai was conveyed ashore, had returned, with the
remainder of the hawser, to the ship, we hoisted her in, and stood over for
Ulietea without delay. The next morning, which was the 3d of November, we made
sail round the southern end of that island, for the harbor of Ohamaneno. We
met with variable light airs and calms alternately, so that, at twelve o'clock,
we were still at the distance of a league from the mouth of the harbor; and
while we were thus detained, Oreo, the chief of the island, with his son and
son-in-law, came off to pay us a visit. All the boats were now hoisted out, and
sent ahead to tow, being assisted by a slight southerly breeze. This soon
failing, and being succeeded by an easterly one, which blew right out of the
harbor, we were obliged to anchor at its entrance, about two o'clock, and to
warp in, which employed us till night. We were no sooner within the harbor
than our ships were surrounded with canoes, filled with the natives, who
brought a supply of fruit and hogs, which they exchanged for our commodites.

The following day, the Resolution was moored close to the northern shore, at
the head of the harbor; and the Discovery along-side the southern shore.
Captain Cook, in the mean time, returned Oreo's visit, and presented that chief
with a red-feathered cap from Tongataboo, a shirt, a linen gown, and a few
other things of less value. Oreo, and some of his friends, then accompanied him
on board to dinner. On Thursday the 6th, the observatories were set up, and the
necessary instruments carried on shore. The two succeeding days, Captain Cook,
Mr. King, and Mr. Bailey, observed the sun's azimuths, both on shore and on
board, with all the compasses, in order to discover the variation. Nothing
remarkable happened, till very early in the morning of the 13th, when a marine,
named John Harrison, who was sentinel at the observatory, deserted, taking with
him his musket and acco^trements. As soon as we gained intelligence which way
he had gone, a party was detached in search of him; but they returned toward
the evening, without success. The next day, Captain Cook applied to the chief
concerning this affair, who promised to send a party of the islanders after the
fugitive, and give us hops that he should be brought back in the course of that
day. This however, did not happen; and we had reason to imagine, that the chief
had taken no steps toward finding him.

We had, at this time, a considerable number of the natives about our ships,
and several thefts were committed; the consequences of which being apprehended
by them, very few of them came to visit us the next morning. Oreo himself
caught the alarm, and fled with his whole family. Captain Cook considered this
as a good opportunity to insist upon their delivering up the deserter; and
having heard that he was then at a place called Hamoa, situated on the other
side of the island he repaired theither with two armed boats, attended by a
native. In their way, they met with the chief, who also embarked with them. The
Captain, with a few of his men, landing about a mile and a half from the spot,
marched up to it, with great expedition, lest the sight of the boats should
give the alarm, and allow the offender sufficient time to make his escape to
the mountains. This precaution proved unnecessary; for the natives of that part
of the island having obtained information of the Captain's approach, were
prepared to deliver up the fugitive. He was found, with his musket lying
before him seated betwixt two women, who, the instant that the Captain entered
the house, rose up to plead in his vindication. As such proceedings deserved to
be discouraged, the Captain, with a stern look, bid them be gone; upon which
they burst into tears, and retired. Paha, the chief of that district, now came
with a sucking-pig, and a plantain-tree, which he was on the point of
presenting to Captain Cook, as a peace offering; who rejected it, and having
ordered the chief to quit his presence, embarked with Harrison in one of the
boats, and returned to the ships. After this harmony was speedily restored. The
delinquent made no other excuse for his conduct, than that the natives had
enticed him away: which perhaps was in a great measure true, as Paha, and the
two women abovementioned, had been at the ship the day before his desertion.
As he had remained at his station till within a few minutes of the time in
which he was to have been relieved by another, the punishment he received was
not very severe.

About a fortnight after we had arrived in Ulietea, Omai dispatched two of his
people in a canoe, with intelligence, that he continued undisturbed by the
inhabitants of Huaheine, and that every thing succeeded with him, except that
his goat had died in kidding. This information was accompanied with a request
that Captain Cook would send him another goat, and also two axes* Pleased with
this additional opportunity of serving his friend, the Captain sent back the
messengers to Huaheine, on the 18th, with the axes, and a male and female kid.

On Wednesday the 19th, the Commodore delivered to Captain Clerk his
instructions how to proceed, in case of separation, after quitting these
islands. The purport of these instructions was as follows: that, whereas the
passage from the Society Isles to the nothern coast of America was of
considerable length, and as a part of it must be performed in the depth of
winter, when boisterous weather must be expected, which might perhaps occasion
a separation, Captain Clerk should take all possible care to prevent this; but
that if the two ships should chance to be separated, he, after searching for
Captain Cook, and not finding him in five days, was to proceed toward the
coast of New Albion, and endeavor to fall in with it in the latititude of 45,
where he was to cruize for him ten days; and not seeing him in that time, was
to put into the first convenient harbor, in or to the north of that latitude,
to obtain refreshments, and take in wood and water that, during his continuance
in port he was constantly to look out for Captain Cook; and if the latter did
not join him before the 1st of April following, he was to proceed northward to
the latitude of 56, where, at such a distance from the coast as did not exceed
fifteen leagues, he was to cruize for him till the 10th of May; and not finding
him, was to proceed on a northerly course, and attempt to discover a passage
into the Atlantice Ocean, either through Hudson's or Baffin's Bays, as directed
by the instructions of the Board of Admiralty: that, if he should fail in those
endeavors he was to repair to the harbor of St. Peter and St. Paul in
Kamtschatka, and pass the winter there: but that if he could not procure
refreshments at that port, he was at liberty to go where he should think
proper, leaving with the Governor, before his departure, an account of his
destination, to be delivered to Captain Cook on his arrival; and that, in the
spring of the year following (1779) he was to return to the port
abovementioned: that if he then received no further orders from Captain Cook,
so as to justify his pursuing any other measures than those which were pointed
out in the instructions of the Lords of the Admiralty, his future proceedings
were to be directed by them; and that, in case of being prevented, by illness
or any other cause, from carrying these, and the instructions of their
Lordships, into execution, he was to leave them with the officer who was next
in command.

While we lay moored to the shore, we scrubbed both sides of the bottoms of our
vessels, and also fixed some plates of tin under the binds. These plates
Captain Cook received from the ingenious Mr. Pelham, Secretary to the
Commissioners for victualling the royal navy, for the purpose of trying whether
tin would succeed as well as copper, in sheathing the bottoms of ships.

On Monday the 24th, in the morning, the Commodore was informed that two of the
Discovery's people, one of whom was a midshipman, were missing. Not long after,
we learned from the natives, that they had embarked in a canoe the preceding
night, and were now at the other end of the island. As the Midshipman had
expressed a desire of continuing at one of these islands, it was extremely
probable that he and his companion had gone off with that intent. Captain
Clerk therefore, with two armed boats, and a detachment of marines, set out in
quest of the fugitives, but returned in the evening without success. From the
conduct of the islanders* he was of opinion, that they intended to conceal the
deserters; and, with this view, had deceived him with false information,
directing h^^ to seek for them where they could not be found. He was not
mistaken; for the next morning, intelligence was brought, that the two runaways
were in the Isle of Otaha. These not being the only persons in the ships who
were desirous of remaining at these favorite islands, it was necessary, in
order to give an effectual discouragement to any further desertion, to recover
them at all events. Captain Cook therefore determined to go in pursuit of them
himself, having observed that the natives seldom attempted to amuse him with
false information. He accordingly set out with two armed boats, accompanied by
Oreo himself. They proceeded, without stopping at any place, till they came to
the eastern side of Otaha, where they put ashore; and the chief dispatched a
man before them, with orders to seize the fugitives, and keep them till the
Captain and his attendants should arrive with the boats. But when they had got
to the place where they expected to find them, they were informed, that they
had quitted this island, and gone to Bolabola the preceding day. The Captain,
not choosing to follow them thither, returned to the ships, with a full
determination to have recourse to a measure, which, he had reason to believe,
would compel the natives to restore them.

On the 26th, soon after break of day, Oreo, with his son, daughter, and
son-in-law, having come on board the Resolution, Captain Cook resolved to
detain the three last, till our deserters should be delivered up. With this
wiew, Captain Clerk invited them on board his ship; and, as soon as they
arrived in his cabin, a sentinel was placed at the door, and the window
secured. This proceeding greatly surprised them; and Captain Clerk having
explained the reason of it they burst into tears, and begged he would not kill
them. He assured them he would not, and that the moment his people were brought
back, they should be released. This however, did not remove their uneasiness,
and they bewailed their fate in silent sorrow. The chief being with Captain
Cook when he received intelligence of this affair, immediately mentioned it to
him, imagining that this step had been taking without his knowledge and
approbation. The Captain instantly undeceived him; and then he began to
entertain apprehensions with respect to his own situation, and his countenance
indicated the greatest perturbation of mind. But the Captain soon quieted his
fears, by telling him, that he was at liberty to quit the ship whenever he
chose, and to take such steps toward the recovery of our two men, as he should
judge best calculated for that purpose; and that, if he should meet with
success, his friends on board the Discovery should be released from their
confinement: if not, that they should certainly be carried away with us. The
Captain added, that the chief's conduct, as well as that of many of his
countrymen, in not only assisting these two men to make their escape, but in
endeavoring, at this very time, to prevail upon others to follow them, would
justify any measure that would serve to put a stop to such proceedings. This
explanation of the motives upon which the Commodore acted, seemed to remove, in
a great degree, that general consternation into which Oreo, and his people who
were present, were at first thrown. But, though relieved from all apprehensions
with regard to their own safety, they were still under the deepest concern for
the prisoners in the Discovery. Numbers of them went under the stern of that
ship in canoes, and lamented their captivity with long and loud exclamations.
The name of Poedooa (for that was the appellation of Oreo's daughter) resounded
from every quarter; and the women not only made a most dismal howling, but
struck their bosoms, and cut their heads with shark's teeth, which occasioned a
considerable effusion of blood.

The chief now dispatched a canoe to Bolabola, with a message to Opoony, king
of that island, informing him of what had happened and requesting him to seize
the two deserters, and send them back. The messenger, who was the father of
Oreo's son-in-law Pootoe, came to receive Captain Cook's commands before his
departure; who strictly enjoined him not to return without the fugitives, and
to tell Opoony, from him, that if they had left the isle of Bolabola, he must
send canoes in pursuit of them.

The impatient natives, not thinking proper to trust to the return of our
people for the release of the prisoners, were induced to meditate an attempt,
which if it had not been prevented might have involved them in stell greater
distress. Between five and six o'clock, Captain Cook, who was then on shore,
abreast of the ship, observed that all their conoes, in and about the harbor,
began to move off. He enquired, in vain, for the cause of this; till our
people, calling to us from the Discovery, informed us, that some of the
islanders had seized Captain Clerk and Mr. Gore, as they were walking at a
small distance from the ships. The Commodore, struck with the boldness of this
scheme of retaliation, which seemed to counteract him in his own way, instantly
commanded his people to arm; and, in a few minutes, a strong party, under the
conduct of Mr. King, was sent to the rescue of our two gentlemen. Two armed
boats, and a party under Mr. Williamson, were dispatched at the same time to
intercept the flying canoes in their retreat to the shore. These detachments
had scarcely gone out of sight, when intelligence arrived that we had been
misinformed; upon which they were immediately called in.

It manifestly appeared, however, from several corroborating particulars, that
the natives had actually formed the design of seizing Captain Clerk; and they
even made no secret in speaking of it the following day. But the principal part
of their plan of operations was to have laid hold of the person of Captain
Cook. He was accustomed to bathe every evening in the fresh water; on which
occasions he frequently went alone, and always unarmed. Expecting him to go
this evening, as usual, they had resolved upon seizing him, and Captain Clerk
likewise, if he had accompanied him. But Captain Cook, after confining the
chief's family, had taken care to avoid putting himself in their power; and had
cautioned Captain Clerk and the officers, not to go to any considerable
distance from the ships. Oreo, in the course of the afternoon, asked our
Commodore, three or four times, if he would not go to the batihing place; till
at length finding that he could not be prevailed upon, he retired, with his
people, notwithstanding all our entreaties to the contrary. Having no
suspicion, at this time, of their design, Captain Cook imagined, that a sudden
panic had seized them, which would probably be soon over. Being disappointed
with respect to him, they fixed upon those who were more in their power. It was
a fortunate circumstance that they did not succeed in their design, and that no
mischief was done on the occasion; no muskets being fired, except two or
three, to stop the canoes; to which firing, perhaps, Captain Clerk and Mr.
Gore owed their safety It is not improbable that they were also indebted for
their safety to Captain Clerke's walking with a pistol in his hand, which he
once fired. We mention this circumstance on the authority of Captain King.
; for, at that moment, a party of the islanders, armed with clubs, were
marching toward them, but dispersed on hearing the report of the muskets.

This conspiracy was first discovered by a girl who had been brought from
Huaheine by one of our officers. Happening to overhear some of the Ulieteans
say, that they would seize Messrs. Clerk and Gore, she immediately ran to
acquaint the first of our people that she met with. Those who had been
entrusted with the execution of the design, threatened to put her to death, as
soon as we should quit Ulietea, for disappointing them. Being aware of this, we
contrived that the girl's friends should come, a day or two afterward, and
take her out of the ship, to convey her to a place where she might remain
concealed, till she should find an opportunity of returning to Huaheine.

On Thursday the 27th, we took down our observatories, and carried on board
whatever we had ashore; we then unmoored the ships, and moved a little way down
the harbor, where we anchored again. Toward the afternoon the natives,
shaking off their apprehensions, gathered round, and on board, our ships, as
usual; and the unpleasing transactions of the preceding day seemed to be almost
forgotten by both parties. In the succeeding night the wind blew in hard
squalls, which were accompanied with heavy showers of rain. In one of these
squalls, the cable by which the Resolution was riding at anchor, parted; but,
as we had another anchor ready to let go, the ship was quickly brought up again.

No account of our two fugitives having been received from Bolabola, Oreo now
set out for that island, desiring Captain Cook to follow him, the next day,
with the ships. This was the Captain's intentions; but the wind prevented our
getting out to sea. The same wind, however, which detained us in the harbor,
brought back Oreo, with the two deserters, from Bolabola. They had reached
Otaha on the night of their desertion; but being, unable for the want of wind,
to get to any of the islands lying to the eastward, as they at first intended,
they had proceeded to Bolalola, and thence to a little island called Toobace,
where they were apprehended by Pootoe's father. As soon as they were brought on
board, the three prisoners in the Discovery were restored to their liberty.
Such was the termination of an affair, which had given the Commodore much
trouble and vexation.

The wind continuing constantly between the north and west, kept us in the
harbor till Sunday the 7th of December; when, at eight o'clock in the morning,
we weighed and made sail, with a light breeze at the north-east point. During
the preceding week, we had been visited by persons from all quarters of the
island, who afforded us a plentiful supply of hogs and green plantains, so that
the time we remained wind-bound in the harbor was not totally lost; for green
plantains are an excellent succedaneum for bread, and will keep good for two or
three weeks. Besides being furnished with these provisions, we also took in
plenty of wood and water

The Ulieteans appeared to be, in general smaller and more black than the
natives of the adjacent islands, and seemed also less orderly, which may,
perhaps, be owing to their having become subject to the inhabitants of
Bolabola. Oreo, their chief, is only a kind of deputy of the Bolabolan monarch;
and the conquest seems to have diminished the number of subordinate chiefs
resident among them: they are, therefore, less immediately under the eye of
those whose interest it is to enforce a proper obedience. Though Ulietea is now
reduced to this state of humiliating dependence, it was formerly, as we were
informed, the most eminent of this group of islands, and was probably the first
seat of government; for we were told, that the present royal family of Otaheite
derives its descent from that which ruled here before the late revolution. The
dethroned king of Ulietea, whose name is Ooroo, resides at Huaheine,
furnishing, in his own person, an instance not only of the instability of
power, but also of the respect paid by these islanders to particulur familes of
princely rank; for they allow Ooroo to retain all the ensigns which are
appropriated by them to royalty, notwithstanding his having been deprived of
his dominions. We observed a similar instance of this during our stay at
Ulietea, where one of our occasional visitants was Captain Cook's old friend
Oree, late chief of Huaheine. He still maintained his consequence, and was
constantly attended by a numerous retinue.

CHAP. VIII.
Proceed to Bolabola, accompanied by Oreo and others -- Application to Opoony
for Monsieur de Bougainville's (...) Reasons for purc^^sing it -- Delicacy of
Opoony, in not accepting the Present -- Quit the Society Islands -- Description
of Bolabola, and its Harbor -- Curious History of the Reduction of the two
Islands, Otaha and Ulietea -- Bravery of the Men of Bolabola -- Account of the
Animals left at Bolabola and Ulietea -- Process of salting Pork -- Cursory
Observations respecting Otaheite, and the Society Islands.

HAVING taking our leave of Ulietea, we steered for Bolabola. Our principal
reason for visiting this island was, to procure one of the anchors which had
been lost at Otaheite by Monsieur de Bougainville. This, we were informed, had
been afterward found by the natives there, and sent by them to Opoony, the
chief of Bolabola. It was not on account of being in want of anchors that we
were anxious to get possession of it; but, having parted with all our hatchets,
and other iron tools and implements in purchasing refreshments, we were now
obliged to create a fresh assortment of trading articles, by fabricating them
from the spare iron we could find on board, and even the greatest part of that
had been already expended. Captain Cook, therefore, supposed Mons. de
Bougainville's anchor would, in a great measure, supply our want of this useful
material, and he did not entertain a doubt that Opoony might be induced to part
with it.

Oreo, accompanied by six or eight others from Ulietea, attended us to
Bolabola; and, indeed, most of the natives, except the chief, would gladly have
taken a passage with us to England. At sunset, being off the south point of
Bolabola, we shortened sail, and passed the night making short boards. On the
8th, at day break, we made sail for the harbor, on the west side of the
island. The wind being scant, it was nine o'clock before we were near enough to
send away a boat to found the entrance.

The master, when he returned with the boat, reported, that the entrance of the
harbor was rocky at the bottom, but that there was good ground within; and the
debth of water twenty-five and twenty-seven fathoms; and that there was room to
turn the ships in. Upon this information, we attempted to work the ships in;
but, the wind and tide being against us, we made two or three trips, and found
it could not be accomplished till the tide should turn in our favor. Whereupon
Captain Cook gave up the design of carrying the ships into the harbor, and
embarking in one of the boats, attended by Oreo and his companions, was rowed
in for the island.



As soon as they were got ashore, the Commodore was introduced to Opoony,
surrounded by a vast concourse of people. The necessary formality of
compliments being over, he requested the chief to give him the anchor; and, to
induce him to comply with the request, produced the presen he intended for him.
It consisted of a linen nightgown, some gauze handkerchiefs, a shirt, a
looking-glass, some beads and toys, and six axes. Opoony, however, refused to
accept the present till the Commodore had received the anchor; and ordered
three persons to go and deliver it to him; with directions to receive from him
what he thought proper in return. With these messengers we set out in our boats
for a neighboring island, where the anchor had been deposited; but it was
neither so large, nor so perfect, as we expected. By the mark that was upon it,
we found that it had originally weighed seven hundred pounds; but it now wanted
the two palms, the ring, and part of the shank. The reason of Opoony's refusing
Captain Cook's present was now apparent; he, doubtless, supposed that the
anchor, in its present state, was so much inferior to it in value, that, when
he saw it, he would be displeased. The Commodore, notwithstanding, took the
anchor as he found it, and sent the whole of the present, which he, at first,
intended. This negotiation being completed, the Commodore returned on board,
hoisted in the boats, and made sail to the north. But, while we (...) hoisting
in the boats, we were visited by some of the natives, who came off, in three or
four canoes, to see the ships. They brought with them one pig, and a few
cocoa-nuts.

Had we remained there till the next day, we should probably have been supplied
with plenty of provisions; and the natives would, doubtless be disappointed
when they found we were gone: but, having already a good stock of hogs and
fruit on board, and not many articles left to purchase more, we had no
inducement to defer the prosecution of our voyage.

Oteavanooa, the harbor of Bolabola, situated on the west side of the island,
i^ ^ery capacious; and, though we did not enter it, Captain Cook had the
satisfaction of being informed, by persons employed by him for that purpose,
that it was a very proper place for the reception of ships.

Toward the middle of this island is a lofty double-peaked mountain, which
appeared to be barren on the east side, but, on the west side, has some trees
or bushes. The lower grounds, toward the sea, like the other islands of this
ocean, are covered with cocoa-palms, and bread-fruit trees. There are many
little islots that surround it, which add to the number of its inhabitants and
to the amount of its vegetable productions.

Considering the small extent of Bolabola, being only eight leagues in
circumference, it is remarkable that its people should have been able to
conquer Ulietea and Otaha; the former of which islands is, alone, more than
double its size. In each of Captain Cook's three voyages, the war which
produced this great revolution, was frequently mentioned; and, as it may amuse
the reader, we shall give the history, of it as related by themselves.

Ulietea and Otaha had long been friends; or as the natives emphatically
express it, they were considered as two brothers, whose views and interests
where the same. The island of Huaheine was also admitted as their friend, but
not in so eminent a degree. Like a traitor, Otaha leagued with Bolabola,
jointly to attack Ulietea; whose people required the assistance of their
friends of Huaheine, against these united powers. The inhabitants of Bolabola
were encouraged by a prophetess, who predicted their success; and, that they
might rely upon her prediction, she desired a man might be sent to a particular
part of the sea, where, from a great depth, would arise a stone. He was
accordingly sent in a canoe to the place specified, and was going instantly to
dive after the stone, when, behold, it spontaneously started up to the surface,
and came immediately into his hand! All the people were astonished at the
sight; the stone was deemed sacred, and deposited in the house of the Eatooa;
and is still preserved, as a proof that this prophetess had great influence
with the divinity. Elevated with the hopes of victory, the canoes of Bolabola
attacked those of Ulietea and Huaheine; the encounter was of long duration,
and, notwithstanding the miracle, the Bolabola fleet would have been
vanquished, had not that of Otaha arrived at the critical moment. The fortune
of the day was now turned, and their enemies were totally defeated. Two days
after, the men of Bolabola invaded Huaheine, of which they made themselves
masters; it being weakly defended, as most of its warriors were then absent.
Many of its fugitives, however, having got to Otaheite, there related their
lamentable tale. This so affected their own countrymen, and those of Ulietea
whom they found in that island, that they obtained their assistance. They were
furnished with only ten fighting canoes, and with that inconsiderable force,
effected a landing at Huaheine, when dark at night; and, taking the Bolabola
men by surprise, killed many of them, and dispersed the rest. Thus they again
possessed themselves of their own island, which now remains independent, and is
governed by its own chiefs. When the united fleets of Ulietea and Huaheine were
defeated, the men of Bolabola were applied to by their allies of Otaha to be
allowed an equal share of the conquests. This being refused, the alliance
broke; and, during the war, Otaha was conquered, as well as Ulietea, both of
which remain subject to Bolabola; the chiefs by whom they are governed, being
only deputies to Opoony, the king of that island.

Such was their history of the war. It has already been observed, that these
people are extremely deficient in recollecting the exact dates of past events.
And, respecting this war, though it happened but a few years ago, we could only
guess at the time of its commencement and duration, the natives not being able
to satisfy our ^^quiries with any precision. The final (...) of Ulietea; which
terminated the war, had (...) achieved before Captain Cook was there in 1769;
but it was very apparent that peace had not been long restored, as marks of
recent hostilities having been committed were then to be seen. By attending to
the age of Teereetareea, the present chief of Huaheine, some additional
collateral proof may be gathered. He did not appear to be above ten or twelve
years of age, and his father, we were informed, had been killed in one of the
engagements.

The Bolabola men, since the conquest of Ulietea and Otaha, are considered as
invincible; and their fame is so far extended, that, even at Otaheite, if not
dreaded, they are respected for their valor. It is asserted, that they never
fly from an enemy, and that they always are victorious against an equal number
of the other islanders. Their neighbors, too, ascribe much to the superiority
of their god, who, they believed, detained us by contrary winds at Ulietea.

The estimation in which the Bolabola men are held at Otaheite, may be gathered
from Monsieur de Bougainville's anchor having been sent to their sovereign. The
intention of transporting the Spanish bull to their island, must be ascribed to
the same cause. And they already possessed a third European curiosity, a male
animal brought to Otaheite by the Spainards. This animal had been so
imperfectly described by the natives, that we had been much puzzled to
conjecture what it could be. Some good, however, generally arises out of evil.
When Captain Clerke's deserters were brought back from Bolabola, they told us
the animal had been shown to them, and that it was a ram. If our men had not
deserted, it is probable we should never have known this.

In consequence of this intelligence, Captain Cook, when he landed to meet
Opoony, carried an ewe on shore, of the Cape of Good Hope breed; by which he
has probably laid the foundation for a breed of sheep at Bolabola. He also left
with Oreo, at Ulietea, two goats, and an English boar and sow: so that the race
of hogs will be considerably improved, in a few years, at Otaheite, and all the
neighboring islands; and they will, perhaps, be stocked with many valuable
European animals.

When this is really the case, these islands will be unrivalled in abundance,
and variety of refreshments for the supply of navigators. Even in their present
state, they are hardly to be excelled. When the inhabitants are not disturbed
by intestine broils, which has been the case for several years past, their
productions are numerous and plentiful.

If we had possessed a greater assortment of goods, and a proper quantity of
salt, we might have salted as much pork, as would have been sufficient to last
both ships almost a year. But we quite exhausted our trading commodities at the
Friendly Islands, Otaheite, and its neighborhood. Our axes, in particular,
were nearly gone, with which, alone, hogs were, in general, to be purchased.
The salt that remained on board, was not more than was requisite for curing
fifteen puncheons of meat.

The following process of curing pork has been adopted by Captain Cook in his
several voyages. The hogs were killed in the evening; when cleaned, they were
cut up, and the bone taken out. The meat was salted while it was hot, and laid
so as to permit the juices to drain from it, till the next morning: it was then
salted again, put into a cask, and covered with pickle. It remained, in this
situation, four or five days; when it was taken out, and carefully examined;
and, if any of it appeared to be in the least tainted. which was sometimes the
case, it was separated from the rest, which was repacked, headed up, and filled
with good pickle. It was again examined in about eigth or ten days time, but
there appeared to be no necessity for it, as it was generally found to be all
perfectly cured. Bay and white salt, mixed together, answers the best, though
either of them will do alone. Great care was taken that none of the large
blood vessels remained in the meat; and not too much should be packed together
at the first salting, least those pieces which are in the middle should heat,
and hinder the salt from penetrating them. In tropical climates, meat ought not
to be salted in rainy sultry weather.

Europeans having, of late, so frequently visited these islanders, they may, on
that account, have been induced to breed a larger stock of hogs; knowing that,
whenever we come, they may be certain of receiving what they esteem a valuable
consideration for them. They daily expect the Spainards at Otaheite, and, in
two or three years time, they will doubtless expect the English there, as well
as the other islands. It is useless to assure them that you will not return,
for they suppose you cannot avoid it; though none of them either know, or
enquire, the reason of your coming. It would, perhaps, have been better of
these people, to have been ignorant of our superiority, than, after once
knowing it, to be abandoned to their original incapacity. They cannot, indeed,
be restored to their former happy mediocrity, if the intercourse between us
should be discontinued

It is, in a manner, incumbent on the Europeans to pay them occasional visits
(once in three or four years) to supply them with those articles, which we, by
introducing, have given them a predilection for. The want of such supplies may
be severely felt, when it is too late to return to their old imperfect
contrivances, which they now despise and discard. When the iron tools, with
which we have furnished them, are worn out, their own will be almost forgotten.
A stone hatchet is now as great a curiosity among them, as an iron one was
seven or eight years ago; and a chissel made of bone, or stone, is no where to
be seen. Spike nails have been substituted in the room of the latter articles;
and they are weak enough to imagine, that their store of them is inexhaustible,
for they were no longer sought after.

Knives happened at this time, to be in high estimation at Ulietea; and axes
and hatchets bore unrivalled sway at all the islands. Respecting articles
merely ornamented, these islanders are as changeable as the most polished
European nations; for, an article which may be prized by them today, may,
perhaps, be rejected to morrow, as a fashion or wim may alter. But our iron
implements are so evidently useful, that they must continue to be high in their
estimation. They would indeed, be miserable, if they should cease to receive
supplies of what appears necessary to their comfortable existence; as they are
destitute of the materials, and ignorant of the art of fabricating them.

In our former relations, too much has already been published, respecting some
of the modes of life, which rendered Otaheite so pleasing an abode to many of
our people; and, if we could add any finishing strokes to that picture, we
should be unwilling to exhibit a view of such licentious manners as cannot fail
to be disgusting.

Having now concluded our account respecting these islands, which stand so
conspicuous in the list of our discoveries, we refer the reader to the
following chapter, for which we are indebted to Mr. Anderson.

CHAP. IX.
Strictures on former Accounts of Otaheite -- The prevailing Winds -- Beauty
and Fertility of the Country -- Land but little cultivated -- Produce --
Natural Curiosities -- Description of the Natives -- Delicacy of the women --
Their general Character -- Disposed to amorous Gratifications -- Their Language
-- Ignorance of Surgery and Physic -- Animal Food chiefly eaten by the superior
Class -- Pernicious Effects of Ava -- Account of their different Meals --
Connections between the two Sexes -- Circumcision -- Religion -- Notions
concerning Immortality -- Superstitions -- Strange Traditions about the
Creation -- The King almost deified -- Classes of the People -- Punishments --
Peculiarities of the adjacent Islands -- Limits of their Navigation.

AFTER some prefatory remarks, on the accounts of the successive voyages of
Captain Wallis, Monsieur de Bougainville, and Captain Cook, Mr. Anderson begins
to relate such particulars concerning Otaheite, and its neighboring islands,
as he was able to procure from Omai, or by conversing with the other natives.

For the greatest part of the year, the wind blows from between
east-south-east, and east-north-east. It sometimes blows with considerable
force, and is called by the natives Maaraee. When the wind blows strong, the
weather is usually cloudy, with some rain; but, when it is more moderate, it is
clear, settled and serene: if the wind should veer to south-east, or
south-south-east, it blows more gently and is called Maoai. In December and
January, when the sun is nearly vertical, both the winds and weather are very
variable; but it often blows from west-north-west, or north-west. This wind is
called Toerou; and is usually attended by cloudy weather, and sometimes rain.
It seldom continues more than five or six days without interruption; and is the
only wind that will permit the inhabitants of the islands to leeward to visit
this in their canoes. If the wind is still more northerly, it has the different
appellation of Era-potaia. The wind from south-west, and west-south-west, is
more frequent than the former, and is usually gentle, with occasional calms and
breezes, yet it sometimes blows in very brisk squalls. The weather is then
generally cloudy and rainy, with the close hot air; often accompanied with much
thunder and lightning. Is called by the natives Etoa.

Though the natives have no very accurate knowledge of those changes they
pretend to have drawn some conclusions from their effects. When the sea has a
hollow sound, and dashes mildly on the shore, they say it portends good
weather: but, if it sounds harshly, and the waves rapidly succeed each other,
the reverse is to be expected.

The south-east part of Otaheite, affords one of the most luxuriant prospects
in the universe. The hills are high, steep, and craggy; but they are covered to
the very summits with trees and shrubs; the rocks seeming to possess the
property of producing their verdant clothing. The lower land and valleys teem
with various productions, that grow with exuberant vigor, and convey to the
mind of the beholders, an idea, that no country upon earth can vie with this in
the strength and beauty of vegetation; nature has been equally liberal in
distributing rivulets, which glide through every valley, dividing, as they
approach the sea, into several branches, fertilizing the land, through which
they run.

The habitations of the natives are irregularly scattered upon the flat land;
and many of them, along the shore, afforded us a delightful scene from our
ships; especially as the sea, within the reef, is perfectly still, and affords,
at all times, a safe navigation for the inhabitants, who are often seen passing
and repassing in their canoes. On beholding these delightful scenes, I have
often regretted my inability to transmit such a description of them, as would
convey an impression somewhat similar to what I felt, who have been fortunate
enough to have been on the spot. The natural fertility of the country, combined
with the mildness and serenity of the elimate, has rendered the natives so
careless in their cultivation, that the smallest traces of it cannot, in many
places, be discovered, though overflowing with the richest productions. The
cloth plant, and the ava, or intoxicating pepper, are almost the only things to
which they show any attention.

The bread-fruit tree is never planted, but springs from the roots of the old
ones, which spread themselves near the surface of the ground. Hence we may
observe, that the inhabitants of Otaheite, instead of being under a necessity
of planting their bread, will rather be obliged to prevent its progress; which
is, perhaps, sometimes done, to afford room for a different sort of trees,
which may enable them to make some variety in their food.

The principal of these trees are the cocoa-nut and plantain; the first of
which requires no attention, after it appears a foot or two above the ground;
but the plaintain requires some care in the cultivation; for about three months
after it shoots up, it begins to bear fruit; during which time it puts forth
young shoots, which supply a succession of fruit; the old stocks being cut down
as the fruit is taken off.

The products of the island are more remarkable for their great abundance than
for their variety; and curiosities here are not very numerous. Among these may
be reckoned a large lake of fresh water, on the top of one of the highest
mountains, at the distance of almost two days journey. It is remarkable for its
depth, and abounds with eels of an enormous size. This being esteemed the
greatest natural curiosity of the country, travelers, who come from other
islands, are usually asked, among the first things, at their return, whether
they have seen it. There is also a small pond of water on this island, which
has a yellow sediment at the bottom. It has the appearence of being very good,
but has an offensive taste, and often proves fatal to those who drink a
quantity of it; and those who bathe in it, break out in blotches.

On our arrival here, we were struck with the remarkable contrast between the
inhabitants of Tongataboo, and those of Otaheite; the former being of a robust
make, and dark color, and the latter having a distinguished delicacy and
whiteness. That difference, however, did not immediately preponderate in
favor, of the Otaheiteans; and, when it did it was, perhaps, occasioned more
by our becoming accustomed to them; the marks, which had recommended the
others, beginning now to be forgotten.

The women however, of Otaheite, possess all those delicate charecteristics,
which in many countries distinguish them from the other sex. The men wear their
beards long here, and their hair considerably longer than at Tongataboo, which
gave them a very different appearance. The Otaheiteans are timid and fickle.
They are not so muscular and robust as the Friendly Islanders, arising,
perhaps, from their being accustomed to less action; the superior fertility of
their country enabling them to lead a more indolent life. They have a plumpness
and smoothness of the skin; which, though more consenant with our ideas of
beauty, is far from being an advantage; and is attended with a kind of langour
in all their motions. This is visible in their boxing and wrestling, which
display only the feeble efforts of children, if compared to the vigor and
activity with which such exercises are performed at the Friendly Islands.

As personal endowments are in high estimation among them, they have various
methods of improving them, according to their ideas of beauty. Among the
Erreoes, or unmarried men, especially those of some consequence, it is
customary to undergo a kind of physical operation, to render them fair; which
is done by continuing a month or two in the house, wearing a great quantity of
clothes the whole time, and eating nothing but bread-fruit, which they say is
remarkably efficacious in whitening the skin. They also intimate, that their
corpulence and color, at other times, depend upon their food; being obliged,
as the seasons vary, to use different food at different times.

Nine-tenths, at least, of their common diet, consist of vegetable food; and
the mahee, or fermented bread-fruit, which is an article in almost every meal,
prevents costiveness, and has a singular effect in producing coolness about
them, which was not perceivable in us who fed on animal food. To this temperate
course of life, may, perhaps, be attributed their having so few diseases among
them. Indeed, they mention only five or six chronic or national disorders;
among which are the dropsy, and the fefai, mentioned as frequent at Tongataboo.
This was, however, before the arrival of the Europeans; for we have added a
disease to their catalogue, which abundantly supplies the place of all the
others, and is become almost universal; and for which they seem to have no
effectual remedy. The priests, indeed, administer a medly of simples, but they
acknowledge it never cures them. They admit, however, that in some few cases,
nature alone has exterminated the poison of this loathsome disease, and
produced a perfect recovery. They say also, that those infected with it,
communicate it to others, by handling them, or feeding on the same utensils.

They show an openness, and generosity of disposition, upon all occasions.
Omai, indeed, has frequently said, that they exercise cruelty in punishing
their enemies, and torment them with great deliberation; sometimes tearing out
small pieces of flesh from different parts of the body; at other times,
plucking out the eyes, then cutting off the nose; and lastly, completing the
business, by opening the belly. But this is only on very extraordinary
occasions. If cheerfulness results from conscious innocence, one would imagine
their whole lives had been unsullied with a crime. This, however, may be rather
imputed to their feelings, which, though lively, are never permanent. Under any
misfortune, after the critical moment is past, they never labor under the
appearance of anxiety. Care never produces a wrinkle on their brow; even the
approach of death does not deprive them of their vivacity. I have seen them,
when on the brink of the grave by disease, and when preparing to attack the
enemy; but, in neither of these cases, have I ever observed their countenances
overclouded with melancholy or dread.

Disposed, as they naturally are, to direct their aims to what will afford them
ease or pleasure, all their amusements tend to excite their amorous passions;
and their songs, with which they are greatly delighted, are directed to the
same purpose. A constant succession of sensual enjoyments must, however, cloy;
and they occasionally varied them to more refined subjects; they chanted their
triumphs in war, and their amusements in peace; their travels and adventures;
and the peculiar advantages of their own island.

This shows that they are immoderately fond of music, and though they did not
relish our complicated compositions, they were much delighted with the more
melodious sounds, when produced singly, as they, in some degree, resembled the
simplicity of their own. They equally experience the soothing effects produced,
by particular kinds of motion; which, in many cases, will allay any
perturbation of mind, as successfully as music. Of this, the following may
serve as a remarkable instance. Walking, one day, about Matavi Point, I saw a
man in a small canoe, paddling with such expedition, and looking so eagerly
about him, as to command my whole attention. At first, I supposed he had been
pilfering from one of the ships, and was pursued; but he presently repeated his
amusement. He proceeded from the shore to the place where the swell begins;
and, attentively watching its first motion, paddled swiftly before it, till he
perceived it overtook him, and had acquired sufficient strength to force his
canoe before it, without passing underneath. He then ceased paddling, and was
carried along as rapidly as the wave, till he was landed upon the beach; when
he started from his canoe, emptied it, and went in pursuit of another swell. He
seemed to experience the most supreme delight, while he was thus swiftly and
smoothly driven by the sea. His mind was so wholly occupied in this business,
that, though crowds of his countrymen were collected to observe our tents and
ships, as being objects that were both rare and curious to them, he did not
notice them in the least. Two or three of the natives drew near, while I was
observing him, and seemed to partake of his felicity; calling out to inform him
when there was an appearance of a favorable swell. This exercise, which I
understand is very frequent among them, is called chorooe.

Though the language of Otaheite seems radically the same as that of
New-Zealand and the Friendly Islands, it has not that guttural pronunciation,
and is pruned of some of the consonants, with which those dialects abound;
which has rendered it, like the manners of the inhabitants, soft and soothing.
It abounds with beautiful and figurative expressions, and is so copious, that
they have above twenty different names for the bread-fruit; as many for the
taro root, and half that number for the cocoa-nut.

They have one expression corresponding exactly with the phraseology of the
Scriptures, viz. "Yearning of the bowels." They use it upon every occasion,
when affected by the passions; constantly referring pain from grief, desire,
and other affections, to the bowels, as the seat of it; where they imagine, all
opperations of the mind are also performed.

In the arts, they are extremely deficient; yet they pretend to perform cures
in surgery, which our knowledge in that branch has not enabled us to imitate.
Simple fractures are bound up with splints, but if a part of the bone be lost,
they insert, between the fractured ends, a piece of wood made hollow, to supply
its place. The rapaoo, or surgeon, inspects the wound in about five or six
days, when he finds the wood is partly covered by the growing flesh; and, in as
many more days, visits the patient a second time, when it is generally
completely covered; and, when he has acquired some strength, he bathes in the
water and is restored.

Wounds, it is well known, will heal over leaden bullets, and there are some
instances of their healing over other extraneous bodies. But what makes me
entertain some doubt of the truth of this relation, is, that in those cases
which fell under my observation, they were far from being so dexterous. I was
shown the stump of an arm, which had been taken off, that had not the
appearance of a skilful operation, after making a due allowance for their
defective instruments. And I saw a man going about with a dislocated shoulder,
some months after he had received the accident, from their being unacquainted
with a method of reducing it: though it is one of the simplest operations of
our surgery.

Fractures of the spine, they know, are mortal; and they also know, from
experience, in what particular parts of the body wounds prove fatal. Their
physical knowledge seems yet more limited, because, perhaps, their diseases are
fewer than their accidents. In some cases, however, the priests administer the
juices of herbs; and women, afflicted with after-pains, or other complaints
after childbearing, use a remedy which seems unnecessary in a hot country.
Having heated some stones, they lay a thick cloth over them, covered with a
quantity of a small plant of the mustard kind; and over them is spread another
cloth. On this they seat themselves, and sweat profusely to obtain a cure. This
method has been practiced by the men, though ineffectually, for the cure of the
venereal lues. It is remarkable, that they have no emetic medicines here.

A famine frequently happens in this island, notwithstanding its extreme
fertility, in which many people are said to perish. Whether this calamity be
owing to the scanty produce of some seasons, to over-population, or to wars, I
have not been sufficiently informed; but it has taught them to exercise the
strictest economy, even in the times of plenty.

In a scarcity of provision, when their yams and bread-fruit are consumed, they
have recourse to various roots which grow uncultivated upon the mountains. The
patarra, which is found in great plenty, is first used: it somewhat resembles a
large potatoe, or yam; and, when in its growing state, is good, but becomes
hard and stringy when old. They next eat two other roots, one of which appears
like taro; and then the ehoee. Of this there are two sorts; one of which
possesses deleterious qualities, which requires it to be sliced; and macerated
in water, a night before it is baked for eating. It resembles, in this respect,
the cassava root of the West Indies; but in the manner they dress it, has a
very insipid taste. This and the patarra are creeping plants, the latter having
ternate leaves.

A very small portion of animal food is enjoyed by the lower class of people;
and if, at any time, they obtain any, it is either fish, sea-eggs, or other
marine productions; for pork hardly ever falls to their share. Only the Eree de
hoi, is able to afford pork every day; and the inferior chiefs, according to
their riches, perhaps once a week, a fortnight, or a month. Sometimes, indeed,
they are not allowed that; for, when the island is impoverished by war, or any
other means, a prohibition is granted against the killing of hogs, which
sometimes continues in force for several months, and even for a year or two. In
such an interval, the hogs have multiplied so fast, that there have been
instances of their changing there domestic state, and becoming wild.

When this prohibition is taken off, the chiefs assemble at the king's
habitation, each bringing with him a present of hogs. After this, the king
orders some of them to be killed, of which they all partake, and each returns
to his own home, with full permission to kill as many as he pleases for his own
use. On our arrival here, such a prohibition was actually in force, at least in
those districts under the immediate direction of Otoo. And, when we quitted
Oheitepeha, fearing we should not have gone to Matavai, he sent a messenger to
assure us, that, as soon as the ships arrived there, it should be taken off. We
found it so, but our consumption of them was so great, that there is very
little doubt but it would be laid on again, immediately after we had sailed. A
prohibition is sometimes extended to fowls.

The ava is chiefly used among the better sort of people, but this beverage is
differently prepared, from that which we saw in the Friendly Islands. Here they
pour a small quantity of water upon the root, and often bake, roast, or bruise
the stalks, without chewing it before it is infused. They also bruise the
leaves of the plant here, and pour water upon them, as upon the root. It is not
drank in large companies, in that sociable way which is practiced among the
people at Tongataboo; but it has more pernicious effects here, owing, perhaps,
to the manner of its preparation; as we saw frequent instances of its
intoxicating powers.

Many of us, who had visited these islands before, were suprized to find
several of the natives, who were remarkable for their size and corpulency when
we saw them last, now almost reduced to skeletons; and the cause of this
alteration was universally attributed to the use of the ava. Their skins were
dry, rough, and covered with scales; which, they say, occasionally fall off,
and their skin becomes, in some degree, renewed. As an excuse for so
destructive a practice, they allege, it is to prevent their growing too
corpulent; but it e^ervates them exceedingly, and probably shortens the
duration of their lives.

Their meals at Otaheite are every frequent. The first is about two o'clock in
the morning, after which they go to sleep; the next is at eight; they dine at
eleven, and again, as Omai expressed it, at two, and at five; and they go to
supper at eight. They have adopted some very whimsical customs in this article
in domestic life: the women are not only obliged to eat by themselves, but are
even excluded from partaking of most of the better sorts of food. Turtle, or
fish of the tunny kind, they dare not touch, though it is high in esteem; some
particular sorts of the best plantains are also forbidden them; and even those
of the first rank are seldom permitted to eat pork. The children of both sexes
also eat apart; and the women usually serve up their own provisions.

In this, and many other customs, relative to their eating, there is something
exceedingly mysterious. On our inquiring into the reasons of it, we were told,
it was necessary that it should be so; and that was the only answer we could
receive when we interrogated them upon that subject.

They are not so obscure and mysterious in their other customs respecting the
females, especially with regard to their connections with the men. When a young
man and women, from mutual choice, agree to cohabit, the man makes a present to
the father of the girl of the common necessaries of life, as hogs, cloth, or
canoes; and if he supposes he has not received a valuable consideration for his
daughter, he compels her to leave her former friend, and to cohabit with a
person who may be more liberal. The man, indeed, is always at full liberty to
make a new choice; or, should his consort become a mother, he may destroy the
child; and afterward either leave the women, or continue his connection with
her. But if he adopts the child, and permits it to live, the man and women are
then considered as in the married state; and after that they seldom separate. A
man may however, without being censured, join a more youthful partner to his
first wife, and live with both of them.

The custom of changing their conjugal connections is very general, and is so
common an occurrence, that they mention it with indifference. The erreoes, or
those of the better sort who possess the means of purchasing a succession of
fresh connections, are generally roaming about; and, having no particular
attachment, seldom adopt the plan of a settled cohabitation. And this
licentious plan of life is so agreeable to their disposition, that the most
beautiful of both sexes exhaust their youthful days in practices which would
disgrace the most savage tribes. These enormities are peculiarly shocking in a
country whose general character has, in other respects, evident traces of the
prevalence of humane feelings. When an erreoe women brings forth a child, it is
suffocated by applying a cloth to its mouth and nose, which has been previously
dipped in water.

As the women, in such a life, must contribute greatly to its happiness, it is
surprising that they should not only suffer the most humiliating restraints
with regard to food, but should be often treated with a degree of brutality,
which one would suppose a man must be incapable of toward an object for whom
he had the least affection or esteem. It is, however, extremely common to see
the men beat them most unmercifully; and unless this behavior proceeds from
jealousy, which both sexes sometimes pretend to be infected with, it will be
difficult to assign a reason for it. This may the more readily be admitted as a
motive, as I have known many instances where interest has been rejected for
personal beauty; though even in these cases, they are not susceptible of those
delicate sentiments that result from mutual affection. Platonic love is hardly
known in Otaheite.

From a notion of cleanliness, the cutting of the foreskin is a practice
adopted among them; and they bestow a reproachful epithet upon those who
neglect that operation. When five or six lads in a neighborhood are pretty
well grown up, it is made known to a tahoua by the father of one of them. The
t^houa, attended by a servant, conducts the lads to the top of the hills; and
after seating one of them in a proper manner, places a piece of wood beneath
the foreskin, at the same time amusing him by desiring him to look aside at
something which he pretends to see; the young man's attention being thus
engaged, he immediately cuts through the skin with a shark's tooth, and
separates the divided parts; then, after putting on a bandage, he performs the
same operation on the other lads who attend him.

Five days after they have been thus disciplined, they bathe, the bandages are
removed, and the matter is cleansed away. When five days more are expired, they
bathe again, and are recovered; but, as a thickness of the prepuce remains,
occasioned by the cutting, they again ascend the mountains with the tahoua and
servant, where a fire is prepared, and some stones heated; between two of which
the prepuce is placed by the tahoua, and is gently squeezed, in order to remove
the thickness. This done, they return home, adorned with odoriferous flowers;
and the tahoua is rewarded by the fathers of the lads, according to their
several abilities, with a present of hogs and cloth; and if their poverty will
not permit them to make a proper acknowledgment, there relations on this,
occasion are expected to be liberal.

Their religious system abounds in singularities, and few of the common people
have a competent knowledge of it, that being principally confined to their
priests, which indeed are numerous. They pay no particular respect to one god,
as possessing pre-eminence; but believe in a plurality of divinities, who have
each a plenitude of power.

As different parts of the island, and the other neighboring islands, have
different gods, the respective inhabitants imagine they have chosen the most
eminent, or one who is at least sufficiently powerful to protect them, and to
supply their necessities. If he should not give them satisfaction, they think
it no impiety to change. An instance of this kind has lately happened in
Tiaraboo, where two divinities have been discarded, and Oraa, god of Bolabola,
has been adopted in their room. They have probably been induced to make this
new choice, because his people have been victorious in war; and having, since
their new election, been successful against the inhabitants of Otaheite-nooe,
it is solely imputed to Oraa, who literally fights their battles.

In serving their gods, their assiduity is remarkably conspicuous. The whattas
or offering-places of the morais are, in general, loaded with fruits and
animals; and almost every house has a portion of it set apart for a similar
purpose. Many of them are so rigidly scrupulous in their religious matters,
that they will not even begin a meal, till they have laid a side a morsel for
the eatooa; and we have seen their superstitious zeal carried to a most
pernicious height in their human sacrifices, which are, I fear, too frequent.
They probably have recourse to them to avert misfortunes. Their prayers, which
they always chant like the songs in their festive entertainments, are also very
frequent.

As in other cases, so in religion, the women are obliged to show their
inferiority. When they pass the morais they must partly uncover themselves, or
take an extensive circuit to avoid them. Though they do not entertain an
opinion, that their god must be continually conferring benefits, without
sometimes forsaking them, they are less concerned at this, than at the attempts
of some inauspicious being to injure them. Etee, they say, is an evil spirit,
who delights in mischief; to whom they make offerings, as well as to their
divinity. But all the mischiefs they apprehend from invisible beings, are
merely temporal.

As to the soul, they believe it to be both immortal and immaterial; that
during the pangs of death, it keeps fluttering about the lips; and that it
ascends, and is eaten by the deity; that it continues in this state for some
time; after which it takes its passage to a certain place, destined to receive
the souls of men, and has existence in eternal night; or rather in a kind of
dawn, or twilight.

They expect no permanent punishment hereafter for crimes committed upon earth;
the souls of good and bad men being indiscriminately eaten by the deity. But
they consider this coalition as a kind of necessary purification before they
enter the regions of bliss; for their doctrine inculcates, that those who
refrain from all sensual connection with women some months before they depart
this life, pass into their eternal mansion without such a previous union, as if
by such an abstinence they were sufficiently pure to be exempted from the
general lot.

They have not indeed those sublime conceptions of happiness which our
religion, and indeed our reason, teach us to expect hereafter. Immortality is
the only great privilege they think they shall acquire by death; for they
suppose that spirits are not entirely divested of those passions by which they
were actuated when combined with material vehicles. Thus, at a meeting of souls
which were formerly enemies, many conflicts may ensue, which must certainly be
ineffectual as those who are in this invisible state must be invulnerable.

Their reasoning is similar with regard to the meeting of a man and his
consort. If the husband departs this life first, the soul of his wife is no
stranger to him on its arrival in the land of spirits. They renew their former
intimacy in a capacious building, called Tourooa, where departed souls assemble
to recreate themselves with the gods. The husband then conducts her to his
separate habitation, where they eternally reside, and have an offspring, which,
however, is purely spiritual, as their embraces are supposed to be far
different from those of corporeal beings.

Many of their notions respecting the Deity are extravagantly absurd. They
suppose him to be under the influence of those spirits who derive their
existence from him* and that they frequently eat him, though he has power to
recreate himself. They cannot converse about immaterial things, without
referring to material objects to convey their meaning, and therefore perhaps
they use this mode of expression.

They furthe^ add, that, in the tourooa, the deity inquires whether they mean
to destroy him, or not; and their determination is unalterable. This is not
only known to the spirits, but also to the inhabitants of the earth; for, when
the moon is on its wane, they are supposed to be devouring their eatooa; and,
in the proportion that it increases, he is renewing himself. And the superior,
as well as the inferior gods are liable to this accident.

Other places, they also believe, are prepared for the reception of departed
souls. Thus they are of opinion, that those who are drowned in the sea continue
there, and enjoy a delightful country, sumptuous habitations, and every thing
that can contribute to their happiness. They even maintain that all other
animals have souls; and even trees, fruit, and stones; which, at their decease,
or upon their being consumed or broken, ascend to the deity, from whom they
pass into their destined mansion.

They imagine, that every temporal blessing is derived from their punctual
performance of religious offices. They believe that the powerful influence of
the divine spirit is universally diffused, and therefore it cannot be matter of
surprise that they adopt many superstitious opinions concerning its
opperations. Sudden deaths and all other accidents, they suppose to be effected
under the immediate impulse of some divinity. If a man receives a wound in his
toe, by stumbling against a stone, it is imputed to an Eatooa.

In the night, on approaching a toopapaoo, where dead bodies are exposed, they
are st^^tled and terrified; as many of our ignorent and superstitious people
are at the sight of a churchyard, or with the apprehensions of ghosts. They
have implicit confidence in dreams, supposing them to be communications from
their deity, or from the spirit of their friends who have departed this life;
and that those who are favored with them can foretell future events: but this
kind of knowledge is limited to particular persons. Omai pretended to have
these communications. He assured us, that on the 26th of July 1776, his
father's soul had intimated to him in a dream, that he should land somewhere in
three days; but he was unfortunate in his first prophetic attempt, for we did
not get into Tenerisse till the first of August.

Their dreamers, however, are thought little inferior to their inspired priests
and pristesses, whose predictions are universally credited; and all
undertakings of consequence are determined by them. Opoony has a particular
esteem for the priestess who persuaded him to invade Ulietea, and always
consults her previous to his going to war. Our old doctrine of planetary
influence, they, in some degree, adopt; and are sometimes regulated in their
public councils by the appearances of the moon. If, on its first appearance
after the change, it lies horizontally, they are encouraged to engage in war,
and seem confident of success.

They have strange obscure traditions concerning the creation. Some goddess,
they say, had a lump of earth suspended in a cord, and, by giving it a swing
round, scattered about several pieces of land, which constituted Otaheite and
the adjacent islands; and that they were all peopled by one of each sex, who
originally fixed at Otaheite; but this only respects their own immediate
creation; for they admit of an universal one before this. Their remotest
account extends to Tatooma and Tapuppa, who are male and female rocks, and
support our globe. These begat Totorro, who was killed and divided into parts
or parcels of land; then Otaia and Oroo were produced, who were afterward
married, and first begat land, and then a race of gods, Otaia being king, Oroo
marries her son, a god, named Teorroha, whom she orders to create animals, more
land, and every kind of food found upon the earth. She also ordered him to
create a sky, which is supported by men, called Teeserel. The spots observable
in the moon, they say, are groves of a certain tree, which once grew in
Otaheite and being accidentally destroyed, some doves carried its seeds
thither, where they flourish at this day.

They have many religious and historical legends; one of which, relative to
eating human flesh, is in substance as follows: A very long time ago there
lived, at Otaheite, two men who were called Taheeai; a name which is now given
to cannibals. They inhabited the mountains, whence they issued forth and
murdered the natives, whom they afterward devoured, and thus prevented the
progress of population. Two brothers, anxious to rid the country of such
enemies, successfully put in practice a stratagem for their destruction. They
lived farther upward than the Taheeai, and were so situated, that they could
converse with them without hazarding their own safety. They invited them to
partake of an entertainment, to which they readily consented. The brothers then
heated some stones in a fire, and thrusting them into pieces of mahee,
requested one of the Taheeai to open his mouth; when one of those pieces was
immediately dropped in, and some water poured after it, which, in quenching the
stone, made a hissing nose and killed him. The other was entreated to do the
same; but at first declined it, mentioning the consequences of his companion's
eating: but upon being assured that the food was excellent, that these effects
were only temporal, and that his companion would soon recover, he was so
credulous as to swallow the bait, and was also killed.

Their bodies were then cut to pieces, and buried by the natives, who rewarded
the brothers with the government of the island, for delivering them from such
monsters. They resided at Whapaeenoo, a district in the island, where there now
remains a bread-fruit tree, which was once the property of the Taheeais. They
had a woman who lived with them, that had two enormous teeth. After they were
killed, she lived at Otaha; and, when she died, she was ranked among their
deities. She did not, like the men, feed upon human flesh; but, from the
prodigious size of her teeth, the natives still call any animal that has large
tusks Taheeai.

This story, it must be acknowledged, is as natural as that of Hercules
destroying the hydra, or of Jack the Giant-killer. But it does not appear that
there is any moral couched under it, any more than under most of the old
fables, which have been received as truths in ignorant ages. It, however, was
not injudiciously introduced, as serving to express the detestation entertained
here against cannibals. And yet it appears probable from some circumstances,
that the natives of these isles formerly fed upon human flesh. Upon asking Omai
a few questions upon this subject, he resolutely denied it; though, at the same
time, he related a fact within his own knowledge, which almost establishes such
a conjecture.

When the Bolabola men defeated those of Huaheine, many of his kinsmen were
slain; but a relation of his had an opportunity of being revenged, when the
people of Bolabola were worsted in their turn; and, cutting a piece of flesh
from the thigh of one of his enemies, he broiled and devoured it. The offering
made to the chief, of the eye of the person sacrificed, appears to be a vestige
of a custom that once existed to a greater extent.

The principal characteristics of the sovereign are, the being invested with
the maro, the presiding at human sacrifices, and the blowing of the
conch-shell. On hearing the latter, every subject is obliged to bring food, in
proportion to his circumstances, to his royal residence. Their veneration for
his name, on some occasions, they carry to a most extravagant height. When he
accedes to the maro, if any words in the language are found to have a
resemblance to it in sound, they are immediately changed for others; and, if
any man should be presumptuous enough to continue the use of those words, not
only he, but his whole family are put to death.

A similar sat attends all those who shall dare to apply the sacred name of
the sovereign to any animal. Whence Omai, when in England, expressed his
indignation, that the names of prince or princess should be given to our dogs
or horses. But though death is the punishment for taking this liberty with the
name of the sovereign, abuse against his government is only punished with the
forfeiture of land and houses.

The sovereign never deigns to enter the habitation of any of his subjects; in
every district, where he visits he has houses belonging to himself. And if, by
accident, he should ever be obliged to deviate from this rule, the habitation
thus honored with his presence, together with its furniture, is entirely
burnt. When present his subjects uncover to him as low as the waist; and when
he is at any particular place, a pole with a piece of cloth affixed to it, is
set up in some conspicuous part near, on which the same honors are bestowed.
To the first part of this ceremony his brothers are entitled; but the women
only uncover to the royal females.

They are even superstitious in respect to their sovereign, and esteem his
person as almost sacred.

To these circumstances, perhaps, he is indebted for the quiet possession of
his dominions. Even the people of Tiaraboo admit his claim to the same honors,
though they esteem their own chief as more powerful, and assert that, should
the reigning family become extinct, he would succeed to the government of the
whole island.

This indeed is probable, as Waheiadooa, exclusive of Tiaraboo, possesses many
districts of Opooreanoo. The extent of his territories is, therefore, almost
equal to those of Otoo; and his part of the island is more populous and
fertile. His subjects, too, have shown their superiority, by frequently
defeating those of Otaheite-nooe, whom they hold in a contemptible light as
warriors; and over whom they might be easily victorious, if their chief should
be inclined to put it to the test.

The people, exclusive of the Eree de hoi, and his family, are classed in the
following order. The Erees, or powerful chiefs; the Manahoone, or vassals; and
the Teou, or Toutou, servants or slaves. The men, agreeably to the regular
institution, connect themselves with women of their respective ranks; but if
with one of an inferior class and she brings forth a child, it is not only
preserved, but is entitled to the rank of the father; unless he should happen
to be an Eree, in which case the child is killed.

If a woman of condition permits a man of inferior rank to officiate as a
husband, the children they produce are also killed. And if a Teou be detected
in an intrigue with a female of the royal family he is punished with death. The
son of the Eree de hoi, at his birth, succeeds his father in titles and
honors; but, if he has no children the government devolves to his brother at
his death. Possessions, in other families, descend to the eldest son, who is,
nevertheless, obliged to support his brothers and sisters, and allow them
houses on his estates.

Otaheite is divided into several districts, the boundaries of whch are
generally rivulets or low hills; but the subdivisions, by which particular
property is ascertained* are pointed out by large stones which have continued
from generation to generation. Quarrels are sometimes produced, by the removal
of these stones, which are decided by battle; each party claiming the
assistance of his friends. But, upon a complaint being properly made to the
Eree de hoi, he determines the difference in an amicable manner.

These offenses, however, are not common; and property seems to be as secure
here, from long custom, as from the severest laws in other countries. It is an
established practice among them, that crimes which are not of a general nature,
are left to be punished by the party who is injured, supposing that he will
decide as equitably as a person totally unconcerned: and, long custom having
alloted certain punishments for certain crimes, he may inflict them, without
being amenable to any one. If, for instance, any person be detected stealing,
which is usually done in the night, the owner of the goods stolen may kill the
thief immediately. But they seldom inflict so severe a punishment, unless the
property taken is very valuable; such as plaited hair and breast-plates. When
only cloth, or hogs, are stolen, and the robber escapes, if, upon his being
afterward discovered, he engages to return the same number of hogs, and pieces
of cloth, he is acquitted of the offense; or, at most, receives a slight beating

If, in a quarrel, one person should kill another, the friend of the deceased
attack the survivor and his adherents. If they are victorious, they take
possession of the house and property of the other party; but, if they are
vanquished, the reverse takes place. Should a Manahoone kill the slave of a
chief, the latter seizes the property of the former, who flies the country. A
few months after, he returns, and, finding his stock of hogs increased, makes a
large present of these, and other valuable articles, to the Toutou's master,
who generally considers it as a compensation, and suffers him to repossess his
premises. But, it is not surprising that the killing of a man should be
considered as so trifling an offense, among a people who do not think it a
crime to murder their own children. On conversing with them concerning such
instances of unnatural cruelty, and asking them if their chiefs were not
offended, and did not punish them; they said the chief had no right to
interfere in such cases, every one being at liberty to do what he pleased with
his own child.

Though the people, their customs and manners, and the productions of the
islands in the neighborhood, may, in general, be considered the same as at
Otaheite, yet there are a few differences. In the little island Mataia, or
Osnaburgh Island, which lies twenty leagues east of Otaheite, is spoken a
different dialect from that of Otaheite. The men of Mataia also wear long hair,
and, previous to their fighting, cover their arm with something beset with
sharks teeth, and their bodies with a skin of fishes, not unlike shagreen. They
are likewise ornamented with polished pearl shells, which make a refulgent
glittering in the sun; and they have a very large one before, which covers them
like a shield.

In the language of Otaheite, there are many words and phrases very different
from those of the islands to the westward of it. It is remarkable for
producing, in great abundance, that delicious fruit which we call apples, which
are not to be found in any of the others, except Eimeo. It also produces an
odoriferous wood, called eahoi, which is much esteemed at the other isles.
Huaheine and Eimeo produce more yams than the other islands; and, upon the
hills at Mourooa, a particular bird is found, which is highly valued for its
white feathers.

Besides the number or cluster of islands, extending from Mataia to Mourooa, we
were informed by the people at Otaheite, that there was a low uninhabited
island, called Mopeeha; and also several low islands, to the north eastward, at
the distance of about two days sail with a fair wind.

At Mataeeva, it is said to be customary, for men to present their daughters to
strangers who visit that island. The pairs, however, must lie near each other
for the space of five nights, without presuming to take any liberties. On the
sixth evening, the father entertains his guest with food, and orders the
daughter to receive him, that night, as her husband. Though the bedfellow be
ever so disagreeable to the stranger, he must not dare to express the least
dislike; for that is an unpardonable affront, and punishable with death. Forty
men of Bolalola, whom curiosity had incited to go to Mataeeva, were treated in
this manner; one of them having declared his aversion to the female who fell to
his lot, in the hearing of a boy, who mentioned it to the father. Fired with
this information, the Mataeevans fell upon them; but the Bolabolans killed
thrice their own number, though with the loss of the whole party except five.
These, at first, concealed themselves in the woods, and afterward effected
their escape in a canoe.

The low isles are, perhaps, the farthest navigation performed by the
inhabitants of Otaheite, and the Society Islands. Monsieur de Bougainville is
certainly in an error, when he says, "These people sometimes navigate at the
distance of more than three hundred leagues Bougainville's Voyage Autour du
Monde, p. 228.
." For it is deemed a sort of prodigy, that a canoe, which was once driven from
Otaheite in a storm, should have arrived at Mopeeha, though directly to
leeward, at no great distance. Their knowledge of distant islands, is merely
traditional; communicated to them by the natives of those islands, who have
been accidentally driven upon their coasts.

CHAP. X.
Prosecution of our Voyage, after our Departure from the Society Isles --
Christmas Island Discovered -- Supplies of Fish and Turtle -- Solar Eclipse --
Distress of two Seamen who had lost their Way -- Singular Mode of refreshing
himself practiced by one of these Stragglers -- Inscription left in a Bottle --
Soil of the Island described -- Trees and Plants -- Birds, and other Animals --
Further Particulars respecting Christmas Island.

UPON our quitting Bolabola, and taking leave of the Society Islands, On Monday
the 8th of December, we steered to the northward, with the wind between
north-east and east; scarce ever having it in the south-east point, till after
he had crossed the equator. Though a year and five months had now elapsed since
our departure from England, during which period we had not been, upon the
whole, unprofitably employed, Captain Cook was sensible, that, with respect to
the principal object of his instructions, our voyage might be considered, at
this time, as only at its commencement; and therefore, his attention to
whatever might contribute toward our safety and final success, was now to be
exerted as it were anew. He had with this view examined into the state of our
provisions at the islands we had last visited; and having now, on leaving them,
proceeded beyond the extent of the former discoveries, he ordered an accurate
survey to be taken of all the stores that were in each ship, that, by being
fully informed of the quantity and condition of every article, he might know
how to use them to the greatest advantage.

Before we quitted the Society Isles, we had taken every opportunity of
enquiring of the natives, whether there were any islands situated in a
northerly or north-westerly direction from them; but it did not appear that
they knew of any; nor did we meet with any thing by which the vicinity of land
was indicated, till we began, about the latitude of 8 south, to see boobies,
men-of-war bidrs, terns, tropic-birds, and a few other sorts. Our longitude, at
this time, was 205 east. in the night between the 22d and 23d, we crossed the
equinoctial line; and on the 24th, soon after daybreak, we discovered land
bearing north-east by east. It was found, upon our making a nearer approach to
it, to be one of those low islands which are so frequently met with in this
ocean between the tropics; that is, a narrow bank of land that encloses the sea
within. We observed some cocoa-nut trees in two or three places; but the land
in general had a very sterial aspect. At twelve o'clock it was about four miles
distant. On the western side we found the depth of water to be from forty to
fourteen fathoms, over a sandy bottom.

Captain Cook being of opinion that this island would prove a convenient place
for procuring turtle, resolved to anchor here. We accordingly dropped our
anchors in thirty fathoms water; and a boat was immediately dispatched to
search for a commodious landing-place. When she returned, the officer who had
been employed in this search, reported, that he found no place where a boat
could land; but that fish greatly abounded in the shoal-water, without the
breakers. Early the next morning, which was Christmas Day, two boats were sent,
one from each ship, to examine more accurately whether it was practicable to
land; and at the same time, two others were ordered out, to fish at a grappling
near the shore. These last returned about eight, with as many fish as weighed
upwards of two hundred pounds. Encouraged by this success, the Commodore
dispatched them again after breakfast; and he then went himself in another
boat, to view the coast, and attempt landing, which, however, he found to be
impracticable. The two boats which had been sent out on the same search,
returned about twelve o'clock; and the master, who was in that belonging to the
Resolution, reported to Captain Cook, that, about four or five miles to the
northward, there being a break in the land, and a channel into the lagoon,
there was consequently a proper place for landing; and that he had found off
this entrance the same foundings as we had where we now were stationed. In
consequence of this report we weighed, and, after two or three trips, anchored
again over a bottom of fine dark sand, before a little island lying at the
entrance of the lagoon.

On Friday the 26th in the morning, the Commodore ordered Captain Clerk to
send out a boat, with an officer in it, to the south-east part of the lagoon,
in quest of turtle; and went himself with Mr. King, each in a boat, to the
north-east part. It was his intention to have gone to the eastern extremity;
but the wind not permitting it, he and Mr. King landed more to leeward, on a
sandy flat, where they caught one turtle, which was the only one they saw in
the lagoon. They waded through the water to an island, where they found nothing
but a few birds. Captain Cook, leaving Mr. King here to observe the sun's
meridian altitude, proceeded to the land that bounds the sea toward the
north-west, which he found even more barren than the last-mentioned isle; but
walking over to the seacoast, he observed five turtles close to the shore, one
of which he caught: he then returned on board, as did Mr. King soon afterward.
Though so few turtles were observed by these two gentlemen, we did not despair
of a supply; for some of the officers of the Discovery, who had been ashore to
the southward of the channel leading into the lagoon, had more success, and
caught several.

The next morning, the cutter and pinnace were dispatched, under the command of
Mr. King to the south-east part of the island, within the lagoon, to catch
turtle; and the small cutter was sent toward the north to the same purpose.
Some of Captain Clerke's people having been on shore all night, had been so
fortunate as to turn upwards of forty turtles on the sand, which were this day
brought on board; and, in the course of the afternoon, the party detached to
the northward returned with half a dozen; and being sent back again, continued
there till we departed from the island, having, upon the whole, pretty good
success. The day following (the 28th) Captain Cook, accompanied by Mr. Bailey,
landed on the island situated between the two channels into the lagoon, to
prepare the telescopes for observing the solar eclipse that was to happen on
the 30th. Toward noon, Mr. King returned with one boat, and eight turtles;
seven being left behind to be brought by the other boat, whose people were
occupied in catching more; and, in the evening, the same boat conveyed them
provisions and wa^er. Mr. Williamson now went to superintend this business in
the room of Mr. King, who remained on board, in order to attend the observation
of the eclipse. The next day, the two boats, laden with turtle, were sent back
to the ship by Mr. Williamson, who, at the same time, in a message to Captain
Cook, requested, the the boats might be ordered round by sea, as he had
discovered a landing-place on the south-east side of the island, where the
greatest numbers of turtle were caught; so that, by dispatching the boats
thither, the trouble of carrying them over the land (as had hitherto been done)
to the inside of the lagoon, would be saved. This advice was followed.

On Tuesday the 30th, Captain Cook, and Messrs. King and Bailey repaired in the
morning to the small island above mentioned, to observe the eclipse of the sun.
The sky was overcast at times; but it was clear wen the eclipse ended. In the
afternoon, the party who had been employed in catching turtle at the
south-eastern part of the island, returned on board, except a sailor belonging
to Captain Clerke's ship, who had been missing for two days. At first, there
were two men who had lost their way; but happening to disagree with respect to
the track that was most likely to bring them to their companions, they had
separated; and one of them found means to rejoin the party, after an absence of
twenty-four hours, during which he had experienced great distress. There being
no fresh water in the whole island, and not one cocoa-nut tree in that part of
it, he, in order to allay his thirst, had recourse to the extraordinary
expedient of drinking the blood of turtle, which he killed for that purpose.
His method of refreshing himself, when fatigued, was equally singular, though
he said he felt the good effects of it: he undressed himself, and lay down in
the shallow water on the beach for some time.

How these two men had contrived to lose their way, was a matter of
astonishment. The land over which their journey lay, from the seacoast to the
lagoon, where the boats were stationed, did not exceed three miles across; nor
was there any thing that could impede their view; for the country was level,
with a few shrubs dispersed about it; and, from many parts, the masts of our
vessels could be easily discerned. This, however, was a rule of direction which
they did not think of; nor did they recollect in what part of the island the
ships lay at anchor; and they were totally at a loss how to get back to them,
or to the party they had so carelessly straggled from. Considering what strange
people the generality of sailors are, while on shore, we might, instead of
being much surprised that these two should thus lose themselves, rather wonder
that no more of the party were missing.

Captain Clerk was no sooner informed that one of the stragglers was still in
this disagreeable situation, than he detached a party in search of him; but
neither the man nor the party having returned, the next morning the Commodore
ordered two boats into the lagoon, to prosecute the search by different tracks.
In a short time after, Captain Clerke's detachment returned, with there lost
companion; in consequence of which the boats dispatched into the lagoon were
called back by signal. This man's distress must have been far greater than that
of the other straggler; not only as he had been lost a longer time, but as he
was too delicate to drink turtle's blood.

Having some yams and cocoa-nuts on board, in a state of vegetation, we planted
them, by Captain Cook's order, on the small island where he had observed the
late eclipse; and some seeds of melons were sown in another place. The Captain
also left on that little isle a bottle, containing the followng inscription:
Georgius Tertius, Rex, 31 Decembris, 1777. Naves Resolution, Jac. Cock, Pr.
Naves Discovery, Car. Clerk, Pr.


On Thursday the 1st of January, 1778, the Commodore sent out several boats to
bring on board our different parties employed ashore with the turtle which they
had caught. It being late before this business was completed, he thought proper
to defer sailing till the next morning. We procured at this island, for both
ships, about three hundred turtles, which weighed, one with another, about
ninety pounds; they were all of the green sort, and, perhaps, not inferior in
goodness to any in the world. We also caught, with hook and line, a great
quantity of fish, principally consisting of cavallies, snappers, and a few
rock-fish of two species, one with whitish streaks scattered about, and the
other with numerous blue spots.

The soil of this island (to which Captain Cook gave the name of Christmas
Island, as we kept that festival here) is, in some places, light and blackish,
conposed of sand, the dung of birds, and rotten vegetables. In other parts, it
is formed of broken coral-stones, decayed shells, and other marine productions.
These are deposited in long, narrow ridges, lying parallel with the seacoast;
and must have been thrown up by the waves, though they do not reach, at
present, within a mile of some of these places. This seems to prove
incontestably, that the island has been produced by different accessions from
the sea, and is in a state of augmentation; the broken pieces of coral, and
likewise many of the shells being too large and heavy to have been brought from
the beach by any birds to the places where they are now lying. We could not
find any where a drop of fresh water, though we frequently dug for it. We met
with several ponds of salt water, which, as they had no visible communication
with the sea, were probably filled by water filtrating through the sand during
the time of high tides. One of the men who lost their way found some salt on
the south-eastern part of the island. We could not discover the smallest traces
of any human creature having ever been here before us; and, indeed, should any
one be accidentally driven on the island, or left there, he would hardly be
able to prolong his existence. For, though there are birds and fish in
abundance, there are no visible means of allaying thirst, nor any vegetable
that would serve as a substitute for bread, or correct the bad effects of an
animal diet. On the few cocoa-nut trees upon the island, we found very little
fruit, and that little not good.

A few low trees were observed in some parts, besides several small shrubs and
plants, which grew in a very languid manner. We found a sort of purslain, a
species of sida or Indian mallow, and another plant that seemed, from its
leaves, to be a ^esembryanthemum; with two sorts of grass. Under the low trees
sat vast numbers of a new species of tern, or egg-bird, black above, and white
below, having a white arch on the forehead. These birds are somewhat larger
than the common noddy: their eggs are bluish, and speckled with black. There
were likewise many common boobies; a sort greatly resembling a gannet; and a
chocolate-coloured species, with a white belly. Men-of-war-birds, curlews,
plovers, tropic-birds, petrels, etc. are also to be seen here. We saw several
rats, smaller than our's. There were numbers of land-crabs, and small lizards.

Christmas Island is supposed by Captain Cook to be between fifteen and twenty
leagues in circuit. Its form is semi-circular; or like the moon in her last
quarter, the two horns being the north and south points. The west side, or the
small island situate at the entrance into the lagoon, lies in the longitude of
202 30 east, and in the latitude of 1 59 north.

Like most of the other isles in this ocean, Christmas Island is surrounded by
a reef of coral rock extending but a little way from the western side, is a
bank of sand, which extends a mile into the sea. There is good anchorage on
this bank, in any depth between eighteen and thirty fathoms. During our
continuance here, the wind generally blew a fresh gale at east by south, or
east; and we had constantly a great swell from the northward, which broke on
the reef in a very violent surf.

CHAP. XI.
Three Islands discovered -- The Inhabitaints of Atooi approach us in their
Canoes -- Their Persons described -- Some of them venture on board -- Their
Amazement on that Occasion -- Precautions against importing the Venereal
Disease into the Island -- One of the natives killed -- The Ships cast Anchor
-- The Commodore's Reception on landing -- His Excursion into the Country, with
Messrs. Webber and Anderson -- Description of a Morai and its Obelisk -- The
Custom of offering human Victims prevalent among these People -- Curious
feathered Cloaks and Caps -- The Resolution driven from Atooi Road -- The Isle
of Oneeheow visited -- Some of our People are detained on Shore -- Animals and
Seeds left at Oneheow -- Customs of the Natives -- The Ships proceed to the
northward.

WEIGHING anchor at daybreak, on Friday the 2d of January, 1778, we resumed
our northerly course, with a gentle breeze at east, and east-south-east, which
continued till we arrived in the latitude of 7 45 north, and the longitude of
205 east, where we had a day of perfect calm. A north-east-by-east wind then
succeeded, which blew faintly at first, but freshened as we proceeded
northward. We daily ob^^^ved Tropic birds, men-of-war-birds, boobies, etc. and
between the latitude 10 and 11 north, we saw several turtles. Though all these
are considered as signs of the proximity of land, we discovered none till early
in the morning of Sunday the 18th, when an island appeared, bearing
north-east-by-east. Not long after, more land was seen, which bore north, and
was totally detached from the former. At noon, the first was supposed to be
eight or nine leagues distant. Our longitude, at this time, was 200 41 east,
and our latitude, 21 12 north. The next day, at sunrise, the island first seen
bore east, at the distance of several leagues. Not being able to reach this, we
shaped our course for the other; and soon after, observed a third island,
bearing west-north-west.

We had now a fine breze at east-by-north; and, at noon, the second island,
named Atooi, for the east end of which we were steering, was about two leagues
distant. As we made a nearer approach, many of the inhabitants put off from the
shore in their canoes, and very readily came along-side the ships. We were
agreeably surprised to find, that they spoke a dialect of the Otaheitean
language. They could not be prevailed upon by any entreaties to come on board.
Captain Cook tied some brass medals to a rope, which he gave to those who were
on board the canoes; and they, in return, fastened some mackarel to the rope,
by way of equivalent. This was repeated; and some small nails, or pieces of
iron, were given them; for which they gave in exchange some more fish, and a
sweet potatoe; a sure indication of their having some notion of bartering, or,
at least, of returning one present for another. One of them even offered for
sale the piece of stuff which he wore about his waist. These people did not
exceed the ordinary size, and were stoutly made. Their complexion was brown;
and though there appeared to be little difference in the casts of their color,
there was a considerable variation in their features. Most of them had their
hair cropped rather short; a few had it tied in a bunch at the top of the head;
and others suffered it to flow loose. It seemed to be naturally black; but the
generality of them had stained it with some stuff which communicated to it a
brownish color. Most of them had pretty long beards. They had no ornaments
about their persons, nor did we observe that they had their cars perforated.
Some of them were tatooed on the hands, or near the groin; and the pieces of
cloth, which were worn by them round their middle, were curiously colored with
white, black, and red. They seemed to be mild and good-natured; and were
furnished with no arms of any kind, except some small stones, which they had
manifestly brought for their own defense; and these they threw into the sea
when they found that there was no occasion for them.

As we perceived no signs of an anchoring-place at this eastern extremity of
the island, we bore away to leeward, and ranged along the south-east side, at
the distance of about a mile and a half from the shore. The canoes left us when
we made sail; but others came off, as we proceeded along the coast, and brought
with them pigs and some excellent potatoes, which they exchanged for whatever
we offered to them; and several small pigs were purchased by us for a six-penny
nail. We passed diverse villages; some of which were situated near the sea, and
others further up the country. The inhabitants of all of them came in crowds to
the shore, and assembled on the elevated places to take a view of the ships. On
this side of the island the land rises in a gentle acclivity from the sea to
the bottom of the mountains, which occupy the central part of the country,
except at one place near the eastern end, there they rise immediately from the
sea: they seemed to be composed of stone, or rocks lying in horizontal strata.
We observed a few trees about the villages; near which we could also discern
several plantations of sugarcanes and plantains. We continued to sound, but
did not strike ground with a line of fifty fathoms, till we came abreast of a
low point, near the north-west extremity of the island, where we found from
twelve to fourteen fathoms, over a rocky bottom. Having passed this point, we
met with twenty fathoms, then sixteen, twelve, and at last five, over a bottom
of sand. We spent the night in standing off and on; and, the next morning,
stood in for the land. We were met by several canoes filled with natives, some
of whom ventured to come on board.

None of the inhabitants we ever met with before in any other island or
country, were so astonished as these people were, upon entering a ship. Their
eyes were incessantly roving from one object to another; and the wildness of
their looks and gestures, fully indicated their perfect ignorance with respect
to every thing they saw; and strongly marked to us, that they had never, till
the present time, been visited by Europeans, nor been acquainted with any of
our commodities, except iron. This metal, however, they had in all probability
only heard of, or had perhaps known it in some inconsiderable quantity, brought
to them at a remote period. They asked for it by the appellation of hamaite,
referring probably to some instrument, in making which iron could be
serviceably employed; for they applied that name to the blade of a knife,
though they had no idea of that particular instrument, which they could not
even handle properly. They also frequently called iron by the name of toe,
which signifies a hatchet, or adze. On our showing them some beads, they first
asked what they were; and then, whether they were to be eaten. But, on their
being informed, that they were to be hung in their ears, they rejected them as
useless. They were equally indifferent with regard to a looking-glass that we
offered them, and returned it for a similar reason. China cups, plates of
earthen ware, and other things of that kind, were so new to them, that they
asked whether they were made of wood. They were, in many respects, naturally
polite; or, at least, cautious of giving offense. Some of them, just before
their venturing on board, repeated a long prayer; and others, afterward, sung
and made various motions with their hands. On their first entering the ships,
they attempted to steal every thing that they (...) lay hands on, or rather to
take it openly, as if they supposed that we either should not resent such
behavior, or not hinder it. But we soon convinced them of their error; and
when they observed that we kept a watchful eye over them, they became less
active in appropriating to themselves what did not belong to them.

About nine o'clock Captain Cook dispatched Lieutenant Williamson, with three
armed boats, to look out for a proper landing-place* and for fresh water; with
orders, that, if he should find it necessary to land in search of the letter,
he should not allow more than one man to accompany him out of the boats. The
very moment they were putting off from the ship one of the islanders having
stolen a cleaver, leaped over board, got into his canoe, and hastened toward
the shore, while the boats pursued him in vain.

The reason of the Commodore's order that the crews of the boats should not go
on shore, was that he might prevent, if possible, the importation of dangerous
disease into this island, which he knew some of our people now labored under,
and which we, unfortunately, had already communicated to other islands in this
ocean. From the same motive, he commanded that all female visitants should be
excluded from both the ships. Many persons of this sex had come off in the
canoes. Their features. complexion, and stature, were not very different from
those of the men; and though their countenances were extremely open and
agreeable, few traces of delicacy were visible either in their faces, or other
proportions. The only difference in their dress, was their having a piece of
cloth about their bodies, reaching from near the middle almost down to the
knees, instead of the maro worn by the male-sex. They were as much inclined to
favor us with their company on board, as some of the men were; but the
Commodore was extremely desirous of preventing all connection, which might in
all probability, convey an irreparable injury to themselves, and afterward,
through their means, to the whole nation. Another prudent precaution was taken,
by strictly enjoining, that no person capable of communicating the infection
should be sent upon duty out of the ships.

Captain Cook had paid equal attention to the same object, when he first
visited the Friendly Isles; but he afterward found, to his great regret, that
his endeavors had not succeeded. And there is reason to apprehend, that this
will constantly be the case, in such voyages as ours, whenever it is necessary
that many people should be employed on shore. The opportunities and incitements
to an amorous intercourse are then too numerous to be effectually guarded
against; and however confident a commander may be of the health of his men, he
is often undeceived too late, Among a number of men, there are in general to be
found some, who, out of bashfulness, endeavor to conceal their having any
venereal symptoms: and there are others so prosligate and abandoned, as not to
care to whom they communicate this disease. We had an instance of the last
remark at Tongataboo, in the gunner of the Discovery, who had been stationed on
shore. After knowing that he had contracted this disorder, he continued to have
connections with different women, who were supposed to have been, till that
time, free from any infection. His companions remonstrated to him on this
scandalous behavior without effect, till Captain Clerk, being informed of
such a dangerous irregularity of conduct, ordered him to repair on board.

Waiting for the return of our boats, which had been sent out to reconnoitre
the coast, we stood off and on with the ships. Toward midday, Mr Williamson
came back, and reported, that he had observed behind a beach, near one of the
villages, a large pond, which was said by the natives to contain fresh water;
and that there was tolerable anchoring-ground before it. He also mentioned,
that he had made an attempt to land in another place, but was prevented by the
islanders, who, coming down in great numbers to the boats, endeavored to take
away the oars, muskets, and every other article which they could lay hold of;
and crowded so thick upon him and his people, that he was under the necessity
of firing, by which one man was killed. This unfortunate circumstance, however,
was not known to Captain Cook till after we had quitted the island; so that all
his measures were directed as if no affair of that kind had happened, Mr.
Williamson informed him, that, as soon as the man fell, he was taken up and
carried off by his countrymen, who then retired from the boats, but still they
made signals for our people to land, which they declined. It did not appear,
that the natives had the least intention of killing, or even hurting, any of
Mr. Willimson's party; but they seemed to have been excited by curiosity alone,
to get from them what they had, being prepared to give, in return, any thing
that appertained to themselves.

Captain Cook then dispatched one of the boats to lie in the best
anchoring-ground; and when she had gained this nation, he bore down with the
ships, and cast anchor in twenty-five fathoms water, over a sandy bottom. The
eastern point of the road, which was the low point already mentioned, bore
south 51 east; the west point, north 65 west; and the village near which the
fresh water was said to be, was one mile distant. The ships being thus
stationed, between three and four in the afternoon, the Captain went ashore
with three armed boats, and twelve of the marines, with a view of examining the
water, and trying the disposition of the inhabitants who had assembled in
considerable numbers on a sandy beach before the village; behind it was a
valley, in which was the piece of water. The moment he leaped on shore, all the
islanders fell prostrate upon their faces, and continued in that posture of
humiliation, till, by signs, he prevailed on them to rise. They then presented
to him many small pigs, with plantain-trees, making use of nearly the same
ceremonies which we had seen practiced, on similar occasions, at the Society
and other isles: and a long oration or prayer being pronounced by an
individual, in which others of the assembly occasionally joined. Captain Cook
signified his acceptance of their proffered friendship, by bestowing on them,
in return such presents a^ he had brought ashore* This introductory business
being ended, he stationed a guard upon the beach, and was then conducted by
some of the natives to the water, which he found extremely good, and so
considerable, that it might be denominated a lake. After this, he returned on
board, and issued orders that preparations should be made for filling our
water-casks in the morning; at which time he went ashore with some of his
people, having a party of marines for the guard.

They had no sooner landed, than a trade was entered into for potatoes and
hogs, which the islanders gave in exchange for nails and pieces of iron. But
from giving any obstruction to our men who were occupied in watering, they even
assisted them in rolling the casks to and from the pool, and performed with
alacrity whatever was required of them. Captain Cook leaving the command at
this station to Mr. Williamson, who had landed with him, made an excusiron into
the country, up in the valley, being accompanied by Messrs. Anderson and
Webber, and followed by a numerous train of natives, one of whom, who had been
very active in keeping the others in order, the Captain made choice of as a
guide. This, man, from time to time, proclaiming the approach of our gentlemen,
every person who met them, full prostrate on the ground, and remained in that
humble position till they had passed. This, as we were afterward informed, is
their method of showing respect to their own great chiefs.

We had observed at every village, as we ranged along the coast in the ships,
one or more elevated white objects, resembling pyramids, or rather obelisks;
one of which, supposed by Captain Cook to be at least fifty feet in height, was
very conspicuous from our anchoring-station, and seemed to be at a small
distance up this valley. To have a nearer view of it, was the principal motive
of our gentlemen's walk. Their guide was accquainted with their desire of being
conducted to it: but it happened to be in such a situation, that they could not
get at it, the pool of water separating it from them. However, as there was
another of the same kind about half a mile distant, upon their side of the
valley, they set out to visit that. As soon as they reached it, they perceived
that it was situate in a burying-ground, or morai, which bore a striking
resemblance, in several respects, to those they had seen at Otaheite and other
islands in this ocean. It was an oblong space, of considerable extent,
environed by a stone-wall, four or five feet high. The enclosed space was
loosely paved; and, at one end of it, was placed the obelisk or pyramid, called
by the natives henananoo, which was an exact model of the larger one that we
had discerned from our ships. It was about twenty feet in height, and four feet
square at the base. Its four sides were formed of small poles interwoven with
twigs and branches, thus composing an indifferent wicker-work, hollow within
from the top to the bottom. It appeared to be in a ruinous state, and had been
originally covered with a thin greyish cloth. On each side of it were long
pieces of wicker-work, termed herecane, in a condition equally ruinous, with
two poles inclining toward each other at one corner, where some plantains were
placed on a board, fixed at the height of about half a dozen feet. This was
called by the islanders herairemy; and they said* that the fruit was an
offering to their deity. Before the henananoo were several pieces of wood,
carved into some resemblance of human figures. There was also a stone near two
feet in height covered with cloth. Adjoining to this, on the outside of the
morai, was a small shed, which they denominated hareepahoo; and before it there
was a grave, where the remains of a woman had been deposited.

There was a house or shed, called hemanaa, on the further side of the area of
the morai: it was about forty feet in length, ten or eleven feet in height, and
ten in breadth in the middle, but narrower at each end; though considerably
longer, it was lower than their common habitations. Opposite the entrance into
this house, stood two images near three feet high, cut out of A MORAL in ATOOI.
one piece of wood, with pedestals: they were said to be Eatooa no Veheina, or
representations of goddesses, and were not very indifferent either in point of
execution or design. On the head of one of them was a cylindrical cap, not
unlike the head-dress at Otaheite, called tomou; and on that of the other, a
carved helmet, somewhat resembling those of the ancient warriors; and both of
them had pieces of cloth fastened about the loins, and hanging down a
considerable way. There was also, at the side of, each, a piece of carved wood,
with cloth hung on it. Before the pedestals lay a quantity of fern, which had
been placed there at different times. In the middle of the house, and before
the images just described, was an oblong space, enclosed by an edging of stone,
and covered with shreds of cloth; this was the grave of seven chiefs, and was
called heneene.

Our gentlemen had already met with so many instances of resemblance, between
the morai they were now visiting, and those of the islands they had lately
quitted, that they entertained little doubt in their minds, that the similarity
existed also, in the rites here solemnized, and particularly in the horrid
oblation of human victims. Their suspicions were soon confirmed; for, on one
side of the entrance into the hemannaa, they observed a small square place, and
another still smaller and on asking what these were, they were informed by
their conductor, that in one of them was interred a man who had been
sacrificed; and in the other, a hog, which had also been offered up to the
deity. At no great distance from these, were three other square enclosed
places, with two pieces of carved wood at each of them, and a heap of fern upon
them. These were the graves of three chiefs; and before them was an enclosed
space of an oblong figure, called Tangata-taboo by our gentlemen's guide, who
declared to them, that three human sacrifices, one at the funeral of each
chief, had been there buried.

Every appearance induced the Commodore to believe, that this inhuman practice
was very general here. The island seemed to abound with such places of
sacrifice as this, at which he was now present, and which was probably one of
the most inconsiderable of them; being much less conspicuous than some others
which we had observed as we sailed along the coast, and particularly than that
on the opposite side of the piece of water running through this valley; the
white pyramid of which, in all probability, derived its color solely from the
consecrated cloth put over it. In many spots within this burying-ground, were
planted trees of the morinda citrifolia, and cordia sebestina, besides several
plants of the etee, with the leaves of which the hemanaa was thatched.

The journey of our gentlemen to and from this morai, lay through the
plantations. Most of the ground was perfectly flat, with ditches intersecting
different parts, and roads that seemed to have been raised to some height by
art. The intervening spaces, in general, were planted with taro, which grew
with great vigor. There were several spots where the cloth-mulberry was
planted in regular rows; this also grew vigorously. The cocoa-trees were in a
less thriving condition, and were all low; but the plantain-trees, though not
large, made a pretty good appearance. Upon the whole, the trees that are most
numerous around this village, are the cordia sebastina. The greatest part of it
is situate near the beach, and consists of upwards of sixty houses there; but
there may perhaps be near forty more scattered about, toward the morai.

After the Commodore, and Messrs. Anderson and Webber, had carefully examined
whatever was worthy of notice about the morai, and the latter had taken
drawings of it, and of the surrounding country, they returned by a different
route. They found a multitude of people collected at the beach, and a brisk
trade for fowls, pigs, and vegetables, going on there, with the greatest order
and decorum. At noon, Captain Cook went on board to dinner, and then sent Mr.
King to take the command of the party on shore. During the afternoon he landed
again, accompanied by Captain Clerk, intending to make another excursion up
the country: but, before he could execute this design, the day was too far
advanced; he therefore relinquished his intention for the present, and no other
opportunity afterward occurred. Toward sun-s^t, he and his people returned on
board, after having procured, in the course of this day, nine tons of water,
and (principally by exchanging nails and pieces of iron) seventy or eighty
pigs, some fowls, plantains, potatoes, and taro roots. In this commercial
intercourse, the islanders deserved our best commendations, making no attempts
to cheat us, either along-side our ships, or on shore. Some of them, indeed, as
we have already related, betrayed at first; a pilfering disposition; or,
perhaps, they imagined that they had a right to all they could lay their hands
upon: but they quickly desisted from a conduct, which, we convinced them, could
not be persevered in with impunity.

Among the various articles which they brought to barter this day, we were
particularly struck with a sort of cloak and cap, which, even in more polished
countries, might be esteemed elegant. These cloaks are nearly of the shape and
size of the short ones worn by the men in Spain, and by the women in England,
tied loosely before, and reaching to the middle of the back. The ground of them
is a network, with the most beautiful red and yellow feathers so closely fixed
upon it, that the surface, both in point of smoothness and glossiness,
resembles the richest velvet. The method of varying the mixture is very
different; some of them having triangular spaces of yellow and red alternately;
others, a sort of crescent; while some, were entirely red, except that they had
a broad yellow border. The brilliant colors of the feathers, in those cloaks
that were new, had a very fine effect. The natives, at first, refused to part
with one of these cloaks for any thing that we offered in exchange, demanding
no less a price than one of our muskets. They afterward, however, suffered us
to purchase some of them for very large nails. Those of the best sort were
scarce; and it is probable, that they are used only on particular occasions.

The caps are made in ^h^ form of a helmet, with the middle part, or crest,
frequently of a hand's breadth. They sit very close upon the head, and have
notches to admit the ears. They consist of twigs and osiers, covered with a
network, into which feathers are wrought, as upon the cloaks, but somewhat
closer, and less diversified; the major part being red, with some yellow,
green, or black stripes, on the sides. These caps, in all probability, complete
the dress, with the cloaks; for the islanders appeared, sometimes, in both
together.

We could not conjecture from whence they obtained such a quantity of these
beautiful feathers; but we soon procured intelligence respecting one sort; for
they afterward brought for sale great numbers of skins of a small read species
of birds, frequently tied up in bunches of twenty or upwards, or having a
wooden skewer run through them. At first, those that were purchased, consisted
only of the skin from behind the wings forward; but we afterward obtained many
with the hind part, including the feet and tail. The former instantly suggested
to us the origin of the fable of the birds of paradise being destitute of legs;
and sufficiently explained that particular. The reason assigned by the
inhabitants of Atooi for the custom of cutting off the feet of these birds, is,
that by this practice they can preserve them the more easily, without losing
any part which they consider as valuable.

The red-bird of this island was, according to Mr. Anderson, a species of
merops, about as large as a sparrow, its color was a beautiful scarlet, with
the tale and wings black; and it had an arched bill, twice as long as the head,
which with the feet, was of a reddish hue. The contents of the heads were taken
out, as in the birds of paradise, but we did not find, that they practiced any
other mode of preserving them, than simple drying; for the skins, though they
were moist, had neither a smell nor taste that could give any reason for
suspecting the use of anti-putrescent substances.

On Thursday the 22d, we had almost continual rain for the whole morning. The
wind was at south-east, south-south-east, and south; and the surf broke so high
upon the shore, that our boats were prevented from landing. The Resolution was
not in a very secure situation, there being breakers within the length of
little more than two cables from her stern. The natives, notwithstanding the
surf, ventured out in their canoes, bringing off to our ships, hogs and
vegetables, which they exchanged, as before, for our commodities. One of their
number, who offered some fish-hooks for sale, was observed to have a very small
parcel, fastened to the string of one of them, which he carefully separated,
and reserved for himself, when he disposed of the hook. When asked what it was,
he pointed to his belly, and intimated something of its being dead; saying, at
the same time, that it was bad. He was requested to open the parcel, which he
did with great reluctance; and we found, that it contained a small thin piece
of flesh, which had, to all appearance, been dried, but was at present wet with
salt water. Imagining that it might be human flesh, we put the question to the
producer of it, who answered, that the flesh was part of a man. Another of the
islanders, who stood near him, was then asked, whether it was a custom among
them to eat their enemies who had been slain in battle; and he immediately
replied in the affirmative.

In the afternoon, we had some intervals of fair weather. The wind then changed
to the east and north-east; but, toward the evening, it veered back again to
south-south-east. The rain also returning continued the whole night, but was
not accompanied with much wind. At seven the next morning, a north-easterly
breeze springing up, Captain Cook ordered the anchors of his ship to be taken
up, with a view of removing her further out. As soon as the last anchor was up,
the wind, veering to the east, rendered it necessary to make all the sail he
could, for the purpose of clearing the shore; so that, before he had good
sea-room, he was driven considerably to leeward. He endeavored to regain the
road; but having a strong current against him, and very little wind, he could
not accomplish that design. He therefore dispatched Messrs. King and Williamson
ashore, with three boats, to procure water and refreshments, sending, at the
same time, an order to Captain Clerk, to put to sea after him, if he should
find that the Resolution was unable to recover the road.

The Commodore having hopes of finding a road, or perhaps a harbor, at the
west end of the island, was the less anxious about regaining his former
station. But as he had sent the boats thither, he kept as much as possible to
windward; notwithstanding which, at noon, our ship was three leagues to
leeward. As we approached the west end, we found that the coast rounded
gradually to the north-east, without forming a cove, or creek, wherein a vessel
might be sheltered from the violence of the swell, which, rolling in from the
northward, broke against the shore in an amazing surf: all hopes, therefore, of
meeting with a harbor here soon vanished. Many of the natives, in their
canoes, followed us as we stood out to sea, bartering various articles. As we
were extremely unwilling, notwithstanding the suspicious circumstance of the
preceding day, to believe that these people were cannibals, we now made some
further enquiries on this subject. A small instrument of wood, beset with
sharks teeth, had been purchased; which as it resembled the saw or knife made
use of by the savages of New-Zealand to dissect the bodies of their enemies,
was suspected by us to be employed here for the same purpose. One of the
islanders being questioned on this point, informed us that the instrument
abovementioned served the purpose of cutting out the fleshy part of the belly,
when any person was slain. This explained and confirmed the circumstance before
related, of the man's pointing to his belly. The native, however, from whom we
now received this intelligence, being asked whether his countrymen eat the part
thus cut out, strongly denied it; but, when the question was repeated, he
showed some degree of apprehension, and swam off to his canoe. An elderly man,
who sat foremost in the canoe, was then asked whether they eat the flesh; and
he answered in the affirmative. The question being put to him a second time, he
again affirmed the fact; adding, that it was savoury food.

The boats returned about seven o'clock in the evening, with a few hogs, some
plantains and roots, and two tuns of water. Mr. King reported to the Commodore,
that the islanders were very numerous at the watering-place, and had brought
great numbers of hogs to barter; but our people had not commodities with them
adequate to the purchase of them all. He also mentioned, that the surf had run
so very high, that it was with extreme difficulty our men landed, and
afterward got back into the boats.

On Saturday the 24th, at daybreak, we found that our ship had been carried by
the currents to the north-west and north; so that the western extremity of
Atooi bore east, at the distance of one league. A northerly breeze sprung up
soon after, and Captain Cook expecting that this would bring the Discovery to
sea, steered for Oneeheow, a neighboring island, which then bore south-west,
with a view of anchoring there. He continued to steer for it till past eleven,
at which time he was at the distance of about six miles from it. But not seeing
the Discovery, he was apprehensive lest some ill consequence might arise from
our separating so far; he therefore relinquished the design of visiting
Oneeheow for the present, and stood back to Atooi, intending to cast anchor
again in the road, in order to complete our supply of water. At two o'clock,
the northerly wind was succeeded by calms and variable light airs, which
continued till eleven at night. We stretched to the south-east, till early in
the morning of the 25th, when we tacked and stood in for Atooi road; and, not
long after, we were joined by the Discovery. We were utterly unable to regain
the road; and, by the morning of the 29th, the currents had carried us to the
westward, within nine or ten miles of Oneeheow. Weary with plying so
unsuccessfully, Captain Cook laid aside all thoughts of returning to Atooi and
resumed his intention of paying a visit to Oneeheow. With this view, he
dispatched the master in a boat, to found along the coast, and search for a
landing-place, and afterward for fresh water. In the mean time, the ships
followed under an easy sail. The master, at his return reported, that there was
tolerable anchorage all along the coast; and that he had landed in one place,
but could not find any fresh water.

Captain Cook being informed by some of the natives, who had come off to the
ships, that fresh water might be obtained at a village which we saw at a little
distance, run down, and cast anchor before it, about six furlongs from the
shore, the depth of water being twenty-six fathoms. The Discovery anchored at a
greater distance from the shore, in twenty-three fathoms. The south-eastern
point of Oneeheow bore south, 65 east, about one league distant; and another
island which we had discovered the preceding night, named Tahoora, bore south,
61 west, at the distance of seven leagues. Before we anchored, several canoes
had come off to us, bringing potatoes, yams, and small pigs, besides mats. The
people who were in them resembled in their persons the inhabitants of Atooi;
and like them, were acquainted with the use of iron, which they asked for by
the name of toe and hamaite, readily parting with all their commodities for
pieces of this metal. Some more canoes soon reached our ships, after they had
come to anchor; but the islanders who were in these had apparently no other
object, than to make us a formal visit. Many of them came on board, and
crouched down upon the deck; nor did they quit that humble posture, till they
were requested to rise. Several women, whom they had brought with them,
remained along-side in the canoes, behaving with much less modesty than the
females of Atooi; and, at intervals, they all joined in a song, which, though
not very melodious, was performed in the exactest concert, by beating time upon
their breasts with their hands. The men who had come on board did not continue
long with us; and before their departure, some of them desired permission to
lay down locks of their hair on the deck.

The curious enquiry, whether these islanders were cannibals, was this day
renewed, and the subject did not arise from any questions put by us, but from a
circumstance that seemed to remove all doubt. One of the natives, who wished to
get in at the gun-room port, was refused; and he then asked, whether we should
kill and eat him, if he should come in? accompanying this question with signs
so expressive, that we did not entertain a doubt with respect to his meaning.
We had now an opportunity of retorting the question as to this practice; and a
man behind the other, in the canoe, instantly replied, that, if we were killed
on shore, they would not scruple to eat us not that he meant they would destroy
us for that purpose, but that their devouring us would be the consequence of
our being at enmity with them.

Mr. Gore was sent in the afternoon, with three armed boats, in search of the
most commodious landing-place; being also directed to look for fresh water when
he should get on shore. He returned in the evening, and reported to Captain
Cook, that he had landed at the village abovementioned, and had been conducted
to a well about half a mile up the country; but that the water which it
contained was in too small a quantity for our purpose, and the road that led to
it was extremely bad. The next day Mr. Gore was sent ashore again, with a
guard, and a party to trade with the inhabitants for refreshments. The
Commodore's intention was to have followed soon afterward; and he went from
the ship with that design. But the surf had so greatly increased by this time,
that he was apprehensive, if he got ashore, he should not be able to make his
way back again. This circumstance really happened to our people who had landed
with Mr. Gore; for the communication between them and the ships, by our own
boats, was quickly stopped. They made a signal* in the evening, for the boats,
which were accordingly sent; and, in a short time afterward, returned with
some good salt and a few yams. A considerable quantity of both these articles
had been obtained in the course of the day; but the surf was so exceedingly
high, that the greatest part of both had be lost in bringing them off to the
boats. The officer and twenty men, not venturing to run the risque of coming
off, rem^ined all night on shore; by which unfortunate circumstance, the very
thing happened which Captain Cook, as we have already related, so eagarly
wished to prevent, and imagined he had effectually guarded against.

The violence of the surf did not deter the natives from coming off in canoes
to our ships. They brought with them some refreshments, for which we gave them,
in exchange, some nails, and pieces of iron hoops; and we distributed among the
woman in the canoes, many pieces of ribbon, and some buttons, as bracelets.
Some of the men had representations of human figures punctured upon their
breasts, and one of them had a lizard represented. These visitants acquainted
us, that there was no chief of this island, but that it was subject to one of
the chiefs of Atooi, whose name was Teneooneoo. Among other articles which they
now brought off to us, was a small drum, that had a great resemblance to those
of Otaheite.

Between ten and eleven o'clock at night, the wind became southerly, and the
sky seemed to indicate an approaching storm. In consequence of these
threatening appearances, Captain Cook, thinking that we were rather too near
the shore, caused the anchors to be taken up; and the ships being carried into
forty-two fathoms water, came to again in that more secure station. This,
however, proved an unnecessary precaution; for the wind, not long after,
veering to north-north-east, blew a fresh gale, with squalls, and violent
showers of rain. This weather continued for the whole succeeding day, during
which the sea ran so high, that all communication with our party on shore was
totally intercepted, and the islanders themselves would not venture out to the
ships in their canoes. Toward the evening, the Commodore sent the master in a
boat to the south-east point of the island, to try whether he could land in
that quarter. He returned with a favorable report; but it was now too late to
send for our party till the following morning; so that they were obliged to
stay another night on shore. On the ^ppearance of daylight, a boat was
dispatched to the south-east point, with orders to Lieutenant Gore, that, if he
could not embark his people from the spot where they at present were, he should
march them up to the point. The boat being prevented from getting to the beach,
one of the crew swam to shore, and communicated the instructions. After the
boat had returned, Captain Cook went himself with the launch and pinnace up to
the point, in order to bring off our party from the land. He took with him
three goats, one of them a male, and the others female; a young boar and sow of
the English breed; and also the seeds of onions, pumpkins and melons. He
landed, with great ease, under the west side of the point, where he found his
party, in company with some of the natives. To one of these, who assumed some
degree of authority over the rest, he gave the goats, pigs, and seeds. He
intended to have left these useful presents at Atooi. if we had not been so
unexpectedly driven from that island.

While our people were employed in filling some water-casks, from a little
stream which the late rains had occasioned, Captain Cook made a short excursion
into the country, accompanied by the islander abovementioned, and followed by
two others who carried the two pigs. When they had arrived upon a rising
ground, the Captain stopped to look around him, and immediately observed a
woman, on the opposite side of the valley in which he had landed, calling out
to her countrymen who attended him. Upon this the man who acted as chief began
to mutter something as if he was praying; and the two bearers of the pigs
continued walking round the Captain all the time, making about a dozen circuits
before the other had made an end of his orison. This strange ceremony being
performed, they proceeded on their walk, and met people coming from all
quarters, who, upon being called to by the Captain's attendants, fell prostrate
on their faces, till he was out of sight. The ground over which he passed,
though it was uncultivated and very stony, was covered with plants and shrubs,
some of which perfumed the air with the most delicious fragrance.

Our party who had been detained so long on shore, found, in those parts of the
island which they had traversed, several salt ponds, some of which had a small
quantity of water remaining, but others had none. They saw no appearance of a
running stream; and though, in some small wells which they met with, the fresh
water was pretty good, it seemed to be scarce. The houses of the natives were
thinly scattered about; and it was supposed, that there were not more than five
hundred persons in the whole island. The method of living among these people
was decent and cleanly. No instance was observed of the men and women eating
together; and the latter seemed in general to be associated in companies by
themselves. The oily nuts of the do do are burned by these islanders for
lights during the night; and they dress their hogs by baking them in ovens,
splitting the carcases through the whole length. Our people met with a
sufficient proof of the existence of the taboo among them; for one woman was
employed in feeding another who was under that interdiction. Several other
mysterious ceremonies were also observed; one of which was performed by a
woman, who threw a pig into the surf, and drowned it, and then tied up a bundle
of wood, which she disposed of in the like manner. The same female, at another
time, beat a man's shoulders with a stick, after he had seated himself for that
purpose. An extraordinary veneration seemed to be paid here to owls, which they
keep very tame. It appeared to be a pretty general practice among them, to pull
out one of their teeth; and when they were asked the reason of this remarkable
custom, the only answer they gave was, that it was teeha; which was also the
reason assigned by them for giving a lock of their hair.

After our water-casks had been filled, and some roots, salt, and salted fish,
had been purchased from the natives, Captain Cook returned on board with all
his people, intending to make another visit to the Island the next day. But,
about seven in the evening, the anchor of the Resolution started, so that she
drove off the bank. By this accident, we found ourselves, at day break the next
morning, which was the 2d of February, nine miles to the leeward of our last
station; and the Captain foreseeing that it would require more time to regain
it than he chose to employ, made the signal for the Discovery, to weigh anchor
and join us. This junction was effected about noon; and both ships immediately
directed their course to the northward, in prosecution of their voyage. Thus,
after we had spent more time in the neighborhood of these islands than was
necessary to have answered all our purposes, we were obliged to quit them
before we had completed our stock of water, or procured from them such a
plentiful supply of refreshments as the natives were both able and willing to
have furnished us with. Our ship, however, obtained from them provisions that
lasted at least three weeks; and Captain Clerk, more fortunate than we were,
acquired such a quantity of vegetables, as sufficed the Discovery's people
upwards of two months.

The observations which Captain Cook was enabled to make on these islands,
combined with those of Mr. Anderson, whose abilities and assiduity rendered him
a very useful assistant on such occasions, will supply materials for the
following chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Situation of the islands now discovered by us -- The Name of Sandwich Islands
given to the whole Group -- Atooi particularly described -- Its Soil -- Climate
-- Vegetable Produce -- Birds -- Fish -- Domestic Animals -- The Persons and
Disposition of the Natives -- Estimate of their Number -- Their Dress and
Ornaments -- Houses -- Food -- Mode of Cookery -- Diversions -- Musical
Instruments -- Manufactures -- Tools -- Their Acquaintance with Iron accounted
for -- Their Canoes described -- Agriculture -- Account of one of their Chiefs,
who visited Captain Clerk -- Their Wheapons -- Affinity between their Manners
and those of the Society and Friendly Islanders -- Their Language --
Advantageous Situation of the Sandwich Isles.

THE islands in the Pacific Ocean, which have been discovered in the course of
our ate voyages, have been generally found situate a groups; the single
intermediate isles, hitherto met with, being few in proportion to the rest;
though, in all probability, there are many more of them yet unknown, which
serve as gradations or steps between the several clusters. Of what number this
new-discovered Archipelago is composed, must be left to the decision of future
navigators. We observed five of them, whose names are Woahoo, Atooi, Oneeheow,
Oreehoua, and Tahoora. The last of these is a small elevated island, at the
distance of four or five leages from the south-east point of Oneeheow. We were
informed, that it abounds with birds, which are its sole inhabitants. We also
gained some intelligence with regard to the existence of a low uninhabited
island in the neighborhood, named Tammata-pappa. Besides these six, we were
told that there were some other islands both to the eastward and westward.
Captain Cook distinguished the whole group by the name of the Sandwich Islands,
in honor of the Earl of Sandwich. Those which we saw are situated between the
latitude of 21 30, and 22 15 north, and between the longitude of 199 20, and
201 30, east.

With respect to Woahoo, the most easterly of these islands seen by us, we
could get no other information, but that it is high land, and is inhabited.

Oneeheow, concerning which some particulars have been already mentioned, lies,
seven leagues to the westward of our anchoring-place at Atooi, and does not
exceed fifteen leagues in circumference. Yams are its principal vegetable
production. We procured some salt here, called by the natives patai, which is
produced in salt ponds. With it they cure both fish and pork; and some salt
fish, which we purchased from them, were extremely good, and kept very well.
This island is chiefly low land, except the part opposite Atooi, which rises
immediately from the sea to a considerable height; as does also its south-east
point, which terminates in a round hill.

Of Oreehoua we know no other particulars than that it is an elevated island,
of small extent, lying close to the north side of Oneeheow.

Atooi, which is the largest of those we saw, being the principal scene of our
operations, we shall now proceed to lay before our readers such information as
we were able to collect concerning it. From what we observed of it, it is, at
least, ten leagues in length from east to west; from whence its circumference
may nearly be guessed, though it appears to be much broader at the east than at
the west point. The road, or anchoring-place, which our vessels occupied, is on
the south-west side of the island, about two leagues from the west end, before
a village named Wymoa. As far as we sounded, we found the bank free from rocks;
except to the eastward of the village, where there projects a shoal, on which
are some rocks and breakers. This road is somewhat exposed to the trade wind;
notwithstanding which defect, it is far from being a bad station, and greatly
superior to those which necessity continually obliges ships to use, in
countries where the winds are not only more variable, but more boisterous; as
at Madeira, Teneriffe, the Azores, etc. The landing too is not so difficult as
at most of those places; and, unless in very bad weather is always practicable.
The water in the neighborhood is excellent, and may be conveyed with ease to
the boats. But no wood can be cut at any convenient distance, unless the
islanders could be prevailed upon to part with the few etooa trees (for that is
the name they give to the cordia sebastina) that grow about their villages, or
a species called do do, which grows farther up the country.

The land does not in the least resemble, in its general appearance, any of the
islands we have visited within the tropic of Capricorn; if we except its hills
near the center, which are high, but slope gradually toward the sea, or lower
lands. Though it presents not to the view, the delightful borders of Otaheite,
or the luxuriant plains of Tongataboo, covered with trees, which at once afford
a shelter from the scorchin^ rays of the sun, a beautiful prospect of the eye,
and food for the natives; yet its possessing a greater portion of gently rising
land, renders it, in some degree, superior to the abovementioned favorite
islands, as being more capable of improvement. The height of the land within,
and the number of clouds which we saw, during the whole time of our
continuance, hanging over it, and not unfrequently on the other parts, seem to
indicate that there is a sufficient supply of water, and that there are some
running streams which we had not an opportuniry of seeing, particularly in the
deep valles, at the entrance of which the villages are, in general, situated.
The ground, from the wooded part to the sea, is covered with an excellent kind
of grass, about two, feet in height, which sometimes grows in tufts, and
appeared capable of being converted into abundant crops of fine hay. But on
this extensive space not even a shrub grows naturally.

In the narrow valley leading to the morai, the soil is of a dark-brown color,
rather loose; but, on the high ground, it is of a reddish brown more stiff and
clayey. It is probably the same all over the cultivated parts; for what adhered
to most of the potatoes that we purchased, which, doubtless, came from very
different spots, was of this sort. Its quality, however, may be better
estimated from its productions, than from its appearance. For the vale, or
moist ground, produces taro, much larger than any we had ever seen; and the
more elevated ground furnishes sweet potatoes, that seldom weigh less than two
or (...) VIEW in (...).
three pounds, and frequently weigh ten, and sometimes a dozen or fourteen
pounds.

Were we to judge of the climate from our experience, it might be said to be
very variable; for, according to the general opinion; it was, at this time, the
season of the year when the weather is supposed to be most settled, the sun
being at his greatest annual distance. The heat was now very moderate; and few
of those inconveniences to which many countries lying within the tropics are
subject, either from heat, moisture, seem to be experienced here. Nor did we
find any dews of consequence; a circumstance which may partly be accounted for,
by the lower part of the country being destitute of trees.

The rock that constitutes the sides of the valley, is a dark-grey ponderous
stone; but honey-combed, with some spots of a rusty color, and some very
minute shining particles interspersed. It is of an immense depth, and seems to
be divided into strata; though nothing is interposed; for the large pieces
always broke off to a determinate thickness, and did not appear to have adhered
to those that were below them. Other stones are, in all probability, much more
various than in the southern islands. For, during the short time we remained
here, besides the lapis lydius, we found a species of cream-coloured whetstone,
sometimes variegated with whiter or blacker veins, like marble; and common
writing slate, as well as some of a coarser sort; and the natives brought us
some pieces of a coarser whitish pumice stone. We all procured a brown sort of
haematites, which, from its being strongly attracted by the magnet, discovered
the quantity of metal it contained. What we saw of this was cut artificially,
as were also the slates and whetstones.

Besides the vegetables purchased by us as refreshments, among which were, at
least, five or six varieties of plantains, the island produces bread fruit:
this, however, seems to be scarce, as we only saw one tree of that species.
There are also a few cocoa-palms; some yams; the kappe of the Friendly Islands,
or Virginian arum; the atooa tree, and odoriferous gardenia, or cape jasmine.
We met with several trees of the do do, that bear the oily nuts, which are
stuck upon a kind of skewer, and made use of as candles. Our people saw them
used in the same manner at Oneeheow. We were not on shore at Atooi except in
the day time, and then we observed the islanders wearing these nuts, hung on
strings, round their necks. There is a species of sida, or Indian mallow; also
the morinda citrifolia, which is here called none; a species of convolvulus;
the ava, or intoxicating pepper, besides great quantities of gourds. These last
grow to a very large size, and are of a remarkable variety of shapes, which
are, perhaps, the effect of art. Upon the dry sand, about the village, grew a
plant, that had never been seen by us in this ocean, of the size of a common
thistle, and prickly; but bearing a fine flower, greatly resembling a white
poppy.

The scarlet birds, which were brought for sale, were never met with alive; but
we saw one small one, about the size of a canary bird, of a deep crimson
color. We also saw a large owl, two brown hawks, or kites, and a wild duck. We
heard from the natives the names of some other birds; among which were the
otoo, or blueish heron, and the torata, a sort of whimbrel. It is probable that
the species of birds are numerous, if we may judge by the quantity of fine
yellow, green, and small, velvet-like, blackish feathers used upon the cloaks,
and other ornaments, worn by these people.

Fish, and other productions of the sea, were, to appearance, not various; as
besides the small mackarel, we only saw common mullets; a species of a chalky
color; a small brownish rock-fish, adorned with blue spots; a turtle, which
was penned up in a pond; and three or four sorts of fish salted. The few
shellfish seen by us were chiefly converted into ornaments, though they were
destitute of the recommendation either of beauty or novelty.

The only tame or domestic animals that we found here were hogs, dogs, and
fowls, which were all of the same kind that we met with at the islands of the
South Pacific. There were also small lizards; and some rats, resembling those
of every island which we had hitherto visited.

The inhabitants of Atooi are of the middle size, and in general, stoutly made.
They are neither remarkable for a beautiful shape, nor for striking features.
Their visage, particularly that of the women, is sometimes round, but others
have it long; nor can it justly be said, that they are distinguished, as a
nation, by any general cast of countenance. Their complexion is nearly of a nut
brown; but some individuals are of a darker hue. We have already mentioned the
women as being little more delicate than the men in their formation; and we may
add, that, with few exceptions they have little claim to those peculiarities
that distinguish the sex in most other parts of the world. There is, indeed, a
very remarkable equality in the size, color and figure, of the natives of both
sexes; upon the whole, however, they are far from being ugly, and have to all
appearance, few natural deformities of any kind. Their skins is not very soft,
nor shining; but their eyes and teeth are, for the most part, pretty good.
Their hair, in general, is straight; and though its natural color is usually
black; they stain it, as at the Friendly and other islands. We perceived but
few instances of corpulence, and these more frequently among the women than the
men; but it was principally among the latter, that personal defects were
observed; though, if any of them can lay claim to a share of beauty, it
appeared to be most conspicuous amongst the young men.

They are active, vigorous, and most expert swimmers; leaving their canoes upon
the most frivolous occasion, diving under them, and smimming to others, though
at a considerable distance. We have frequently seen women, with infants at the
breast, when the surf was so high as to prevent their landing in the canoes,
leap overboard, and swim to the shore, without endangering their little ones.

They appear to be of a frank, cheerful disposition; and are equally free from
the fickle levity which characterizes the inhabitants of Otaheite, and the
sedate cast which is observable among many of those of Tongataboo. They seem to
cultivate a sociable intercourse with each other; and except the propensity to
thieving, which is, as it were, innate in most of the people we have visited in
these seas, they were extremely friendly to us. And it does no small credit to
their sensibility, without flattering ourselves, that when they saw the
different articles of our European manufacture, they could not refrain from
expressing their astonishment, by a mixture of joy and concern, that seemed to
apply the case as a lesson of humility to themselves; and, on every occasion,
they appeared to have a proper consciousness of their own inferiority; a
behavior that equally exempts their national character from the ridiculous
pride of the more polished Japanese, and of the ruder native of Greenland. It
was pleasing to observe with what affection the women managed their infants,
and with what alacrity the men contributed their assistance in such a tender
office; thus distinguishing themselves from those savages, who consider a wife
and child as things rather necessary, than desirable, or worthy of their regard
and esteem.

From the numbers that we saw assembled at every village, as we coast^^ along,
it may be conjectured, that the inhabitants of this island are pretty numerous.
Including the straggling houses, there might perhaps be, in the whole island
sixty such villages as that near which our ships anchored; and if we allow five
persons to each house, there would be, in every village, five hundred; or
thirty thousand upon the island. This number is by no means exaggerated, for
there were sometimes three thousand people, at least, collected upon the beach;
when it could not be supposed, that above a tenth part of the natives were
present.

The ordinary dress of both sexes has been already described. The women have
often much larger pieces of cloth wrapped about them, extending from just below
the breasts to the hams, and sometimes lower; and several were observed with
pieces thrown loosely over their shoulders, which covered the greatest part of
the body; but the children, when very young, are entirely naked. They wear
nothing upon the head; but the hair both of men and women, is cut in various
forms; and the general fashion, particularly among the latter, is to have it
short behind, and long before. The men frequently had it cut on each side in
such a manner, that the remaining part somewhat resembled the crest of their
caps or helmets, before mentioned. Both sexes, however, seemed to be very
careless about the hair, and had no combs, nor any thing of the kind to dress
it with. The men sometimes twist it into a number of separate parcels, like the
tails of a wig, each about as thick as a finger; though most of these which are
so long as to reach far down the back, are artificially fixed upon the head,
over their own hair.

Contrary to the general practice of most of the islands of the Pacific Ocean,
the people of the Sandwich Isles have not their ears perforated, nor do they
were any ornaments in them. Both men and women however, adorn themselves with
necklaces composed of bunches of small black cord, like our hat-string, often
above a hundredfold; entirely resembling those we saw worn at Woteeoo, except
that, instead of the two little balls on the middle before, they fix a small
piece of wood, stone, or shell, about two inches in length, with a broad hook,
well polished. They have also necklaces of many strings of very small shells,
or of the dried flowers of the Indian mallow; and they sometimes hang round
their necks a small human figure of bone, about the length of three inches. The
women likewise wear bracelets of a single shell, pieces of black wood, with
bits of ivory interspersed, and neatly polished, fastened together by the
string drawn closely through them; or others of hogs-teeth, placed parallel to
each other, with the concave part outward, and the points cut off; some of
which, formed only of large boar's tusks, are very elegant. The men sometimes
fix on their heads plumes of feathers of the tropic bird; or those of cocks,
fastened round neat polished sticks, two feet in length; and, for the same
purpose, they sew the skin of a white dog's tail over a stick, with its tuft
(...) the end. They also, not unfrequently, wear on the head a kind of
ornament, of the thickness of a finger, or more, covered with yellow and red
feathers, curiously varied, and tied behind; and, on that part of the arm which
is above elbow, a sort of broad shell-work, grounded upon network.

The men sometimes puncture themselves upon their hands or arms, and near the
groin; but frequently we saw no marks at all; though a few individuals had more
of this species of ornament than we had usually seen at other places, and
curiously executed in a great variety of lines and figures, on the arms and
forepart of the body. Contrary to the custom of the Friendly and Society
Islands, they do not slit, or cut off, any part of the A MAN and WOMAN of
SANDWICH ISLANDS.
prepuce; but have it universally drawn over the glans, and tied with a string.

There is no appearance of defense, or fortification, near any of their
villages, and the houses, are scattered about, without the least order. Some of
these habitations are large and commodious, from forty to fifty feet in length,
and twenty or thirty in breadth; while others of them are contemptible hovels.
Their figure resembles that of hay-stacks; or, perhaps, a better idea may be
conceived of them, by supposing the roof of a barn placed on the ground, in
such a manner, as to form a high, acute ridge, with two low sides. The gable at
each end corresponding to the sides, makes these dwelling-places close all
round; and they are well thatched with long grass, which is laid on slender
poles. The entrance is made either in the end or side, and is an oblong hole,
extremely low; it is often shut up by a board or planks, fastened together,
which serves as a door; but, as it has no hinges, must be removed occasionally.
No light enters the house except by this opening; and though such close
habitations may be comfortable places of retreat in bad weather, they seem but
ill-adapted to the warm climate of this country. They are kept remarkably
clean, and the floors are strewed with dried grass, over which mats are spread
to sit and sleep on. At one end stands a bench, about three feet high, on which
the domestic utensils are placed. These consist of gourd-shells, which the
natives convert into vessels that serve a^ bottles to hold water, and as
baskets to contain their food, and other things; and also of a few wooden bowls
and trenchers of various sizes.

From what we saw growing, and from what was brought to market, we have no
doubt, that sweet potatoes, taro, and plantains, constitute the principal part
of their vegetable diet; and that yams and bread-fruit are rather to be
considered as rarities. Of animal food, they appear to be in no want; as they
have great numbers of hogs, which run without restraint, about the houses; and,
if they eat dogs, which is not altogether improbable, their stock of these
seemed very considerable. The quantities of fishing-hooks found among them,
indicated that they procure a tolerable supply of animal food from the sea.
They have a custom of salting-fish, and likewise pork, which they preserve in
gourd-shells. The salt, which they use for this purpose, is of a reddish
color, but not very coarse, and seems to be nearly the same with what our
stragglers found at Christmas Island. Its color, is doubtless, derived from a
mixture of mud, at the bottom of the part where it is formed; for some of it,
which had adhered in lumps, was of a tolerable whiteness.

They bake their vegetable articles of food with heated stones; and, from the
great quantity which we saw dressed at one time, we imagined, that all the
inhabitants of a village, or at least, a considerable number of people, joined
in the use of a common oven. We did not perceive them dress any animal food at
this island; but Mr. Gore's party, as has been already mentioned, observed that
it was dressed at Oneeheow in the same kind of ovens, which makes it highly
probable that this is also the practice in Atooi; particularly as we met with
no utensil there, that could serve the purpose of boiling or stewing. The only
artificial dish we saw was a taro pudding; which, though very sour, was
devoured with avidity by the natives. They eat off a sort of wooden trenchers;
and as far as we were enabled to judge from one instance, the women, if
restrained from feeding at the same dish with the men, as is the custom at
Otaheite, are, at least, allowed to eat in the same place near them.

The amusements of these people are various. We did not see the dances at which
they use the feathered cloaks and caps; but, from the motions which they made
with their hands, on other occasions, when they sung, we judged that they were
somewhat similar to those we had met with at the southern islands, though not
so skilfully performed. They had not among them, either flutes or reeds; and
the only two musical instruments, seen by us, were of an extremely rude kind.
One of them does not produce a melody superior to that of a child's rattle. It
consists of what may be denominated a conic cap inverted, but very little
hollowed at the base, made of a sedge-like plant; the upper part of which, and
likewise the edges, are embellished with beautiful red feathers; and to the
point, or lower part, is a fixed gourd-shell. Into this they put something to
rattle, which is done by holding the instrument by the small part, and shaking
it briskly before the face, at the same time striking the breast with the other
hand. The other instrument was a hollow vessel of wood, not unlike a platter,
combined with the use of two sticks, on which one of our gentlemen observed a
man performing. He held one of the sticks, about two feet in length, with one
hand, in the same manner as we hold a violin, and struck it with the other,
which was smaller, and resembled a drum-stick, in a quicker or flower measure;
beating with his foot at the same time upon the hollow vessel, that lay upon
the ground inverted, and thus producing a tune, that was not disagreeable. This
music was accompanied by the vocal performance of some women, whose song had a
pleasing effect.

They have great numbers of small polished rods, of the length of between four
and five feet, rather thicker than the rammer of a musket, with a tuft of long
white dog's hair fixed on the small end. These they probably make use of their
diversions. We saw a native take one of them in his hand, and, holding it up,
give a smart stroke, till it was brought into an horizontal position, striking
the ground with his foot, on the same side, and beating his breast with his
other hand. They play it bowls with pieces of the whet-stone abovementioned,
shaped somewhat like a small cheese, but rounded at the edges and sides, which
are very neatly polished. They have other bowls made of a reddish-brown clay,
glazed over with a compositon of the same color, or of a course dark-grey
slate. They also use, as quoits, small flat roundish pieces of the writing
slate, scarcely a quarter of an inch thick.

In the different manufactures of these people, there appears to be an
extraordinary degree of ingenuity and neatness. Their cloth is made from the
morus papyrifera, and, doubtless, in the same manner, as at Tongataboo and
Otaheite; for we bought some of the grooved sticks with which, they beat it.
Its texture, however, though thicker, is inferior to that of the cloth of
either of the places just mentioned; but in coloring or staining it, the
inhabitants of Atooi display a superiority of taste, by the infinite variety of
figures which they execute. Their colors, indeed, are not very bright, except
the red; but the regularity of the figures and stripes is amazing; for, as far
as we know, they have nothing like stamps or prints, to make the impressions.
We had no opportunity of learning in what manner they produce their colors;
but, besides the variegated sorts, they have some pieces of plain white cloth,
and others of a single color, particularly light blue, and dark-brown. In
general, the pieces brought to us were about the breadth of two feet, and four
or five yards in length, being the form and quantity made use of by them for
their common dress, or maro; and even some of these were composed of pieces
sewed together. They have also a particular sort that is thin and greatly
resembles oil-cloth; and which is either oiled or soaked in some kind of
varnish. They fabricate numbers of white mats, which were strong, with many red
stripes, rhombuses, and other figures interwoven on one side. These in all
probability, occasionally make a part of their dress; for, when they offered
them to sale, they put them on their backs. They manufacture others of a
coarser sort, plain and strong, which they spread over their floors, to sleep
upon.

They stain their gourd-shells neatly with undulated lines, triangles, and
other figures of a black color. They also seem to be acquainted with the art
of varnishing; for some of these stained gourd-shells are covered with a sort
of lacker; and, on other occasions, they make use of a strong size, or
glutinous substance, to fasten things together. Their wooden dishes and bowls,
out of which they drink their ava, are of the etooa tree, or cordia, extremely
neat and well polished. They likewise make small square fans of mat or
wicker-work, with handles of the same, or of wood tapering from them, which are
curiously wrought with small cords of hair, and cocoa-nut fibers, intermixed.
Their fishing-hooks are ingeniously made; some of bone, many of pearlshell, and
others of wood, pointed with bone. The bones are for the most part small, and
consist of two pieces; and the various sorts have a barb, either on the inside,
like ours, or on the outside; but others have both, the exterior one being
farthest from the point. Of the latter sort one was procured, nine inches in
length, made of a single piece of bone; the elegant form and polish of which,
could not be exceeded by any European artist. They polish their stones, by
constant friction, with pumice-stone in water; and such of their tools as we
saw, resembled those of the southern islanders. Their hatchets. or rather
adzes, were exactly of the same pattern, and were either formed of a blackish
stone, or of a clay-coloured one. They have also small instruments composed of
a single shark's tooth, some of which are fixed to the forepart of the
jaw bone of a dog, and others to a thin wooden handle of a similar shape; and
at the other end there is a bit of string fastened through a little hole. They
serve occasionally as knives, and are, probably, used in carving.

The only iron-tools seen among them, and which they possessed before our
arrival, were a piece of iron-hoop, about the length of two inches, fitted into
a wooden handle; and another edgetool, which we supposed to have been made of
the point of a broad sword. Their having the actual possession of these, and
their being well acquainted with the use of this metal, inclined some of our
people to imagine that we were not the first European visitors of these
islands. But the very great surprise which they testified on seeing our ships,
and their perfect ignorance of the use of firearms, cannot be reconciled with
such an opinion. There are several means by which such people may obtain pieces
of iron, or acquire the knowledge of the existence of that metal, without
having had an immediate connection with those nations that use it. It can
scarcely be doubted, that it was unknown to all the inhabitants of the Pacific
Ocean, till Magellan led the way into it; for no navigator, immediately after
his voyage, found any of this metal in their possession; though, in the course
of our late voyages, it has been remarked, that the use of it was known at
several islands, which no former European vessel had ever, to our knowledge,
visited. At all the places where Mendana touched, during his two voyages, some
of it must have been left; and this would, doubtless, extend the knowledge of
it to all the various islands with which the people, whom he visited, had any
immediate intercourse. It might even have been carried farther; and where
specimens of this valuable article could not be met with, descriptions might,
in some degree, serve to make it known, when afterward seen. The next voyage
to the southward of the equator, in which any intercourse was had with the
people who inhabit the islands of this ocean, was that of Quiros, who landed at
Sagittaria, the island of Handsome People, and at Tierra del Espiritu Santo; at
all which places, as well as at those with which they had any communication, it
must undoubtedly have been made known. To him succeeded, in this navigation, Le
Maire, and Schouten, whose connections with the natives began much farther to
the eastward, and terminated at Cocos and Horn islands. It is certain, that the
inhabitants of Otaheite, and the Society Isles, had a knowledge of iron, and
purchased it with the greatest avidity, when Captain Wallis discovered
Otaheite; and they could only have acquired this knowledge through the
mediation of those neighboring islands at which it had been originally left.
They acknowledge, indeed, that this was really the case; and they have since
informed us, that they held it in such estimation, before the arrival of
Captain Wallis, that an Otaheitean chief, who had gained possession of two
nails, received no small emo^^ment, by letting out the use of them to his
neighbors, for the purpose of boring holes. The natives of the Society
Islands, whom we found at Wateeoo, had been driven to that place long after the
knowledge and use of iron had been thus introduced among their countrymen; and
though, perhaps, they had no specimen of it with them, they would naturally
communicate at that island, by description, their knowledge of this useful
metal. From the people of Wateeoo, again, those of Hervey's Island might derive
that inclination for it, of which we had sufficient proofs during our short
intercourse with them.

The consideration of the facts will show, how the knowledge of iron has been
conveyed throughout the Pacific Ocean, to islands which have never had an
immediate connection with Europeans; and it may easily be imagined, that,
wherever the history of it only has been reported, or a very inconsiderable
quantity of it has been left, the greater eagerness will be shown by the
inhabitants to procure plentiful supplies of it. The application of these
particulars, to the object of our present consideration, is manifest. The
natives of Atooi and Oneeheow, without having ever been visited by Europeans
before us, might have received this metal from intermediate islands, situated
between them and the Ladrones which the Spaniards have frequented almost ever
since the period of Magellan's voyage. Or, if the distant western position of
the Ladrones, should detract from the probability of this solution, is there
not the American continent to windward, where the Spaniards have been settled
for upwards of two centuries and a half: during which long space of time,
shipwrecks must frequently have happened on its coasts? It cannot be deemed
surprising that part of such wrecks, containing iron, should, by the easterly
trade-winds, be occasionally cast upon some of those islands which are
dispersed about this immense ocean. -- The distance of Atooi from America, is
no argument against this supposition; and even if it were, it would not destroy
it. This ocean is annually traversed by Spanish vessels; and it is highly
probable, that, besides the accident of losing a mast and its appendages, casks
with iron-hoops, and many other things that contain iron, may fall, or be
thrown overboard during so long a passage, and thus find their way to land.
These are not mere conjectures; for one of Captain Cook's people actually saw
some wood in a house at Wymoa, which he supposed to be fir: it was worm-eaten,
and the natives informed him, that it had been driven ashore by the waves; and
we had their own express testimony, that they had obtained, from some place to
the eastward, the specimens of iron found among them.

From this digression (if it can justly be called so) let us return to the
observations made during our continuance at Atooi. The canoes of these people
are commonly about four and twenty feet in length, and have the bottom, in
general, formed of a single picee of wood, hollwed out to the thickness of an
inch, or more, and brought to a point at each end. The sides are composed of
three boards, each about an inch thick; neatly fitted and lashed to the bottom.
The extremities, both at head and stern, are a little elevated, and both are
made sharp, somewhat resembling a wedge, but they flatter more abruptly, so
that the two side-boards join each other, side by side, for upwards of a foot.
As they seldom exceed a foot and a half in breadth, those that go single (for
they sometimes join them) have outriggers, which are shaped and fitted with
more judgment than any we had before seen. They are rowed by paddles, such as
we had generally observed at other islands; and some of them have a light
triangular sail, extended to a mast and boom. The ropes which they use for
their boats, and the smaller cords for their fishing-tackles, are strong, and
neatly made.

They are by no means novices in the art of agriculture. The vale-ground is one
continued plantation of taro, and some other articles, which have all the
appearance of being carefully attended to. The potatoe-fields, and spots of ^
sugar-cane, or plantains, on the higher grounds, are planted with great
regularity; but neither these, nor the others, are enclosed with any fence,
unless we consider the ditches in the low grounds as such; which, it is more
probable, are designed to convey water to the taro. The great quantity and
excellence of these articles, may perhaps be as much owing to skilful culture,
as natural fertility of soil, which seems better adapted to them than to
bread-fruit and cocoa-nut trees; the few we saw of these latter not being in a
thriving state. Notwithstanding this skill in agriculture, the island, from its
general appearance, seemed to be capable of more extensive improvement, and of
mantaining thrice as many inhabitants as are now upon it; for the greater part
of it, that now lies waste, was apparently as good a soil as those parts that
are cultivated. It must therefore be inferred, that these people do not
increase in that proportion, which, would render it necessary for them to take
advantage of the extent of their islands, toward raising a greater quantity of
its vegetable productions for their maintenance.

Though Captain Cook did not see a chief of any note, there were, however,
several, as the islanders informed us, who reside at Atooi, and to whom they
prostrate themselves as a mark of homage and respect. This prostration seems
equivalent to the more moea, paid to the chiefs of the Friendly Islands, and is
here denominated hamoea, or more. Whether they were, at first, afraid to show
themselves, or happened to be absent, we cannot determine; but after the
Resolution had left the island, one of these great men made his appearance, and
visited Captain Clerk on board the discovery; he came off in a double canoe;
and, like the sovereign of the Friendly Isles, paid no regard to the small
canoes that chanced to be in his way, but ran against, or over them, without
making the least attempt to avoid them. And it was impossible for these poor
people to avoid him, for they could not then manage their canoes; it being a
necessary mark of their submission, that they should lie down till he had
passed. His attendants assisted him in getting on board the ship, and placed
him in the gang-way* where they stood round him, holding each other by the
hands; nor would they suffer any one to approach him but Captain Clerk
himself. He was a young man, apparelled from head to foot, and was accompanied
by a young woman, who was perhaps his wife. His name was said to be Tamahano.
Captain Clerk having made him some presents, received from him, in return, a
large bowl, supported by two figures of men, the carving of which displayed
some degree of skill, both with respect to the design and the execution. This
bowl used to be filled with the kava, or ava, (as it is termed at Otaheite),
which liquor is prepared and drank here as at the other islands of the Pacific
Ocean. Captain Clerk could not prevail upon this chief to go below, nor to
move from the spot where his attendants had first placed him. After remaining
some time in the ship, he was carried back into his canoe, and returned to the
island. The following day, several messages were sent to Captain Clerk,
inviting him to return the visit on shore, and giving him to understand, that
the chief had prepared a considerable present for the occasion; but the Captain
being anxious to get out to sea, and join the Resolution, did not think proper
to accept of the invitation.

The short and imperfect intercourse we had with the natives, did not enable us
to form any accurate judgment of the form of government established amongst
them; but, from the general similarity of customs, and particularly from what
we observed of the honors paid to their chiefs, it seems reasonable to
imagine, that it is of the same nature with that which prevails in all the
islands we had hitherto visited; and, in all probability, their wars among
themselves are equally frequent. This, indeed, might be inferred, from the
number of weapons which we found in their possession, and from the excellent
order in which they kept them. But we had proofs of the fact from their own
confession; and, as we were informed, these wars are carried on between the
different districts of their own island, as well as between it and the
neighboring inhabitants of the isles of Oneeheow and Oreehoua. We scarcely
need assign any other cause besides this, to account for the appearance,
beforementioned, of their population not being proportioned to the extent of
their ground that is capable of cultivation.

Besides their spears, formed of a fine brownish wood, beautifully polished
some of which are barbed at one end, and flattened to a point at the other,
they had a kind of weapon which we had never met with before. It somewhat
resembles a dagger, and is, in general, about eighteen inches in length;
sharpened at one or both ends, and secured to the hand by a string. Its use is
to stab in close combat, and it seems well adapted to that purpose. Some of
these may be denominated double daggers, having a handle in the middle, with
which they are the better enabled to strike different ways. They have likewise
bows and arrows; but both from their slender construction, and their apparent
scarcity, it is probable that they never make use of them in battle. The knife
or saw, already mentioned, with which they dissect the dead bodies of their
enemies, may also be ranked among their weapons as they both strike and cut
with it when engaged in close fight. It is a small flat wooden instrument,
about a foot in length, of an oblong shape, rounded at the corners; its edges
are surrounded with shark's teeth strongly fixed to it, and pointing outward;
and it has generally a hole in the handle, through which passes a long string,
which they wrap several times round the wrist. We also conjectured, that they
use slings on some occasions; for we procured some pieces of the haematites or
boodstone, artificially made of an oval form, longitudinally divided with a
narrow groove in the middle of the unequal part. To this the person who had one
of them applied a thin cord, but would not dispose of it, though he was not
unwilling to part with the stone, which, as it weighed a pound, must prove
fatal when thrown with some degree of force. We likewise saw some pieces of
whetstone neatly polished, of an oval figure, but somewhat pointed toward each
end; nearly resembling in shape some stones seen by Captain Cook at New
Caledonia in 1774, and made use of there in slings.

As some of their religious institutions, and their method of disposing of
their dead, strongly indicate an affinity between the manners of these people
and of the natives of the Friendly and Society Islands, we will mention a few
particulars that will serve to place this in a striking point of view. The
inhabitants of Tongataboo bury their dead with great decency, and they also
inter their human sacrifices; but they do not, to our knowledge, offer any
other animal, or even vegetable, to their deities. The Otaheiteans do not inter
their dead, but expose them to waste by time and putrefaction, though they
afterward bury the bones; and, this being the case, it is remarkable, that
they should inter the entire bodies of their human sacrifices. They also offer
up, to their gods, other animals and vegetables; but are far from being
attentive to the condition of the places, where they celebrate those solemn
rites; most of their morais, being in a ruinous state, and showing manifest
tokens of neglect. The people of Atooi, again, bury, both their common dead,
and their human sacrifices, as at Tongataboo; but they resemble those of
Otaheite, in offering vegetables and animals to their gods, and in the
neglected state of their religious places.

The taboo also prevails in Atooi, in its full extent, and apparently with
greater strictness than even at Tongataboo. For the natives here always asked,
with great eagerness, and with indications of a fear of offending, whether any
particular thing, which they desired to see, or we were unwilling to show, was
taboo, or (as they pronounced the word) tafoo? The may raa, or prohibited
articles at the Society Islands, though undoubtedly the same thing, did not
appear to be so rigorously observed by them, except with regard to the dead:
respecting whom we thought them more superstitious than any of the others were.
These, however, are circumstances concerning which we cannot pretend to speak
decisively; and we shall only observe, to show the similitude in other points
connected with religion, that the tahounas, or priests, seem to be as numerous
here as at the other islands.

But whatever resemblance. we might discover between the general manners of the
inhabitants of Atooi, and those of Otaheite, these were less striking than the
similarity of language. Indeed, the languages of both places may be said to be
almost entirely the same. The people of Atooi, in general, have neither the
strong guttural pronunciation of the New-Zealanders, nor that smaller degree of
it, which also distinguishes the Friendly Islanders; and they have not only
adopted the soft mode of the Otaheitans, in avoiding harsh sounds, but the
whole idiom of their language; making use of the same affixes and suffixes to
their words, and the same measure and cadence in their songs; at first hearing,
indeed, a stranger may perceive some disagreement; but it should be considered,
that the natives of Otaheite, from their frequent connections with the English,
had learned, in some measure, to adapt themselves to our imperfect knowledge of
their language, by using the most common and even corrupted expressions in
conversation with us; whereas, when they talked with each other, and used the
several parts necessary to propriety of speech, they were hardly at all
understood by those among us, who had made the greatest progress in the
knowledge of their vocabulary. A list of words was collected at Atooi, by the
indefatigable Mr. Anderson, who embraced every opportunity of rendering our
voyage useful to those who amuse themselves in tracing the emigrations of the
various tribes that have peopled the globe, by the most convincing of all
arguments, that drawn from the coincidence of language.

How widely has this nation diffused itself, in so many detached islands, so
far distant from each other, in every quarter of the Pacific Ocean! We find it,
from New-Zealand, in the south, as far as the Sandwich Islands to the
northward; and, in another direction, from Eastern Island, to the New Hebrides:
that is, over an extent of sixty degrees of latitude, or three thousand six
hundred miles, north and south; and eighty three degrees of longitude, or four
thousand nine hundred and eighty miles, east and west! How much farther, in
either of those directions, its colonies reach, is not known; but, from what we
are already acquainted with, we are authorized in pronouncing it to be the most
extensive nation upon earth, though, perhaps, not the most numerous.

If the Sandwich Islands had been discovered at an early period, by the
Spaniards, they would doubtless have availed themselves of so excellent a
situation, and have made use of Atooi, or some other of the islands, as a place
of refreshment for the ships, that sail annually between Manilla and Acapulco.
They lie almost midway between the last mentioned place and Guam, one of the
Ladrones, which is at present their only port in traversing this vast ocean;
and it would not have been a week's sail out of their ordinary route, to have
touched at them. An acquaintance with the Sandwich Isles would also have been
equally favorable to our Buccaneers; who have sometimes passed from the coast
of America to the Ladrones, with a stock of provisions and water scarcely
adequate to the support of life. Here they might always have met with a
plentiful supply, and have been within a month's sail of the very part of
California, which the Manilla ship is obliged to make. How happy would Lord
Anson have been, and what difficulties would he have avoided, had he known that
there was a cluster of islands, half way between America and Tinian, where all
his wants might have been effectually relieved!

CHAP. XIII.
Observations on the Longitude, Tides, etc. -- Proceed on the Voyage -- Weather
remarkably mild as far as the Latitude 44 North -- Scarcity of Oceanic Birds in
the Nothern Hemisphere -- Beautiful Sea-Animals described, supposed by Mr.
Anderson to be a new species of Oniscus -- See the Coast of North America --
Description of the Country -- Difficulty at Cape Foulweather -- Stormy and
tempestuous Weather -- Strictures on Martin d' Aguilar's River -- Fallacy of
Juan de Fuca's pretended Strail -- An Inlet discovered -- The Ships anchor
there, and are visited by Numbers of the Natives -- Their Behavior.

THE Discovery having joined us, we stood away to the northward, with a gentle
gale from the east. The tides are so inconsiderable at the Sandwich Islands,
that with the great surf breaking against the shore, it was difficult, at all
times to know whether we had high or low water, or wether it ebbed or flowed.
On the south side of Atooi, a current generally set to the westward, or
north-westward. But, when we were at anchor off Oneeheow, we found a current
setting nearly north-west and south-east, six hours each way. This was
doubtless a regular tide, and the flood appeared to come from the north-west.

But, to avoid digression, on Saturday the 7th of February, we were in the
latitude of 29 north and in the longitude of 200 east, the wind veering to
south-east. We steered north-east and east till the 12th, when the wind had
veered round to north-east and east-north-east. We then tacked and stood to the
northward, being in the latitude of 30 north, and in the longitude of 206 15
east. In this advanced latitude, and even in the winter season, we had only
begun to feel a sensation of cold in the mornings and evenings; a proof of the
equal and durable influence of the heat of the sun, at all times to 30 on each
side the line. After that, the disproportion is known to become very great.
This must be principally attributed to the direction of the sun's rays,
independent of the bare distance, which is not equal to the effect. On Thursday
the 19th of February, the wind veered to south-east, and we were again enabled
to steer to the east, inclining a little to the north. On the 25th, we reached
the latitude of 42 30, and the longitude of 219; when we began to meet with the
rock-weed, mentioned in Lord Anson's voyage, by the name of sea-leek, which is
generally seen by the Manilla ships. Sometimes a piece of wood appeared; but,
if we had not known that we were near the continent of North America, we might
have supposed, from the few signs of vicinity of land that we had seen, that we
were not within some thousand leagues of any. Since we left Sandwich Islands we
had hardly beheld a bird, or any other oceanic animal.

On the 1st of March, we had a calm day, which was succeeded by a wind from the
north, with which we stood to the east, intending to make land. We ought to
have been near it, according to the charts. Such moderate and mild weather
appeared to us very extraordinary, when we were so far north, and so near an
extensive continent, at this time of the year. The season must have been
remarkably mild, for Sir Francis Drake met with very severe cold, about this
latitude, even in the month of June See Sir Francis Drake's Voyage, in
Campbell's Edition of Harris, vol. i. p. 18.
. Viscaino, indeed, who was in the same part of the world, in the depth of
winter, hardly takes notice of the cold, and mentions a ridge of snowy
mountains, on this coast, as something extraordinary Vanega's Hist. of
California. vol. ii. p. 229.
.

It is a singurlar circumstance, that we should meet with so few birds,
compared to those we saw in the same latitudes, to the south of the line. This
must either proceed from a scarcity of them, or from a deficiency of
resting-places. Hence it may be concluded, that, in the southern hemisphere,
beyond 40, the species are much more numerous, and the islands more plentifully
scattered, than any where near that latitude, between the coast of California
and Japan.

On the morning of the 2d, during a calm part of the sea appeared to be covered
with a kind of slime, and some small sea animals were seen swimming about.
Those which were most conspicuous, were of the gelatinous kind, almost
globular; a smaller sort had a white or shining appearance, and were in great
abundance. Some of the latter were put into a glass cup, with some salt water;
and, when in a prone situation, they appeared like small scales or pieces of
silver.

When they swam about, which they did with equal ease in various directions,
they emitted the brightest colors of the most valuable gems, according to
their position respecting the light. At one time they appeared pellucid, at
another displaying the various tints of blue, from a sapphirine to a voilet,
mixed with a kind of ruby, and glowing with sufficient strengh to illuminate
the glass and water. When the vessel was held to the strongest light, the tints
appeared most vivid; but almost vanished when the animals subsided to the
bottom, and they had then a brownish appearance. By candlelight, the color,
was principally, a beautiful pale green, with a kind of burnished gloss; and,
in the dark, it faintly exhibited a glowing fire.

They are a new species of oniscus and were called, by Mr. Anderson, oniscus
fulgens; being supposed to be an animal that contributes to that lucid
appearance, often observed at sea, in the night. Two large birds settled, this
day on the water, near the ship. One was the procellaria maxima; and the other,
of little more than half the magnitude of the former, appeared to be of the
albatross kind. It was larger than a sea-gull, but resembled it in other
respects. About noon, on the 6th, we beheld two seals, and several whales; and
early the next morning, the long-expected coast of New Albion So named by Sir
Francis D. (...)
was seen, at the distance of ten or twelve leagues, extending from north-east
to south east. At noon, we were in the latitude of 44 33 north, and in the
longitude of 235 20 east and the land about eight leagues distant.

We had now seventy-three fathoms water, over a muddy bottom, and found ninety
fathoms about a league farther off. The land, which was of a moderate height,
appeared to be diversified with hills and valleys, and principally covered with
wood. No very striking object, however, presented itself, except an high hill,
with a flat summit, which bore east from us at noon. The land formed a point at
the northern extreme, which Captain Cook named Cape Foulweather, from the
exceeding bad weather we afterward met with.

After variable light airs and calms, at eight o'clock in the evening of 7th, a
breeze sprung up at south-west. We stood to the north-west, under an easy sail,
entending to range along the coast at day light. But, the next morning, at
four, the wind having shifted to north-west, it blew in squalls, with rain.
Till near ten o'clock our course was north-east: but, not being able to make
any progress on this tack, and seeing nothing that had the appearance of an
harbor, we tacked, and stood off south-west. Cape Foulweather, at this time,
bore north-east by north, distant about eight leagues.

In the evening of the 8th, the wind veered to the north-west, with squalls,
hail, and sleet; and, the weather being hazy and thick, we stood out to sea
till about noon the next day, when we stood in again for the land, which we saw
at two in the afternoon, bearing east-north-east. In the evening, the wind
veered more to the west, and the weather grew worse, which obliged us to tack
and stand off till about four the next morning, when we stood in again. In the
afternoon, at four, we discovered the land, which, at six, was about eight
leagues distant. Here we tacked, and sounded, but could not reach the ground
with a line of one hundred and sixty fathoms. We stood off till near midnight,
and then stood in again. At half past six, the next morning, we were about
three leagues from the land. Seeing nothing like a harbor, and the weather
continuing unsettled, we tacked and stretched off south-west, having then
fifty-five fathoms water.

The land which we approached, when we tacked, is moderately high, but, in many
places, it rises still higher within. It is diversified with hills and rising
grounds, many of which are covered with tall straight trees; and others, which
were not so high, grew in spots, like clumps or coppices; but the spaces
between, and the sides of the rising grounds, were clear.

Though, perhaps, as a summer prospect, this might be very agreeable, yet at
this season, it had an uncomfortable appearance, the bare grounds along the
coast being covered with snow, which seemed to lie in abundance between hills
and rising grounds; and in many places, toward the sea, had, at a distance,
the appearance of white cliffs. On the rising grounds, the snow was thinner
spread; and farther inland, there seemed to be none at all. Hence it might,
perhaps, be concluded, that the snow which we had seen toward the sea, had
fallen the proceeding night; which was, indeed the coldest we had experienced
since our arrival on that coast; and a kind of sleet sometimes fell.

The coast appeared almost straight in every part, not having any opening or
inlet, and terminating in a kind of white sanday beach; though it was imagined
by some on board, that such appearance was owing to the snow. Each extreme of
the land shot out into a point; the northern one was that which we had seen on
the 7th, and therefore Captain Cook called it Cape Perpetua. Its latitude is 44
6 north, and its longitude 235 52 east. The southern extreme the Commodore
named Cape Gregory. It lies in the latitude of 43 30, and in the longitude 235
57 east. This point is rendered remarkable, by the land of it rising
immediately from the sea, to a tolerable height, and that on each side of it is
very low. We stood off till almost one in the afternoon, and then tacked and
stood in, hoping in the night, to have the wind off from the land. We were,
however, mistaken, for, at five o'clock it veered to the west and south-west,
which induced us once more to stand out to sea.

Cape Perpetua now bore north-east by north; and the farthest land to the south
of Cape Gregory, bore south by east, distant about ten or twelve leagues. Its
latitude will therefore be 43 10, and its longitude 235 55 east. This is nearly
the situation of Cape Blanco, discovered the 19th of January, 1603, by Martin
d'Aguilar. It is remarkable that, in this very latitude, Geographers have
placed a large entrance or strait, ascribing the discovery of it to the same
navigator; whereas nothing more is mentioned in his voyage, than his having
discovered a large river in this situation, which he would have entered, but
was hindered by the currents.

The wind was now very unsettled, and blew in squalls, with snow showers. At
midnight, it shifted to west-north-west, and presently increased to a very hard
gale with heavy squalls, and sleet, or snow. We had not a choice now, but were
obliged to stretch to the southward, to get clear of the coast. This was done
under more sail than the ships could bear with safety, but it was absolutely
necessary to avoid the more imminent danger of being forced on shore. This gale
abated at eight o'clock in the morning of the 13th, and then we stood in again
for the land. The wind remained at west and north-west. Storms, breezes, and
calms, alternately succeeded each other, till the morning of the 21st, when a
breeze sprung up at south-west. This being accompanied with fair weather, we
steered north-easterly, hoping to fall in with the land, beyond where we had
been tossed about for the preceding fortnight. In the evening the wind shifted
to the westward, and the next morning, about eight o'clock, we beheld the land
at the distance of about nine leagues. Our latitude was now 47 5 north, and our
longitude 235 10 east. We stood to the north, with a fine breeze, till near
seven in the evening, when we tacked, in order to wait for daylight. We were
now in forty-eight fathoms water, and four leagues from the land, extending
from north to south-east; and a small round hill, which we supposed to be an
island, bore north three quarters east, at the distan^^ of about six or seven
leagues. It seemed to be or a tolerable height, and could but just be seen from
the deck.

There appeared to be a small opening between this supposed island, and the
northern extreme of the land; we therefore entertained some hopes of finding an
harbor; but these hopes gradually vanished as we drew nearer; and, at length,
we were almost convinced that the opening was closed by low land. The Commodore
for this reason, named the point of land to the north of it, Cape Flattery. Its
latitude is 48 15 north, and its longitude 235 3 east.

All the land upon this part of the coast, is of a pretty equal height, is
principally covered with wood, and has a very fertile appearance. In this very
latitude, Geographers have placed the pretended strait of Juan de Fuca. But
nothing of that kind presented itself to our view, nor is it probable that any
such thing ever existed. We stood to the southward till ^idnight, and then
taked, and, with a gentle breeze at south-west, steered to the north-west,
intending, at daylight, to stand in for the land. But, before that time, we
had a very hard gale, with rain, right on shore; instead therefore of running
in for the land, we endeavored to get an offing, or, at least, to preserve
that which we had already got. The south-west wind, however, did not continue
long, for it veered again to the west before night.

Thus were we perpetually encountering with strong west and north-west winds.
In an evening, the wind would sometimes become moderate, and veer southward;
but this was a certain prelude to a storm, which blew the hardest at
south-south-east, and was generally accompanied with rain and sleet. In the
course of six hours, it was usually succeeded by a gale from the north-west,
which introduced fair weather. About nine o'clock in the morning, of Sunday the
29th, we again saw the land, the nearest part about six leagues distant. We
were now in the latitude of 49 29 north, and in the longitude of 232 29 east.

The face of the country was very different from that of the parts which we had
before seen; numbers of losty mountains presented themselves to our view, whose
summits were covered with snow. The valleys between them, and the land toward
the coast, were covered with high straight trees, that appeared like a vast
forest. A low point was formed at the south-east extreme of the land, off which
are several breakers, occasioned by some sunken rocks. It was therefore called
Point Breakers. Its latitude is 49 15 north, and its longitude 233 20 east. The
latitude of the other extreme is about 50, and the longitude 232. This last was
named Woody Point. It is high land, and projects to the south-west.

Between these two points, a large bay is formed, which the Commodore called
Hope Bay; hoping, as he said, to find in it a good harbor; and the event
proved that he was not mistaken. As we approached the coast we saw the
appearance of two inlets; one of which was in the north-west, and the other in
the north-east corner of the bay. We bore up for the latter, and passed some
breakers about a league from the shore. Half a league without them, we had
nineteen and twenty fathoms water; but, after we had passed them, the depth
increased to fifty fathoms; and farther in, the ground was unfathomable with
the greatest length of line.

Though appearances were in our favor, we were not yet certain that there were
any inlets; but being in a deep bay, Captain Cook resolved to anchor, in order
to endeavor to get some water, which we began to be much in need of. As we
advanced, however, the existence of the inlet no longer remained doubtful.
About five o'clock, when we reached the west point of it, we were becalmed for
some time. In this situation, the Commodore ordered all the boats to be hoisted
out, in order to tow the ships in. Presently a fresh breeze sprung up at
north-west, with which we stretched up into an arm of the inlet, which ran in
to the north-east. Here we were again becalmed, and found it necessary to
anchor in eighty-five fathoms water, and so near the land as to be able to
reach it with a hawser. The Discovery was becalmed before she got within the
arm, where she anchored in seventy fathoms water.

As soon as we approached the inlet, we perceived the coast to be inhabited;
and three canoes came off to the ship, at the place where we were first
becalmed; in one of which were two men, in another six, and in the other ten.
Advancing pretty near us, a person stood in one of the two last, and spoke for
a considerable time, inviting us, as we supposed by his gestures, to go ashore;
and, at the same time, continued strewing handfuls of feathers toward us. Some
of his companions also threw a red powder in the same manner.

The person who was the orator upon this occasion, was clothed with the skin of
some animal, and held something in each hand which rattled as he shook it. At
length, grown weary with his repeated exortations, of which we could not
comprehend a word, he became quiet; and the others in their turn, had something
to say to us; but their speeches were neither so long, nor so vehement as that
of the other. The hair of two or three of these people was strewed over with
small white feathers; and that of others, with large ones, stuck into different
parts.

The tumultuous noise having ceased, they lay at a small distance from the
ship, conversing together with much ease and composure, without showing the
least distrust or surprise. Some of them rose, occasionally, and said something
aloud, after the manner of their first harangues; and one, in particular, sung
a most agreeable air, accompanied with a great degree of melody and softness;
the word haela b^ing frequently repeated as the burden of the song.

A breeze springing up soon after, brought us closer to the shore, when the
canoes began to visit us in great numbers; having had, at one time, no less
than thirty-two of them about the ship, containing from three to seven or eight
persons each, and of both sexes. Several of these also stood up and spoke
aloud, using the same gestures as our first visitors. One canoe particularly
attracted our observation, by a peculiar head, which had a birds eye, and an
enormous large beak, painted on it. The person who was in it, and who appeared
to be a chief, was equally remarkable for his singular appearance; having a
large quantity of feathers hanging from his head and being painted or smeared
in a very extraordinary manner. In this hand he had a carved bird of wood, of
the size of a pigeon, with which he often rattled, like the person
beforementioned, and was equally vociferous in his harangue, which was
accompanied with many expressive gestures. Though our visitors were so
peaceable, that they could not be suspected of any hostile intention, not any
of them could be prevailed upon to come on board. They were very ready,
however, to part with any thing they had, and received whatever we offered them
in exchange; but were more solicitous after iron, than any of our other
articles of commerce; appearing to be no strangers to the use of that valuable
metal.

We were followed, by many of the canoes, to our anchoring-place; and a group,
consisting of about ten or a dozen of them, continued along-side the Resolution
the greatest part of the night. -- Hence we flattered ourselves, that we were
so comfortably situated, as to be able to get all our wants supplied, and
forget the delays and hardships we had experienced, in almost a constant
succession of adverse winds and tempestuous weather, ever since we arrived upon
this coast.

A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK IV. TRANSACTIONS WITH THE NATIVES OF
NORTH AMERICA: DISCOVERIES ON THAT COAST AND THE EASTERN EXTREMITY OF ASIA, AND
RETURN SOUTHWARD TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.
CHAP. I.
Arrival at the Sound -- Moor in an excellent Harbor -- Visited by great
Numbers of the Natives, who are an inoffensive Race of People -- Variety of
Articles brought to Barter, particularly human Skulls -- Mischievous Thefts
committed -- The Observatories erected on a Rock -- Also a Forge erected --
Alarmed at seeing the Natives arm themselves -- Distant Tribes not permitted by
the Natives to traffic with us -- Tempestuous Weather -- A Survey of the Sound
-- Friendly Behavior of the Natives of one of the Villages -- Treatment
received from an inhospitable Chief -- Greeted with a Song by young Women A
second Visit to one of the Villages -- Grass purchased -- Departure of the
Ships.

HAVING happily found such excellent shelter for our ships, in an inlet whose
coasts appeared to be inhabited by an inoffensive race of people, we lost no
time, after coming to anchor, in searching for a commodious harbor, where we
might be stationed during our continuance in the Sound. Upon this service,
Captain Cook sent three armed boats, under the command of Mr. King; and went
himself, in a small boat, on the same business. He had no difficulty in finding
what he wanted; for, on the north-west of the arm, and at a small distance from
the ships, he found a convenient snug cove, perfectly adapted to our purpose.
Mr. King was also successful and found a still better harbor, lying on the
north-west side of the land. It would, however, have required more time to take
the ships thither, than to the cove where the Captain had been; therefore his
choice was determined in favor of the latter situation. But, apprehending that
we could not transport our ships to it, and moor them properly, before night
had overtaken us, he thought it prudent to continue where we were till the next
morning.

Plenty of canoes, filled with the inhabitants, were about the ships the whole
day; and a reciprocal trade was commenced between us, which was conducted with
the strictest harmony and integrity on both sides. Their articles of commerce
where the skins of various animals; such as bears, sea-otters, wolves, foxes,
deer, racoons, martins, and pole-cats. They also produced garments made of
skins; and another kind of clothing, fabricated from the bark of a tree, or a
plant resembling hemp. Besides these articles, they had bows, arrows, and
spears; fish-hooks, and various kinds of instruments; wooden vizors
representing horrid figures; a sort of woollen-stuff; carved work; beads; and
red ochre; also several little ornaments of thin brass and iron, resembling an
horse-shoe, which they were pendant at their noses. They had likewise several
pieces of iron fixed to handles, somewhat resembling chissels. From their being
in possession of these metals, it was natural for us to infer, that they must
either have been visited before by persons of some civilized nation, or had
connections with those on their own continent, who had some communication with
them.

Among all the articles, however, which they exposed to sale, the most
extraordinary were human skulls, and hands, with some of the flesh remaining on
them, which they acknowleged they had been feeding on; and some of them,
indeed, bore evident marks of their having been upon the fire. From this
circumstance, it was but too apparent, that the horrid practice, of devouring
their enemies, is practiced here, as much as at New-Zealand, and other
South Sea islands. For the various articles they brought, they received in
exchange, knives, chissels, nails, looking-glasses, buttons, pieces of iron and
tin, or any kind of metal. They had not much inclination for glass-beads, and
rejected every kind of cloth.

The next day was employed in hauling our ships into the cove, where they were
moored. We found, on heaving up the anchor, notwithstanding the great depth of
water, that rocks were at the bottom. These had greatly injured the cable, as
well as the hausers that were carried out to warp the ship into the cove,
consequently the whole bottom was ^^^ewed with rocks. The ship was now become
very leaky in her upper works: the carpenters were therefore ordered to caulk
her, and to repair any other defects they might discover.

In the course of this day (the 31st of March) the news of our arrival brought
vast numbers of the natives about our ships. At one time we counted above a
hundred canoes, each of which on an average, had five people on board; few
containing less than three; many having seven, eight, or nine; and one was
manned with seventeen. Many of these were new visitors, which we discovered by
their orations and ceremonies when they approached the ships.

If they, at first, had apprehended that we meant to be hostile, their fears
were now removed; for they ventured on board the ships, and mixed with our
people with the utmost freedom and familiarity. We discovered, however, by this
intercourse, that they were as fond of pilfering as any we had met with during
our voyage: and they were much more mischievous than any of the other thieves
we had found; for, having sharp instruments in their possession, they could,
the instant that our backs were turned, cut a hook from a tackle, or a piece of
iron from a rope.

Besides other articles, we lost several hooks in this manner, one of which
weighed between twenty and thirty pounds. They stripped our boats of every
morsel of iron that was worth taking away, though some of our men were always
left in them as a guard. They were, indeed, so dextrous in effecting their
purposes, that one fellow would contrive to amuse our people at one end of the
boat, while another was forcing off the iron-work at the other. If an article
that had been stolen, was immediately missed, the thief was easily detected, as
they were fond of impeaching each other. But the prize was always reluctantly
given up by the guilty person; and sometimes compulsive means were obliged to
be exercised for that purpose.

Our ships being safely moored, we proceeded, the next day, to other necessary
business. The observatories were taken ashore, and placed upon a rock on one
side of the cove, not far from the Resolution. A party of men was ordered to
cut wood, and clear a place for watering. Having plenty of pine-trees here,
others were employed in brewing spruce-beer. The forge was also erected to make
the necessary iron-work for repairing the foremast, which had one of the bib^
defective, and was otherwise incomplete.

We were daily visited by a considerable number of the natives; and, among
them, we frequently saw new faces. They had a singular mode of introducing
themselves on their first appearance. They paddled, with their utmost strength
and activity, round both the ships; a chief, all this time, standing up with a
spear in his hand, and speaking, or rather bawling, most vociferously.

Sometimes the face of this orator was covered with a mask, representing either
a human countenance, or that of some other animal; and, instead of a spear, he
had a kind of rattle in his hand. Having made this ceremonious circuit round
the ship, they would come along-side, and then begin to traffic with us.
Frequently, indeed, they would first entertain us with a song, in which their
whole company joined, and produced a very agreeable harmony. During these
visits, our principal care was to guard against their thievery.

We had, however, in the morning of the 4th of April, a very serious alarm. Our
party, who were employed on shore in cutting wood and filling water, observed,
that the natives, in all quarters, were arming themselves in the best manner
they were able; and that those who had not proper weapons, were collecting
sticks and stones. Hearing this, we thought it necessary to arm also: but,
being resolved to act upon the defensive, the Commodore ordered all our workmen
to repair to the rock, on which our observatories had been placed, leaving the
supposed enemy in possession of the ground where they had assembled, which was
within about a hundred yards of the Resolution's stern.

Our danger, however, was only imaginary; for these hostile preparations were
directed against a body of their own countrymen, who were advancing to attack
them. Our friends of the Sound, perceiving our apprehensions, exerted their
best endeavors to convince us that this was really the case. We saw they had
people looking out, on both sides of the cove, and canoes were frequently
dispatched between them and the main body. The adverse party, on board of about
a dozen large canoes, at length drew up in line of battle, off the south point
of the cove, a negotiation for the restoration of peace having been commenced.
In conducting the treaty, several people in canoes passed between the two
parties, and some debates ensued. At length the matter in dispute appeared to
be adjusted: but the strangers were not permitted to approach the ships, nor to
have any intercourse or dealings with us.

We were probably the occasion of the quarrel; the strangers, perhaps,
insisting on having a right of sharing in the advantages of a trade with us;
and our first friends resolving to engross as entirely to themselves. We were
convinced of this on many other occasions; nay, even among those who lived in
the Sound, the weaker were often obliged to submit to the stronger party, and
were plundered of every thing, without even attempting to make any resistance.

In the afternoon we resumed out work, and, the next day, rigged the foremast;
the head of which not being large enough for the cap, the carpenter was ordered
to fill up the vacant space. In examining the state of the mast-head for this
purpose, both cheeks were discovered to be rotten; insomuch that there was not
a possibility of repairing them. We were therefore obliged to get the mast out,
and to supply it with new ones.

Thus, when almost ready for sea, all our work was to be done over again, and
an additional repair was necessary to be undertaken, which would require much
time to be completed. It was, however, fortunate, that these defects should be
discovered, when we were so commodiously situated, as to be able to procure the
materials that were requisite. For, in the cove where our ships lay, there were
some small seasoned trees, perfectly adapted for our purpose; and two new
cheeks were immediately made from one of these. In the morning of the 7th of
April, having got the foremast out, we hauled it ashore, and the carpenters
were set to work upon it. Some of our lower standing rigging being much
decayed, the Commodore embraced the opportunity, while the foremast was
repairing, of ordering a new set of main-rigging, to be fitted, and the
fore-rigging to be improved.

From our putting into the Sound, till the 7th of April, the weather had been
remarkably fine; but, in the morning of the 8th, the wind blew fresh at
south-east, accompanied with hazy weather and rain; it increased in the
afternoon, and in the evening it blew extremely hard. It came in heavy squalls,
right into the cove, from over the high land on the opposite shore; and, though
the ships were well moored, they were in a dangerous situation.

Though these tempestuous blasts succeeded each other quickly they were of
short duration, and, in the intervals, we had a perfect calm. Another
misfortune now befell us. On board the Resolution, the mizen was the only mast
that now remained rigged, with its topmast up. The former was too defective to
support the latter during these squalls, and gave way at the head, under the
rigging. The gale abated about eight o'clock; but the rain continued, almost
without intermssion, for sevral days, during which time, a tent was erected
over the foremast, that the carpenters might be enabled to proceed in their
labors with some degree of convenience.

The natives were not discouraged, by this bad weather, from making us daily
visits; and, in our situation, such visits were very acceptable to us. They
frequently brought us a supply of fish, when we were unable to catch any with a
hook and line, and we had not a convenient place to draw a net. The fish they
brought us were small cod, and a small kind of bream, or sardine. On the 11th
the main-rigging was fixed and got ever head, notwithstanding the rainy
weather; and, the next day, we took down the mizen-mast the head of which was
so rotten, that it dropped off in the slings.

We received a visit, in the evening from a tribe of natives whom we had not
seen before; and who, in general, made a better appearance than our old
friends. The Commodore conducted them into the cabin, but there was not an
object that demanded their attention; all our novelties were looked on with
indifference, except by a very few, who showed a certain degree of curiosity.
The next day, a party of our men went into the woods, and cut down a tree, of
which a mizen-mast was to be made. The day after it was conveyed to the place
where the carpenters were at work upon the foremast. The wind, in the evening,
veered to the south-east, and blew a very hard gale, attended with rain, till
eight o'clock the next morning; at which time it abated, and veered again to
the west.

The foremast being now finished we hauled it along side; but, on account of
the bad weather, could not get it in till the afternoon. We were expeditious in
rigging it, while the carpenters were employed on the mizen-mast on shore. On
the 16th, when they had made considerable progress in it, they discovered that
the tree on which they were at work, was wounded, owing, it was imagined, to
some accident in cutting it down. It therefore became necessary to procure
anothor tree out of the woods, on which occasion, all hands were employed above
half a day.

During these operations, many of the natives were about the ships, gazing on
with an expressive surprise, which, from their general inattention, we did not
expect. A party of strangers, in seven or eight canoes, came into the cove on
the 18th, and after looking at us for some time, retired. We apprehended that
our old friends, who, at this time, were more numerous about us than our new
visitors, would not suffer them to have any dealings with us. It was evident,
indeed, that the neighboring inhabitants engrossed us entirely to themselves,
and that they carried on a traffic with more distant tribes, in those articles
they had received from us; for they frequently disappeared for four or five
days together and returned with fresh cargoes of curiosities and skins.

Such of the natives as visited us daily, were the most benificial to us; for,
after disposing of their trifles, they employed themselves in fishing, and we
always partook of what they caught. We also procured from them a considerable
quantity of good animal oil, which they brought to us in bladders. Some,
indeed, attempted to cheat us, by mixing water with the oil; and once or twice,
they so far imposed upon us, as to fill their bladders with water only. But, it
was better for us to wink at these impositions, than suffer them to produce a
quarrel; for our articles of traffic chiefly consisted of trifles, and we found
it difficult to produce a constant supply even of these. Beads, and such like
toys, of which we had some remaining, were not highly estimated. Metal was
principally demanded by our visitors: and brass had now supplanted iron, being
sought after, with such eagerness, that, before we left the Sound, hardly a bit
of it was to be found in the ships, except what constituted a part of our
necessary instruments. Suits of clothes were stripped of their buttons; bureaus
of their furniture; kettles, canisters, and candlesticks, all went to rack; so
that our American friends procured from us a greater variety of things, than
any other nation we had visited.

Having had a fortnight's bad weather, Sunday the 19th being a fair day, we
embraced the opportunity of getting up the top-masts and yards, and of fixing
up the rigging. Most of our heavy work being now finished, the Commodore set
out the next morning to survey the Sound; and, going first to the west point,
he discovered a large village, and, before it, a very snug harbor, with from
nine to four fathoms water.

The inhabitants of this village, who were numerous, many of whom the Commodore
was no stranger to, received him with great courtesy, every one pressing him to
enter his apartment; for several families have habitations under the same roof.
He politely accepted the invitations, and the hospitable friends whom he
visited testified every mark of civility and respect.

Women were employed, in many of these habitations, in making dresses of the
bark or plant already mentioned, and executed their business much like the
inhabitants of New-Zealand. Others were busy in opening sardines; large shoals
of which we have seen brought on shore, and measured out to several people, who
carried them home, where they performed the operation of curing them, which is
done by smoke-drying. They are hung upon small rods; at first, about a foot
over the fire; they are then removed higher and higher to make room for others.
When dried they are closely packed in bales, and the bales covered with mats.
Thus they are preserved till they are wanted, and they are not unpleasant food.
They also cure cod and other large fish in the same manner; but these are
sometimes dried in the open air.

Leaving this village, the Commodore proceeded up the west side of the Sound.
For near three miles he saw several small islands, so situated ^s to form some
convenient harbors, the depths being from thirty to seven fathoms. About two
leagues within the Sound, on the same side, an arm runs in the direction of
north-north-west, and another in the same direction about two miles further.

About a mile above the second arm, he found the ruins of a village. The
framings of the houses remained standing, but the boards or roofs were taken
away. Behind this deserted village is a small plain, covered with the largest
pine trees that the Commodore had ever seen. This was indeed singular, as most
of the elevated ground on this side of the Sound appeared rather naked.

Passing from this place to the east side of the Sound, Captain Cook found,
what he had before imagined, that it was an island under which the ships lay;
and that many smaller ones lay scattered on the west side of it. Upon the main
land, opposite the north end of our island, the Commodore observed a village,
and landed there; but he was not so politely received by the inhabitants, as by
those of the other village he had visited. This cold reception was occasioned
by one surly chief, who would not suffer the Commodore to enter their houses,
but followed him wherever he went; making expressive signs that he was
impatient for him to be gone. Captain Cook attempted, but in vain, to sooth him
with presents; for, though he did not refuse them, he continued the same kind
of behavior. But, notwithstanding this treatment from the inhospitable chief,
some of the young women expeditiously apparelled themselves in their best,
assembled in a body, and gave us a hearty welcome to the village, by joining in
an agreeable song. Evening now drawing on, Captain Cook proceeded for the ships
round the north-end of the island.

When he returned on board, he was informed that, in his absence, some
strangers, in two or three large canoes, had made a visit to the ships; from
whom our people understood, by signs, that they had come from the south-east.
They brought with them several garments, skins, and other articles, which they
bartered for some of ours. But the most remarkable circumstance was, that two
silver table-spoons were purchased of them by our people, which appeared to be
of Spanish manufacture. They were worn round the neck of one of these visitors,
by way of ornament.

On the 21st, the mizen-mast was got in and rigged, and the carpenters ordered
to make a new fore-top mast, to replace that which had been carried away. A
number of strangers visited us about eight o'clock the next morning in twelve
or thirteen canoes. They came from the southward; and when they had turned the
point of the cove, they drew up in a body, where they remained about half an
hour, at the distance of two hundred yards from the ships. We imagined, at
first, they were afraid to approach; but in this we were mistaken, for they
were only making preparations for an introductory ceremony.

At length they advanced toward the ships, all standing up in their canoes,
and began to sing. Some of their songs were slow and solemn, in which they were
joined by the whole body; others were in quicker time, and their notes were
regularly accompanied by the motions of their hands, their paddles beating in
concert on the sides of the canoes; and they, at the same time, exhibited the
most expressive gestures. They remained silent, for a few seconds, after the
conclusion of each song, and then began again, frequently pronouncing the word
hooee as a kind of chorus.

Having thus favored us with a specimen of their music, with which we were
highly entertained for half an hour, they came nearer the ships and bartered
with us. We now perceived that some of our old friends from the Sound were
among them, who managed for the strangers in the traffic between us and them.

These visitors being gone, the Captains Cook and Clerk went with two boats to
the village at the west point, where Captain Cook had been two days before, and
had observed that plenty of grass was to be had near it; and it was necessary
to get a supply of this, for the few remaining goats and sheep which were still
on board. They experienced the same welcome reception that Captain Cook had met
with before; and, soon after they were ashore, the Commodore ordered some of
his people to begin cutting; not imagining that the natives would object to our
furnishing ourselves with what could not be of any use to them, though
essentially necessary for us. In this, however, he was mistaken, for as soon as
our men began cutting the grass, some of the inhabitants would not permit them
to proceed, saying, " makook," which signified that we must buy it first.

The Commodore, at this time, was in one of he houses; but, hearing of this, he
repaired immediately to the field, where he found about a dozen claimants of
different parts of the grass that grew on the premises. The Commodore treated
with them for it, and having complied with the terms of his purchase, thought
we had now full liberty to cut wherever we pleased. Here he was again mistaken;
for he had so liberally paid the first pretended proprietors, that fresh
demands were made from others; so that it almost appeared that every single
blade of grass had a separate owner; and so many of them were to be satisfied,
that his pockets, presently became empty. When they were, however, convinced
that he had nothing more to give, they ceased to be importunate, and we were
permitted to cut where we pleased, and as much as we pleased.

It is worthy of observation, that we never met with any uncivillized nation,
or tribe, who possessed such strict notions of their having an exclusive
property in the produce of their country, as the inhabitants of this Sound.
They even wanted our people to pay for the wood and water that were carried on
board. Had Captain Cook been present when these demands were made, he would
doubtless have complied with them; but our workmen thought differently, and
paid little or no attention to such claims. The natives thinking we were
determined to pay nothing, at length ceased to apply. But they frequently took
occasion to remind us, that their esteem for us had induced them to make us a
present of wood and water.

While they remained at this village, Mr. Webber, who attended the two
Captains, thither, made a drawing of every thing that was thought curious, both
within doors and without. This he was well enabled to do, as he had an
excellent opportunity of inspecting narrowly, the construction of their
buildings, their furniture; and implements or utensils as well a the most
striking peculiarities of the modes of living of the inhabitants. Having, at
length, completed all their operation at this village, the natives and the two
Captains took a friendly leave of each other, and we returned to the ships in
the afternoon. The 23d, 24th, and 25th, of April were employed in preparing to
put to sea; the sails were bent; the observatories and other articles removed
from the shore; and both ships put into a proper condition for sailing.

Thus prepared, we intended to have put to sea on the morning of the 26th, but
having both wind and tide against us, we were under a necessity of waiting till
noon; when a calm succeeded the south-west wind, and the tide, at the same
time, turning in our favor, we towed the ships out of the cove. We had
variable airs and calms till about four in the afternoon, when a breeze sprung
up, attended with thick hazy weather.

The mercury in the barometer sunk uncommonly low, and we had every appearance
of an approaching storm from the southward. In this situation Captain Cook
hesitated, for a short time, (as night was then approaching) whether he should
sail immediately, or stay till the next morning. But his anxiety to proceed
upon the voyage, and the fear of loosing so good an opportunity of getting out
of the Sound, opperated more strongly upon his mind than the apprehensions of
danger, and he resolved to put to sea.

We were attended by the natives till we were almost out of the Sound; some in
their canoes, and others on board the ships. One of the thiefs, who had
particularly attached himself to the Commodore, was among the last who parted
from us. The Commodore, a little time before he went, made him a small present
for which he received, in return, a beaver skin of a much superier value. This
occasioned him to make some addition to his present, which pleased the chief so
highly, that he presented to the Commodore the beaver-skin cloak which he then
wore, and of which he was particularly fond.

Struck with this instance of generosity, and wishing him not to be a sufferer
by his gratitude, Captain Cook insisted upon his acceptance of a new
broad-sword, with a brass hilt, with which he appeared greatly delighted. We
were earnestly importuned by the chief, and many of his countrymen, to pay them
another visit; who, by way of inducement, promised to procure a large stock of
skins. Further particulars relative to the country and its inhabitants, will
furnish materials for the two subsequent chapters.

CHAP. II.
Directions for sailing into the Sound -- The adjacent Country described --
Remarks on the Weather and Climate -- Trees and other vegetable Productions --
Racoons, Martins, Squirrels, and other Quadrupeds -- Variety of Skins brought
for Sale -- Whales, and other Sea Animals -- The Sea Otter described -- Birds
-- Oceanic Birds -- Fish -- Shell Fish -- Snakes and Lizards -- Insects --
Stones -- Description of the Natives -- Their Color -- Formation -- Dress and
Ornaments -- Particular Dresses, and horrible wooden Masks -- Leathern Mantle
for War -- Their Disposition -- Songs -- Musical Instruments -- Their Fondness
for Metals, which they take every Opportunity of stealing.

KING George's Sound was the appellation given by the Commodore to this inlet,
on our first arrival; but he was afterward informed that the natives called it
Nootka. The entrance is in the east corner of Hope Bay; its latitude is 49 33
north, and its longitude 233 12 east. The east coast of that bay is covered by
a chain of sunken rocks; and, near the Sound, are some islands and rocks above
water. We enter the Sound between two rocky points, lying east south-east, and
west north-west from each other, distant about four miles. The Sound widens
within these points, and extends in to the northward at least four leagues.

A number of islands, of various size, appear in the middle of the Sound. The
depth of water, not only in the middle of the Sound, but also close to some
parts of its shore, is from forty-seven to ninety fathoms, or more. Within its
circuit, the harbors and anchoring-places are numerous. The cove, where our
ships anchored, is on the east side of the Sound, and also on the east of the
largest island. It is, indeed, covered from the sea, which is its principal
recommendation, for it is exposed to the south-east winds, which sometimes blow
with great violence, and make great devastation, as was but too apparent in
many places.

Upon the seacoast the land is tolerably high and level; but, within the
Sound, it rises into steep hills, which have an uniform appearance, ending in
roundish tops with sharp ridges on their sides. Many of these hills are high,
and others are of a more moderate height; but all of them are covered to their
tops with the thickest woods. Some bare spots are to be seen on the sides of
some of the hills, but they are not numerous, though they sufficiently show the
general rocky disposition of these hills. They have, indeed, no soil upon them,
except what has been produced from rotten mosses and trees, of the depth of
about two feet. Their foundation are, indeed, nothing more than stupendous
rocks; which are of a gray or whitish cast when, exposed to the werther; but,
when broken, are of a bluish gray color. The rocky shore consists entirely of
this; and the beaches of the little coves in the Sound are composed of
fragments of it.

During our stay the weather nearly corresponded with that which we had
experienced when we were off the coast. We had fine clear weather, if the wind
was between north and west; but if more to the southward, hazy, accompanied
with rain. The climate appears to be infinitely milder than that on the east
coast of America, under the same parallel of latitude. We perceived no frost in
any of the low ground; but, on the contrary, vegetation proceeded very briskly,
for we saw grass, at this time, upwards of a foot long.

The trees, of which the woods are principally composed, are the Canadian pine,
white cypress, and two or three other sorts of pine. The two first are in the
greatest abundance, and, at a distance, resemble each other; though they are
easily distinguished on a nearer view, the cypress being of a paler green than
the other. In general, the trees grow here with great vigor, and are of a
large size. At this early season of the year, we saw but little variety of
other vegetable productions.

About the rocks, and borders of the woods* we saw some strawberry plants, and
rasberry, current, and gooseberry bushes, all in a flourishing state. There
were also a few black alder-trees; a species of sow-thistle; some crow's-foot
with a fine crimson flower, and two sorts of anthericum. We also met with some
wild rose-bushes, just budding; some young leeks, a small sort of grass, and
some watercresses, besides a great abundance of andromeda. Within the woods
are two sorts of underwood shrubs, unknown to us, and some mosses and serns.

The season of the year did not permit us to acquire much knowledge of the
vegetable of this country; and it was impossible, from our situation, to learn
much about its animals. The want of water induced us to enter the Sound at
first; and the accidents that happened there, though they obliged us to stay
longer than we intended, were unfavourable to our acquiring any knowledge of
this kind. It was absolutely necessary that every person should be employed in
forwarding the necessary business of the ships; which was the principal object,
as the season was advancing, and the success of the voyage depended upon their
diligence in performing their several tasks. Excursions of any kind were,
therefore, never attempted.

Lying in a cove, on an island, all the animals that we saw alive were two or
three racoons, martins, and squirrels; some of our people, indeed, who landed
on the continent, on the south-east side of the Sound, raw the prints of a
bear's feet, not far from the shore. The only account, therefore, that we can
furnish of the quadrupeds, is taken from the skins which were purchased of the
inhabitants; and these were sometimes so mutilated in the heads, tails, and
paws, that we could not even guess to what animals they belonged; though others
were either so perfect, or so well known, they did not admit of a doubt about
them. The most common among them were bears, deer, foxes, and wolves.
Bear-skins were very plentiful, generally of a shining black color, but not
very large. The deer skins were not so plentiful, and appeared to belong to
what the historians of Carolina call the fallow-deer; though Mr. Pennant
distinguishes it by the name of Virginian deer, and thinks it quite a different
species from ours. Their foxes are numerous, and of several varietes; the skins
of some being yellow, with a black tip at the tail; others, of a reddish
yellow, intermixed with black; and others of an ash color, also intermixed
with black.

When the skins were so mutilated as to admit of a doubt, our people applied
the name of fox of wolf indiscriminately. At length, we met with an entire
wolf's skin, and it was gray. Here is the common martin, the pine martin, and
another of a lighter brown color. The ermine is also found in this country,
but is small, and not very common: its hair is not remarkably fine though the
animal is entirely white, except about an inch on the tip of the tail. The
racoons and squirrels are such as are common, but the latter is not so large as
ours, and has a rusty color extending the length of the back.

We were sufficiently clear respecting the animals already mentioned, but there
were two others that we could not, with any certainty, distinguish. One of
them, we concluded to be the elk or mouse deer; and the other was conjectured
to be the wild cat or lynx. Hogs, dogs, and goats, have not yet made their
appearance in this place. Nor have the natives any knowledge of our brown rats,
to which they applied the name they gave to squirrels, when they saw them on
board the ships.

The sea animals near the coast, are whales, porpoises, and seals; the latter,
from the skins we saw, seeming to be of the common sort. The porpoises is the
Phocena. Though the sea otter is amphibious, we shall consider him as belonging
to this class, as living principally in the water. We doubted, for some time,
whether the skins, which the natives sold us for otter skins, really belonged
to that animal; but, a short time before our departure, a whole one, just
killed, was purchased from some strangers, of which Mr. Webber made a drawing.
It was young, weighing only twenty-five pounds; was of a glossy black color,
but many of the hairs being tipped with white, gave it, at first sight, a greyish
cast. The face, throat, and breast, were of a light brown, or yellowish white;
and, in many of the skins, that color extended the whole length of the belly.
In each jaw it had six cutting teeth; two in the lower jaw being exceeding
small, and placed without, at the base of the two in the middle. In these
respects, it differs from those found by the Russians, and also in the outer
toes of the hind feet not being skirted with a membrane. There also appeared a
greater variety in color, than is mentioned by those who describe the Russian
sea otters. It is most probable, that these changes of color naturally take
place at the different gradations of life. The very young ones had brown coarse
hair, with a ^ittle fur underneath; but those of the size of the animal just
described, had a greater quantity of that substance. After they have attained
their full growth, they lose the black color, which is succeeded by a deep
brown. At that period, they have a greater quantity of fine fur, and very few
long hairs. Some, which we supposed to be older, were a chestnut brown; and we
saw some few skins that were of a perfect yellow. The fur of these creatures is
certainly finer than that of any other animal we know of; consequently the
discovery of this part of North America, where so valuable an article of
commerce is to be procured, ought certainly to be considered as a matter of
some consequence.

Birds are far from being numerous here, and those that are to be seen are
remarkably shy, owing, perhaps, to their being continually harrassed by the
natives, either to eat them, or become possessed of their feathers to be worn
as ornaments. There are crows and ravens, not differing, in the least, from
those in England; also a jay or magpie; the common wren, which is the only
singing bird we heard; the Canadian thrush; the brown eagle, with a white head
and tail; a small species of hawk; a heron, and the large-crested American
king-fisher. There are also some that have not yet been mentioned by those who
have treated on natural history. The two first are species of wood peckers. One
is somewhat smaller than a thrush, of a black color on the back, having white
spots on the wings; the head, neck, and breast; of a crimson color, and the
belly of a yellowish olive color; whence it might with propriety, be called
the yellow-bellied wood-pecker. The other is larger and more elegant; the back
is of a dusky brown color, richly waved with black; the belly has a reddish
cast, with black spots; it has also a black spot on the breast, and the lower
part of the wings and tail are of a scarlet color; the upper part blackish. A
crimson streak runs on each side, from the angle of the mouth, a little down A
SEA OTTER.
the neck. The third and fourth are, one of th finch kind, not larger than a
linnet, of a dusky color, black head and neck, and white bill; and a
sandpiper, of a dusky brown color, with a broad white band across the wings,
of the size of a small pigeon. There are also humming birds, which differ, in
some degree, from, the numerous sorts already known of this delicate little
animal.

The quebrantahuessos, shags, and gulls, were seen off the coast; and the two
last were also frequent in the Sound. There are two sorts of wild ducks; one of
which was black, with a white head; the other was white, and had a red bill,
but of a larger size. Here are also the greater lumme, or diver, which are
found in our northern countries. Some swans too, where once or twice seen
flying to the northward, but we are unacquainted with their haunts. On the
shores we found another sand-piper, about the size of a lark, and not unlike
the burre: also a plover very much resembling our common sea-lark.

Though the variety of fish is not very great here, they are more plentiful in
quantity than birds. The principal sorts are the common herring, which are very
numerous, though not exceeding seven inches in length; a smaller sort, which,
though larger than the anchovy, or sardine, is of the same kind; a
silver-coloured bream, and another of a gold brown color, with narrow blue
stripes. It is most probable that the herrings, and sardines, had also pieces
of rock crystal. The two first articles were probable to be obtained near the
spot, as they had considerable quantities of them; but the latter, it may be
supposed, came from a greater distance, or is extremely scarce; for our
visitors would not part with it without a very valuable consideration.

The stature of the natives is, in general, below the common standard; but
their persons are not proportionably slender, being usually pretty plump, thou
not muscular. Their soft fleshiness, however, seems never to swell into
corpulence; and many of the older people are rather lean. Most of the natives
have round full visages, which are sometimes broad, with high prominent cheeks.
Above these, the face frequently appears fallen in quite across between the
temples; the nose flattens at its base, has wide nostrils, and a rounded point.
The forehead is low, the eyes small, black, and languishing; the mouth round,
the lips thick, and the teeth regular and well set, but not remarkable for
their whiteness.

Some have no beards at all, and others only a small thin one upon the point of
the chin. This does not arise from an original deficiency of hair on that part,
but from their plucking it out by the roots; for those who do not destroy it,
have not only considerable beards on every part of the chin, but also wiskers,
or mustachias running from the upper lip to the lower jaw obliquely downward It
is a mistaken notion though espoused by eminent writers, that American Indians
have no beards. See Carver's Travels, p. 224, 225; and Marsden's History of
Sumatra, p. 39, 40.
. Their eyebrows are also scanty and narrow; but they have abundance of hair
on the head, which is strong, black, straight, and lank. Their necks are short,
and their arms are rather clumsy, having nothing of beauty or elegance in their
formation. The limbs, in all of them, are small in proportion to the other
parts; besides, they are crooked and ill-formed, having projecting ancles, and
large feet aukwardly shaped. The latter defect seems to be occasioned, in a
great measure, by their sitting so continually on their hams or knees.

Their color cannot be properly ascertained, their bodies being incrusted with
paint and nastiness; though, when these have been carefully rubbed off, the
skin was little inferior in whiteness to that of the Europeans; though of that
palish cast which distinguishes the inhabitants of our southern nations. Some
of them, when young, appear rather agreeable, when compared to the generality
of the people; that period of life being attended with a peculiar degree of
animation; but, after a certain age, the distinction is hardly observable; a
remarkable sameness characterizes every countenance, dullness and want of
expression being visibly pourtrayed in every visage. The women, in general, are
of the same size, color, and form, with the men; nor is it easy to distinguish
them, as they possess no natural feminine delicacies. Nor was there a single
one to be found, even among those who were in their prime, who had the least
pretensions to ^eauty or comeliness.

Their dress, in common, is a flaxen kind of mantle, ornamented with a narrow
stripe of fur on the upper edge, and fringes at the lower edge. Passing under
the left arm, it is tied over the right shoulder, leaving both arms perfectly
free. Sometimes the mantle is fastened round the waist by a girdle of coarse
matting. Over this is worn a small cloak of the same substance, reaching to the
waist, also fringed at the bottom. They wear a cap like a truncated cone, or a
flower-pot, made of very fine matting, ornamented with a round knob, or a bunch
of leathern tassels, having a string passing under the chin, to prevent its
blowing off.

The above dress is common to both sexes, and the men often wear, over their
other garments, the skin of some animal, as a bear, wolf, or seaotter, with the
hair outward; sometimes tying it before, and sometimes behind, like a cloak.
They throw a coarse mat about their shoulders in rainy weather, and they have
woollen garments which are but little used. They generally wear their hair
hanging loosely down; but, those who have not a cap, tie it into a kind of
bunch on the crown of the head.

Their dress is certainly convenient, and, were it kept clean, would not be
inelegant; but, as they are continually rubbing their bodies ov^^ with a red
paint, mixed with oil, their garments become greasy, and contract a rancid
offensive smell. The appearance, indeed, of these people, is both wretched and
filthy, and their heads and garments swarm with lice. So lost are they to every
idea of cleanliness, that we frequently saw them pick off these vermin, and eat
them with the greatest composure.

Their bodies, it has been observed, are always covered with red paint, but
their faces are ornamented with a variety of colors; a black, a brighter red,
or a white color; the last of these gives them a ghastly horrible appearance.
They likewise strew the brown martial mica over the paint, which causes it to
glitter. Many of their ears are perforated in the lobe, where they make a large
hole, and two smaller ones higher up on the outer edge. In these holes are hung
bits of bone, quills fastened upon a leather thong, shells, bunches of tassels,
or thin pieces of copper. In some, the septum of the nose is also perforated,
and a piece of cord drawn through it. Others wear, at the same place, pieces of
copper, brass, or iron, shaped somewhat like a horse-shoe, the narrow opening
receiving the septum, so that it may be pinched gently by the two points, and
thus the ornament hangs over the upper lip. The rings of our buttons were
eagerly purchased, and appropriated to this use. Their bracelets, which they
wear about their wrists, are bunches of white bugle beads, or thongs with
tassels, or a broad black horny shining substance. Round their ancles they
frequently wear leathern thongs or the sinews of animals curiously twisted.

Such are the common dresses and ornaments, but they have some that are used
only on extraordinary occasions, such as going to war, and exhibiting
themselves to strangers in ceremonial visits. Amongst these are the skins of
wolves, or bears, tied on like their other garments, but edged with broad
borders of fur, ingeniously ornamented with various figures. These are
occasionally worn separately, or over their common clothing. The most usual
head-dress, on these occasions, is a quantity of with, wrapped about the head,
with large feathers, particularly those of eagles, stuck in it; or it is
entirely covered with small white feathers. At the same time the face is
variously painted, the upper and lower parts being of opposite colors, and the
strokes having the appearance of fresh gashes; or it is besmeared with a kind
of fat or tallow, mixed with paint, formed into a great variety of figures,
somewhat like carved work.

The hair, sometimes is separated into small parcels, and tied, at intervals,
with thread; and others tie it together behind, after the English manner, and
stick in it some branches of the cupressus thyoides. Thus equipped, they have a
truly savage and ridiculous appearance, which is much heightened when they
assume their monsterous decorations. These consist of a great variety of wooden
masks, applied to the face, fore head, or upper part of the head. Some of these
visors resemble human faces, having hair, beards, and eyebrows; others
represent the heads of birds, and many the heads of animals; such as deer,
wolves, porpoises, and others.

These representations generally exceed the natural size, and they are
frequently strewed with pieces, of the foliaceous m^^a, which makes them
glitter, and augments their deformity. Sometimes they even exceed this, and fix
large pieces of carved work upon the head, projecting to a considerable
distance, and resembling the prow of a canoe. So much do they delight in these
disguises, that, for want of another mask, we saw one of them thrust his head
into a tin-kettle which he had bought from us.

Whether these extravagant masquerade ornaments are used on any religious
occasion, or in any kind of diversion, or whether they are calculated to
intimidate by their monstrous appearance, or as decoys when hunting animals, is
uncertain. But, if travelers, in an ignorant and credulous age, when more than
mavelous things were supposed to exist, had seen several people decorated in
this manner, and had not approached so near them as to be undeceived, they
would have believed, and have endeavored to make others believe, that a race
of beings existed, partaking of the nature of man and beast.

Among the people of Nootka, one of the dresses seems peculiarly adapted to
war. It is a thick tanned leathern mantle doubled, and appears to be the skin
of an elk, or buffalo. This is fastened on in the ordinary manner, and is so
contrived as to cover the breast quite up to the throat; part of it, at the
same time, falling down to their heels. This garment is, sometimes, very
curiously painted, and is not only strong enough to resist arrows, but, as we
understood from them, even spears cannot pierce it; so that it may be
considered as their compleatest defensive armor. Sometimes they wear a sort of
leathern cloak, over which are rows of the hoofs of dear, placed horizontally,
and covered with quills; which, on their moving, make a loud rattling noise.
Whether this part of their garb is intended to strike terror in war, or to be
used on ceremonious occasions, is uncertain; but we saw one of their musical
entertainments, which was conducted by a man habited in this manner, having a
mask on, and shaking his rattle.

Though we cannot view these people without a kind of horror, when they are
thus strangely apparelled, yet, when divested of these extravagant dresses, and
beheld in their common habit, they have ^o appearances of ferocity in their
countenances; but, as has been already observed, they seem to be of a quiet
phlegmatic disposition; deficient in animation and vivacity, to render
themselves agreeable in society. They are rather reserved than loquacious; but
their gravity seems constitutional, and not to arise from a conviction of its
propriety, or to be the result of any particular mode of education; for, in
their highest paroxysms of rage, they have not heat of language, or
significancy or gestures, to express it sufficiently.

The orations which they make on all public occasions, are little more than
short sentences, and sometimes only single words, forcibly repeated in one tone
of voice, accompanied with a single gesture at every sentence; at the same time
jerking their whole body a little forward, with their knees bending, and their
arms hanging down by their sides.

From their exhibiting human skulls and bones to sale, there is little reason
to doubt of their treating their enemies with a degree of brutal cruelty; but,
as this circumstance rather marks a general agreement of character among almost
every uncivilized tribe, in every age and country, they are not to be
reproached with any charge of peculiar in humanity. Their disposition, in this
respect, we had not any reason to judge unfavourably of. They appear to be
docile, courteous, and good-natured; but they are quick in resenting injuries,
notwithstanding the predominancy of their phlegm; and, like all other
passionate people, as quickly forgetting them.

These fits of passion never extended farther than the parties immediately
concerned; the spectators never entering into the merits of the quarrel,
whether it was with any of us, or among their own people; showing as much
indifference, as if they were wholly unacquainted with the whole transaction.
It was common to see one of them rave and scold while all his agitation did not
in the least excite the attention of his countrymen, and when we could not
discover the object of his displeasure. They never betray the least symptom of
^imidity upon these occasions, but seem resolutely determined to punish the
insulter. With respect to ourselves, they were under no apprehensions about our
superiority; but if any difference arose, were as anxious to avenge the wrong,
as if the cause of qurrel had been among themselves,

Their other passions appear to lie dormant, especially their curiosity. Few
expressed any desire or inclination to see or examine things with which they
were unacquainted; and which, to a curious observer, would have appeared
astonishing. If they could procure the articles they knew and wanted, they were
perfectly satisfied; regarding every thing else with great indifference. Nor
did our persons, dress, and behavior (though so very different from their own)
or even the size and construction of our ships, seem to command their
admiration or attention.

Their indolence may, indeed, be a principal cause of this. But it must be
admitted, that they are not wholly unsusceptible of the tender passions, which
is evident from their being fond of music, and that too of the truly pathetic
kind. Their songs are generally slow and solemn; but their music is less
confined than that which is usually found in other rude nations; the variations
being very numerous and expressive, and the melody powerfully soothing. Besides
their concerts, sonnets were frequently sung by single performers keeping time
by striking the hand against the thigh. Though solemnity was predominant in
their music, they sometimes entertained us in a gay and lively strain, and even
with a degree of pleasantry and humor.

A rattle and a small whistle, are the only instruments of music which we have
seen among them. The rattle is used when they sing; but upon what occasions the
whistle is used, we never knew, unless it be when they assume the figures of
particular animals, and endeavor to imitate their howl, or cry. We once saw
one of these people dressed in the skin of a wolf with the head covering his
own, striving to imitate that animal, by making a squeaking noise with a
whistle he had in his mouth. The rattles are generally in the shape of a bird,
with small pebbles in the belly, and the tail is the handle. They have another
sort, which resembles a child's rattle.

Some of them displayed a disposition to knavery, and, in trafficking with us,
took away our goods without making any return. But of this we had few
instances, and we had abundant reason to approve the fairness of their conduct.
Their eagerness, however, to possess iron, brass, or any kind of metal, was so
great, that, when an opportunity presented itself, few of them could resist the
temptation to steal it. The natives of the South Sea islands, as appears in
many instances would steal any thing they could find, without considering
whether it was useful to them or not. The novelty of the object, was a
sufficient inducement for them to get possession of it by any means. They were
rather actuated by a childish curiosity, than by a thievish disposition. The
inhabitants of Nootka, who made free with our property, are entitled to no such
apology. The appellation of thief is certainly due to them; for they knew that
what they pilfered from us, might be converted to the purposes of private
utility; and according to their estimation of things, was really valuable.
Luckily for us, they set no value upon any of our articles, except the metals.
Linens, and many other things were secure from their depredations, and we could
safely leave them hanging out all night ashore, without being watched. The
principle which prompted these people to pilfer from us, would probably operate
in their intercourse with each other. We had, indeed, abundant reason to
believe, that stealing is very common among the^^ and frequently produces
quarrels, of which we saw more instances than one.

CHAP. II.
Number of inhabitants at Nootka Sound -- Manner of building their Houses --
Description of their Inside, Furniture, and Utensils -- Their Filthiness --
Wooden Images, called Klumma -- Employments of the Men -- Indolence of the
young Men -- Of the Women, and their employments -- Different Sorts of Food,
and Manner of preparing it -- Bows -- Arrows -- Spears -- Slings, and other
Weapons -- Manufactures of Woollen, etc. -- Mechanic Arts -- Design and
Execution in Carving and Painting -- Canoes -- Implements used in Hunting and
Fishing -- Iron Tools common among them -- Manner of procuring that, and other
Metals -- Language etc.

THE only inhabited parts of the Sound, seem to be the two villages already
mentioned. A pretty exact computation of the number of inhabitants in both,
might be made from the canoes that visited our ships, the second day after our
arrival. They consisted of about a hundred, which upon an average, contained at
least five persons each. But, as there were very few women, old men, children,
or youths, then among them, we may reasonably suppose, that the number of the
inhabitants of the two villages could not be A VIEW of the (...) in NOOTKA
SOUND.
less than four times the number of our visitors; being two thousand in the
whole.

The village which is situated at the entrance of the Sound, stands on the side
of a pretty steep ascent, extending from the beach to the wood. The houses
consist of three ranges or rows, placed at almost equal distances behind each
other, the front row being the largest; and there are a few straggling houses
at each end. These rows are intersected by narrow paths, or lanes, at irregular
distances, passing upward; but those between the houses are considerably
broader. Though this general disposition has some appearance of regularity,
there is none in the respective houses; for every division made by the paths,
may either be considered as one or more houses; there being no regular
separation to distinguish them by, either within or without. These erections
consist of very long broad planks, resting upon the edges of each other, tied,
in different parts, with withes of pine-bark. They have only slender posts on
the outside, at considerable distances from each other, to which they are also
fastened; but there are some larger poles within, placed aslant. The sides and
ends of these habitations are about seven or eight feet in height, but the back
part is somewhat higher. The planks, therefore, which compose the roof, slant
forward, and, being loose, may be moved at pleasure. They may either be put
close to exclude the rain, or separated to admit the light in fine weather.

Upon the whole, however, they are most miserable dwellings, and display very
little attention or ingenuity in their construction: for, though the
side-planks are pretty close to each other in some places, they are quite open
in others. Besides, these habitations have no regular doors, and can only be
entered by a hole, which the unequal length of the planks has accidentally
made. In the sides of the house they have also holes to look out at, serving
for windows; but these are very irregularly disposed, without attending, in the
least, to the shape and size of them.

Within the habitations, we have frequently a view from one end to the other of
these ranges of building; for, though there are some appearances of separations
on each side, for the accommodation of different persons or families, they do
not intercept the sight; and generally consist of pieces of plank, extending
from the side to the middle of the house. On the sides of each of these parts
is a little bench, about five or six inches higher than the rest of the floor,
covered with mats, whereon the family sit and sleep. The length of these
benches is generally seven or eight feet, and the breadth four or five. The
fireplace, which has neither hearth nor chimney, is in the middle of the
floor. One house in particular, was nearly separated from the rest by a close
partition; and this was the most regular building of any we had seen. In it
there were four of these benches, each holding a single family at the corner;
but it had not any separation by boards, and the middle of the house seemed to
be common to all the inhabitants.

The furniture of their houses consists principally of chests and boxes of
various sizes, piled upon each other, at the sides or ends of the house; in
which are deposited their garments, skins, masks, and other articles that are
deemed valuable. Many of them are double, or the upper one serves as a lid to
the other: some have a lid fastened with thongs; others that are very large,
have a square hole cut in the upper part, for the convenience of putting things
in, or taking them out. They are frequently painted black, studded with the
teeth of animals, or rudely carved with figures of birds, etc. as decorations.
They have also square and oblong pails; round wooden cups and bowls; wooden
troughs, of about two feet in length, out of which they eat their food; bags of
matting, baskets of twigs, etc.

Their implements for fishing, and other things, are hung up, or scattered in
different parts of the house, without any kind of order, making, in the whole,
a perfect scene of confusion; except on the sleeping benches, which have
nothing on them but the mats, which are of a superior quality to those that
they usually have to sit on in their boats.

The irregularity and confusion of their houses is, however, far exceeded by
their nastiness and stench. They not only dry their fish within doors, but they
also gut them there; which, together with their bones und fragments thrown upon
the ground at meals, occasions several heaps of filth, which are never removed,
till it becomes troublesome, from their bulk, to pass over them. Every thing
about the house stinks of train-oil, fish, and smoke; and every part of it is
as filthy as can be imagined,

Notwithstanding all this filth and confusion, many of these houses are
decorated with images; which are nothing more than the trunks of large trees,
of the height of four or five feet, placed at the upper end of the apartment,
with a human face carved on the front, and the hands and arms upon the sides.
These figures too are variously painted, and make, upon the whole, a most
ridiculous appearance. These images are generally called Klumma; but the names
of two particular ones, standing abreast of each other, at the distance of
about three or four feet, were Natchkoa and Matseeta. A sort of curtain, made
of mat, usually hung before them, which the natives were sometimes unwilling to
remove: and when they did consent to unveil them, they seemed to express
themselves in a very mysterious manner. It seems probable that they sometimes
make offerings to them; for, if we rightly interpreted their signs, they
requested us to give something to these images, when they drew the mats from
before them.

From these circumstances, it was natural for us to suppose that they were
representatives of their gods, or some superstitious symbols; and yet they were
held in no very extraordinary degree of estimation, for, with a small quantity
of brass, or iron, any person might have purchased all the gods in the place.

Mr. Webber, in drawing a view of the inside of a Nootka house, wherein these
figures are represented, was interrupted, and hindered from proceeding, by one
of the inhabitants. Thinking a bribe would have a proper effect upon this
occasion, Mr. Webber made him an offer of a button from his coat, which, being
metal, immediately operated as it was intended, and he was at liberty to
proceed as before. But soon after he had made a beginning, he was again
interrupted by the same man, who held a mat before the figures. He therefore
gave him another button, and was suffered again to proceed. He then renewed his
former practice, till Mr. Webber had parted with every single button; and then
permitted him to proceed without any farther obstruction.

The men seem to be chiefly employed in fishing, and killing animals for the
sustenance of their families: few of them be^^^ seen engaged in any business in
their houses; but the women were occupied in manufacturing their garments, and
in curing their sardines, which they also carry from the canoes to their
houses. The women also go in the small canoes, to gather muscles and other
shellfish. They are as dexterous as the men in the management of these canoes;
and when there are men in the canoes with them, they are paid very little
attention to on account of their sex, none of the men offering to relieve them
from the labor of the paddle. Nor do they show them any particular respect or
tenderness on other occasions.

The young men are remarkably indolent; being generally sitting about, in
scattered companies, basking themselves in the sun, or wallowing in the sand
upon the beach, like so many hogs, without any kind of covering. This disregard
of decency was, however, confined solely to the men. The women were always
decently clothed, and behaved with great propriety; justly meriting all
commendation for a modest bashfulness, so becoming their sex. In them it is the
more meritorious, as the men have not even a sense of shame.

Besides seeing something of their domestic life and employments, we were
enabled to form some judgment of their disposition, and method of living, from
the frequent visits received from them at our ships, in the canoes; in which we
understood they pass much of their time, especially in the summer: for they not
only eat and sleep frequently in them, but lie and bask themselves in the sun,
as we had seen them at their villiage. Their large canoes are, indeed,
sufficiently spacious for that purpose; and are, except in rainy weather, more
comfortable habitations than their filthy houses.

Their greatest reliance for food seems to be upon the sea, as affording fish,
and sea-animals. The principal of the first are herrings and sardines, two
species of bream, and some small cod. The herrings and sardines not only serve
to be eaten fresh in their season, but to be dried and smoked as stores. The
herrings also afford them another grand resource for food; which is a vast
quantity of roe, prepared in a very extraordinary manner. It is strewed upon
small branches of the Canadian pine. It is also prepared upon a long sea-grass,
which is found, in great plenty, upon the rocks under water. This caviare is
preserved in baskets of mat, and used occasionally, after being dipped in
water. It has no disagreeable taste, and serves these people as a kind of
winter bread. They also eat the roe of some other large fish, that has a very
rancid smell and taste.

The large muscle is an essential article of their food, which is found in
great abundance in the Sound. After roasting them in their shells, they are
stuck upon long wooden skewers, and taken off as they are wanted to be eaten,
as they require no further preparation, though they are sometimes dipped in
oil, as a sauce. The smaller shellfish contribute to increase the general
stock, but cannot be considered as a material article of their food.

The porpoise is more common among them as food than any of the sea-animals;
the flesh and rind of which they cut in large pieces, dry them as they do
herrings, and eat them without farther preparation. They have also a very
singular manner of preparing a sort of broth from this animal, when in its
fresh state. They put some pieces of it in a wooden vessel or pail, in which
there is al^ ^^me water, and throw heated stones into it. This operation is
repeatedly performed till the contents are supposed to be sufficiently stewed.
The fresh stones are put in, and the others taken out, with a cleft stick,
serving as a pair of tongs; the vessel being, for that purpose, always placed
near the fire. This is a common dish among them, and seems to be a very strong
nourishing food. From these, and other sea-animals they procure oil in great
abundance, which they used upon many occasions, mixed with other food, as
sauce, and frequently sip it alone with a kind of scoop made of horn.

They probably feed upon other sea-animals, such as whales, seals, and
sea-otters; the skins of the two latter being common amongst them: and they are
furnished with implements of all sorts for the destruction of these different
animals, though perhaps they may not be able, at all seasons, to catch them in
great plenty. No great number of fresh skins were to be seen while we lay in
the Sound.

The land-animals, at this time, appeared also to be scarce, as we saw no flesh
belonging to any of them; and, though their skins were to be had in plenty,
they might, perhaps, have been procured by traffic from other tribes. It
plainly appears, therefore, from a variety of circumstances, that these people
are furnished with the principal part of their animal food by the sea; if we
except a few gulls, and some other birds, which they shoot with their arrows.

Their only winter vegetables seem to be the Canadian pine-branches, and
sea-grass; but, as the spring advances, they use others as they come in season.
The most common of these were two sorts of liliaceous roots, of a mild sweetish
taste, which are mucilaginous and eaten raw. The next is a root called aheitu,
and has a taste resembling liquorice. Another small, sweetish root, about the
thickness of sarsaparilla, is also eaten raw. As the season advances, they have
doubtless many others which we did not see. For though there is not the least
appearance of cultivation among them* there are plenty of alder, gooseberry,
and current bushes. One of the conditions, however, which they seem to require
in all food, is, that it should be of the less acrid kind; for they would not
touch the leek or garlic, though they sold us vast quantities of it, when they
understood we liked it. They seemed, indeed, not to relish any of our food and
rejected our spirituous liquors as something digusting and unnatural.

Small marine animals, in their fresh state, are sometimes eaten raw; though it
is their ordinary practice to roast or broil their food; for they are absolute
strangers to our method of boiling, as appears from their manner of preparing
porpoise broth; besides, as they have only wooden vessels, it is impossible for
them to perform such an operation. Their manner of eating corresponds with the
nastiness of their houses and persons; for the platters and troughs, out of
which they eat their food, seem never to have been washed since their original
formation; the dirty remains of a formal meal, being only swept away by a
succeeding one. Every thing solid and tough, they tear to pieces with their
hands and teeth; for though their knives are employed in cutting off the larger
portion, they have not yet endeavored to reduce these to mouthfuls by the same
means, though so much more cleanly and convenient. But they do not possess even
an idea of cleanliness, and constantly eat the roots which are dug from the
ground, without attempting to shake off the soil that adheres to them.

Whether they have any set time for meals, we never certainly knew; having seen
them eat at all hours in their canoes. But having seen several messes of
porpoise broth preparing about noon, when we went to the village, they probably
make a principal meal about that time.

They have bows and arrows, spears, slings, short truncheons made of bone, and
a small pick-axe, somewhat resembling the common American tomahawk. Some of the
arrows are pointed with iron, and others with indented bone; the spear has
usually a long point made of bone. The tomahawk is a stone of the length of
seven or eight inches; one end terminating in a point, and the other fixed into
a wooden handle. This handle is intended to resemble the head and neck of a
human figure; the stone being fixed in the mouth so as to represent a tongue of
great magnitude. To heighten the resemblance, human hair is also fixed to it.
This weapon is called taaweesh; and they have another weapon made of stone,
which they call seeaik, about ten or twelve inches long, having a square point.

It may be reasonably concluded that they frequently engage in close combat,
from the number of their stone and other weapons; and we had very disagreeable
proofs of their wars being both frequent and bloody, from the quantity of human
skulls that were offered us to sale.

The design and execution of their manufactures and mechanic arts, are more
extensive and ingenious than could possibly have been expected, from the
natural disposition of the people, and what little progress they had made in
civilization. The flaxen and woollen garments engage their first care, as being
the most material of those that may be classed under the head of manufactures.
The former are fabricated from the bark of the pine tree, beat into a mass
resembling hemp. After being prepared in a proper manner, it is spread upon a
stick, which is fastened to two others in an erect position. The manufacturer,
who sits on her hams at this simple machine, knots it across, at the distance
of about half an inch from each other, with small plaited threads. Though it
cannot, by this method, be rendered so close and firm as cloth that is woven,
it is sufficiently impervious to the air, and is likewise softer and more
pliable.

Though their woollen garments are probably manufactured in the same manner,
they have much the appearance of a woven cloth; but, the supposition of their
being wrought in a loom is destroyed, by the various figures that are
ingeniously inserted in them; it being very improbable that these people should
be able to produce such a complex work, except immediately by their hands. They
are of different qualities; some resembling our coursest sort of blankets; and
others not much inferior to our finest sort, and certainly both warmer and
softer.

The wool, of which they are manufactured, seems to be produced by different
animals, particularly the fox and brown lynx; that from the lynx is the finest,
and nearly resembles our coarser wools in color; but the hair, which also
grows upon the animal, being intermixed with it, the appearance of it is
somewhat different when wrought. The ornamental figures in these garments are
disposed with great taste, and are generally of a different color, being
usually dyed either of a deep brown or a yellow; the latter of which, when new,
equals in brightness the best in our carpets.

Their fondness for carving on all their wooden articles, corresponds with
their taste in working fi^^res upon their garments. Nothing is to be seen
without a kind of freeze-work, or a representation of some animal upon it; but
the most general figure is that of the human face, which is frequently cut out
upon birds, and the other monstrous things already mentioned, and even upon
their weapons of bone and stone.

The general design of these figures conveys a sufficient knowledge of the
objects they are intended to represent; though, in the carving, very little
dexterity is displayed. But, in the execu^ion of many of the masks and heads,
they have shown themselves ingenious sculptors. They preserve, with the
greatest exactness, the general character of their own faces, and finish the
more minute parts with great accuracy and neatness. That these people have a
strong propensity to works of this sort, is observable in a variety of
particulars. Representations of human figures; birds; beasts; fish; models of
their canoes, and household utensils, we found among them in very great
abundance.

Having mentioned their skill in some of the imitative arts, such as working
figures in their garments, and engraving, or carving them in wood; we may also
add their drawing them in colors. The whole process of their whale fishery has
been represented, in this manner, on the caps they wear. This indeed, was
rudely executed, but served, at least, to convince us, that, though they have
not the knowledge of letters amongst them, they have a notion of representing
actions, in a lasting way, exclusive of recording them in their songs and
traditions. They have also other painted figures, which, perhaps, have no
established significations, and are only the creation of fancy or caprice.

Though the structure of their canoes is simple, they appear well calculated
for every useful purpose. The largest, which contains upwards of twenty people,
are formed of a single tree. The length of many of them is forty feet, the
breadth seven, and the depth three. They become gradually narrower from the
middle toward each end, the stern ending perpendicularly, with a knob at the
top. The forepart stretches forwards and upwards, and ends in a point or prow,
much higher than the sides of the canoe, which are nearly straight. The
greatest part of them are without any ornament; some have a little carving, and
are studded with seals' teeth on the surface. Some have also a kind of
additional prow, usually painted with the figure of some animal. They have
neither seats nor any other supporters, on the inside, except some small round
sticks, about the size of a walking cane, placed across, about half the depth
of the canoe. They are very light and, on account of their breadth and
flatness, swim firmly, without an out-rigger, of which they are all destitute.
Their paddles, which are small and light, resembles a large leaf in shape,
being pointed at the bottom, broad in the middle, and gradually becoming
narrower in the shaft; the whole length being about five feet. By constant use,
they have acquired great dexterity in the management of these paddles; but they
never make use of any sails.

For fishing and hunting, their instruments are ingeniously contrived, and
completely made. They consist of nets, hooks, and lines, harpoons, gigs, and an
instrument resembling an oar. The latter is about twenty feet in length, four
or five inches in breadth, and of the thickness of half an inch. The edges, for
about two-thirds of its length, are set with sharp bone-teeth, about two inches
in length; the other third serving for a handle. With this instrument they
attack herrings and sardines, and such other fish as come in shoals. it is
struck into the shoal, and the fish are taken either upon, or between the
teeth. Their hooks, which are made of bone and wood, display no great
ingenuity; but the harpoon, which is used in striking whales, and other
sea-animals, manifests a great extent of contrivance. It consists of a piece of
bone, formed into two barbs, in which the oval blade of a large muscle-shell,
and the point of the instrument, is fixed. Two or three fathoms of rope is
fastened to this harpoon, and in throwing it, they use a shaft of about fifteen
feet long, to which the rope is fastened; to one end of which the harpoon is
fixed so as to leave the shaft floating, as a buoy upon the water, when the
animal is struck with the harpoon.

We are strangers to the manner of their catching or killing land animals, but,
it is probable, that they shoot the smaller sorts with their arrows; and
encounter bears, wolves, and foxes, with their spears. They have several sorts
of nets, which are perhaps applied to that purpose; it being customary for them
to throw them over their heads, to signify their use, when they offered them
for sail. Sometimes they decoy animals by disguising themselves with a skin,
and running upon all fours, in which they are remarkably nimble; making, at the
same time, a kind of noise, or neighing. The masks, or carved heads as well as
the dried heads of different animals, are used upon these occasions.

Every thing of the rope kind which they use in making their various articles,
is formed either from thongs of skins, and sinews of animals, or from the
flaxen substance, of which they manufacture their mantles. The sinews were
sometimes so remarkably long, that it was hardly possible they could have
belonged to any other animal than the whale. The same conjecture may be
hazarded with regard to the bones, of which they make their instruments and
weapons.

The assistance they receive from iron-tools, contributes to their dexterity in
wooden performances. Their implements are almost wholly made of iron; at least,
we saw but one chessel that was not made of that metal, and that was only of
bone. The knife and the chessel are the principal forms that iron assumes
amongst them. The chissel consists of a flat long piece, fastened into a wooden
handle. A stone is their mallet, and a bit of fish-skin their polisher. Some of
these chissels were nine or ten inches in length, and three or four in breadth;
but they were, in general, considerably smaller.

Some of their knives are very large, and their blades are crooked; the edge
being on the back or unequal part. What we have seen among them, were about the
breadth and thickness of an iron-hop; and their singular form sufficiently
proves that they are not of European make. These iron-tools are sharpened upon
a coarse slate whetstone, and the whole instrument is kept continually bright.

Iron is called by the natives seekemaile, a name which they also give to tin,
and other white metals. It being so common among these people, we were anxious
to discover how it could be conveyed to them. As soon as we arrived in the
Sound we perceived that they had a knowledge of traffic and an inclination to
pursue it; and we were afterward convinced that they had not acquired this
knowledge from a cursory interview with any strangers, but it seemed habitual
to them and was a practice in which they were well skilled.

With whom they carry on this traffic, we cannot ascertain; for, though we saw
several articles of European manufacture, or such, at least, as had been
derived from some civilized nation, such as brass and iron, it does not
certainly follow that they were received immediately from these nations. For we
never could obtain the least information of their having seen ships, like ours,
before, nor of their having been engaged in commerce with such people. Many
circumstances corroborate to prove this beyond a doubt. On our arrival, they
were earnest in their enquiries, whether we meant to settle amongst them, and
whether we were friendly visitors; informing us, at the same time, that they
freely gave us wood and water from motives of friendship.

This sufficiently proves, that they considered themselves as proprietors of
the place, and dreaded no superiority: for it would have been an unnatural
enquiry, if any ships had been here before, and had supplied themselves with
wood and water, and then departed; for they might then reasonably expect that
we should do the same. It must be admitted, indeed, that they exhibited no
marks of surprise at beholding our ships; but this may, with great propriety,
be attributed to their natural indolence of temper, and their wanting a thirst
of curiosity. They were never startled at the report of a musket, till they,
one day, showed us that their hide-dresses were impenetrable to their spears
and arrows; when one of our people shot a musket ball through one of them that
had been six times folded. Their astonishment at this, plainly indicated their
ignorance of the effect of firearms. This was afterward very frequently
confirmed, when we used them to shoot birds, at which they appeared greatly
confounded. And our explanation of the piece, together with the nature of its
operation, with the aid of shot and ball, struck them so forcibly, as to
convince us of their having no previous ideas on this matter.

Though some account of a voyage to this coast, by the Spaniards, in 1774, or
1775, had arrived in England before we sailed, the circumstances just mentioned
sufficiently prove, that these ships had never been at Nootka It has since
appeared, that they were not within two degrees of Nootka, and probably the
inhabitants of that place never heard of these Spanish ships.
. It was also evident, that iron would not have been in so many hands, nor
would the use of it have been so well known, if they had so lately obtained the
first knowledge of it.

From their general use of this metal, it probably comes from some constant
source, in the way of traffic, and they have perhaps been long supplied with
it; for they use their tools with as much dexterity as the longest practice can
acquire. The most natural conjecture, therefore, is, that they trade for their
iron with other Indian tribes, who may have some communication with European
settlements upon that continent, or receive it through several intermediate
nations. By the same means they probably obtain their brass and copper.

Not only the rude materials, but some manufactured articles seem to find their
way hither. The brass ornaments for noses are made in so masterly a manner,
that the Indians cannot be supposed capable of fabricating them. We are
certain, that the materials are European, as all the American tribes are
ignorant of the method of making brass; though copper has been frequently met
with, and, from its ductility, might easily be fashioned into any shape, and
polished. If such articles are not used by our traders to Hudson's Bay and
Canada, in their traffic with the natives, they must have been introduced at
Nootka from Mexico; whence, it is probable, the two silver table spoons were
originally derived.

Little knowledge can we be supposed to have acquired of the political and
religious institutions established among these people. We discovered, however,
that there were such men as chiefs, distinguished by the title of Acweek, to
whom the others are, in some degree, subordinate. But the authority of each of
these great men, seems to extend no farther than to his own family, who
acknowledge him as their head. As they were not all elderly men, it is possible
this title may be hereditary.

Nothing that we saw could give us any insight into their notions of religion,
except the figures already mentioned, called Klumma. These, perhaps, were
ido^s; but, as the word acweek was frequently mentioned when they spoke of
them, we may suppose them to be the images of some of their ancestors, whose
memories they venerate. This, however is all conjecture, for we could receive
no information concerning them; knowing little more of their language than to
enable us to ask the names of things, and being incapable of holding any
conversation with the natives, relative to their traditions, or their
institutions.

Their language is neitheir harsh nor disagreeable, farther than proceeds from
their pronouncing the k and h with less softness than we do. As to the
composition of their language, we are enabled to say but little. It may,
however, be inferred, from their slow and distinct method of speaking, that it
has few prepositions or conjunctions, and is destitute of even a single
interjection to express surprise or admiration. The affinity it may bear to
other languages, we have not been able sufficiently to trace, not having proper
specimens to compare it with; but, from the few Mexican words we have procured,
there is an obvious agreement, thoughout the language, in the frequent
terminations of the words in l, tl, or z.

The wood wakash was frequently in the mouths of the people of Nootka. It
seemed to express approbation, applause, and friendship. Whenever they appeared
to be pleased or satisfied at any sight or occurrence, they would call out
wakash! wakash! -- It is worthy of remark, that as these people so essentially
differ from the natives of the islands in the Pacific Ocean, in their persons,
customs, and language, we cannot suppose their respective progenitors to have
belonged to the same tribe, when they emigrated into those places where we now
find their descendants.

CHAP. IV.
A Storm -- The Resolution springs a Leak -- Progress of the Ships along the
North-American Coast -- An Inlet named Cross Sound -- Beering's Bay -- Cape
Suckling -- Account of Kay's Island -- Our Ships anchor near Cape Hinchingbroke
-- the Natives visit us -- Their Fondness for Beads and Iron -- Their daring
Attempt to carry off one of our Boats -- They also attempt to plunder the
Discovery -- Progress up the Sound -- Mr. Gore and the Master sent to examine
its Extent -- Montague Island -- The Ships leave the Sound.

WE have already mentioned, that we put to sea, in the evening of the 26th of
April, with manifest indications of an approaching storm; and these signs did
not deceive us. We had scarce sailed out of the sound, when the wind shifted
from north-east to south-east by east, and blew a strong gale, with squalls and
rain, the sky being at the same time uncommonly dark. Being apprehensive of the
winds veering more to the south, which would expose us to the danger of a
lee-shore, we got the tacks on board, and made all the sale we could to the
south-west. It fortunately happened, that the wind veered no further toward
the south, than south-east; so that, early the next morning, we were entirely
clear of the coast. Captain Clerke's ship being at some distance estern, the
Commodore brought to, till she came up, and then both vessels steered a
north-westerly course. The wind blew with great violence, and the weather was
thick and hazy. Between one and two o'clock in the afternoon, there was a
perfect hurricane; so that the Commodore deemed it exceedingly dangerous to run
any longer before it: he therefore brought the ships to, with their heads to
the south. In this situation, the Resolution sprung a leak, in her starboard
quarter, which, at first alarmed us extremely; but, after the water was baled
out, which kept us employed till midnight, it was kept under by means of one
pump. The wind having, in the evening, veered to the southward, its fury in
some measure abated; upon which we stretched to the west; but about eleven, the
gale again increased, and continued till five the next morning, when the storm
began to moderate.

The weather now clearing up, we were able to see several leagues around us,
and steered more to the north. At noon, our longitude was 229 26 east: and our
latitude, 50 1 north. We now steered north-west by north, with a fresh gale,
and fair weather. But, toward the evening, the wind again blew hard, with
squalls and rain. With this weather, we continued the same course till the
30th, when we steered north by west, intending to make the land. Captain Cook
regretted that he could not do it sooner, as we were now passing the spot where
the pretended strait of Admiral de Font has been placed by geographers. Though
the Captain gave no credit to such vague and improbable stories, he was
desirous of keeping the coast of America aboard, that this point might be
cleared up beyond dispute. But he considered, that it would have been very
imprudent to have engaged with the land while the weather was so tempestuous,
or to have lost the advantage of a fair wind, by waiting for less stormy
weather. This day, at twelve o'clock, our latitude was 53 22 north, and our
longitude 225 14 east.

On Friday, the 1st of May, not seeing land, we steered to the north-east,
having a fresh breeze at south-south-east and south, with squalls and showers
of hail and rain. About seven o'clock in the evening, we descried the land, at
the distance of twelve or fourteen leagues. At four the next morning, the coast
was seen from south-east to north by west, the nearest part of it being five or
six leagues distant. At this time, the northern point of an inlet, or, at
least, what appeared to be one, bore east by south; and from it to the
northward, there seemed to be many bays and harbors along the coast. At six
o'clock, making a nearer approach to the land, we steered north-west by north,
this being the direction of the coast; and between eleven and twelve, we passed
a cluster of little islands situate near the continent, to the northward of the
southern point of an extensive bay. An arm of this bay seemed to extend in
toward the north, behind a round lofty mountain that stands between it and the
sea. To this mountain Captain Cook gave the name of Mount Edgecumbe; and the
point of land projecting from it, he called Cape Edgecumbe. The latitude of
this cape is 57 3 north, and its longitude 224 7 east. The land, except in some
parts close to the sea, is of a considerable height, abounding with hills.
Mount Edegcumbe, which far out-tops all the rest, was entirely covered with
snow, as were also the other elevated hills; but the lower ones, and the
flatter spots near the sea, were destitute of it, and covered with wood.

In our progress to the northward, we found that the coast from Cape Edgecumbe
trended to the north and north-east for six or seven leagues, and there formed
a spacious bay. There being some islands in the entrance of this bay, the
Commodore named it the Bay of Islands. It seemed to branch out into several
arms, one of which turned toward the south, and may perhaps communicate with
the bay on the eastern side of Cape Edgecumbe, and thus render the land of that
cape an island. On the 3d, at half an hour after four in the morning,
Mount-Edgecumbe bore south 54 east, a large inlet, north 50 east; and the most
advanced point of land toward the north-west, lying under a very lofty peaked
mountain, which obtained the appellation of Mount Fair-Weather, bore north 32
west. The inlent we named Cross Sound, having first observed it on the day so
marked in our calendar. The south eastern point of this Sound is an elevated
promontory, which we distinguished by the name of Cross Cape. To the point
under the abovementioned peaked mountain, we gave the name of Cape
Fair-Weather. At noon, this cape was distant twelve or thirteeen leagues.

We had now light breezes from the north-west, which continued several days. We
steered to the south west, and west-south-west, till the morning of the 4th,
when we tacked and stood toward the shore. At twelve o'clock, Mount
Fair-Weather bore north 63 east, and the shore under it was about a dozen
leagues distant. This mount is the highest of a chain or ridge of mountains,
that rise at the north-western entrance of Cross Sound, and extend toward the
north-west, parrellel with the coast. These mountains were covered with snow,
from the highest summit down to the seacoast; except a few places, where we
could discern trees that seemed to rise, as it were, from the sea. About five
o'clock in the afternoon, the top of a high mountain appeared above the
horizon, bearing north 26 west; and, as we afterward found, near forty leagues
distant. We supposed that it was the mount St. Elias, of Commodore Beering. We
saw, in the course of this day, several porpoises, seals, and whales; also
great numbers of gulls, and many flocks of birds which had a black circle about
the head, and a black band on the tip of the tail and upper part of the wings,
the rest being white below and blueish above. We likewise observed a brownish
duck, with a blackish or dark blue head and neck.

As we had light winds, with occasional calms, we proceeded but slowly. On the
6th, at midday, the nearest land was at the distance of about eight leagues. In
a north-easterly direction, there appeared to be a bay, and an island near its
southern point, covered with wood. This is probably the place where Beering
anchored. Southward of the bay (which Captain Cook named Beering's Bay, in
honor of its discoverer) the ridge of mountains, already mentioned, is
interrupted by a plain of several leagues in extent, beyond which the sight was
unbounded. In the afternoon, we sounded, and found a muddy bottom at the depth
of about seventy fathoms. Soon afterward, having a light northerly breeze, we
steered to the westward; and at noon, the next day, we were at the distance of
four or five leagues from the shore. From this station we could perceive a bay
under a high land, with low woodland on each side of it. We now found that the
coast trended considerably to the west; and as we had but little wind, and that
chiefly from the westward, we made a slow progress. On the 9th, about noon,
Mount St Elias bore north 30 east at the distance of nineteen leagues. This
mountain stands twelve leagues inland, in the longitude of 219 east, and in the
latitude of 69 27 north. It belongs to a ridge of very lofty mountains, which
may be reckoned a kind of continuation of the former, being separated from them
only by the plain beforementioned.

On Sunday the 10th, at twelve o'clock, we were about three leagues distant
from the coast of the continent, which extended from east half north, to
north-west half west. To the westward of the latter direction was an island, at
the distance of six leagues. A point which the commodore named Cape Suckling,
projects toward the north-eastern end of this island. The extremity of the
cape is low; but, within it, stands a hill of a considerable height, which is
divided from the mountains by low land; so that the cape, at a distance, has an
insular appearance. On the north side of Cape Suckling is a bay, which seemed
to be extensive, and to be sheltered from most winds. Captain Cook had some
thoughts of reparing to this bay, in order to stop the leak of his ship, all
our endeavors to effect that purpose at sea having proved fruitless. We
therefore steered for the cape; but, having only variable light breezes, we
advanced toward it slowly. Before night, however we had approached near enough
to see some low land projecting from the cape to the north-west; we also
observed some little islands in the bay, and several elevated rocks between the
cape and the north-eastern extremity of the island. As there appeared to be a
passage on each side of these rocks, we continued steering thither the whole
night. Early the next morning, the wind shifted from north-east to north. This
being against us, the Commodore relinquished his design of going into the bay,
and bore up for the west end of the island. There being a calm about ten
o'clock, he embarked in a boat, and landing on the island, with a view of
seeing what lay on the other side; but finding that the hills were at a greater
distance than he expected, and that the way was woody and steep, he laid aside
that intention. On a small eminence near the shore, he left, at the foot of a
tree, a bottle containing a paper, on which the names of our ships, and the
date of our discovery, were inscribed; he also enclosed two silver two-penny
pieces of English coin, which, with many others, had been furnished him by Dr.
Kay, now Dean of Lincoln; and, in testimony of his esteem for that gentleman,
he distinguished the island by the name of Kay's Island.

This isle does not exceed twelve leagues in length, and its breadth is not
above a league and a half in any part of it. The south-west point whose
latitude is 59 49 north, and longitude 216 58 east, is a naked rock,
considerably elevated above the land within it. There is also a high rock lying
off it, which, when seen in some particular directions, has the appearance of a
ruinous castle. The island terminates toward the sea, in bare sloping cliffs,
with a beach consisting of large pebbles, intermixed in some places with a
clayey sand. The cliffs are composed of a blueish stone or rock, and are,
except in a few parts in a soft or mouldering state. Some parts of the shore
are interrupted by small valleys and gullies, in each of which a rivulet or
torrent rushes down with a considerable degree of impetuosity; though, perhaps,
only furnished from the snow, and lasting no longer than till the whole is
dissolved. These valleys are filled with pinetrees; and they also abound in
other parts of the island, which, indeed, is covered, as it were, with a broad
girdle of wood. The trees, however, are far from being of an extraordinary
growth; few of them seeming to be larger than what a person might grasp round
with his arms, and their general height being forty or fifty feet; so that they
would be of no great service for shipping, except as material for making top
gallant masts, and other small things. The pine-trees appeared to be all of one
species; and neither the Canadian pine, nor cypress, was to be seen.

Upon the edges of the cliffs, the surface was covered with a kind of tuft,
about six inches thick, apparently composed of the common morse and the upper
part of the island had nearly the same appearance in point of color; but that
which covered it, whatever it was, seemed to be thicker. Among the trees were
some current and the leaves of other plants not yet in flower, particular one
which was supposed by Mr. Anderson to be the heracleum of Linnaeus.

A crow was seen flying about the wood; two or three white headed eagles, like
those of Nootka, were also observed; besides another species equally large,
which had a white breast. The Commodore likewise saw, in his passage from the
ship to the shore, a number of fowls sitting on the water; or flying about; the
principal of which were gulls, burres, shags, ducks, or large petrels, diverse,
and quebrantahuesses. The diverse were of two sorts; one very large, whose
color was black, with a white belly and breast; the other of a smaller size,
with a longer and more pointed bill. The ducks were also of two species; one
brownish, with a dark-blue or blackish head and neck: the other smaller, and of
a dirty black color. The shags were large and black, having a white spot
behind the wings. The gulls were of the common sort, flying in flocks. There
was also a single bird flying about, apparently of the gull kind, whose color
was a snowy white, with some black along part of the upper side of its wings.
At the place where our party landed, a fox came from the verge of the wood, and
eyeing them with little emotion, walked leisurely on without manifesting any
signs of fear. He was not of a large size, and his color was a reddish yellow.
Two or three small seals were likewise seen near the shore; but no traces were
discovered of inhabitants having ever been in the island.

Captain Cook, with those who accompanied him, returned on board in the
afternoon, and with a light breeze from the east, we steered for the south west
side of the island, which we got round by eight o'clock in the evening: we then
stood for the westernmost land that was now in sight. At the north-east end of
Kay's Island stands another island, extending north-west and south-east about
nine miles, to within the same distance of the north-western boundary of the
bay mentioned before, to which the appellation of Comptroller's bay was given.
Early the next morning Kay's Island was still in sight, bearing east by south;
and, at this time, we were at the distance of four or five leagues from the
main. At noon, the eastern point of a spacious inlet bore west-north-west,
about three leagues distant. From Comptroller's Bay to this point, which the
Commodore named Cape Hinchingbroke, the direction of the coast is nearly east
and west. Beyond this, it appeared to incline toward the south; a direction
very different from that which is marked out in the modern charts, founded on
the late discoveries of the Russians; insomuch that we had some reason to
expect, that we should find, through the inlet before us, a passage to the
north, and that the land to the west and south-west was a group of islands. The
wind was now south-easterly, and we were menaced with a fog and a storm; and
Captain Cook was desirous of getting into some place to stop the leak, before
we had another gale to encounter. We therefore steered for the inlet, which we
had no sooner reached, than the weather became exceedingly foggy, and it was
deemed necessary that the ships should be secured in some place or other, till
the sky should clear up. With this view we hauled close under Cape
Hinchingbroke, and cast anchor before a small cove, over a clayey bottom, in
eight fathoms water, at the distance of about two furlongs from the shore.

Soon after we had anchored, the boats were hoisted out, some to fish, and
others to sound. The seine, at the same time, was drawn in the cove; but
without success, as it was torn. At intervals the fog cleared away, and gave us
a view of the neighboring land. The cape was one league distant; the western
point of the inlet, five leagues; and the land on that side extended to west by
north. Between this point and north-west by west, we could discern no land. The
most westerly point we had in view on the north shore, was at the distance of
two leagues. Betwixt this point, and the shore under which our ships now lay at
anchor, is a bay about three leagues deep, on the south-eastern side of which
are several coves; and, in the middle, stand some rocky islands.

Mr. Gore was dispatched in a boat to these islands, in order to shoot some
birds that might serve for food. He had scarcely reached them, when about
twenty natives appeared, in two large canoes; upon which he retured to the
ships, and they followed him. They were unwilling, however, to venture
along-side, but kept at a little distance, shouting aloud, and clasping and
extending their arms alternately. They then began a kind of song, much after
the manner of the inhabitants of King George's or Nootka Sound. Their heads
were strewed with feathers, and one of them held out a white garment, which we
supposed was intended as a token of friendship; while another, for near a
quarter of an hour, stood up in the canoe, entirely naked, with his arms
extended like a cross, and motionless. Their canoes were constructed upon a
different plan from those of Nootka. The frame consisted of slender laths, and
the outside was formed of the skins of seals, or other animals of a similar
kind. Though we returned their signs of amity, and endeavored by the most
expressive gestures, to encourage them to come along-side, we were unable to
prevail upon them. Though some of our people repeated several of the most
common words of the language of Nootka, such as mahook and seekemaile, they did
not appear to understand them. After they had received some presents that were
thrown to them, they retired toward the shore, intimating by signs, that they
would pay us another visit the next morning. Two of them, however, came off to
us in the night, each in a small canoe; hoping, perhaps, that they might find
us all asleep, and might have an opportunity of pilfering; for they went away
as soon as they perceived themselves discovered.

The wind, during the night, blew hard and in squalls, with rain, and thick
hazy weather. The next morning, about ten, the wind becoming more moderate, and
the weather in some measure clearing up, we got up our anchors and made sail,
in order to search for some convenient place where we might stop the leak, as
our present station was two much exposed for that purpose. Captain Cook at
first proposed to have gone up the bay before which our ships had anchored; but
he was afterward induced by the clearness of the weather, to steer toward the
north, further up the great inlet. After we had passed the north-west point of
the above mentioned bay, we found that the coast, on that side, inclined to the
eastward. We did not follow it, but proceeded on our course to the northward,
for a point of land which we observed in that direction.

The Americans who had visited us the preceding day, came off again in the
morning, in five or six canoes; but as they did not come till after we were
under sail, they were unable to reach the ships, though they followed us for a
considerable time. In the afternoon, before two o'clock, the unfavourable
weather returned, with so thick a haze, that we could discern no other land but
the point just mentioned, off which we arrived between four and five o'clock,
and found it to be a little island, situated at the distance of about two miles
from the neighboring coast, being a point of land on the eastern side of which
we discovered an excellent bay, or rather harbor. To this we plied up, while
the wind blew in very hard squalls, accompanied with rain. Though, at some
intervals, we could see land in every direction, yet, in general, there was so
great a fog, that we could only perceive the shores of the bay for which we
were now steering. In passing the island, we found a muddy bottom, at the depth
of twenty-six fathoms. Not long after, we found sixty and seventy fathoms, over
a rocky bottom; and, in the entrance of the bay, the depth of water was from
thirty to six fathoms. At length, about eight o'clock, we were obliged, by the
violence of the squalls, to cast anchor in thirteen fathoms water, before we
had proceeded so far into the bay as the Commodore intended; but we thought
ourselves fortunate in having the ships already secured; for the night was
extremely tempestuous.

Though the weather was so turbulent, the natives were not deterred from paying
us a visit. Three of them came off in two canoes; two men in one, and one in
the other, being the number that each canoe could carry. For they were
constructed nearly in the same manner with those of the Esquimaux, except that
in one of them were two holes for two persons to sit in, and in the other but
one. These men had each a stick, of the length of about three feet, with the
large feathers, or wings of birds, fastened to it. These they frequently held
up to us, probably as tokens of peace. The treatment these three received,
induced many others to visit us, between one and two o'clock the following
morning, in both great and small canoes. Some of them ventured on board the
Resolution, though not before some of our people had stepped into their boats.
Among those who ^ame on board, was a middle aged man, who, as we afterward
found, was the chief. His dress was made of the skin of the sea-otter, and he
had on his head such a cap as is worn by the inhabitants of Nootka, embellished
with sky-blue glass beads. He appeared to value these much more than our white
glass beads. Any kind of beads, however, seemed to be in high estimation among
these people, who readily gave in exchange for them whatever they had, even
their fine sea-otter skin.

They were very desirous of iron, but absolutely rejected small bits, and
wanted pieces nine or ten inches long at least, and of the breadth of three or
four fingers. They obtained but little of this commodity from us, as, by this
time, it was become rather scarce. The points of some of their spears were of
this metal; others were of copper; and a few were of bone; of which last the
points of their arrows, darts, etc. were formed.

The chief could not be prevailed upon to venture below the uper deck, nor did
he and his companions continue long on board. While they were with us, it was
necessary to watch them narrowly, as they soon manifested an inclination for
thieving. At length, when they had been three or four hours along-side the
Resolution, they all quitted her, and reparied to the Discovery, which ship
none of them had before been on board of, except one man, who came from her at
this very time, and immediately returned to her, in company with the others. As
soon as they had departed from our ship, Captain Cook dispatched a boat to
found the head of the bay, for as, the wind was moderate at present, he had an
intention of laying the ship ashore, if a proper place could be found for the
process of stopping the leak. Soon afterward all the Americans quitted the
Discovery, and made their way toward our boat that was employed in sounding.
The officer who was in her, observing their approach, returned to the ship, and
all the canoes followed him. The crew of the boat had no sooner repaired on
board, leaving in her, by way of guard, two of their number, then several of
the natives stepped into her; some of whom presented their spears before the
two men, while others loosed the rope by which she was fastened to the ship,
and the rest were so daring as to attempt to tow her away. But the moment they
saw that we were preparing to oppose them, they let her go, stepped out of her
into their own boats, and made signs to us to persuade us to lay down our arms,
being, to all appearance, perfectly unconcerned.

This attempt, though a very bold one, was scarce equal to what they had
meditated on board Captain Clerke's ship. The man whom we mentioned before as
having conducted his countrymen from the Resolution to the Discovery, had first
been on board of the latter; where looking down all the hatchways, and
observing no one except the officer of the watch, and one or two others, he
doubtless imagined that she might be plundered with ease, particularly as she
was stationed at some distance from the Resolution. It was unquestionably with
this intent, that the natives went off to her. Several of them went on board
without the least ceremony, and drawing their knives, made signs to the
officer, and the other people upon deck, to keep off, and began to search for
plunder. The first thing they laid hold of was the rudder of one of our boats,
which they immediately threw overboard to those of their party who had
continued in the canoes. But before they had time to find another object that
struck their fancy, the ships crew were alarmed, and many of them, armed with
cutlasses came upon deck. On observing this, the plunderers all sneaked off
into their canoes, with evident marks of indifference. It was at this time,
that our boat was occupied in sounding, as we have already mentioned; and the
natives, without delay, proceeded toward her, after the disappointment they
had met with at the Discovery. Their visiting us so early in the morning was
undoubtedly with a view of plundering, on a supposition that they should find
all our people asleep.

From the circumstances above related, it may reasonably be inferred, that
these people are not acquainted with firearms. For, had they known any thing
of their effect, they would by no means have ventured to attempt carrying off a
boat from under, a ship's guns, in the face of upwards of a hundred men; for
most of the Resolution's people were looking at them, at the very instant of
their making the attempt. However, we left them as ignorant, in this
particular, as we found them; for they neither saw nor heard a musket fired,
except at birds.

As we were on the point of weighing anchor, in order to proceed further up the
bay, the wind began to blow as violently as before, and was attended with rain;
insomuch that we were obliged to bear away the cable again, and lie fast. In
the evening, perceiving that the gale did not abate, and thinking that it might
be some time before an opportunity of getting higher up presented itself, the
Commodore was determined to heel the ship in our present station: and, with
that view, caused her to be moored with, a kedgeanchor and hawser. One of the
sailors, in heaving the anchor out of the boat, was carried overboard by the
buoy-rope, and accompanied the anchor to the bottom. In this very hazardous
situation, he had sufficient presence of mind to disengage himself, and come up
to the surface of the water, where he was immediately taken up, with a
dangerous fracture in one of his legs, Early the following morning, we heeled
the ship, in order to stop the leak, which, on ripping off the sheathing, was
found to be in the seams. While the carpenters were employed in this business,
others of our people filled the water-casks at a stream not far from our
station. The wind had, by this time, considerably abated; but the weather was
hazy, with rain. The Americans paid us another visit this morning: those who
came off first, were in small canoes; others arrived afterward in large ones.
In one of these great canoes were twenty women and one man, besides several
children.

On Saturday the 16th, toward the evening, the weather cleared up, and we then
found ourselves encompassed with land. Our station was on the eastern side of
the Sound, in a place distinguished by the appellation of Snug Corner Bay.
Captain Cook, accompanied by some of his officers, went to take a survey of the
head of it; and they found that it was sheltered from all winds, and had a
muddy botto^ at the depth of from seven to three fathoms. The land near the
shore is low; partly wooded, and partly clear. The clear ground was covered
with snow, but very little remained in the woods. The summits of the hills in
the neighborhood were covered with wood; but those that were at a greater
distance inland, had the appearance of naked, rocks, involved in snow.

The leak of the Resolution being at length stopped, we weighed anchor on the
17th, at four in the morning, and steered a north-west course, with a gentle
breeze at east-north-east. Soon after we had made sail, the Americans visited
us again, seemingly with no other view than to gratify their curiosity, for
they did not enter into any traffic with us. When we had reached the
north-western point of the arm wherein we had achored, we observed that the
flood-tide came into the inlet, by the same channel through which we had
entered. This circumstance did not much contribute to the probability of a
passage to the north through the inlet, though it did not make entirely against
it. After we had passed the point just mentioned, we met with much foul ground,
and many sunken rocks. The wind now failed us, and was succeeded by calms and
variable light airs, so that we had some difficulty in extricating ourselves
from the danger that threatened us. At last, however, about one o'clock, we
cast anchor in about thirtheen fathoms water, under the eastern shore, about
four leagues to the northward of our last station. Though the weather, in the
morning, had been very hazy, it cleared up afterward, so as to afford us a
distinct view of all the surrounding land, particularly toward the north,
where it appeared to close. This gave us but little hope of meeting with a
passage that way. That he might be enabled to form a better judgment, Captain
Cook sent Mr. Gore, with two armed boats, to examine the northern arm; and at
the same time dispatched the Master, with two other boats, to survey another
arm that seemed to incline toward the east. Both of them returned at night.
The Master informed the Commodore, that the arm, to which he had been sent,
communicated with that we had last quitted, and that one side of it was formed
by a cluster of islands. Mr. Gore reported, that he had seen the entrance of an
arm, which, he thought, extended a very considerable way to the north-eastward,
and by which a passage might probably be found. On the other hand, Mr. Roberts,
one of the Mates, who had accompanied Mr. Gore on this occasion, gave it as his
opinion, that they saw the head of this arm. The variation of these two
opinions, and the circumstance beforementioned of the flood-tide entering the
inlet from the southward, rendered the existence of a passage this way
extremely uncertain. Captain Cook therefore determined to employ no more time
in seeking a passage in a place that afforded so small a prospect of success,
particularly as the wind was now become favorable for getting out to sea.

The next morning, about three o'clock, we weighed, and made sail to the
southward down the inlet, with a light northerly breeze. We met with the same
broken ground as on the preceding day, but soon extricated ourselves from it.
We were enabled to shorten our way out to sea, by discovering another passage
into this inlet, to the south-west of that by which we entered. It is separated
from the other, by an island that extends eighteen leagues in the direction of
south-west and north-east, to which Captain Cook gave the appellation of
Montagu Island.

There are several islands in the south-western channel. Those which are
situate in the entrance, next the open sea, are elevated and rockey. Those that
are within, are low; and as they were totally free from snow, and covered with
wood and verdure, they were, for this reason, denominated Green-Islands.

The wind, at two o'clock in the afternoon, veered to the south-west and
south-west by south, which subjected us to the necessity of plying. We first
stretched over to within the distance of two miles of the eastern shore, and
tacked in about fifty-three fathoms. As we stood back to Montagu Island, we
discovered a ledge of rocks, some under water, and others above the surface. We
afterward met with some others toward the middle of the channel. These rocks
rendering it unsafe to ply during the night, we spent it in standing off and
on, under Montagu Island; for the depth of water was so great, that we could
not cast anchor. The next morning, at break of day, we steered for the channel
between the Green Islands and Montagu Island, which is about two leagues and an
half in breadth. The wind was inconsiderable the whole day; and, about eight in
the evening, we had a perfect calm; when we let go our anchors at the depth of
twen^^ one fathoms, over a muddy bottom, about the distance of two miles from
Montagu Island. After the calm had continued till ten o'clock the succeeding
morning, a slight breeze sprung up from the north with which we again weighed
and made sail. Having got out into the open sea by six in the evening, we
discovered that the coast trended west by south, as far as the eye could
possibly reach.

CHAP. V.
Extent of Prince William's Sound -- The Persons of its Inhabitants described
-- Their Dress -- Remarkable Custom of making an incision in the Underlip --
Their various Ornaments -- Canoes -- Weapons -- Armor -- Domestic Utensils --
Their skill in all manual Works -- Their Food -- A specimen of their Language
-- Quadrupeds -- Birds -- Fish -- Trees Conjectures whence they procure Beads
and Iron.

THE inlet which we had now quitted, was distinguished by Captain Cook with the
name of Prince William's Sound. From what we saw of it, it seems to occupy, at
least, one degree and an half of latitude, and two degrees of longitude,
exclusive of the branches or arms, with whose exent we are unacquainted. The
natives whom we saw, were in general of a middling stature, though many of them
were under it. They were square, or strong-chested, with short thick necks, and
large broad visages, which were, for the most part, rather flat. The most
disproportioned part of their body appeared to be their heads, which were of
great magnitude. Their teeth were of a tolerable whiteness, broad, well set,
and equal in size. Their noses had full round points, turned up at the tip, and
A VIEW of SNUG CORNER (...) P^^NCE WILLIAM^ SOUND
their eyes, though not small, were scarcely proportioned to the largeness of
their faces. They had black hair, which was strong, straight, and thick. Their
beards were, in general, thin, or deficient; but the hairs growing about the
lips of those who have them, were briftly or stiff, and often of a brownish
color; and some of the elderly men had large, thick, straight beards.

Though, for the most part, they agree in the formation of their persons, and
the largeness of their heads, the variety in their features is considerable.
Very few, however, can be said to be handsome, though their countenance usually
indicates frankness, vivacity, and goodnature; and yet some of them showed a
reserve and fullenness in their aspect. The faces of some of the women are
agreeable; and many of them, but principally the younger ones, may easily be
distinguished from the other sex, by the superior delicacy of their features.
The complexion of some of the females, and of the children, is white, without
any mixture of red. Many of the men, whom we saw naked, had father a swarthy
cast, which was scarcely the effect of any stain, as it is not their custom to
paint their bodies.

The men, women, and children of this Sound, are all clothed in the same
manner. Their ordinary dress is a sort of close frock, or rather robe, which
sometimes reaches only to the knees, but generally down to the ancles. It has,
at the upper part, a hole just sufficient to admit the head, with sleeves
reaching to the wrist. These frocks are composed of the skins of various
animals, such as the gray fox, racoon, pine-martin, sea-otter, seal, etc. And
they are commonly worn with the hairy side outward. Some of the natives have
their frocks made of the skins of fowls, with only the down left on them, which
they glue upon other substances: we also saw one or two woollen garments,
resembling those of the inhabitants of King George's Sound. At the seams, where
the different skins are sewed together, they are usually adorned with fringes
or tassels of narrow thongs, cut out of the same skins. There is a sort of cape
or collar to a few of them, and some have a hood; but the other is the most
customary form, and appears to constitute their whole dress in fair weather.
They put over this, when it is rainy, another frock, made with some degree of
ingenuity from the intestines of whales, or of some other large animal,
prepared with such skill, as to resemble, in a great measure, our gold-beater's
leaf. It is formed so as to be drawn tight round the neck; and its sleeves
extend down to the wrist, round which they are fastened with a string. When
they are in their canoes, they draw the skirts of this frock over the rim of
the hole in which they sit, so that the water is prevented from entering. At
the same time it keeps the men dry upwards, for no water can penetrate through
it. It is apt to crack or break, if it is not constantly kept moist. This
frock, as well as the common one made of skins, is nearly similar to the dress
of the natives of Greenland, as described by Crantz Crantz's History of
Greenland, Vol. I. p. 136 -- 138.
.

Though the inhabitants of this inlet in general, do not cover their legs or
feet, yet some of them wear a kind of skin stockings, reaching halfway up
their thighs. Few of them are without mittens for their hands, formed from the
skins of a bear's paws. Those who wear any thing on their heads, resembled, in
this particular, the people of Nootka, having high truncated conical caps,
composed of straw, and sometimes of wood.

The hair of the men is commonly cropped round the forehead and neck, but the
females suffer it to grow long; and the greatest part of them tie a lock of it
on the crown, while a few club it behind, after our method. Both the men and
women perforate their ears with several holes about the outer and lower part of
the edge, wherein they suspend small bunches of beads. They also perforate the
septum of the nose, through which they often thrust the quill-feathers of
birds, or little bending ornaments, made of a tubulous shelly substance, strung
on a stiff cord, of the length of three or four inches, which give them a
ridiculous and grotesque appearence. But the most extraordinary ornamental
fashion, adopted by some of the natives of both sexes, is their having the
under-lip cut quite through lengthwise, rather below the swelling part. This
incision frequently exceeds two inches in length, and either by its natural
retraction while the wound is still fresh, or by the repetition of some
artificial management, assumes the appearance and shape of lips, and becomes
sufficiently large to admit the tongue through. This happened to be the case,
when a person with his under-lip thus slit was first seen by one of our
sailors, who immediately exclaimed, that the man had two mouths; which, indeed
it greatly resembles. They fix in this artificial mouth a flat, narrow kind of
ornament, made principally out of a solid shell or bone, cut into small narrow
pieces, like teeth, almost down to the base, or thick part, which has, at each
end, a projecting bit, that serves to support it when put into the divided lip;
the cut part then appearing outward. Some of them only perforate the lower lip
into separate holes; on which occasion the ornament consists of the same number
of distinct shelly studs, the points of which are thrust through these holes,
and their heads appear within the lip, not unlike another row of teeth under
their natural ones.

Such are the native ornaments of these people. But we observed among them many
beads of European manufacture, chiefly of a pale blue color, which are hung in
their ears, or about their caps, or are joined to their lip-ornaments, which
have a little hole drilled in each of the points to which they are fastened,
and others to them, till they sometimes even hang as low as the point of the
chin. In this last case, however, they cannot remove them with such facility;
for, with respect to their own lip-ornaments, they can take them out with their
tongue at pleasure. They likewise wear bracelets of beads, made of a shelly
substance, or others of a cylindrical form, composed of a substance resembling
amber. And they are, in general, so fond of ornaments of some kind or other,
that they fix any thing in their perforated lip; for one of them appeared with
two of our iron nails projecting like prongs from it; and another man attempted
to put a large brass button into it.

The men often paint their faces of a black color, and of a bright red, and
sometimes of a blueish or leaden hue; but not in any regular figure. The woman
puncture or stain the chin with black, that comes to a point in each of their
cheeks; a custom similar to which is in vogue among the Greenland females, as
we are informed by Crantz. The bodies of these people are not painted, which
may probably be owing to the scarcity of materials for that purpose; all the
colors which they brought for sale, being in very small quantities. Upon the
whole, we have in no country seen savages who take more pains than these do, to
ornament, or rather (as we should think) to disfigure their persons.

Their canoes are of two sorts; the one large and open, the other small and
covered. We have mentioned before, that there were twenty women, and one man,
besides children, in one of their large boats. Captain Cook having attentively
examined this, and compared its construction with Crantz's description of the
great, or woman's boat in Greenland, found that they were built in the same
mode, with no other difference than in the form of the head and stern,
particularly of the former, which somewhat resembles a whale's head. The
framing consists of slender pieces of wood: and the outside is composed of the
skins of seals, or other sea animals, stretched over the wood. The small canoes
of these people, are constructed nearly of the same form and mateirals with
those of the Esquimaux and Greenlanders. Some of these, as we have already
mentioned, carry two persons. Their forepart is curved like the head of a
violin; and they are broader in proportion to their length than those of
Esquimaux.

Their weapons, and implements for hunting and fishing, are the same with those
used by the Greenlanders and Esquimaux. Many of their spears are headed with
iron, and their arrows are generally pointed with bone. Their larger darts are
thrown by means of a piece of wood about a foot long, with a small groove in
the middle, which receives the dart: at the bottom is a hole for the reception
of one finger, which enables them to grasp the piece of wood much firmer, and
to throw with greater force. For defensive armor they have a sort of jacked,
or coat of mail, formed of laths, fastened together with sinews, which render
it very flexible, though it is so close as not to admit a dart or arrow. It
serves only to cover the trunk of the body, and may, not improperly, be
compared to the stays worn by women.

We had not an opportunity of seeing any of the habitations of the natives, as
none of them dwelt in the bay where our ships anchored, or where any of us
landed. With respect to their domestic utensils, they brought, in their canoes
some round and oval wooden dishes, rather shallow; and others of a sylindrical
form, considerably deeper. The sides consisted of one piece, bent round, after
the manner of our chip boxes, but thick, and neatly fastened with thongs; the
bottoms being fixed in with small pegs of wood. Others were somewhat smaller,
and of a more elegant figure, not unlike a large oval butter-boat, without any
handle, but shallower: these were composed of a piece of wood, or some horny
substance, and were sometimes neatly carved. They had a number of little square
bags, made of the same gut with their exterior frocks, curiously adorned with
very small red feathers, interwoven with it, in which were contained several
very fine sinews, and bundles of small cord, made out of them, plaited with
extraordinary ingenuity. They likewise brought some wooden models of their
canoes chequered baskets, wrought so closely as to hold water, and a
considerable number of small images, of the length of four or five inches,
either of wood, or stuffed, which were covered with a piece of fur, and
embellished with quill-feathers, with hair fixed on their heads. We could not
determine whether these were intended merely as children's toys, or were held
in veneration, as representing their deceased friends and relations, and
applied to some superstitious purpose. They have many instruments formed of two
or three hoops, or concentrical pieces of wood, having a cross-bar fixed in he
middle, by which they are held. To these they fix a number of dried
barnacle-shells, with threads, which when shaken, produce a loud noise, and
thus serve the purpose of a rattle. This contrivance is probably a substitute
for the rattling-bird at King George's Sound.

It is uncertain with what tools their wooden utensils, frames, of canoes, etc,
are made; the only one that we observed among them being a sort of stone adze,
somewhat resembling those of Otaheite, and other islands of the Pacific Ocean.
They have a great quantity of iron knives, some of which are rather curved,
others strait, and some very small ones, fixed in longish handles, with the
blades bent upwards. They have also knives of another sort, sometimes almost
two feet in length, shaped, in a great measure, like a dagger, with a ridge
toward the middle. They wear these in sheaths of skins, hung by a thong round
their necks, under their robe or frock. It is probable, that they use them only
as weapons, and that their other knives are applied to different purposes.
Whatever they have, is as well made as if they were provided with a complete
chest of tools; and their plating of sinews, sewing, and small work on their
little bags above mentioned, may be said to vie with the neatest manufactures
found in any part of the globe. Upon the whole, considering the uncivilized
state of the natives of this Sound, their northerly situation, amidst a country
almost continually covered with snow, and the comparatively wretched materials
they have to work with, it appears, that, with respect to their skill and
invention, in all manual operations, they are at least equal to any other
people.

The food that we saw them eat, was the flesh of some animal, either roasted or
broiled, and dried fish. Some of the former that was purchased, had the
appearance of bear's flesh. They likewise eat a larger sort of fern-root,
either baked or dressed in some other method. Some of us observed them eat
freely of a substance, which we imagined was the interior part of the pine
bark. Their drink, in all probability, is water; for, in their canoes, they
brought snow in wooden vessels, which they swallowed by mouthfulls. Their
manner of eating is decent and cleanly, for they constantly took care to remove
any dirt that might adhere to their food; and though they would sometimes eat
the raw fat of some sea animal, they did not fail to cut it carefully into
mouthfuls. Their persons were, to appearance, always clean; and their utensils,
in general, were kept in excellent order, as were also their boats.

The language of these people seems difficult to be understood; which is,
perhaps, not owing to any confusion or indistinctness in their sounds, but to
the various significations which their words bear. For they appeared frequently
to make use of the same word on very different occasions; though, probably, if
we had had a longer intercourse with them, this might have proved to be a
mistake on our part. Among the very few words of their language that Mr.
Anderson was enabled to procure, are the following, viz. aa, yes; keeta, give
me something; tawuk, keep it; akashou, what is the name of that? namuk, an
ear-ornament; natooneshuk, a sea-otter's skin; ableu, a spear; yaut, I Will go,
or, shall I go? keelashnk, guts of which they make jackets; naema, give me
something by way of exchange, or barter; whaehai, shall I keep it? ooonaka, of
or belonging to me.

Our knowledge of the animals of this part of the American continent, is
entirely derived from the skins that were brought by the natives for sale.
These were principally of bears, common and pine martins, sea-otters, seals,
racoons, small ermines, foxes, and the whitish cat or lynx. Among these various
skins, the most common were those of racoons, martins, and sea-otters, which
constituted the ordinary dress of these people; but the skins of the martins,
which were in general of a far lighter brown than those of Nootka, were greatly
superior to them in point of fineness; whereas those of the sea-otters, which,
as well as the martins, were much more plentiful here than at Nootka, seemed to
be considerably inferior in the thickness and fineness of their fur, though
they far exceeded them with respect to size; and were, for the most part, of
the glossy black sort. The skins of seals and bears were also pretty common;
and the former were in general white, beautifully spotted with black, or
sometimes simply white; and many of the bears here were of a dark brown hue.

Besides these animals, there is here the white bear, of whose skins the
natives brought several pieces, and some complete skins of cubs. There is also
the wolverine, or quickhatch, whose skin has very bright colors; and a larger
species of ermine than the common one, varied with brown, and having scarcely
any black on its tail. The skin of the head of some very large animal was
likewise brought to us, but we could not positively decide what it was: though,
from the color and shagginess of the hair, and its not resembling any land
animal, we conjectured that it might be that of the male ursine seal, or
sea-bear. But one of the most beautiful skins that fell under our observation,
is that of a small animal near a foot in length, of a brown color on the back
with a number of obscure whitish specks, the sides being of a blueish ash
color, with a few of these specks. The tail is about a third part of the
length of the body, and is covered with whitish hair. This animal is doubtless
the same with that which is called by Mr. Staehlin, in his account of the New
Northern Archipelago, the spotted field mouse. But whether it is really of the
mouse kind, or a squirrel, we could not determine, for want of entire skins;
though Mr. Anderson was inclined to imagine, that it is the same animal which
Mr. Pennant has described under the appellation of the Casan marmot. The great
number of skins that we observed here, demonstrates the abundance of the
various animals we have mentioned; but it is somewhat remarkable, that we
neither met with the skins of the mouse, nor of the common species of deer.

With respect to birds, we found here the halcyon, or great king-fisher, which
had fine bright colors; the shag; the white-headed eagle; and the
humming-bird, which often flew about our ships, while we lay at anchor; though
it can scarcely be supposed to live here during the winter, which must be
extremely severe. The waterfowl seen by us were Black sea-pyes, with red
bills, such as we met with in New-Zealand and Van Diemen's Land; geese; a small
sort of duck, nearly resembling that species we saw at Kerguelen's Land; and
another sort with which none of us were acquainted. Some of our people who went
ashore, killed a snipe, a grouse, and some plovers. But though the waterfowl
were numerous, particularly the geese and ducks, they were so shy that it was
scarce possible to get within shot; in consequence of which, we procured a very
inconsiderable supply of them as refreshment. The duck beforementioned is
about the size of the common wild duck, of a deep black, with red feet, and a
short pointed tail. Its bill is white, tinged toward the point with red, and
has a large black spot, almost square, near its base, on each side, where it is
also somewhat distended. On the forehead is a large triangular white spot; and
on the hind^r part of the neck is one still larger. The colors of the female
are considerably duller than those of the male; and it has none of the
ornaments of the bill, excepting the two black spots, which are rather obscure.

A species of diver, which seems peculiar to this place, was observed here. It
is equal to a partridge in size, and has a short, black, compressed bill. Its
head, and the upper part of its neck, are of a brownish black; and the
remainder of its body is of a deep brown, obscurely waved with black, except
the under part, which is totally of a blackish cast, minutely varied with
white. We also found a small land bird, of the finch kind, about the size of a
yellow-hammer; but we imagined it to be one of those which change their color
with the season, and with their different migrations. It was, at this time, of
a dusky brown, with a reddish tail; and the supposed male had, on the crown of
the head, a large yellow spot, with some varied black on the upper part of its
neck, but the latter was on the breast of the female.

The fish that were principally brought to us by the natives for sale, were
torsk and halibut; and we caught some sculpins about the ship, with star-fish
of a purplish hue, that had sixteen or eighteen rays. The rocks were almost
destitute of shellfish; and the only other animal of this tribe that was
observed by us, was a reddish crab, covered with very large spines.

The metals seen by us were iron and copper; both which, but more particularly
the former, were in such abundance, as to form the points of numbers of their
lances and arrows. The ores which they made use of to paint themselves with,
were a brittle, unctuous, red ochre, or iron ore; a pigment of a bright blue;
and black lead. Each of these seemed to be very scarce among them.

We observed few vegetables of any kind; and the trees that chiefly grew about
this sound, were the Canadian and spruce pine, some of which were of a
considerable size.

These people must, doubtless, have received from some more civilized nation,
the beads and iron found among them. We were almost certain, that we were the
first Europeans with whom they had ever had a direct communication; and it
remains only to be determined, from what quarter they had procured our
manufactures, by intermediate conveyance. And it is more than probable, that
they had obtained these articles, through the intervention of the more i^land
tribes either from the settlements about Hudson's Bay, or those on the lakes of
Canada; unless we can admit the supposition, that the Russians, from
Camtsckatka, have already extended their traffic to this distance; or that the
natives of their most easterly Fox Islands carry on an intercourse along the
coast, with the inhabitants of Prince Wililam's Sound.

With respect to copper, these people, perhaps, procure it themselves, or, at
most, it passes to them through few hands; for, wh^^ they offered any of it by
way of barter, they used to express its being in sufficient plenty among them,
by pointing to their weapons; as if they meant to intimate, that as they had so
much copper of their own, there was no occasion for increasing their stock.

If, however, the natives of this inlet are furnished with European commodities
by means of the intermediate traffic to the eastern coast, it is rather
remarkable, that they should never, in return, have supplied the more inland
Indians with some of their sea-otter skins, which would undoubtedly have
appeared, at some time or other, in the invirons of Hudson's Bay. But that does
not appear to be the case; and the only method by which we can account for
this, must be by considering the very great distance; which, though it might
not prevent European articles of commerce from coming so far, as being so
uncommon, might hinder the skins, which are common, from passing through more
than two or three tribes, who might make use of them for their own clothing,
and send others, which they reckoned of inferior value, as being of their own
animals, toward the east, till they reach the traders at the European
settlements.

CHAP. VI.
Proceed along the Coast -- Cape Elizabeth -- Cape St. Hermogenes -- Beering's
Voyage and Chart very defective -- Point Banks -- Barren Isles -- Cape Douglas
-- Cape Bid -- Mount St. Augustine -- Endeavor to find a passage up an Inlet
-- Both Ships make a Progress up it -- Convincing Proofs of its being a River
-- A Branch of it called River Turnagain -- The great River named Cook's River
-- The Ships return -- Several Visits from the Natives -- Leiutenant King
lands, displays a Flag, and takes possession of the Country -- His Reception by
the Natives -- The Resolution strikes upon a Bank -- The high Tides accounted
for.

LEAVING Prince William's Sound, on Wednesdy the 20th of May, we steered to the
south-west, with a gentle breeze; which was succeeded by a calm at four o'clock
the next morning, and that calm was soon after followed by a breeze from
south-west. We continued to stretch to the south-west, and passed a lofty
promontory, in the latitude of 59 10, and the longitude of 207 45. It having
been discovered on Princess Elizabeth's birthday, Captain Cook gave it the
name of Cape Elizbeth. As we could see no land beyond it, we flattered
ourselves that it was the western extremity of the continent; but we were soon
convinced that we were mistaken, fresh land appearing in sight, bearing
west-south-west. The wind had now increased to a strong gale, and forced us to
a considerable distance from the coast. On the 22d, in the afternoon, the gale
abated, and we stood for Cape Elizabeth; which, about noon the next day, bore
west, distant ten leagues. New land was then seen, bearing south-west, which,
it was imagined connected Cape Elizabeth with the land we had seen toward the
west.

We stood to the southward till the next day at noon, at which time we were
about three leagues from the coast, which we had seen on the 22d. In this
situation, it formed a point, that bore west-north-west. More land was
discovered, extending to the southward; on which was seen a ridge of mountains,
with summits covered with snow, behind the first land, which we supposed to be
an island, there appearing on it but an inconsiderable quantity of snow. The
latitude of this point of land is 58 15, and its longitude 207 42. And, by what
the Commodore could gather from Beering's Voyage and Chart, supposed it to be
what he called Cape St. Hermogenes. But the account of that Voyage, as well as
the chart, is so extremely inaccurate, that it is almost impossible to discover
any one place, which that navigator either saw or touched at. The Commodore,
indeed, was by no means certain, that the bay which he had named after Beering,
was the place where he had anchored.

In the chart above mentioned, a space is here pointed out, where Beering is
supposed to have seen no land. This favored Mr. Staehelin's ascount, who makes
Cape St. Hermogenes, and the land discovered by Beering to the south west of
it, to be a cluster of islands; and that St Hermogenes is one of those which
are destitute of wood. This appeared to be confirmed by what we now saw; and we
entertained the pleasing hopes of finding here a passage northward, with out
being under the necessity of proceeding any farther to the south-west.

By variable light airs and calms, we were detained off the Cape till two
o'clock in the morning of the 25th, when a breeze springing up, we steered
along the coast, and perceived that the land of Cape St. Hermogenes was an
island, about six leagues in circumference separated from the coast by a
channel of about one league in breadth. Some rocks lie above water, a league
and a half to the north of this island; and on the north-east side of the
rocks, we had from thirty to twenty fathoms water.

About noon, St. Hermogenes bore south-east, distant eight leagues; the land to
the north-west extending from south half west to near west. In the last
direction it ended in a low point, named Point Banks. The ship was, at this
time, in the latitude of 58 41, and in the longitude of 207 44. In this
situation, the land was in sight bearing north-west, which, it was imagined,
connected Cape Elizabeth with this south-west land. When we approached it, we
saw it was a groupe of high islands and rocks, and consequently unconnected
with any other land. From the nakedness of their appearance, they were
denominated the Barren Isles: they are situated in the latitude of 59, three
leagues distant from Cape Elizabeth, and five from Point Banks.

We intended to have passed through one of the channels by which these islands
are divided; but, a strong current setting against us, we went to the leeward
of them all. The weather, which had been thick and hazy, cleared up toward the
evening, and we perceived a very lofty promontory, whose elevated summit
appeared above the clouds, forming two exceedingly high mountains. The
Commodore named this promontory Cape Douglas, in honor of his friend Dr.
Douglas canon of Windsor. Its latitude is 58 56, and its longitude 206 10;
twelve leagues from Point Banks, and ten to the westward of the Barren Isles.

The coast seemed to form a large deep bay, between this point and Cape
Douglas; which, from our observing some smoke upon Point Banks received the
name of Smokey Bay. On the 26th, at daybreak, being to the northward of the
Barren Isles, we perceived more land, extending from Cape Douglass to the
north. It consisted of a chain of very high mountains; one of which being much
more conspicious than the rest, obtained the name of Mount St Augustine.

We were not discouraged at perceiving this land, supposing it to be wholly
unconnected with the land of Cape Elizabath. We also expected to find a passage
to the north-west, between Cape Douglass and Mount St. Augustine. It was, indeed,
imagined, that the land to the north of Cape Douglass, consisted of a groupe of
islands, separated by so many channels, any of which we might have chosen,
according to the direction of the wind.

Flattered with these ideas, and having a fresh gale at north-north-east, we
stood to the north-west, till eight o'clock, when we were fully convinced, that
what we had supposed to be the islands, were summits of mountains, connected by
the lower land, which we could not perceive at a greater distance, on account
of the haziness of the horizon. This land was covered wholly with snow, from
the tops of the mountains down to the sea beach; and had, in every other
respect, the appearance of a great continent. Captain Cook was now fully
convinced that he should discover no passage by this inlet: and his persevering
in the search of it, was more to satisfy others, than to confirm his own
opinion.

Mount St. Augustine, at this time, bore north west, about three leagues
distant. It is of vast height, and of a conical figure; but whether it be an
island, or part of the continent, is not yet ascertained. Perceiving that
nothing was to be done to the west, we stood over to Cape Elizabeth, under
which we fetched at about five in the afternoon.

Between Cape Elizabeth and a lofty promontory, named Cape Bid This name, and
that of Mount St. Augustine, were directed by our calendar.
, is a bay, in which there appeared to be two snug harbors. We stood into this
bay, and might have anchored there in twenty-three fathoms water: but, the
Commodore having no such intention, we tacked, and stood to the westward, with
a very strong gale, accompanied with rain and hazy weather. The gale abated the
next morning, and about three o'clock in the afternoon, the weather cleared up;
Cape Douglass bearing south-west by west, and the depth of water being forty
fathoms, over a rocky bottom.

The coast from Cape Bid, trended north-east by east, with a chain of
mountains inla^d, in the same direction. On the coast, the land was woody, and
there appeared to be some commodious harbors. We had the mortification,
however, to discover low land in the middle of the inlet, extending from
north-north-east, to north-east by east; but, as it was supposed to be an
island, we were not much discouraged. About this time we steered, with a light
breeze, to the westward of this low land; as, in that direction, there was no
appearance of obstruction. Our soundings were from thirty to twenty-five
fathoms.

In the morning of the 28th, having but little wind, the ship drove to the
southward; and, in order to stop her, we dropped a kedge-anchor, with an eight
inch hauser. But, in bringing the ship up, we lost both that and the anchor. We
brought the ship up, however, with one of the bowers, and spent a considerable
part of the day in sweeping for them, but without effect. We were now in the
latitude of 59 51; the low-land extended from north east to south-east, the
nearest part distant about two leagues. The land on the western shore was
distant about seven leagues. A strong tide set to the southward, out of the
inlet; it was the ebb, and ran almost four knots in an hour. At ten o'clock it
was low water. Great quantities of sea-weed, and some drift wood, were taken
out with the tide. Though the water had become thick, and resembled that in
rivers, we were encouraged to proceed, by finding it as salt as the ocean, even
at low water. Three knots was the strength of the flood tide; and the stream
continued to run up till four in the afternoon.

Having a calm the whole day, we moved with a light breeze at east, at eight
o'clock in the evening, and stood to the north, up the inlet. The wind, soon
after, veered to the north, increased to a fresh gale, and blew in squalls,
with some rain. But this did not hinder us from plying up while the flood
continued, which was till the next morning, at near five o'clock. We had from
thirty-five to twenty-four fathoms water. We anchored about two leagues from
the eastern shore, where our latitude was 6o 8; some low land, which we
supposed to be an island, lying under the western shore, distant between three
and four leagues.

The weather having now become fair and clear, we could see any land within our
horizon; when nothing was visible to obstruct our progress in a north-east
direction. But a ridge of mountains appeared on each side, rising behind each
other, without any separation. Captain Cook supposed it to be low water about
ten o'clock, but the ebb ran down till almost twelve. Two columns of smoke were
now visible on the eastern shore; a certain sign that inhabitants were near. We
weighed at one in the afternoon, and plied up under double reefed topsails,
having a strong gale at north east.

We stretched over to the western shore, intending to have taken shelter till
th gale should cease; but falling suddenly from forty fathoms water into
twelve, and seeing the apperance of a shoal, we stretched back to the eastward,
and anchored in nineteen fathoms water, under the eastern shore; the north-west
part of which, ended in a bluff point.

On the 30th of May, about two o'clock in the morning, we weighed anchor again,
the gale having much abated, but still continuing contrary. We plied up till
near seven, and then anchored in nineteen fathoms water, under the shore to the
eastward.

Two canoes, with a man in each, came off to the ship about noon, nearly from
that part where we had seen the smoke the day before. It cost them some labor
to paddle across the strong tide; and they hesitated a little, before they
dared venture to approach us. One of them was very loquacious, but to no
purpose, for we could not understand a syllable he said: while he was talking,
he kept pointing continually to the shore, which we supposed to be an
invitation for us to go thither. Captain Cook made them a present of a few
trifles, which he conveyed to them from the quarter gallery.

These people strongly resembled those we had seen in Prince William's Sound,
both in dress and person: their canoes were also constructed in the same
manner. One of our visitors seemed to have no beard, and his face was painted
of a jet black; the other, who was older, was not painted, but he had a large
beard, and a countenance like the common sort of the people in the Sound. Smoke
was this day seen upon the flat western shore; whence we inferred, that these
lower spots only are inhabited.

As we weighed when the flood made, the canoes quitted us. We stood over to the
western shore, with a fresh gale, and fetched under the point above mentioned.
This, with the point on the opposite shore, contracted the breadth of the
channel to about four leagues, through which ran a prodigious tide. It had a
terrible appearance, as we were ignorant whether the water was thus agitated by
the stream, or by the dashing of the waves against sands or rocks. Meeting with
no shoal, we concluded it to be the former, but we afterward found ourselves
mistaken.

We kept the western shore aboard, that appearing to be the fairest. We had a
depth of thirteen fathoms near the shore, and, two or three miles off, upwards
of forty. In the evening, about eight o'clock, we anchored under a point of
land bearing north-east, distant about three leagues, and lay there during the
ebb.

Till we arrived here, the water retained an equal degree of saltness, both at
high and low water, and was as salt as that which is in the ocean; but now the
marks of a river evidently displayed themselves. The water, which was taken up
at this ebb, was much fresher than any we had tasted; whence we concluded that
we were in a large river, and not in a strait which had a communication with
the northern seas. But having proceeded thus far, we were anxious to have
stronger proofs; and, therefore, in the morning of the 31st we weighed with the
flood, and drove up with the tide, having but little wind.

We were attended, about eight o'clock, by many of the the natives, in one
large canoe, and several small ones. The latter had only one person on board
each; and some of the paddles had a blade at each end, like those of the
Esquimaux. Men, women, and children, were contained in the large canoes. At
some distance from the ship, they exhibited on a long pole, a kind of leathern
frock, which we interpreted to be a sign of their peaceable intentions. They
conveyed this frock into the ship, as an acknowledgement for some trifles which
the Commodore had given them.

No difference appeared either in the persons, dress, or canoes of these
people, and the natives of Prince William's Sound, except that the small canoes
were not so large as those of the Sound, and carried only one man.

We bartered with them for some of their fur dresses, made of the skins of
animals; particularly those of sea-otters, martins, and hares: we also had a
few of their dar^s, and a supply of salmon and halibut. We gave them in
exchange for these, some old cloths, beads, and pieces of iron.

They were already possessed of large iron knives, and glass beads of a sky
blue color, such as we saw among the inhabitants of Prince William's Sound.
The latter, as well as those which they received of us, they seemed to value
highly. But they were particularly earnest in asking for large pieces of iron,
to which they gave the name of goone; though with them, as well as with their
neighbors in the Sound, one word seemed to have many significations. Their
language is certainly the same, the words ^naka, keeta, and naema, and a few
others which were frequently used in Prince William's Sound, were also commonly
used by this new tribe. After passing about two hours between the two ships,
they retired to the western shore.

We anchored at nine o'clock, in sixteen fathoms water, and almost two leagues
from the western shore, the ebb being already begun. It ran but three knots an
hour at its greatest strength; and fell, after we had anchored, twenty-one feet
upon a perpendicular. The weather was alternately clear and misty, with
drizling rain. When it was clear, we perceived low land between the mountains
on the eastern shore, bearing east from the station of the ships, which we
concluded to be islands between us and the main land. We also beheld low land
to the northward, which appeared to extend from the mountains on one side, to
those on the other; and, at low water, large shoals were seen, stretching out
from this low land, from some of which we were not far distant. We doubted,
from these appearances, whether the inlet did not take an easterly direction
through the above opening; or whether that opening was only a branch of it, the
main channel continuing its northern direction. The chain of mountains, on each
side of it, strongly countenanced the latter supposition.

To be satisfied of these particulars, Captain Cook dispatched two boats; and,
when the floodtide made, followed with the two ships: but it being a dead calm,
and having a strong tide, we anchored, after driving about ten miles. At the
lowest of the ebb, the water at and near the surface was perfectly fresh;
though retaining a considerable degree of saltness, if taken above a foot below
it* We had this and many other convincing proofs of its being a river: such as
thick muddy water, low shores, trees and rubbish of various kinds, floating
backwards and forwards with the tide. In the afternoon we received another
visit from the natives, in several canoes, who trafficked considerably with our
people, without so much as attempting any dishonest action.

At two o'clock in the morning of the first of June, the master, who commanded
the two boats returned, informing us that he found the inlet, or river,
contracted to one league in breadth, and that it took a northerly course
through low land on each side. He advanced about three leagues through this
narrow part, which he found from twenty to seventeen fathoms deep. While the
stream ran down, the water was perfectly fresh; but it became brackish when it
ran up, and very much so toward high water.

He went ashore upon an island, between this branch and that to the east, and
saw some current bushes; and some other fruit trees and bushes that were
unknown to him. About three leagues to the northward of this search, he saw
another separation in the eastern chain of mountains, through which he supposed
it probable the river took a north-east direction; but this, perhaps, was only
another branch, and the main channel continued in a northern direction between
the two chains of mountains.

The hopes of finding a passage were no longer entertained; but as the ebb was
spent, and we were unable to return against the tide, we took the advantage of
the latter, to get a closer view of the eastern branch; in order to determine
whether the low land on the east, was an island or not. For this purpose we
weighed with the first of the flood, and stood over for the eastern shore. At
eight o'clock a breeze sprung up in an opposite direction to our course, so
that we despaired of reaching the entrance of the river. The Commodore,
therefore, dispached two boats. under the command of Lieutenant King, to make
such observations as might enable us to form some tolerable idea of the nature
of the river.

We anchored, about ten o'clock, in nine fathoms water. The Commodore observing
the strength of the tide to be so great, that the boats could not make head
against it, made a signal for them to return before they had proceeded half way
to the entrance of the river. The chief knowledge obtained by this tide's work,
was, that all the low land, which we imagined to be an island, was one
continued tract from the great river to the foot of the mountains, terminating
at the south entrance of this eastern branch, which the Commodore denominated
the river Turnagain. The low land begins again on the north side of this river
and extends from the foot of the mountains, to the banks of the great river;
forming, before the river Turnagain, a large bay, having from twelve to five
fathoms water.

After entering the bay, the flood set very strong into the river Turnagain,
and the ebb came out still stronger, the water falling twenty feet upon a
perpendicular. From these circumstances, it plainly appeared, that a passage
was not to be expected by this side river, any more than by the main branch.
But, as the water at ebb, though much fresher, retained a considerable degree
of saltness, it is probable that both these branches are navigable by ships
much farther; and that a very extensive inland communication lies open, by
means of this river and its several branches. We had traced it to the latitude
of 61 30, and the longitude of 219, which is upwards of several leagues from
its entrance end saw no appearance of its source.

The time we spent in the discovery of this great river Captain Cook having
here left a blank, Lord Sandwich very judiciously directed it to be called
Cook's River.
ought not to be regretted, if it should hereafter prove useful to the present,
or any future age. But the delay, thus occasioned, was an essential loss to us,
who had an object of greater magnitude in view. The season was far advanced;
and it was now evident that the continent of North America extended much
farther to the west, than we had reason to expect from the most approved
charts. The Commodore, however, had the satisfaction to reflect, that, if he
had not examined this very large river, speculative fabricators of geography
would have ventured to assert that it had a communication with the sea to the
north, or with Hudson's or Baffin's bay to the east; and it would probably have
been marked, on future maps of the world with as much appearance of precision,
as the imaginary straits of de Fuca, and de Font.

Mr. King was again sent, in the afternoon, with two armed boats, with orders
from Captain Cook to land on the south east side of the river, where he was to
display the flag; and, in his Majesty's name, to take possession of the country
and the river. He was also ordered to bury a bottle in the earth, containing
some English coin of 1772, and a paper, whereon were written the names of our
ships, and the date of our discovery. The ships, in the mean time, were got
under sail. The wind blew fresh easterly; but we had not been long under way
before a calm ensued; and the flood tide meeting us, we found it necessary to
anchor in six fathoms water; the point where Mr. King landed bearing south, at
the distance of two miles. This point of land was named Point Possession.

On Mr. King's return, he informed the Commodore, that when he approached the
shore, he saw eighteen or twenty of the natives with their arms extended; an
attitude, he supposed, meant to signify their peaceable disposition, and to
convince him that they were without weapons. Seeing Mr. King and his attendants
land, and observing muskets in their hands, they were alarmed, and requested
(by expressive signs) that they would lay them down. This was immediately
complied with, and then Mr. King and his party were permitted to walk up to
them, when they appeared to be very sociable and cheerful.

They had with them several dogs, and a few pieces of fresh salmon. Mr. Law,
Surgeon of the Discovery, happened to be of the party, purchased one of the
dogs, and, taking it toward the boat, immediately shot it dead. At this they
seemed exceedingly surprised; and, not thinking themselves safe in such
company, they walked away; but it presently appeared, that they had concealed
their spears and other weapons in the bushes close behind them. Mr. King
informed us, that the ground was swampy, and the soil poor and light. It,
however, produced some pines, alders, birch, and willows; some rose and current
bushes, and a little grass; but there was not a plant in flower to be seen.

When it was high water we weighed anchor, and, with a faint breeze, stood over
to the west shore, where we anchored early the next morning, on account of the
return of the flood. Presently after we were visited by several of the natives,
in canoes, who bartered their skins, and afterward parted with their garments,
many of them returning perfectly naked. Among others they brought a great
quantity of the skins of white rabbits and red foxes, but only two or three of
those of otters. We also purchased some pieces of halibut and salmon. They gave
iron the preference to every thing we offered them in exchange. The
lip-ornaments were less in fashion among them than at Prince William's Sound;
but those which pass through the nose were more frequent, and in general,
considerably longer. They had, likewise, more embroidered work on their
garments, quivers, knife-cases, and many other articles.

We weighed at half past ten, and plied down the river with a gentle breeze at
south; when, by the inattention of the man at the lead, the Resolution struck,
and stuck upon a bank, nearly in the middle of the river. It is pretty certain
that this bank occasioned that strong agitation of the stream, with which we
were so much surprised when turning up the river. We had twelve feet depth of
water about the ship, at the lowest of the ebb, but the bank was dry in other
parts.

When the Resolution came aground, Captain Cook made a signal for the Discovery
to anchor. We were afterward informed, that she had been almost a shore on the
west side of the bank. About five o'clock in the afternoon, as the flood tide
came in, the ship floated off without sustaining any damage, or occasioning the
least trouble. We then stood over to the west shore, where we anchored, in deep
water, to wait for the ebb, the wind being still unfavourable to us.

At ten o'clock at night we weighed with the ebb; and about five the next
morning, (the 3d of June) the tide being finished, we cast anchor on the west
shore, about two miles below the bluff point. When we were in this station we
were visited by many of the natives, who attended us all the morning; and,
indeed, their company was highly acceptable to us, as they brought with them a
quantity of fine salmon, which they exchanged for some of our trifles. Several
hundred weight of it was procured for the two ships, and the greatest part of
it split, and ready for drying.

The mountains now, for the first time after our entering the river, were free
from clouds, and we perceived a volcano in one of those on the western side.
Its latitude is 60 23; and it is the first high mountain north of Mount St.
Augustine. The volcano is near the summit, and on that part of the mountain next
the river. It emits a white smoke, but no fire. The wind continuing southerly,
we still tided it down the river; and, on the morning of the 5th, arriving at
the place where we had lost our kedge anchor, we attempted, though
unsuccessfully, to recover it.

Before our departure from this place, we were again visited by some of the
natives, in six canoes, from the eastern shore. For half an hour they remained
at a small distance from the ships, gazing at them with a kind of silent
surprise, without uttering a syllable to us, or to each other. At length they
grew courageous, came along-side, and began to barter with u^^* nor did they
leave us till they had parted with their skins and salmon, which were the only
articles they had brought to traffic with.

It may not be unnecessary to remark, that all the people we had seen in this
river, had a striking resemblance, in every particular, to those who inhabit
Prince William's Sound, but differed most essentially from those of Nootka, as
well in their persons as their language.

The points of their spears and knives are made of iron; some of the former,
indeed, are made of copper. Their spears resemble our spontoons; and their
knives, for which they have sheaths, are of a considerable length. Except
those, and a few glass beads, every thing we saw amongst them was of their own
manufacture. We have already hazarded conjectures from whence they derive their
foreign articles. It cannot be supposed, however, that the Russians have been
amongst them, for we should not then have seen them clothed in such valuable
skins as those of the sea-otter.

A very beneficial fur trade might certainly be carried on with the natives of
this vast coast; but, without a northern passage, it is to remote for
Great Britain to be benefited by such commerce. It should, however, be
observed, that almost the only valuable skins, on, this west side of North
America, are those of the sea-otter. Their other skins were of a superior
quality; and it should be farther observed, that the greater part of the skins,
which we purchased of them, were made up into garments. Some of them indeed,
were in pretty good condition, others, old and ragged, and all of them
extremely lousy. But, as skins are used by these people only for clothing
themselves, they, perhaps, are not at the trouble of dressing more of them than
they require for this purpose. This is probably the chief cause of their
killing the animals, for they principally receive their supply of food from the
sea and rivers. But if they were once habituated to a constant trade with
foreigners, such an intercourse would increase their wants, by acquainting them
with new luxuries; to be enabled to purchase which, they would become more
assiduous in procuring skins; a plentiful supply of which might doubtless be
obtained in this country.

The tide is very considerable in this river, and greatly assists to facilitate
the navigation of it. In the stream, it is high water between two and three
o'clock, on the days of the new and full moon; and the tide rises between three
and four fathoms. The mouth of the river being in a corner of the coast, the
ocean forces the flood into it by both shores, which swells the tide to a
greater height than at other parts of this coast.

CHAP. VII.
Departure from Cook's River -- Pass St. Hermogenes -- Cape Whitsunday --
Whitsuntide Bay -- Cape Greville -- Cape Barnabas -- Two headed Point --
Trinity Island -- Beering's Foggy Island -- Foggy Cape -- Pinnacle Point --
Description of a curious Bird -- Account of the Schumagin Island -- A Russian
Letter brought on board the Discovery -- Various Conjectures concerning it --
Rock Points -- Halibut Island -- Halibut Head -- A Volcano -- Escape
providentially -- Arrival at Oo^alashka -- Traffic with the Natives there --
Another Russian Letter brought on board -- Description of the Harbor of
Samganoodha.

THE ebb tide making in our favor, we weighed, and, with a gentle breeze at
south-west, plied down the river. The flood, however, obliged us to anchor
again; but, about one o'clock the next morning, we got under sail with a fresh
breeze, passed the barren islands about eight, and at noon Cape St. Hermogenes
bore south-south-east, about eight leagues distant. We intended to go through
the passage between the island of that name and the main land; but the wind
soon after failed us, and we had baffling airs from the eastward; we,
therefore, abandoned the design of carrying our ship through that passage.

We now beheld several columns of smoke on the continent, northward of the
passage; which were probably meant as signals to attract us thither. The land
forms a bay here, a low rocky island lying off the north-west point of it. Some
other islands, of a similar appearance, are scattered along the coast between
here and Point Banks.

About eight in the evening, St. Hermogenes extended from south half east to
south-south-east; and the rocks bore south-east, distant three miles. Here we
had forty fathoms water, and catched several halibut with hooks and lines. We
passed the rocks, and bore up to the southward about midnight; and, on the 7th
at noon, St. Hermogenes bore north, at the distance of four leagues. The
southernmost point of the main land lay north half west, five leagues distant.
The latitude of this promontory is 58 15, and its longitude 207 24. It was
named, after the day, Cape-Whitsunday; and a large bay to the west; of it, was
called Whitsuntide Bay.

The wind, which had been at north-east, shifted to the southward about two in
the afternoon. The weather was gloomy, and the air cold. At midnight we stood
in for the land, and at seven o'clock in the morning of the 8th, we were within
four miles of it, and less than two miles from some sunken rocks, bearing
west-south-west. Here we anchored in thirty-five fathoms water. In standing in
for the coast, we passed the mouth of Whitsuntide Bay, and perceived land all
round the bottom of it; therefore the land must either be connected, or the
points lock in behind each other; the former conjecture appears to be the most
probable. There are some small islands to the west of the bay. To the southward
the sea coast is low, with projecting rocky points, having small inlets between
them. Upon the coast there was no wood, and but little snow; but the mountains,
at some distance inland, were entirely covered with snow. We were now in the
latitude of 57 52; the land here forming a point, it was named Cape Greville.
Its latitude is 57 33, and its longitude 207 15. It is fifteen leagues distant
from St. Hermogenes.

The 9th, 10th, and 11th, we had constant misty weather, with some rain, and
seldom had a sight of the coast; we had a gentle breeze of wind, and the air
was raw and cold. We continued plying up the coast.

In the evening of the 12th, the fog clearing up, we saw the land about twelve
leagues distant, bearing west; and we stood in for it early the next morning.
At noon we were within three miles of it; an elevated point, which was named
Cape Barnabas, in the latitude of 57 13, bore north-north-east, at the distance
of about ten miles. We could not see the north-east extreme for the haze, but
the point to the south-west had an elevated summit, which terminated in two
round hills* and was therefore called Two-headed Point. This part of the coast
is principally composed of high hills, and deep valleys. We could sometimes
perceive the tops of other hills beyond those which form the coast, which had a
very barren appearance, though not much incumbered with snow. Not a tree or
bush was to be found, and the land, in general, had a brownish hue.

We continued to ply, and, at about six in the evening, being about midway
between Cape Barnabas and Two-headed Point, two leagues from the shore we had
sixty-two fathoms water. Here a low point of land was observed, bearing south
69 west. On the 14th, at noon, we were in the latitude of 56 49. The land seen
in the preceding evening now appeared like two islands. We were up with the
southernmost part of this land the next morning, and perceived it to be an
island, which obtained the name of Trinity Island. Its greatest extent, in the
direction of east and west, if about six leagues. It has naked elevated land at
each end, and is low toward the middle. Its latitude is 56 36, and its
longitude 205. It is distant about three leagues from the continent, between
which rocks and islands are interspersed. There seems, nevertheless, to be good
passage, and safe anchorage. We at first, imagined that this was Beering's
Foggy Island; but its situation is not agreeable to his chart.

In the evening at eight, we were within a league of the small islands above
mentioned. The westernmost point of the continent, now in view, we called Cape
Trinity, it being a low point facing Trinity Island. in this situation, we
stood over for the island, meaning to work up between that and the main. In
standing over toward the island, we met two men in a canoe, paddling from
thence to the main: instead of approaching us, they seemed carefully to avoid
it.

The wind now inclining to the south, we expected it would presently be at
south-east; knowing, from experience, that a south-easterly wind was here
generally accompanied with a thick fog, we were afraid to venture between the
island and the continent, lest we should not be able, to accomplish our passage
before night, or before the foggy weather came on; when we should be under the
necessity of anchoring, and lose the advantage of a fair wind. Induced by these
reasons, we stretched out to sea, and passed two or three rocky islets, near
the east end of Trinity Island. Having weathered the island, we tacked about
four in the afternoon, and steered west southerly, with a gale at
south-south-east, which veered to the south-east about midnight, and was
attended with misty rainy weather.

We expected, from the course we steered during the night, to fall in with the
continent in the morning; and we should, doubtless, have seen it if the weather
had been clear. No land appearing at noon, and the gale and fog increasing, we
steered west-north-west, under such sail as we could haul the wind with;
sensible of the danger of running before a strong gale, in the vicinity of an
unknown coast, and in a thick fog. It was, however, become necessary to run
some risk, when the wind was favorable to us; as we were convinced, that clear
weather was generally accompanied with westerly winds.

About three in the afternoon, land was perceived through the fog, bearing
north-west, about three miles distant. We instantly hauled up south, close to
the wind. The two courses were soon after split, and we had others to bring to
the yards: several of our sails received considerable damage. The gale abated,
and the weather cleared up about nine; when we again saw the coast, about the
distance of five leagues. Our depth was a hundred fathoms water.

The fog returned soon after, and was dispersed about four o'clock the next
morning; when we found ourselves, in some degree, surrounded by land; the
continent, or that which we supposed to be the continent, some elevated land,
bearing south-east, about nine leagues distant. The extreme of the main, at the
north-east, was the point of land seen during the fog; it was named Foggy Cape,
and lies in the latitude of 56 31.

Having had but little wind all night, a breeze now sprung up at north-west; we
stood to the southward with this, in order to make the land plainer, that was
seen in that direction. About nine o'clock, we discovered it to be an island,
nine miles in circumference, in the latitude of 56 10, and the longitude of 202
45. In our chart, it is named Foggy Island, it being reasonable to suppose,
from its situation, that it is the island on which Beering had bestowed the
same appellation. Three or four islands bore north by west; a point, with
pinnacle rocks upon it, bore north-west by west, called Pinnacle Point; and a
cluster of islets south-south-east, about nine leagues from the coast. In the
afternoon we had very little wind, and our progress was inconsiderable.

On Wednesday the 17th, we had gentle breeze* between west and north-west; the
weather was perfectly clear, and the air dry and sharp. The continent, about
noon, extended from south-west to north by east; the nearest part about seven
or eight leagues distant; a group of islands lying to the south-west, about the
same distance from the continent.

The weather was clear and pleasant on the 18th, and it was calm the greatest
part of the day. There is, probably, a continuation of the continent between
Foggy Cape and Trinity Island, which the thick weather hindered us from
perceiving.

The Commodore having occasion to send a boat to the Discovery, one of the
people a-board her, shot a most beautiful bird. It is smaller than a duck, and
the color is black, except that the forepart of the head is white; behind
each eye, an elegant yellowish-white crest arises; the bill and feet are of
reddish color. The first we saw of these birds was to the southward of Cape
St. Hermogenes; after which we saw them daily, and frequently in large flocks.
We often saw most of the other sea-birds, that are usually met with in the
northern ocean; such as shags, gulls, puffins, sheer-waters, ducks, geese, and
swans; and we seldom passed a day, without seeing whales, seals, and other fish
of great magnitude.

We got a light breeze, southerly, in the afternoon, and steered west, for the
channel between the islands and the continent. At daybreak next morning, we
were not far from it, and perceived several other islands, within those that we
had already seen, of various dimensions. But, between these islands, and those
we had seen before, there appeared to be a clear channel, for which we steered;
and, at noon, our latitude was 55 18, in the narrowest part of the channel. Of
this groupe of islands, the largest was now upon our left, and is called
Kodiak, as we were afterward informed. The Commodore did not bestow a name
upon any of the others, though he supposed them to be the same that Beering has
named Schumagin's Islands Decouve^tes des Russes, par Muller, p. 262.277.
. Islands appeared to the southward, as far as an island could be seen. They
begin in the longitude of 200 15 east, and extend about two degrees to the
westward.

Most of these islands are tolerably high, but very barren and rugged;
exhibiting very romantic appearances, and abounding with rocks and cliffs. They
have several bays and coves about them, and some fresh water streams descend
from their elevated parts, but the land was not embellished with a single tree
or bush. Plenty of snow still remained on many of them, as well as on those
parts of the continent which appeared between the innermost islands.

By four o'clock in the afternoon, we had passed all the islands to the south
of us. We found thirty fathoms water in the channel, and soon after we had got
through it, the Discovery, which was two miles astern, fired three guns, and
brought too, making a signal to speak with us. Captain Cook was much alarmed at
this; for, as no apparent danger had been observed in the channel, he was
apprehensive that the Discovery had sprung a leak, or met with some similar
accident. A boat was sent to her, which immediately returned with Captain
Clerk. He informed the Commodore, that some natives in three or four canoes,
having followed the ship for some time, at last got under his stern; one of
whom made many signs, having his cap off and bowing in the European manner. A
rope was then handed down from the ship, to which he fastened a thin wooden
box, and, after he had made some more gesticulations, the canoes left the
Discovery.

It was not imagined, that the box contained any thing, till the canoes had
departed, when it was accidently opened, and found to contain a piece of paper
carefully folded up, on which some wrighting appeared, which they supposed to
be in the Russian language. To this paper was prefixed the date 1778, and a
reference was made therein to the year 1779. Though unable to decypher the
alphabet of the writer, we were convinced, by his numerals, that others had
preceded us in visiting these dreary regions. Indeed the hopes of speedily
meeting some of the Russian traders, must be highly satisfactory to those, who
had been so long conversant with the savages of the Pacific Ocean, and those of
the continent of North America.

At first, Captain Clerk imagined, that some Russians had been shipwrecked
here; and that, seeing our ships, these unfortunate persons were induced thus
to inform us of their situation. Deeply impressed with sentiments of humanity
on this occasion, he was in hopes the Resolution would have stopped till they
had time to join us; hut no such idea ever occured to Captain Cook. If this had
really been the case, he supposed, that the first step which such shipwrecked
persons would have taken, in order to secure relief, would have been, to send
some of their people off to the ships in the canoes. He, therefore, rather
thought the paper was intended to communicate some information, from some
Russian trader, who had lately visited these islands, to be delivered to any of
his countrymen who should arrive; and that the natives supposing us to be
Russians, had brought off the note. Convinced of this, he enquired no farther
into the matter, but made sail, and steered to the westward.

We ran all night with a gentle breeze at north-east; and the next morning at
two some breakers were seen within us, distant about two miles; others were
soon after seen ahead, and they were innumerable on our larboard bow, and also
between us and the land. By holding a south course we, with difficulty, cleared
them. These breakers were produced by rocks, many of which were above water;
they are very dangerous, and extend seven leagues from land. We got on their
out side about noon, when our latitude was 54 44, and our longitude 198. The
nearest land was an elevated bluff point and was named Rock-Point; it bore
north, about eight leagues distance; the westernmost part of the main bore
north-west, and a high round hill, called Halibut Head, bore south-west,
distant about thirteen leagues.

At noon on the 21st, we made but little progress, having only faint winds and
calms. Halibut Head then bore north 24 west; and the island where it is
situated, called Halibut Island, extended from north by east to north-west.
This island is seven leagues in circumference, and, except the head, is very
low and barren; several small islands are near it, between which and the main,
there appears to be a passage, of the breadth of two or three leagues.

We were kept at such a distance from the continent, by the rocks and breakers,
that we had a very distant view of the coast between Halibut Island and Rock
Point. We could, however, perceive the main land covered with snow; and
particularly some hills, whose elevated tops towered above the clouds to a most
stupendous height. A volcano was seen on the most south-westerly of these
hills, which perpetually threw up immense columns of black smoke; it is at no
great distance from the coast, and is in the latitude of 54 48, and the
longitude of 195 45. Its figure is a complete cone, and the volcano is at the
summit of it: remarkable as it may appear, the wind, at the height to which the
smoke of the volcano rose, often moved in an opposite direction to what it did
at sea, even in a fresh gale.

Having three hours calm in the afternoon, upwards of an hundred halibuts were
caught by our people, some of which weighed upwards of an hundred pounds, and
none of them less than twenty. They were highly acceptable to us. We fished in
thirty-five fathoms water, about four miles distant from the shore; during
which time we were visited by a man in a small canoe, who came from the large
island. When he approached the ship, he uncovered his head and bowed as the
other had done the preceding day, when he came off to the Discovery.

That the Russians had some communication with these people, was evident, not
only from their politeness, but from the written paper already mentioned. We
had now an additional proof of it; for our new visitor had on a pair of green
cloth breeches, and a jacket of black cloth, under the frock of his own
country. He had with him a gray fox skin, and some fishing implements; also a
bladder, in which was some liquid, which we supposed to be oil; for he opened
it, drank a mouthful, and then closed it up again.

His canoe was smaller than those we had seen before, though of the same
construction; like those who had visited the Discovery, he used the double
bladed paddle. His features resembled those of the natives of Prince William's
Sound, but he was perfectly free from any kind of paint; and his lip had been
perforated in an oblique direction, though at that time, he had not any
ornament in it. Many of the words, so frequently used by our visitors in the
Sound, were repeated to him, but he did not appear to understand any of them;
owing either to his ignorance of the dialect, or other erroneous pronunciation.

The weather was principally cloudy and hazy, till the afternoon of the 22d,
when the wind shifted to the south-east, attended, as usual, with thick rainy
weather. Before the fog, we saw no part of the main land, except the volcano,
and a neighboring mountain. We steered west till seven, when, fearing we might
fall in with the land in thick weather, we hauled to the southward till two the
next morning, and then bore away west. Our progress was but trifling, having
but little wind, and that variable; at five o'clock in the afternoon, we had an
interval of sunshine, when we saw land, bearing north 59 west.

On the 24th, at six in the morning, we saw the continent, and at nine it
extended from north east-by-east, to south-west-by-west the nearest part four
leagues distant. The land to the south-west consisted of islands, being what we
had seen the preceding night. In the evening being about the distance of four
leagues from the shore, and having little wind, we threw out our hooks and
lines, but caught only two or three little cod.

We got an easterly breeze the next morning, and, with it, what was very
uncommon, clear weather; insomuch, that we clearly saw the volcano, the other
mountains, and all the main land under them. It extended from north-east by
north, to north-west half west. Between this point and the islands, a large
opening appeared, for which we steered, till land was seen beyond it; and,
though we did not perceive that this land joined the continent, a passage
through the opening was very doubtful; as well as whether the land to the
south-west was insular or continental. Unwilling to trust too much to
appearances, we therefore steered to the southward; when, having got without
all the land in sight, we steered west, the islands lying in that direction.

Three of them, all of a good height, we had passed by eight o'clock; more were
now seen to the westward. In the afternoon, the weather became gloomy, and
afterward turned to a mist, the wind blowing fresh at east. We therefore
hauled the wind to the southward till daybreak, and then proceeded on our
course to the west.

We derived but little advantage from daylight, the weather being so thick
that we could not discover objects at the distance of a hundred yards; but, as
the wind was moderate, we ventured to run. About half an hour after four, the
sound of breakers alarmed us, on our larboard bow; we found twenty-eight
fathoms water, and then twenty-five. We brought the ship too, and anchored in
the last depth; the Commodore ordering the Discovery, who was not far distant,
to anchor also.

Some hours after, the fog being a little dispersed, we discovered the imminent
danger we had escaped. We were three quarters of a mile from the north-east
side of an island; two elevated rocks were about half a league from us, and
from each other. Several breakers also appeared about them; and yet Providence
had safely conducted the ships through in the dark, between those rocks, which
we should not have attempted to have done in a clear day, and to so commodious
an anchoring place.

Being so near land, Captain Cook ordered a boat ashore, to examine what it
produced. When she returned in the afternoon, the officer who commanded her
said, he saw some grass, and other small plants, one of which had the
appearance of purslain; but the island produced neither trees nor shrubs.

The wind blew fresh at south, in the night, but in the morning was more
moderate, and the fog, in a great degree, dispersed. We weighed at seven
o'clock, and steered between the island near which we had anchored, and a small
one not far from it. The breadth of the channel does not exceed a mile, and the
wind failed before we could pass through it; we were therefore obliged to
anchor, which we did in thirty-four fathoms water. Land now presented itself in
every direction. That to the south extended, in a ridge of mountains, to the
south-west; which we afterward found to be an island called Oonaloshka.

Between this island, and the land to the north, which we supposed to be a
group of islands, there appeared to be a channel in a north west direction. On
a point, west from the ship, and at the distance of three quarters of a mile,
we perceived several natives and their habitations. To this place we saw two
whales towed in, which we supposed had just been killed. A few of the
inhabitants, occasionally, came off to the ships, and engaged in a little
traffic with our people, but never continued with us above a quarter of an hour
at a time. They seemed, indeed, remarkably shy; though we could readily
discover they were not unacquainted with vessels, similar, in some degree, to
ours. Their manner displayed a degree of politeness which we had never
experienced among any of the savage tribes.

About one in the afternoon, being favored with a light breeze, and the tide
of flood, we weighed, and proceeded to the channel last mentioned; expecting,
when we had passed through, either to find the land trend away to the
northward; or that we should discover a passage out to sea, to the west. For we
did not suppose ourselves to be in an inlet of the continent, but among
islands; and we were right in our conjectures. Soon after we got under sail,
the wind veered to the north, and we were obliged to ply. The depth of water
was from forty to twenty-seven fathoms. In the evening, the ebb made it
necessary for us to anchor within three leagues of our last station.

We weighed the next morning at day break, and were wasted up the passage by a
light breeze at south; after which we had variable light airs from all
directions. There was, however, a rapid tide in our favor, and the Resolution
got through before the ebb made. The Discovery was not equally fortunate, for
she was carried back, got into the race, and found a difficulty in getting
clear of it.

Being now through the channel, we found the land, on one side, trending west
and south-west, and that on the other side to north. This encouraged us to
hope, that the continent had taken a new direction in our favor. Being short
of water, and expecting to be driven about in a rapid tide, without wind
sufficient to govern the ship, we stood for a harbor the south side of the
passage, but were driven beyond it; and, that we might not be forced back
through the passage, anchored near the southern shore, in twenty-eight fathoms
water, and out of the reach of the strong tide; though, even here it ran five
knots and an half in an hour.

^


In this situation, we were visited by several of the natives in separate
canoes. They bartered some fishing implements for tobacco. A young man, among
them, overset his canoe, while he was along-side of one of our boats. He was
caught hold of by one of our people, but the canoe was taken up by another and
carried ashore. In consequence of this accident, the youth was obliged to come
into the ship, where he was invited into the cabin, and readily accepted the
invitation, without any surprise or embarrassment. He had on an upper garment,
resembling a shirt, made of the gut of a whale, or some other large sea-animal.
Under this, he had another of the same form, made of the skins of birds with
the feathers on, curiously sewed together; the feathered side placed next his
skin. It was patched with several pieces of silk stuff, and his cap was
embellished with glass beads.

His clothes being wet, we furnished him with some of our own, which he put on
with as much readiness as we could have done. From the behavior of this youth,
and that of several others it evidently appeared, that these people were no
strangers to Europeans, and to many of their customs. Some thing in our ships,
however, greatly excited their curiosity; for, such as had not canoes to bring
them off, assembled on the neighboring hills (...) have a view of them.

At low water we towed the ship into the harbor, where we anchored in nine
fathoms water, the Discovery arriving soon after. A boat was sent to draw the
seine, but we caught only a few trout, and some other small fish.

We had not long anchored, before a native of the island brought another note
on board, similar to that which had been given to Captain Clerk. He presented
it to Captain Cook; but, as it was written in the Russian language, neither he,
nor any of us, could read it. As it could not be of any use to us, and might
probably be of consequence to others, the Commodore returned it to the bearer,
accompanied with a few presents; for which he expressed his thanks, as he
retired, by several low bows.

On the 29th, we saw along the shore, a group of the natives of both sexes
seated on the grass, partaking of a repast of raw fish, which they seemed to
relish exceedingly.

We were detained by thick fogs, and a contrary wind, till the 2d of July;
during which time we acquired some knowledge of the country, as well as of its
inhabitants; the particulars of which shall be hereafter related.

This harbor is called Samganoodha, by the natives, and is situated on the
north side of Oonaloshka, the latitude being 53 55, the longitude 193 30; and
in the strait which separates this island from those to the north. It is about ^
a mile broad at the entrance, and runs in about four miles south by west. It
narrows toward the head, the breadth there not exceeding a quarter of a mile.
Plenty of good water may be procured here, but not a piece of wood of any kind.

THE END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN FOR MAKING DISCOVERIES IN THE NORTHERN
HEMISPHERE: PERFORMED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF Captains COOK, CLERK, and GORE,
In the Years 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780.

BY Captain JAMES COOK, F. R. S. AND Captain JAMES KING, LL. D. and F. R. S.

ILLUSTRATED WITH ELEGANT PLATES, AND A LARGE CHART.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. III.

NEW YORK: Printed by TIEBOUT and O'BRIEN: FOR BENJAMIN and JACOB JOHNSON, NO.
147, HIGH STREET, PHILADELPHIA. -- 1796.

CONTENTS.
BOOK IV. TRANSACTIONS WITH THE NATIVES OF NORTH AMERICA; DISCOVERIES ON THAT
COAST AND THE EASTERN EXTREMITY OF ASIA, AND RETURN SOUTHWARD TO THE SANDWICH
ISLANDS.
CHAP. VIII. The Ships proceed to the Northward -- The Isles of Oonella and
Acootan -- Onemak -- Plenty of Cod caught -- Bristol River -- Round Island --
Calm Point -- Mr. Williamson lands at Cape Newenham -- His Report -- Bristol
Bay -- Extent of it -- Shoal Water -- The Ships are obliged by the Shoals to
return -- Shoal Ness -- Americans come off to our Ships -- Their Behavior,
Dress, etc. -- Point Upright -- Death of Mr. Anderson -- His character -- An
Island named after him -- Account of Sledge Island -- King's Island -- Cape
Prince of Wales -- Anchor in a large Bay on the Asiatic Coast. Page 1 CHAP. IX.
Captain Cook lands at a Village -- Interview with some of the Natives, the
Tschutski -- Their Weapons described -- Their Persons -- Ornaments -- Dress --
Winter Habitations -- Summer Huts -- Canoes -- The Ships quit the Bay -- Cross
the Straight to the American Coast -- Point Mulgrave -- Appearance of a
prodigious mass of Ice -- Icy Cape -- The Sea, in a Manner, blocked up with Ice
-- Sea Horses killed, and made use of as Provisions -- Account of these Animals
-- The ships almost surrounded with Ice -- Cape Lisburne -- Unsuccessful
Attempts to get to the North through the Ice -- Remarks on the Formation, etc.
of this Ice -- Arrival on the Asiatic Coast -- Cape North. 28 CHAP. X. The
Ships proceed along the Coast of Asia -- Burney's Islands -- Cape Serdze Kamen
-- Pass the East Cape of Asia -- Description of it -- Bay of St. Lawrence --
Two other Bays -- Beering's Cape Tschukotskoi -- Steer for the Coast of America
-- Cape Derby -- Bald-head -- Captain Cook lands in search of Wood and Water --
Cape Denbigh -- Some of the Natives come off to us -- Besborough Island --
Captain Cook's Interview with a particular Family -- Mr. King's Interview with
the same Family -- Supplies of Wood and Water -- Mr. King sent to examine the
Coast -- Visits from the Natives -- Their Huts -- Produce of the Country -- Mr.
King's Report -- Norton's Sound -- Lunar Observations. Page 53 CHAP. XI.
Stuart's Island discovered -- Its Situation, Extent, etc. -- Cape Stephens --
Point Shallow Water -- Shoals on the Coast of North America -- Clerke's Island
-- Gore's Island -- Pinnacle Island -- The Resolution springs a Leak -- The
ships arrive at Oonalashka -- Plentiful supplies of Fish -- Intercourse with
the natives, and the Russian Traders -- Mr. Ismyloff comes on board --
Intelligence received from him -- Two Charts produced by him -- Account of the
Islands visited by the Russians -- Of their settlement at Oonalashka --
Description of the Natives -- Their Dress -- Food -- Manner of Building --
Manufactures -- Canoes -- Implements for Hunting and Fishing -- Fish, and other
Sea Animals -- Water Fowls -- Land-Birds -- Quadrupeds -- Vegetables -- Stones
-- Repositories of the Dead -- Diseases -- Resemblance of the Inhabitants of
this Side of America to the Esquimaux and Greenlanders -- Tides, Longitude,
etc. 80 CHAP. XII. Departure from Samganoodha -- Amoghta -- An elevated Rock --
Repass the Strait between Oonalashka and Oonella -- Proceed to the South -- One
Man killed, and three or four wounded on board the Discovery -- Mowee
discovered -- Visits from the Natives -- A Visit from a Chief named Terreeoboo
-- Owhyhee, an island, discovered -- Ships ply to Windward -- An Eclipse of the
Moon -- Ship's Crew refuse to taste Sugar-cane Beer -- Comparative View of the
Cordage in the Navy and Merchants Service -- Eulogium on the Natives of Owhyhee
-- The Resolution accomplishes the Intention of getting to Windward of the
Island -- The Progress -- Visits from the Islanders -- Joined by the Discovery
-- Mr. Bligh examines Karakakooa Bay -- Multitudes of People -- Anchor in the
Bay. Page 123
BOOK. V. JOURNAL OF THE TRANSACTIONS ON RETURNING TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.
CHAP. I. Karakakooa Bay described -- Multitudes of the Natives surround the
Ships -- Despotic Authority of the Chiefs over the inferior People -- A Visit
received from Koah -- Description of the Morai at Kakoa -- Offering made to
Captain Cook at the Morai -- Mr. King erects Observatories -- The Spot on which
they are situated, tabooed -- Method of curing Meat in Tropical Climates --
Society of Priests accidentally discovered -- Their Munificence -- Ceremony at
the Reception of Captain Cook -- Mean Artifice of Koah -- Arrival of Terreeoboo
-- The Bay tabooed upon that Occasion -- Bring the Inhabitants to Obedience, by
firing a Musket -- Remarkable Ceremony -- Visit from Terreeoboo -- Captain
Cook returns it. Page 147 CHAP. II. The Civility and Hospitality of the Natives
-- Much addicted to thieving -- Their Alacrity in conducting a Party of us up
the Country -- A Boxing-Match described -- Death of William Watman, a Seaman --
Attention of the Priests at his Funeral -- Ceremony of the Natives at his
Funeral -- A Gravestone erected -- The Rail and Images on the Morai purchased
-- The Natives very inquisitive about our Departure -- What they supposed to be
the Object of our Voyage -- Entertained by the Buffoonery of one of the Natives
-- Magnificent Presents from Terreeoboo -- The Natives regret our Departure --
Wish to prevail on Mr. King to remain amongst them -- The vessels quit the
Island -- The Resolution damaged in a Gale of Wind, and obliged to return. 167
CHAP. III. The Behavior of the Islanders, on our Return to Karakakooa Bay,
somewhat mysterious -- A Theft committed on board the Discovery -- The Thieves
pursued up the Country by Captain Cook and Mr. King -- Scuffle between the
Natives and our People, in which Pareea receives a severe Blow -- The Pinnace
attacked and plundered -- Crew obliged to quit her -- Captain Cook's
Reflections on the Occasion -- Attempt at the Observatory -- The Discovery's
Cutter stolen from the Buoy -- Steps taken for its Recovery -- Captain Cook
goes on Shore to invite the King and his two Sons on board -- His Wife and the
Chiefs oppose his going. -- A Contest arises on the occasion -- Intelligence
arrives of one of the Chiefs being killed by one of our People -- The
Consequences -- A Chief threatens Captain Cook and is shot by him -- A general
Attack ensues -- Death of Captain Cook -- Account of his Services, and a Sketch
of his Character. Page 185 CHAP. IV. Transactions at Owhyhee, subsequent to the
death of Captain Cook -- Bravery of Mr. Phillips -- The Islanders forced to
retire -- Situation of our Party at the Morai -- The natives annoy them with
stones -- Attempts to storm the Morai -- A short Truce -- Our People quit the
Morai -- Pacific Measures determined on -- Mr. King sent to obtain a Conference
with some of the Chiefs -- His Interview with Koah -- Contemptuous Behavior of
the Natives -- Precaution taken by us -- Two of the Islanders, in a Canoe,
fired at, but not hurt -- A Piece of Captain Cook's Flesh brought us by one of
them -- Further Provocations from the Natives -- Some great Guns fired at them
-- Our Watering Party harrassed with stones -- The Village of Kakoa burned by
our People -- Bravery of one of the Natives -- A Procession, headed by
Kaireekeea, who comes on board the Resolution -- The Bones of Captain Cook
brought to us -- They are committed to the Deep -- The Ships leave Karakakooa
Bay. 206 CHAP. V. Leave Karakakooa Bay -- In quest of an Harbor on the
South-East Side of Mowee -- Driven to Leeward by the Current, and strong
easterly Winds -- Pass Tohoorowa -- South-west Side of Mowee described --
Proceed to Woahoo -- The northeast coast of Woahoo described -- Disappointed in
attempting to water -- Proceed to Atooi -- Anchor in Wymoa Bay -- The Natives
not so friendly as before -- The watering Party guarded by Marines -- Insolence
of the Natives, who demanded a Hatchet for every Cask of Water -- The islanders
treat our People with Contempt -- They steal Mr. King's Hanger out of his Hand
-- Their Insolence at the Waterside -- Are fired at by two Marines -- One of
them wounded -- Visit from the contending Chiefs -- Anchor off Oneeheow --
Departure. Page 244 CHAP. VI. The Number, Names, and Situation, of the Sandwich
Islands -- Extent of Owhyhee, which is the largest of the whole Group --
Account of its Districts -- Its Coasts and the adjacent Country, described --
Snowy Mountains -- Volcanic Appearances -- Account of a Journey into the
interior Parts of Owhyhee Plantations -- Account of a Hermit -- The Country
cultivated to the greatest Advantage -- A remarkable Cave -- Description of
Mowee. -- Ranai. -- Morotoi -- Tahoorowa -- Woahoo -- Atooi -- Oneeheow --
Oreehoua -- Tahoora -- Climate of the Sandwich Isles -- Winds -- Currents --
Tides -- Quadrupeds -- Amazing Supply of Pork procured by us -- Birds --
Vegetables. 261 CHAP. VII. General Account of the Sandwich Isles continued --
Origin of the Natives -- Their Persons described -- Instances of Deformity --
Pernicious Consequences arising from the immoderate Use of the Ava --
Population of these Islands -- Disposition and Manners of the Inhabitants --
Restraints imposed on their Women -- Their Ingenuity and Docility -- Mr. King's
Reasons for supposing that they are not Cannibals at present. -- Methods of
wearing their Hair -- Various Ornaments -- Dress of the Men -- Feathered Cloaks
and Helmets -- Dress of the Women -- A beautiful Kind of Ruff described --
Other Ornaments -- Villages -- Houses -- Food -- Occupations -- Diversions --
Their Fondness for Gaming -- Astonishing Dexterity in Swimming -- Canoes --
Arts and Manufactures -- Mode of painting Cloth -- Beauty of their Mats --
Their Fishing-Hooks -- Cordage -- Various Uses of Gourd-Shells -- Salt-Pans --
Weapons. Page 288 CHAP. VIII. Continuation of the Account of the Sandwich
Islands -- Division of the People into three classes -- Superior Power of the
Eree-taboo -- Genealogical Account of the Kings of Owhyhee and Mowee --
Authority of the Erees -- Tyranny of Pareea, exercised on an inferior Chief --
Punishment of Offenses -- Account of their Religion -- Society of Priests --
The Orono -- Idols -- Eatooas of deceased Chiefs -- Religious Ceremonies,
Chantings, etc. previous to the drinking of Ava -- Human Sacrifices very
frequent among them -- Religious Custom of knocking out the Fore-Teeth -- Their
ideas of a future State -- Particular Explanation of the Word Taboo --
Marriages -- Remarkable Instance of Jealousy -- Funeral Ceremonies at the Death
of an old Chief, etc. 332
BOOK VI. TRANSACTIONS IN A SECOND EXPEDITION TO THE NORTH, BY THE WAY OF
KAMTSCHATKA, AND IN RETURNING HOME, BY THE WAY OF CANTON, AND THE CAPE OF GOOD
HOPE.
CHAP. I. Quit Oneeheow -- Unsuccessful Attempt to discover Modoopapappa --
Steer for Awatska Bay -- See vast Quantities of oceanic Birds -- Prepare for a
cold Climate -- Seamen require directing like Children -- Sudden change of
Climate -- The leaking of the Resolution occasions great Distress -- See the
coast of Kamtschatka -- Continued Showers of Sleet, and great Severity of
Weather -- Lose Sight of the Discovery -- The Resolution enters Awatska Bay --
With some Difficulty discover the Town of St. Peter and St. Paul -- Party sent
ashore -- Avoided by Inhabitants on a Sledge -- Their Reception by the
Commander of the Port -- Dispatches to the Commander at Bolcheretsk -- Arrival
of the Discovery in the Bay -- Return of the Messenger -- Curious Mode of
Traveling -- Visit from a Russian Merchant, and a German Servant. Page 339
CHAP. II. Stores and Provisions extremely scarce at St. Peter and St. Paul --
Exorbitant Demands of a Merchant -- A party dispatched to Bolcheretsk in
pursuit of Stores and Provisions -- Proceed up the River Awatska -- Pass the
night in a Marquee on the Riverside -- Civility and Hospitality of the Town of
Karatchin -- Dresses of the Kamischadales -- Prosecute our Journey on Sledges
-- Curious account of that Mode of Traveling -- Arrive at Natcheenki --
Remarkable hot Spring there -- Embark on the Bolchoireka River -- Arrival at
the Capital -- Formal Procession into that town -- Generosity and Hospitality
of Major Behm, Commander of the Garrison -- Bolcheretsk described -- Presents
received from the Major -- Entertainments of Dancing -- Very affecting
Departure from Bolcheretsk -- Return to the Ships -- Remarkable Instance of
Generosity in the Sailors -- Major Behm carries Dispatches to Petersburgh --
His Departure, and extraordinary Character. 366
A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK. IV. TRANSACTIONS WITH THE NATIVES O^
NORTH AMERICA; DISCOVERIES ON THAT COAST AND THE EASTERN EXTREMITY OF ASIA, AND
RETURN SOUTHWARD TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.
CHAP. VIII.
The Ships proceed to the Northward -- The Isles of Oonella and Acootan --
Onemak -- Plenty of God caught -- Bristol River -- Round Island -- Calm Point
-- Mr. Williamson lands at Cape Newenham -- His Report -- Bristol Bay -- Extent
of it -- Shoal Water -- The Ships are obliged by the Shoals to return -- Shoal
Ness -- Americans come off to our Ships -- Their Behavior, Dress, etc. --
Point Upright -- Death of Mr. Anderson -- His character -- An Island named
after him -- Account of Sledge Island -- King's Island -- Cape Prince of Wales
-- Anchor i^ a large Bay on the Asiatic Coast.

ON the 2d of July, we steered from Samganoodha, with a gentle breeze at
south-south-east, to the northward, and met with nothing to obstruct us in that
course. For on the one side, the Isle of Oonalashka trended south-west; and, on
the other, no land was visible in a direction more northerly than north-east;
all which land was a continuation of the same groupe of islands that we had
fallen in with on the 25th of the preceding month. That which is situated
before Samganoodha, and constitutes the north-eastern side of the passage
through which we came, is denominated Oonella, and its circumference is about
seven leagues. Another island, lying to the north-eastward of it, bears the
name of Acootan, it is considerably superior in size to Oonella, and has in it
some very lofty mountains, which were, at this time, covered with snow. It
appeared, that we might have passed with great safety between these two islands
and the continent, whose south-western point opened off the north-eastern point
of Acootan and proved to be the same point of land that we had discerned when
we left the coast of the continent, the 25th of June, to go without the
islands. It is termed Oonemak by the natives, and is situate in the longitude
of 192 3 east, and in the latitude of 54 30 north. Over the cape, which, of
itself is high land, there is a round elevated mountain, at present covered
with snow. This mountain bore east 2 north, at six o'clock in the afternoon;
and two hours afterward, no land was to be seen. Concluding, therefore, that
the coast of the continent had now inclined to the north-eastward, we steered
the same course, till one o'clock the following morning, when the watch
stationed upon deck imagined they saw land ahead. Upon this we wore, and, for
the space of about two hours, stood toward the south-west; after which we
resumed our course to the east north-east. At six we discoveted land ahead, at
the distance of about five leagues, bearing south-east. As we advanced we
descried more and more land, the whole of which was connected. At twelve
o'clock, we observed that it extended from south-south-west to east, the part
nearest to us being five or six leagues distant. Our longitude, at this time,
was 195 18 east, and our latitude 55 21 north. At six, in the afternoon, we
sounded, and found a bottom of black sand at the depth of forty-eight fathoms.
We were now four leagues from the land; and the eastern part in sight was in
the direction of east-south-east, appearing as an elevated round hummock.

On Saturday the 4th at eight o'clock in the morning we saw the coast from
south-south-west, and east by south; and, at intervals we could discern high
land, covered with snow, behind it. Not long after we had a calm; and being in
thirty fathoms water, we caught, with hook and line, a good number of excellent
cod. At twelve we had an easterly breeze and clear weather; at which time we
found ourselves about six leagues from the land which extended from south by
west to east by south; and the hummock, seen the preceding evening, bore south
west by south, at the distance of nine or ten leagues. A great hollow swell
from the west-south-westward, convinced us, that there was no main land, in
that direction, near us. We steered a northerly course till six o'clock in the
afternoon, when the wind, veering to the south-east, enabled us to steer
east-north-east. The coast lay in this direction, and, at twelve o'clock on the
following day, was at the distance of about four leagues.

We made but little progress on the 6th and 7th, as the wind was northerly. In
the evening of the latter day, about eight o'clock, the depth of water was
nineteen fathoms, and we were three or four leagues from the coast, which, on
Wednesday the 8th, extended from south-south-west to east by north, and was all
low land, with a ridge of mountains, covered with snow, behind it. It is not
improbable that this low coast extends to a considerable distance toward the
south-west; and that those places which we sometimes supposed to be the inlets
or bays, are nothing more than valleys between the mountains. This day we put
our hooks and lines over, and caught plenty of fine cod.

On the 9th, in the morning, having a breeze at north-west, we steered east by
north, in order to make a nearer approach to the coast. At noon, we were at the
distance of about two leagues from the land, which was observed to extend from
south by east to east-north-east; being all a low coast, with points projecting
in several places, which, from the deck, had the appearance of islands; but,
from the mast head, we saw that low land connected them. We were now in the
longitude of 201 33 east, and in the latitude of 57 49 north. In this
situation, our soundings were fifteen fathoms, over a bottom of fine black sand.

In advancing toward the north-east, we had found that the depth of water
gradually decreased, and the coast trended more and more northerly. But we
observed, that the ridge of mountains behind it, continued to lie in the same
direction as those that were more westerly; so that the extent of the low land,
between the coast and the foot of the mountains, insensibly increased. Both the
low and high grounds were totally destitute of wood; but were apparently
covered with a green turf, the mountains excepted, which were involved in snow.

As we proceeded along the coast with a light westerly breeze, the water
shoaled gradually from fifteen to ten fathoms, though we were eight or ten
miles distant from the shore. About eight o'clock in the evening, a lofty
mountain which had been some time within sight, bore south-east by east, at the
distance of twenty-one leagues. Several other mountains, forming a part of the
same chain, and much further distant, bore east 3 north. The coast was seen to
extend as far as north-east half north, where it seemed to terminate in a
point, beyond which it was both our hope and expectation, that it would assume
a more easterly direction. But, not long afterward, we perceived low land,
that extended from behind this point, as far as north-west by west, where it
was lost in the horizon; and behind it we discerned high land, appearing in
hills detached from each other. Thus the fine prospect we had of getting to the
northward vanished in an instant. We stood on till nine o'clock, and then the
point beforementioned was about one league distant, bearing north-east half
east. Behind the point is a river, which at its entrance, seemed to be a mile
in breadth. The water appeared somewhat discolored, as upon shoals; but a calm
would have given it a similar aspect. It seemed to take a winding direction
through the extensive flat which lies between the chain of mountains toward
the south-east, and the hills to the north-westward. It doubtless abounds with
salmon, as many of those fish were seen leaping in the sea before the entrance,
and some were found in the maws of cod that we had caught. The mouth of this
river, which we distinguished by the appellation of Bristol River, is situated
in the longitude of 201 55 east, and in the latitude of 58 27 north.

At daybreak, on the 10th, we made sail to the west-south-west, with a light
breeze at north-east. About eleven o'clock, thinking that the coast toward the
north-west terminated in a point, bearing north-west by west, the Commodore
steered for that point, having ordered the Discovery to keep ahead. But,
before that vessel had run a mile she made a signal for shoal water. At that
very time we had the depth of seven fathoms; and before we could get the head
of our ship the other way, we had less than five: but the Discovery's soundings
were less than four fathoms. We now stood back to the north-east, three or four
miles; but observing that there was a strong tide setting to the
west-south-west, that is, toward the shoal, we brought the ships to anchor in
about ten fathoms, over a sandy bottom. Two hours after we had cast anchor, the
water had fallen upwards of two feet; which proved, that it was the tide of ebb
that came from Bristol River.

In the afternoon, at four o'clock, the wind having shifted to the south-west,
we weighed and made sail toward the south, several boats being occupied ahead
in sounding. Having passed over the south-end of the shoal, in six fathoms
water, we afterward got into thirteen and fifteen; in which last depth we let
go our anchors again, between eight and nine in the evening; some part of the
chain of mountains on the south-eastern shore, being in sight, and bearing
south-east half south; and the most westerly land on the other shore bearing
north-west. In the course of this day, we had descried high land, which bore
north 60 west, and which we supposed to be about twelve leagues distant.

We weighed anchor the next morning, at two o'clock, with a gentle breeze at
south west, by west, and plied to windward till nine; when judging the
flood-tide to be now against us, we anchor^d in twenty-four fathoms water. At
one in the afternoon, the fog, which had this morning prevailed, dispersing,
and the tide becoming favorable, we weighed again, and plied to the
south-westward. Toward the evening, the wind was extremely variable, and we
had some thunder: we had heard none before, from the time of our arrival on the
coast; and that which we now heard was at a great distance. The wind settling
again in the south-west quarter, in the morning of Sunday the 12th we steered a
a north-west course, and, at ten oclock, saw the continent. At midday, it
extended from north-east by north to north-north-west a quarter west; and an
elevated hill appeared in the direction of north-north-west, nine or ten
leagues distant. This was found to be an island, to which, on account of its
figure, Captain Cook gave the name of Round Island. It stands in the latitude
of 58 37 north, and the longitude of ^00 6 east, and is seven miles distant
from the continent. At nine in the evening, having steered a northerly course
to within three leagues of the shore, we tacked in fourteen fathoms water, the
extremities of the coast bearing east-south-east half east, and west.

The wind now veered to the north-west, and enabled us to stretch along the
shore, till two the next morning, when we suddenly got into six fathoms water,
being then six miles from the land. After we had edged off a little, our depth
of water gradually increased; and, at twelve o'clock, our soundings were twenty
fathoms. Round Island, at this time, bore north 5 east; and the western extreme
of the coast was seven leagues distant, bearing north 16 west. It is an
elevated point, to which the appellation of Calm Point was given, from our
having calm weather while we were off it. To the north-westward of Round
Island, we discerned two or three hillocks which had an insular appearance; and
perhaps they may be Islands, for we had but a distant prospect of this
particular part of the coast.

We advanced but slowly on the 14th and 15th, having little wind, and, at
times, a very thick fog. Our soundings were from twenty-six to fourteen
fathoms; and we had pretty good success in fishing, for we caught plenty of
cod, and some flac fish. On Thursday the 16th at five o'clock in the morning,
the fog clearing up, we found ourselves nearer the shore than we expected. Calm
Point bore north 72 east, and a point about eight leagues from it, in a
westerly direction, bore north 3 east, only three miles distant. Betwixt these
two points, the coast forms a bay in several parts of which the land could
scarcely be seen from the mast-head. There is another bay on the north-western
side of the last-mentioned point, between it and a high promontory, which now
bore north 36 west, at the distance of sixteen miles. About nine o'clock,
Captain Cook dispatched Lieutenant Williamson to this promontory, with orders
to go ashore, and observe what direction the coast assumed beyond it, and what
was the produce of the country; which, when viewed from the ships, had but a
steril aspect. We here found the flood tide setting strongly toward the
north-west, along the coast. At twelve o'clock it was high water, and we cast
anchor at the distance of twelve miles from the shore, in twenty-four fathoms
water. In the afternoon, about five, the tide beginning to make in our favor,
we weighed, and drove with it, there being no wind.

Mr. Williamson, at his return, reported, that he had landed on the point, and,
having ascended the most elevated hill, found, that the most distant part of
the coast in sight was nearly in a northerly direction. He took possession of
the country in the name of his Britannic Majesty, and left on the hill a bottle
contai^ing a paper, on which the names of our ships, and of their commanders,
and the date of the discovery, were inscribed. The promontory, which he named
Cape Newenham, is a rocky point, of considerable height; and stands in the
longitude of 197 36 east, and in the latitude of 58 4^ north. Over it, or
within it, two lofty hills rise one behind the other; of which the innermost,
or easternmost, is the highest. The country, as far as Mr. Williamson could
discern, produces not a single tree or shrub. The hills were naked; but on the
lower grounds, there grew grass and plants of various kinds, very few of which
were at this time in flower. He met with no other animals than a do and her
fawn, and a dead seahorse or cow that lay upon the beach. Of the latter
animals we had lately seen a considerable number.

The coast, as we have already mentioned, assuming a northerly direction from
Cape Newenham, that cape is the northern boundary of the extensive bay and
gulf, situate before the river Bristol, which in honor of the Admiral Earl of
Bristol, received from the Commodore the denomination of Bristol Bay. Cape
Ooneemak forms the southern limit of this bay; and is eighty-two leagues
distant, in the direction of south south-west, from Cape Newenham.

A light breeze arising about eight o'clock in the evening, and settling at
south-south-east, we steered to the north-west, and north-north-west round Cape
Newenham; which at twelve the following day, was four leagues distant, bearing
south by east. Our soundings, at this time, were seventeen fathoms; the most
advanced land toward the north bore north 30 east; and the nearest part of the
coast was three leagues and a half distant. During the whole afternoon, there
was but little wind; so that, by ten o'clock in the evening, we had only
proceeded three leagues on a northerly course.

We steered north by west till eight o'clock the next morning, (Saturday the
18th) when, the depth of water suddenly decreasing to seven and five fathoms,
we brought too, till a boat from each of our ships was sent ahead to sound,
and then steered to the north-east. At noon, the water was deepened to
seventeen fathoms. Cape Newenham was now eleven or twelve leagues distant,
bearing south 9 east; the north-eastern extremity of the land in sight bore
north 66 east; and the distance of the nearest shore was four or five leagues.
Our present latitude was 59 16 north. Between Cape Newenham and this latitude,
the coast consists of low land and hills, and seemed to form several bays.

Before one o'clock, the boats ahead displayed the signal of shoal water. They
had, indeed, only two fathoms; and at the same time, the ships were in six
fathoms water. By hauling more to the north, we continued nearly in the same
depth till between five and six o'clock, when our boats finding less and less
water, Captain Cook made the signal to the Discovery, which was then ahead to
cast anchor, and both ships soon came to. In bringing up the Resolution, her
cable parted at the clinch, so that we were obliged to make use of the other
anchor. We rode in six fathoms water, over a bottom of sand, at the distance of
four or five leagues from the continent. Cape Newenham now bore south, sixteen
or seventeen leagues distant; the farthest hills we could perceive toward the
north, bore north-east by east; and there was low land stretching out from the
more elevated land, as far as north by east. Without this there was a shoal of
stones and sand, dry at half ebb. The two masters having been sent, each in a
boat, to sound between this shoal and the coast, reported, on their return,
that there was a channel, in which the soundings were six and seven fathoms,
but that it was rather narrow and intricate.

We attempted, at low water to get a hawser round the lost anchor, but we did
not then meet with success. However, being resolved not to leave it behind us,
while there was any prospect of recovering it, we persevered in our endeavors;
and, at length, in the evening of the 20th, we succeeded. While we were thus
occupied, the Commodore ordered Captain Clerk to dispatch his master in a boat
to search for a bassage in a south-west direction. He accordingly did so, but
no channel was observed in that puarter; nor did it appear that there was any
other way to get clear of the shoals, than by returning by the same track in
which we had entered. For though by following the channel we were now in, we
might perhaps have got further down the coast; and though this channel might
probably have carried us at last to the northward, clear of the shoals, yet the
attempt would have been attended with extreme hazard; and, in case of ill
success, there would have been a great loss of time that we could not
conveniently spare. These reasons induced the Commodore to return by the way
which had brought us in, and thus avoid the shoals.

The longitude of our present station, by lunar observations, was 197 45 48
east, and the latitude 59 37 30 north. The most northern part of the coast,
that we could discern from this station was supposed to be situate in the
latitude of 60. It formed, to appearance, a low point, which received the name
of Shoal Ness. The tide of flood sets to the northward, and the ebb to the
southward: it rises and falls five or six feet upon a perpendicular; and we
reckon that it is high water at eight o'clock, on the full and change days.

At three in the morning of the 21st, we weighed anchor with a gentle breeze at
north-north-west, and steered back to the south, having three boats ahead
employed in sounding. Notwithstanding this precaution, we met with greater
difficulty in returning than we had found in advancing; and were at length
under the necessity of anchoring, to avoid the danger of running upon a shoal
that had only a depth of five feet. While we lay at anchor, twenty-seven
Americans each in a separate canoe, came off to the ships, which they
approached with some degree of caution. As they advanced, they hollowed and
opened their arms; thereby intimating, as we understood, their peaceable
intentions. Some of them, at last, came near enough to receive a few trifling
articles which we threw to them. This gave encouragement to the others to
venture along-side; and a traffic quickly commenced between them and our
people, who obtained wooden vessels, bows, darts, arrows, dresses of skins,
etc. in exchange for which the natives excepted whatever we offered them. They
appeared to be the same sort of people, with (...) we had met with all along
this coast; and they wore in their lips and noses the same species of
ornaments, but were not so well clothed, and were far more dirty. They seemed
to be perfectly unacquainted with any civilized nation; they were ignorant of
the use of tobacco; nor did we observe in their possession any foreign article,
unless a knife may be considered as such. This, indeed, was nothing more than a
piece of common iron fitted in a handle made of wood, so as to serve the
purpose of a knife. They, however, so well knew the use and value of this
instrument, that it seemed to be almost the only article they were desirous of.

The hair of most of them were shaved, or cut short off, a few locks only being
left on one side, or behind. They wore as a covering for their heads, a hood of
skins, and a bonnet, which was seemingly of wood. One part of their dress,
which we procured from them, was a kind of girdle, made of skin in a very neat
manner, with trappings depending from it and passing betwixt the thighs, so as
to conceal the adjacent parts. From the use of this girdle, it is probable that
they some times go in other respects naked, even in this high northern
latitude; for it can scarcely be supposed that they wear it under their other
clothing. Their canoes were covered with skins, like those we had lately seen;
but they were broader, and the hole wherein the person sits we wider than in
any of those we had before met with. Our boats returning from sounding appeared
to give them some alarm, so that they all departed sooner than perhaps they
otherwise would have done.

We did not get clear of the shoals before the evening of Wednesday the 22d;
and then we durst not venture to steer toward the west during the night, but
spent it off Cape Newenham. At daybreak, on the 23d, we stood to the
north-westward, the Discovery being ordered to go ahead. Before we had
proceeded two leagues, our soundings decreased to six fathoms. Being
apprehensive, that, if we continued this course, we should meet with less and
less water, we hauled to the south, with a fresh easterly breeze. This course
gradually brought us into eighteen fathoms water, upon which we ventured to
steer a little westerly, and afterward due west, when we at length found
twenty-six fathoms. At noon, on the 24th, our longitude, by observation, was
194 22 east, and our latitude. 58 7 north. About three leagues to the west of
this situation, our soundings were twenty-eight fathoms; and we then steered
west-north-west, the depth of water gradually increasing to thirty-four
fathoms. We should have steered more northerly had not the wind prevented us.

In the evening of Saturday the 25th, having but little wind, and an
exceedingly thick fog, we let go our anchors in thirty fathoms; our longitude
being, at that time, 191 37 east, and our latitude 58 29 north. About six
o'clock the next morning, the weather in some degree clearing up, we weighed,
and with a gentle breeze at east, steered to the northward, our depth of water
being from twenty-five to twenty-eight fathoms. After we had proceeded on this
course for the space of nine leagues, the wind veered to the north, so that we
were obliged to steer more westerly. The weather, for the most part, continued
to be foggy, till about twelve o'clock on the 28th, when we had clear sunshine
for a few hours, during which several lunar observations were made. The mean
result of these, reduced to noon, at which time our latitude was 59 55 north,
gave 190 6 east longitude, and the time-keeper gave 189 59.

Continuing our westerly course, we discovered land at four in the morning of
the 29th, bearing north-west by west, at the distance of six leagues. We stood
toward it till between ten and eleven, when we tacked in twenty-four fathoms,
being then a league from the land, which bore north-north-west. It was the
south-eastern extreme, and formed a perpendicular cliff of great height; upon
which account, Captain Cook gave it the name of Point Upright. It stands in the
longitude of 187 30 east and in the latitude of 60 17 north. More land was
perceived to the westward of this point; and, at a clear interval, we discerned
another portion of high land, bearing west by south; and this seemed to be
perfectly separated from the other. We here observed an amazing number of
birds, such as guillemots, awks, etc.

During the whole afternoon we had baffling light winds, which occasioned our
progress to be but slow; and the weather was not sufficiently clear, to enable
us to determine the extent of the land that was before us. We conjectured that
it was one of the many islands laid down in Mr. Staehlin's map of the New
Northern Archipelogo; and we every moment expected to descry more of them.

On the 30th, at four o'clock in the afternoon, Point Upright was six leagues
distant, bearing north-west by north. A light breeze now springing up at
north-north-west, we steered to the north-eastward till four the next morning,
when the wind veered to the cast; we then tacked, and stood to the north-west.
The wind, not long after, shifting to south-east, we steered north-east by
north; and continued this course, with foundings from thirty-five to twenty
fathoms, till noon the following day (August 1.) Our latitude, at this time,
was 60 58 north, and our longitude was 191 east. The wind now becoming
north-easterly, we first made a stretch of about ten leagues toward the
north-west; and then, as we observed no land in that direction, we stood back
to the east for the space of fourteen or fifteen leagues, and met with a
considerable quantity of drift-wood. Our depth of water was from twenty-two to
nineteen fathoms.

On Sunday, the 2d of August, variable light winds, with showers of rain,
prevailed the whole day. In the morning of the 3d, the wind settling in the
south-east quarter, we resumed our northward course. At twelve o'clock our
soundings were sixteen fathoms, our latitude was 62 34 north, longitude 192
east.

Between three and four o'clock this afternoon Mr. Anderson, Surgeon of the
Resolution, expired, after he had lingered under a consumption for upwards of a
twelve month. He was a sensible, intelligent young man, and an agreeable
companion. He had great skill in his profession and had acquired a considerable
portion of knowledge in other departments of science. Our readers will
doubtless have observed, how useful an assistant he had proved in the course of
the voyage; and if his life had been prolonged to a later period, the public
might have received from him many valuable communications respecting the
natural history of the different places visited by us. Soon after he had
resigned his breath, we discovered land to the westward, at the distance of
twelve leagues. We supposed it to be an island; and the Commodore, to
perpetuate the memory of the deceased, for whom he had a particular esteem,
distinguished it by the name of Anderson's Island. The following day Mr. Law,
Surgeon of the Discovery, was removed into the Resolution; and Mr. Samual, the
Surgeon's first mate of the Resolution, was appointed to succeed Mr. Law as
Surgeon of the Discovery.

At three in the afternoon, on the 4th we saw land extending from
north-north-east to north-west. We steered toward it till four, when, being
four or five miles distant from it, we tacked; and, not long afterward, the
wind failing, we let go our anchors in thirteen fathoms, over a sandy bottom,
at the distance of about two leagues from land. Our latitude was now 64 27
north, and longitude 194 18 east. We could, at intervals, discern the coast
extending from east to north-west, and an island of considerable elevation,
bearing west by north, nine miles distant.

The land before us, which we imagined to be the continent of America, appeared
rather low next the sea; but, inland, it rose in hills, which seemed to be of a
tolerable height. It had a greenish hue, and was apparently destitute of wood,
and free from snow. While our ships remained at anchor, we observed that the
tide of flood came from the eastward, and set to the westward, till between the
hours of ten and eleven, from which time, till two o'clock the next morning,
the stream set to the east, and the water fell three feet. The flood running
both longer and stronger than the ebb, we concluded, that there was a westerly
current besides the tide.

On Wednesday the 5th, at ten o'clock in the morning, we ran down, and, soon
after, anchored between the island and the continent in seven fathoms. Not long
after we had cast anchor, Captain Cook, accompanied by Mr. King, and some other
officers, landed upon the island. He hoped to have had from it a prospect of
the coast and sea toward the west; but, in that direction, the fog was so
thick, that the view was not more extensive than it was from our ships. The
coast of the continent seemed to incline to the north, at a low point, named by
us Point Rodney, which bore from the island north-west half west, at the
distance of three or four leagues; but the high land, which assumed a more
northerly direction, was perceived at a much greater distance.

The latitude of this island is 64 30 north, and its longitude is 193 57 east.
It is about twelve miles in circumference. The surface of the ground
principally consists of large loose stones, covered in many places with moss
and other vegetables' of which twenty or thirty different species were
observed, and most of them were in flower. But the Captain saw not a tree or
shrub, either on the island, or upon the neighboring continent. Near the beach
where he landed, was a considerable quantity of wild purslain, long-wort,
pease, etc. some of which he took on board for boiling. He saw several plovers,
and other small birds; a fox was also seen. He met with some decayed huts,
built partly under ground. People had lately been upon the island, and it is
more than probable, that they often repair to it, there being a beaten path
from one end to the other. At a small distance from that part of the shore
where our gentlemen landed, they found a sledge, which induced Captain Cook to
give the island the appellation of Sledge Island. It appeared to be such a one
as is used by the Russian in Kamtschatka, for the purpose of conveying goods
from one place to another over the snow or ice. It was about twenty inches in
bredath, and ten feet in length; had a sort of rail-work on each side, and was
shod with bone. Its construction was admirable, and its various parts were put
together with great neatness; some with wooden pins, but for the most part with
thongs or lashings of whale-bone; in consequence of which, the Captain imagined
that it was entirely the workmaship of the natives.

We weighed anchor at three o'clock in the morning of the 6th, and made sail to
the north-west, with alight breeze from the southward. Having afterward but
little wind, and that variable, we made but a slow progress; and, at eight
o'clock in the evening, finding the ships, getting into shoal water, we
anchored in seven fathoms, our distance from the coast being about two leagues.
Sledge Island then bore south 51 east, nine or ten leagues distant. Soon after
we had let go our anchors the weather, which had been misty, cleared up, and we
perceived high land extending from north 40 east to north 30 west, seemingly
disjoined from the coast near which we lay at anchor, which appeared to extend
to the north-eastward. We at the same time saw an island bearing north 81 west,
at the distance of eight or nine leagues. It seemed to be of a small extent,
and was named King's Island. We rode at anchor till eight the next morning,
when we weighed, and steered a north-west course. The weather being clear
toward the evening, we obtained a sight of the north-western land, distant
about three leagues. We passed the night in making short boards, the weather
being rainy and misty, and the wind inconsiderable. Between four and five in
the morning of the 8th, we again had a sight of the north-west land; and, not
long afterward, having a calm, and being driven by a current toward the
shore, we thought proper to anchor in twelve fathoms water, at the distance of
about two miles from the coast. Over the western extremity is a lofty peaked
hill, situate in the longitude of 192 18 east, and in the latitude of 65 36
north. A north-easterly breeze springing up at eight o'clock, we weighed, and
made sail to the south-eastward, hoping to find a passage between this
north-west land and the coast, near which we had cast anchor in the evening of
the 6th. But we quickly got into seven fathoms water, and perceived low land
connecting the two coasts, and the elevated land behind it.

Convinced that the whole was a continued coast, we now tacked, and steered for
its north-western-part, near which we anchored in seventeen fathoms. The
weather, at present, was very thick and rainy: but, at four the next morning,
it cleared up, and enabled us to discern the neighboring land. A lofty steep
rock or island bore west by south; another island to the northward of it, and
considerably larger, bore west by north; the peaked hill beforementioned,
south-east by east; and the point that was under it, south 32 east. Under this
hill is some low land, extending toward the north-west, the extreme point of
which was now about one league distant, bearing north-east by east. Over it,
and also beyond it, we observed some high land, which we imagined was a
continuation of the continent.

This point of land, which the Commodore distinguished by the name of Cape
Prince of Wales, is the western extreme of all America hitherto known. It
stands in the longitude of 191 4 east, and in the latitude 65 46 north. We
fancied that we saw some people on the coast: and, perhaps, we were not
mistaken in our supposition, as some elevations like stages, and others
resembling huts, were observed at the same place.

At eight o'clock this morning, a faint northerly breeze arising, we weighed
anchor: but our sails were scarcely set, when it began to blow and rain with
great violence, there being at the same time, misty weather. The wind and
current were in contrary directions, raising such a sea, that it often broke
into the ship. Having plied to windward, with little effect, till two o'clock
in the afternoon, we stood for the island which we had perceived to the
westward, intending to cast anchor under it till the gale should abate. But,
upon our nearer approach to this land, we found that it was composed of two
small islands, neither of which exceeded three or four leagues in
circumference. As these could afford us little shelter, we did not come to an
anchor, but continued to stretch toward the west; and, about eight o'clock in
the evening, we saw land extending from north-north-west to west by south, the
distance of the nearest part being six leagues. We stood on till ten o'clock,
and then made a board toward the east, in order to pass the night.

On Monday the 10th, at break of day, we resumed our westward course for the
land seen by us the preceding evening. At eleven minutes after seven o'clock,
it extended from south 72 west, to north 51 east. Betwixt the south-western
extremity, and a point bearing west, six miles distant, the coast forms a
spacious bay, in which we dropped our anchors at ten in the forenoon, about two
miles from the northern shore over a gravelly bottom, at the depth of ten
fathoms. The nothern point of this bay bore north 43 east; its southern point
south 58 west; the bottom of the bay, north 60 west, between two and three
leagues distant; and the two islands that we had passed the preceding day, were
at the distance of fourteen leagues, bearing north 72 east.

CHAP. IX.
Captain Cook lands at a Village -- Interview with some of the Natives, the
Tschutski -- Their Weapons described -- Their Persons -- Ornaments -- Dress --
Winter Habitations -- Summer Huts -- (...) -- The Ships quit the Bay -- Cross
the Straight to the American Coast -- Point Mulgrave -- Appearance of a
prodigious mass of Ice -- Icy Cape -- The Sea, in a Manner, blocked up with Ice
-- Sea Horses killed, and made use of as Provisions -- Account of these Animals
-- The ships almost surrounded with Ice -- Cape Lisburne -- Unsuccessful
Attempts to get to the North through the Ice -- Remarks on the Formation, etc.
of this Ice -- Arrival on the Asiatic Coast -- Cape North.

WHILE we were steering for this bay, we observed on the north shore, a
village, and some people, who seemed to have been thrown into confusion, or
fear, at the sight of our vessels. We could plainly perceive persons running up
the country with burdens upon their shoulders. At this village Captain Cook
proposed to land; and accordingly, went with three armed boats, accompanied by
some of the officers. Thirty or forty men, each of whom was armed with a
spontoon, bow, and arrows, stood drawn up on an eminence near the houses; three
of them came down toward the shore, on the approach of our gentlemen, and were
so polite as to pull off their caps, and make them low bows. Though this
civility was returned, it did not inspire them with sufficient confidence to
wait for the landing of our party; for, the instant they put the boats ashore
the natives retired. Captain Cook followed them alone, without any thing in his
hand; and, by signs and gestures prevailed on them to stop, and accept some
trifling presents; in return for these, they gave him two fox-skins, and a
couple of sea horse teeth. The Captain was of opinion that they had brought
these articles down with them for the purpose of presenting them to him, even
if they had expected no return.

They seemed very timid and cautious; intimating their desire, by signs, that
no more of our people should be suffered to come up. On the Captain's laying
his hand on the shoulder of one of them, he started back several paces; in
proportion as he advanced, they retreated, always in the attitude of being
ready to make use of their spears; while those on the eminence, were prepared
to support them with their arrows. Insensibly, the Captain, and two or three of
his companions, introduced themselves among them. The distribution of a few
beads among some of them, soon created a degree of confidence, so that they
were not alarmed, when the Captain was joined by a few more of his people; and,
in a short time, a kind of traffic was entered into. In exchange for tobacco,
knives, beads, and other articles, they gave a few arrows, and some of their
clothing; but nothing that our people had to offer, could induce them to part
with a spear or a bow. These they held in continual readiness, never quitting
them, except at one time, when four or five persons laid theirs down, while
they favored our party with a song and a dance; and even then, they placed
them in such a manner, that they could lay hold of them in a moment.

Their arrows were pointed either with stone or bone, but very few of them had
barbs; and some of them had a round blunt point. What use these are applied to,
we cannot say, unless it be to kill small animals without damaging the skin.

These bows were such as we had observed on the American coast: their
spontoons, or spears, were of iron or steel, and of European or Asiatic
workmanship: and considerable pains had been taken to embellish them with
carving, and inlayings of brass and of a white metal. Those who stood with bows
and arrows in their hands, had the spear slung by a leathern strap over their
right shoulder. A leathern quiver, slung over their left shoulder, served to
contain arrows; and some of these quivers were exceedingly beautiful, being
made of red leather, on which was a very neat embroidery, and other ornaments.
Several other things, and particularly their clothing, indicated a degree of
ingenuity, far surpassing what any one would expect to find among so northern a
people.

All the Americans we had seen since our arrival on that coast, had round
chubby faces, and high cheek-bones, and were rather low of stature. The people
among whom we now were, far from resembling them, had long visages, and were
stout and well made: upon the whole, they appeared to be a very different
nation. No women, nor children of either sex, were observed, nor any aged
persons, except one man whose head was bald, and he was the only one who bore
no arms: the other seemed to be select men, and rather under than above the
middle age. The elderly man had a black mark across his face, which was not
perceived in any others; all of them had their ears perforated, and some had
glass beads hanging to them. These were the only fixed ornaments seen about
them, for they wear none to their lips: this is another particular, in which
they differ from the Americans we had lately seen.

Their apparel consisted of a pair of breeches, a cap, a frock, a pair of
boots, and a pair of gloves, all made of the skins of deer, dogs, seals, and
other animals, and extremely well dressed; some with the hair or fur on, and
others without it. The caps were made in such a manner, as to fit the head very
close; and besides these caps, which were worn by most of them, we procured
from them some hoods, made of dog-skins, that were sufficiently large to cover
both head and shoulders. Their hair was apparently black, but their heads were
either shaved, or the hair cut close off and none of them wore beards. Of the
few articles which they obtained from our people, knives and tobacco were what
they set the most value upon.

The village was composed both of their winter and their summer habitation; the
former are exactly like a vault, the floor of which is sunk below the surface
of the earth. One of them, which Captain Cook examined, was of an oval figure,
about twenty feet in length, and twelve or more in height; the framing
consisted of wood, and the ribs of whales, judiciously disposed, and bound
together with smaller materials of the same kind. Over this framing, a covering
of strong coarse grass was laid, and that again was covered with earth; so that
on the outside, the house had the apperance of a little hillock, supported by a
wall of stone, of the height of three or four feet, which was built round the
two sides, and one end. At the other end of the habitation, the earth was
raised sloping, to walk up to the entrance, which was by a hole in the top of
the roof, over that end. The floor was boarded, and under it was a sort of
cellar, in which the Captain saw nothing but water; at the end of each house
was a vaulted ^
room; which he supposed was a store-room. These store-rooms communicated, by a
dark passage, with the house; and with the open air by a hole in the roof,
which was even with the ground one walked upon; they cannot be said to be
entirely below ground; for one end extended to the edge of the hill, along
which they were made, and which was built up with stone. Over it stood a kind
of centry-box; or tower, formed of the large bones of great fish.

Their summer huts were of a tolerable size, and circular, being brought to a
point at the top. Slight poles and bones, covered with the skins of
sea-animals, ^omposed the framing. Captain Cook examined the inside of one:
their was a fire place just within the door, where a few wooden vessels were
deposited, all very dirty. Their bed-places were close to the side, and
occupied about one-half of the circuit: some degree of privacy seemed to be
observed; for there were several partitions, made with skins. The bed and
bedding consisted of deer-skins, and most of them were clean and dry.

About the houses were erected several stages, ten or twelve feet in height,
such as we had seen on some parts of the American coast. They were composed
entirely of bones, and were apparently intended for drying their fish and
skins, which were thus placed out of reach of their dogs, of which they had
great numbers. These dogs are of the fox kind, rather large, and of different
colors, with long soft hair, that resembles wool. They are, in all
probability, used for the purpose of drawing their sledges, in water; for it
appears that they have sledges, as the Captain saw many of them laid up in one
of their waner huts. It is, likewise, not improbable, that dogs constitute a
part of their food, for several lay dead, which had been killed that morning.

The canoes of these people are of the same kind with those of the northern
Americans, some both of the large and small sort, being seen lying in a creek
near the village.

From the large bones of fish, and other sea-animals, it appeared, that the sea
furnished them with the greater part of their subsistence. The country seemed
extremely barren, as our gentlemen saw not a tree or shrub. At some distance
toward the west, they observed a ridge of mountains covered with snow, that
had fallen not long before.

At first, some of us supposed this land to be a part of island of Alaschka,
laid down in Mr. Staehlin's map before mentioned; but from the appearance of
the coast, the situation of the opposite shore of America, and from the
longitude, we soon conjectured that it was, more probably, the country of the
Tschutski, or the eastern extremity of Asia, explored by Beering in the year
1728. In admitting this, however, without farther examination, we must have
pronounced Mr. Staehlin's map, and his account of the new northern Archipelago,
to be either remarkably erroneous, even in latitude, or else to be a mere
fiction* a judgment which we would not presume to pass, upon a publication so
respectably vouched, without producing the most decisive proofs.

After our party had remained with these people between two and three hours,
they returned on board; and, soon after, the wind becoming southerly, we
weighed anchor, stood out of the bay and steered to the north-east, between the
coast and the two islands. At twelve o'clock the next day (August 11) the
former extended from south 80 west, to north 84 west; the latter bore south 40
west; and the peaked hill, over Cape Prince of Wales, bore south 36 east. The
latitude of the ship was 66 5 north, the longitude 191 19 east; our soundings
were twenty eight fathoms; and our position nearly in the middle of the
channel, between the two coasts, each being at the distance of about seven
leagues.

We steered to the eastward from this station, in order to make a nearer
approach to the American coast. In this course the water gradually shoaled; and
there being very little wind, and all our endeavors to increase our depth
failing, we were obliged at last to cast anchor in six fathoms; which was the
only remedy remaining, to prevent the ships driving into more shallow water.
The nearest part of the western land bore west, twelve leagues distant; the
peaked mountain over Cape Prince of Wales, bore south l6 west; and the most
northern part of the American continent in sight, east-south-east; the distance
of the nearest part being about four leagues. After we had anchored, a boat was
dispatched to sound, and the water was found to shoal gradually toward the
land. While our ships lay at anchor, which was from six to nine in the evening,
we perceived little or no current, nor did we observe that the water rose or
fell.

A northerly breeze springing up, we weighed and made sail to the westward,
which course soon brought us into deep water; and, during the 12th, we plied to
the northward in sight of both coasts, but we kept nearest to that of America.
On the 13th, at four in the afternoon, a breeze arising at south, we steered
north-east by north, till four o'clock the next morning, when, seeing no land,
we directed our course east by north; and between the hours of nine and ten,
land appeared, which we supposed was a continuation of the continent. It
extended from east by south, to east by north; and, not long afterward, we
descried more land, bearing north by east. Coming rather suddenly into thirteen
fathoms water, at two in the afternoon, we made a trip off till four, when we
again stood in for the land; which soon after, we saw, extending from north to
south-east, the nearest part being at the distance of three or four leagues.
The coast here forms a point, named by us Point Mulgrave, which is situated in
the latitude of 67 45 north, and in the longitude of 194 51 east. The land
seemed to be very low near the sea, but a little farther it rises into hills of
a moderate height: the whole was free from snow, and apparently destitute of
wood. We now tacked, and bore away north-west by west; but, in a short time
afterward, thick weather, with rain, coming on, and the wind increasing, we
hauled more to the westward. At two o'clock the next morning, the wind veered
to south-west by south, and blew a strong gale, which abated toward noon. We
now stood to the north-east, till six the next morning, when we steered rather
more easterly: in this run we met with several sea-horses, and great numbers of
birds; some of which resembled sand-larks and others were not larger than
hedge-sparrows. We also saw some shags, so that we judged we were not far from
land; but, having a thick fog, we could not expect to see any; and as the wind
blew strong, it was not deemed pr^dent to continue a course which was most
likely to bring us to it. From the noon of this day, (the 16th of August) to
six o'clock in the morning of the following, we steered east by north; a course
which brought us into fifteen fathoms water. We now steered north-east by east,
thinking, by such a course, to increase our depth of water. Bu^, in the space
of six leagues, it shoaled to eleven fathoms, which induced us to haul close to
the wind, that now blew at west. About twelve o'clock, both sun and moon were
clearly seen at intervals, and we made some hasty observations for the
longitude; which, reduced to noon, when the latitude was 70 33 north, gave 197
41 east. The time-keeper, for the same time, gave 198

Some time in the forenoon, we perceived a brightness in the northern horizon,
like that reflected from ice, usually called the blink. Little notice was taken
of it, from a supposition that it was improbable we should so soon meet with
ice. The sharpness of the air, however, and gloominess of the weather, for the
two or three preceding days, seemed to indicate some sudden change. About an
hour afterward, the sight of an enormous mass of ice, left us no longer in any
doubt respecting the cause of the brightness of the horizon. Between two and
three o'clock we tacked close to the edge of the ice, in twenty-two fathoms
water, being then in the latitude of 70 41 north, and unable to stand on any
farther: for the ice was perfectly impenetrable, and extended from west by
south, to east by north, as far as the eye could reach. Here we met wi^h great
numbers of sea-horses, some of which were in the water, but far more upon the
ice. The Commodore had thoughts of hoisting out the ^oats to kill some of these
animals; but, the wind freshening, he gave up the design; and we continued to
ply toward the south* or rather toward the west, for the wind came from that
duarter. We made no progress; for, at twelve on the 18th, our latitude was 70
44 north, and we were almost five leagues farther to the east.

We were, at present, close to the edge of the ice, which was as compact as
wall, and appeared to be at least ten or twelve feet in height: but, farther
northward, it seemed to be much higher. Its surface was exceedingly rugged,
and, in several places, we saw pools of water upon it. We now stood to the
south, and, after running six leagues, shoaled the water to seven fathoms; but
it soon increased to the depth of nine fathoms. At this time, the weather,
which had been hazy, becoming clearer, we saw land extending from south to
south-east by east, at the distance of three or four miles* The eastern
extremity forms a point, which was greatly encumbered with ice, on which
account it was distinguished by the name of Icy Cape. Its latitude is 70 29
north, and its longitude 198 20 east. The other extreme of the land was lost in
the horizon; and we had no doubt of its being a continuation of the continent
of America. The Discovery being about a mile a-stern, and to leeward, met with
less depth of water than we did; and tacking on that account, the Commodore was
obliged to tack also, to prevent separation.

Our present situation was very critical. We were upon a lee shore in shoal
water; and the main body of the ice to windward, was driving down upon us. It
was evident, that if we continued much longer between it and the land, it would
force us ashore, unless it should chance to take the ground before us. It
appeared almost to join the land to leeward, and the only direction that was
free from it, was to the south-westward. After making a short board to the
north, Captain Cook made a signal for the Discovery to tack, and his ship
tacked at the same time. The wind proved in some measure favorable so that we
lay up south-west, and south-west by west.

On Wednesday the 19th at eight in the morning the wind veering to west, we
tacked to the northward and, at twelve, the latitude was 70 6 north, and the
longitude 196 42 east. In this situation, we had a considerable quantity of
d^ift ice about our ships, and the main ice was about two leagues to the north.
Between one and two, we got in with the edge of it. It was less compact than
that which we had observed toward the north; but it was too close, and in too
large pieces to attempt forcing the ships through it. We saw an amazing number
of sea-horses on the ice, and as we were in want of fresh provisions, the boats
from each ship were dispatched to procure some of them. By seven in the
evening, we had received, on board the Resolution, nine of these animals;
which, till this time, we had supposed to be sea cows; so that we were greatly
disappointed, particularly some of the sailors, who, on account of the novelty
of the thing, had been feasting their eyes for some days past. Nor would they
now have been disappointed, nor have known the difference, if there had not
been two or three men on board, who had been in Greenland, and declared what
animals these were, and that no person ever eat of them. Notwithstanding this,
we made them serve us for provisions, and there were few of our people who did
not prefer them to our salt meat.

The fat of these animals, at first, as sweet as marrow; but, in a few days, it
becomes rancid, unless it is salted, in which state it will keep much longer.
The lean flesh is coarse and blackish and has a strong taste: and the heart is
almost as well tasted as that of a bullock. The fat, when melted, affords a
good quantity of oil which burns very well in lamps; and their hides, which are
of great thickness, were extremely useful about our rigging. The teeth, or
tusks, of most of them were, at this time, of a very small size; even some of
the largest and oldest of these animals, had them not exceeding half a foot in
length. Hence we concluded, that they had lately shed their old teeth.

They lie upon the ice in herds of many hundreds, huddling like swine, one over
the other; and they roar very loud; so that in the night, or when the weather
was foggy, they gave us notice of the vicinity of the ice, before we could
discern it. We never found the whole herd sleeping, some of them being
constantly upon the watch. These, on the reproach of the boat, would awake
those that were next to them; and the alarm being thus gradually communicated,
the whole herd would presently be awake. However they were seldom in a hurry to
get away, before they had been once fired at. Then they would fall into the
sea, one over the other in the utmost confusion; and, if we did not happen, at
the first discharge, to kill those we fired at, we generally lost them, though
mortally wounded.

They did not appear to us to be so dangerous as some authors have represented
them, not even when they were attacked. They are, indeed, more so, in
apperrance, than in reality. Vast multitudes of them would follow, and come
close up to the boats; but the flash of a musket in the pan, or even the mere
pointing of one at them, would send them down in a moment. The female will
defend her young one to the very last, and at the expense of her own life,
whether upon the ice or in the water. Nor will the young, one quit the dam,
though she should have been killed; so that, if you destroy one, you are sure
of the other. The dam, when in the water, holds her young one between her fore
sins. Mr. ^ennant, in his Synopsis of Quadrupeds, has given a very good
description of this animal under the name of the Arctic Walrus. Why it should
be called a seahorse, is difficult to determine, unless the word be a
corruption of the Russian name Morse; for they do no^ in the least resemble a
horse. It is, doubtless, the same animal that is found in the Gulf of St.
Lawrence, and there called a sea-cow. It is certainly more like a cow than a
horse; but this resemblance consists in nothing but the snout. In short, it is
an animal not unlike a seal, but incomparably larger. The length of one of
them, which was none of the largest, was nine feet four inches from the snout
to the tail; the circumference of its body at the shoulder, was seven feet ten
inches: its circumference near the hinder fins was five feet six inches, and
the weight of the carcass, without the head, skin, or intrails, was eight
hundred and fifty-four pounds. The head weighed forty-one pounds and a half,
and the skin two hundred and five pounds.

It may not be improper to remark, that, for some days before this time, we had
often seen flocks of ducks flying to the south. They were of two species, the
one much larger than the other. The larger sort was of a brown color; and of
the small sort, either the duck or drake was black and white, and the other
brown. Some of our people said that they also saw geese. This seems to
indicate, that there must be land to the northward, where these birds, in the
proper season, find shelter for breeding, and whence they were now on their
return to a warmer climate.

Soon after we had got our sea-horses on board, we were, in a manner,
surrounded with the ice, and had no means of clearing it, but by steering to
the southward, which we did till three o'clock the next morning, with a light
westerly breeze, and, in general, thick, foggy weather. Our soundings were from
twelve to fifteen fathoms. We then tacked and stood to the northward till ton
o'clock, when the wind shifting to the north, we stood to the west-south-west
and west. At two in the afternoon, we fell in with the main ice, and kept along
the edge of it, being partly directed by the roaring of the sea-horses, for we
had an exceeding thick fog. Thus we continued sailing ^ill near midnight, when
we got in among the loose pieces of ice.

The wind being easterly, and the fog very thick, we now hauled to the
southward, and at ten the next morning, the weather clearing up, we saw the
American continent, extending from south by east, to east by south; and, at
noon, from south-west half south to east, the distance of the nearest part
being five leagues. We were at present in the latitude of 69 32 north, and in
the longitude of 195 48 east; and, as the main ice was not far from us, it is
evident, that it now covered a part of the sea; which, a few days before, had
been free from it; and that it extended farther toward the south, than where
we first ^ell in with it.

During the afternoon we had but little wind; and the Master was sent in a boat
to observe whether there was any current, but he found none. We continued to
steer for the American land till eight o'clock, in order to obtain a nearer
view of it, and to search for a harbor; but seeing nothing that had the
appearance of one, we again stood to the north, with a gentle westerly breeze.
At this time, the coast extended from south-west to east, the nearest part
being at the distance of four or five leagues. The southern extreme seemed to
form a point, to which the name of Cape ^isburne was given. It is situate in
the latitude of 69 5 north, and in the longitude of 194 42 east, and appeared
to be tolerably high land, even down to the sea; but there may be low land
under it, which we might not then see, being not less than ten leagues distant
from it. In almost every other part, as we advanced to the north, we had found
a low coast, from which the land rises to a moderate height. The coast now
before us was free from snow, except in one or two places, and had a greenish
hue. But we could not discern any wood upon it.

On Saturday the 22d, the wind was southerly, and the weather for the most part
foggy, with some intervals of sunshine. At eight in the evening, we had a calm,
which continued till midnight, when we heard the surge of the sea dashing
against the ice, and had many loose pieces about us. A light breeze now rose at
north-east, and the fog being very thick, we steered to the south to get clear
of the ice. At eight the next morning, the fog dispersed, and we hauled toward
the west; for the Commodore finding that he could not get to the north near the
coast, by reason of the ice, resolved to try what could be done at a distance
from it; and as the wind seemed to be fixed at north, he considered it as a
favorable opportunity.

In our progress to the westward, the water gradually deepened to twenty-eight
fathoms. With the northerly wind the air was sharp and cold; and we had fogs,
sunshine, showers of snow and fleet alternately. On the 26th, at ten in the
morning, we fell in with the ice. At twelve, it extended from north-west to
east by north, and seemed to be thick and compact. We were now, by observation,
in the latitude of 69 36 north, and in the longitude of 184 east; and it now
appeared that we had no better prospect of getting to the north here, than
nearer the shore.

We continued steering to the west, till five in the afternoon, when we were,
in some degree, embayed by the ice, which was very close in the north-west and
north-east quarters, with a great quantity of loose ice about the edge of the
main body. At this time, we had baffling light airs, but the wind soon settled
at south, and increased to a fresh gale, accompanied with showers of rain. We
got the tack aboard, and stretched to the east, as this was the only direction
in which the sea was free from ice.

On Thursday the 27th, at four in the morning, we tacked and stood to the
westward, and at seven o'clock in the evening, we were close in with the edge
of the ice, which lay east-north-east, and west-south-west, as far in each of
those directions as the eye could reach. There being but little wind, Captain
Cook went with the boats, to examine the state of the ice. He found it
consisting of loose pieces, of various extent, and so close together, that he
could scarcely enter the outer edge with a boat; and it was as impracticable
for the ships to enter it, as if it had been so many rocks. He particularly
remarked, that it was all pure transparent ice, except the upper surface, which
was rather porous. It seemed to be wholly composed of frozen snow, and to have
been all formed at sea. For, not to insist on the improbability of such
prodigious masses floating out of rivers, none of the productions of the land
were found incorporated, or mixed in it; which would certainly have been the
case, if it had been formed in rivers, either great or small.

The pieces of ice that formed the outer edge of the main body, were from forty
or fifty yards in extent, to four or five; and the Captain judged, that the
larger pieces reached thirty feet or more, under the surface of the water. He
also thought it highly improbable, that this ice could have been the production
of the preceding winter alone. He was rather inclined to suppose it to have
been the production of many winters, It was equally improbable, in his opinion,
that the little that now remained of the summer, could destroy even the tenth
part of what now subsisted of this great mass; for the sun had already exerted
upon it the full force and influence of its rays. The sun, indeed, according to
his judgment, contributes very little toward reducing these enormous masses.
For though that luminary is above the horizon a considerable while, it seldom
shines out for more than a few hours at a time, and frequently is not seen for
several successive days. It is the wind, or rather the waves raised by the
wind, that brings down the bulk of these prodigious masses, by grinding one
piece against another, and by undermining and washing away those parts which
are exposed to the surge of the sea. This was manifest, from the Captain's
observing, that the upper surface of many pieces had been partly washed away,
while the base, or under part, continued firm for several fathoms round that
which appeared above water, like a shoal round a high rock. He measured the
depth of water upon one, and found that it was fifteen feet, so that the ships
might have sailed over it. If he had not measured this depth, he would have
been unwilling to believe, that there was a sufficient weight of ice above the
surface, to have sunk the other so much below it. It may thus happen, that more
ice is destroyed in one tempestous season than is formed in several winters,
and an endless accumulation of it is prevented. But that there is constantly a
remaining store, will be acknowledged by every one who has been upon the spot.

A thick fog, which come on while the commodore was thus employed with the
boats, hastened him aboard sooner than he could have wished, with one seahorse
to each ship. Our party had killed many, but could not wait to bring them off.
The number of these animals, on all the ice that we had seen, is really
astonishing. We spent the night standing off and on, amongst the drift ice, and
at nine o'clock the next morning, the fog having in some degree dispersed,
boats from each of the ships were dispatched for sea-horses; for our people by
this time began to relish them, and those we had before furnished ourselves
with, were all consumed.

At noon, our latitude was 69 17 north, our longitude 183 east, and our depth
of water was twenty-five fathoms. At two in the afternoon, having got on board
as many sea horses as were deemed sufficient, and the wind freshening at
south-south-east, we hoisted in the boats, and steered to the south-west. But
being unable to weather the ice upon this tack, or to go through it, we made
aboard to the eastward, till about eight o'clock, then resumed our course to
the south-west, and were obliged before midnight, to tack again, on account of
the ice. Not long after, the wind veering to the north west, and blowing a
stiff gale, we stretched to the south-west, close hauled.

On the 29th, in the morning, we saw the main ice toward the north, and soon
after, perceived land bearing south-west by west. In a short time after this,
more land was seen, bearing west. It showed itself in two hills, resembling
islands, but soon the whole appeared connected. As we made a nearer approach to
the land, the depth of water decreased very fast, so that, at twelve o'clock,
when we tacked, we found only eight fathoms; being three miles from the coast,
which extended from south 30 east, to north 60 west. The latter extremity
terminating in bluff point, being one of the hills mentioned before.

The weather was now very hazy, with drizzling rain; but, soon afterward, it
cleared up particuarly to the southward, westward, and northward. This enabled
us to have a tolerable view of the coast; which resembles, in every respect,
the opposite coast of America; that is, low land next the sea, with higher land
farther back. It was totally distitute of wood, and even of snow; but was
probably, covered with a mossy substance, that gave it a brownish hue. In the
low ground that lay between the sea and the high land, was a lake, extending to
the south eastward farther than we could see. As we stood off, the most
westerly of the two hills abovementioned, came open off the bluff point, in a
north-west direction. It had the appearance of an island, but it might perhaps
be connected with the other by low land, though we did not see it. And if that
be the case, there is a twofold point, with a bay between them. This point,
which is rocky and steep, received the name of Cape North. It is situated
nearly in the latitude of 68 56 north, and in the longitude of 180 51 east. The
coast beyond it doubtless assumes a very westerly direction; for we could
discern no land to the northward of it, though the horizon was there pretty
clear. Wishing to see more of the coast to the westward, we tacked again, at
two in the afternoon, thinking we should be able to weather Cape North; but
finding we could not, the wind freshening, a thick fog arising, with much snow,
and being apprehensive of the ice coming down upon us, the Commodore
relinquished the design he had formed of plying to the westward, and again
stood off shore.

The season was now so far advanced, and the time when the frost generally sets
in was so near, that Captain Cook did not think it consistent with prudence, to
make any farther attempts to discover a passage into the Atlantic Ocean this
year, in any direction, so small was the probability of success. His attention
was now directed to the search of some place, where we might recruit our wood
and water; and the object that principally occupied his thoughts was, how he
should pass the winter, so as to make some improvements in navigation and
geography, and at the same time, be in a condition to return to the northward
the ensuing summer, to prosecute his search of a passage into the Atlantic.

CHAP. X.
The Ships proceed along the Coast of Asia -- Burney's Islands -- Cape Serdze
Kamen -- Pass the East Cape of Asia -- Description of it -- Bay of St. Lawrence
-- Two other Bays -- Beering's Cape Tschukotskoi -- Steer for the Coast of
America -- Cape Derby -- Bald-head -- Captain Cook lands in search of Wood and
Water -- Cape Denbigh -- Some of the Natives come off to us -- Besborough
Island -- Captain Cook's Interview with a particular Family -- Mr. King's
Interview with the same Family -- Supplies of Wood and Water -- Mr. King sent
to examine the Coast -- Visits from the Natives -- Their Huts -- Produce of the
Country -- Mr. King's Report -- Norton's Sound -- Lunar Observations.

HAVING stood off till our foundings were eighteen fathoms, we made sail to the
eastward, along the coast, which, we were now pretty well convinced, could only
be the continent of Asia. The wind blowing fresh, and there being, at the same
time, a thick mist, and a very heavy fall of snow, it was requisite that we
should proceed with particular caution: we therefore brought too, for a few
hours, in the night. Early the next morning, which was the 30th of August, we
steered such a course as we judged most likely to bring us in with the land,
being guided, in a great measure, by the land; for the weather was extremely
thick and gloomy, with incessant showers of snow. At ten o'clock we obtained a
sight of the coast, which was at the distance of four miles, bearing
south-west. Soon afterward, our depth of water having decreased to seven
fathoms, we hauled off. A very low point now bore south-south-west, distant two
or three miles; to the eastward of which there seemed to be a narrow channel,
that led into some water which we saw over the point. It is not improbable,
that the lake abovementioned communicates here with the sea.

About twelve o'clock, the mist dispersing, we had a view of the coast, which
extended from south-east to north-west by west. Some parts of it were
apparently higher than others; but the greatest part of it was rather low, with
high land farther up the country. It was almost entirely covered with snow,
which had fallen very lately. We ranged along the coast, at the distance of
about two leagues, till ten o'clock in the evening, when we hauled off; but
resumed our course early on the following morning, when we had another view of
the coast, extending from west to south-east by south. At eight o'clock, the
eastern part bore south, and was found to be an island, which, at twelve, was
four or five miles distant, bearing south-west half south. It is of a moderate
height, between four and five miles in circumference, with a steep rocky coast.
It is situated in the latitude of 67 45 north, about three leagues from the
continent; and is distinguished in the chart by the appellation of Burney's
Island. The inland country, about this part, abounds with hills, some of which
are of considerable elevation. The land in general was covered with snow,
except a few spots on the coast, which still continued to be low, but somewhat
less so than farther toward the west.

During the two preceding days, the mean height of the mercury in the
thermometer had been frequently below the freezing point, and, in general, very
little above it; insomuch that the water, in the vessels upon deck, was often
covered with a sheet of ice. We continued to steer south-south-east, almost in
the direction of the coast, till five o'clock in the afternoon, when we saw
land bearing south 50 east, which proved to be a continuation of the coast. We
hauled up for it without delay; and, at ten in the evening, being abreast of
the eastern land, and doubtful of weathering it, we tacked, and made a board
toward the west, till after one o'clock the next morning, (Tuesday, the 1st of
September), when we again made sail to the east. The wind was now very
unsettled, continually varying from north to north-east. Between eight and
nine, the eastern extremity of the land was at the distance of six or seven
miles, bearing south by east. A head-land appeared, at the same time, bearing
east by south, half south; and, not long after, we could discern the whole
coast that lay between them, and a little island at some distance from it.

The coast now in sight seemed to form several rocky points, that were
connected by a low shore, without any appearance of an harbor. At a distance
from the sea many hills presented themselves to our view, the highest of which
were involved in snow; in other respects, the whole country had a naked aspect.
At seven o'clock in the evening, two points of land, beyond the eastern head,
opened off it in the direction of south 37 east.

Captain Cook was now convinced of what he had before imagined, that this was
the country of the Tschutski, or the north-eastern coast of Asia; and that
Beering had proceeded thus far in the year 1728; that is, to this head, which,
according to Muller, is denominated Serdze Kamen, on account of a rock upon it,
that is of the figure of a heart. There are, indeed, many high rocks on this
cape, some one or other of which may perhaps be shaped like a heart. It is a
promontory of tolerable height, with a steep rocky cliff fronting the sea. Its
latitude is 67 3 north, and its longitude 188 11 east. To the east of it the
coast is elevated and cold; but, to the west, it is low, and extends north west
by west, and north-north-west; and it is nearly of the same direction all the
way to Cape North. The depth of water is every where the same at an equal
distance from the shore; and this is likewise the case on the opposite coast of
America. The greatest depth we met with, as we ranged along it, was
twenty-three fathoms. During the night, or in thick foggy weather, the
soundings are no bad guide to those who sail along either of these coasts.

On the 2d of September, at eight in the morning, the most advanced land to the
south-eastward, bore south 25 east; and, from this particular point of view,
had an insular appearance. But the thick showers of snow, that fell in quick
succession, and settled on the land, concealed, from our sight, at this time, a
great part of the coast. In a short time after, the sun, which we had not seen
for near five days, broke out during the intervals between the showers, by
which means the coast was, in some degree, freed from the fog; so that we
obtained a sight of it, and found that the whole was connected. The wind was
still northerly, the air was cold, and the mercury in the thermometer did not
rise above 35, and was sometimes not higher than 30. At twelve o'clock our
latitude was 66 37 north; Cape Serdze Kamen was twelve or thirteen leagues
distant, bearing north 52 west; the most southerly point of land that we had in
our sight, bore south 41 east; our soundings were twenty-two fathoms; and the
distance of the nearest part of the shore was about two leagues.

The weather was now fair and bright; and, as we were ranging along the coast,
we saw several of the natives, and some of their dwelling-places, which had the
appearance of hillocks of earth. In the course of the evening we passed the
Eastern Cape, or the point beforementioned; from which the coast trends to the
south-westward. This is the same point of land that we had passed on the 11th
of the preceding month. Those who gave credit to Mr. Staehlin's map, then
supposed it to be the eastern point of his island Alaschka; but we were, by
this time, convinced, that it is no other than the eastern promontory of Asia;
and, perhaps, it is the proper Tschukotskoi Noss, though the promontory, which
received that name from Beering, is situated further toward the south-west.

Muller, in his map of the discoveries of the Russians, places the Tschukotskoi
Noss nearly in the latitude of 75 north, and extends it somewhat to the
eastward of this cape. But Captain Cook was of opinion, that he had no good
authority for so doing. Indeed his own, or rather Deshneff's account of the
distance between the river Anadir and the Noss, cannot well be reconciled with
so northerly a position. For he says, that, with the most favorable wind a
person may go by sea from the Noss to the river Anadir in three whole days, and
that the journey by land is very little longer. But Captain Cook, having hopes
of visiting these parts again, deferred the discussion of this point to another
opportunity. In the mean time, however, he concluded, as Beering had done
before him, that this was the easternmost point of all Asia. It is a peninsula
of considerable elevation, joined to the continent by a very low and apparently
narrow isthmus. It has, next the sea, a steep rocky cliff; and off the very
point are several rocks resembling spires. It stands in the longitude of 190 22
east, and in the latitude of 66 6 north; and is thirteen leagues distant, in
the direction of north 53 west, from Cape Prince of Wales, on the coast of
America. The land about this promontory consists of valleys and hills. The
former terminate at the sea in low shores, and the latter in steep rocky
points. The hills appeared like naked rocks; but the valleys, though destitute
of tree or shrub, were of a greenish hue.

After we had passed the Cape, we steered south-west half west toward the
northern point of St. Lawrence's Bay, in which our ships had anchored on the
10th of August. We reached it by eight o'clock the following morning, and saw
some of the natives at the place where we had before seen them, as well as
others on the opposite side of the bay, Not one of them, however, came off to
us; which was rather remarkable, as the weather was sufficiently favorable,
and as those whom we had lately visited had no reason to be displeased with us.
These people are certainly the Tschutski, whom the Russians had not hitherto
subdued; though it is manifest that they must carry on a traffic with the
latter, either directly, or by the interposition of some neighboring nation;
as their being in possession of the spontoons we saw among them, cannot
otherwise be accounted for.

The Bay of St. Lawrence Captain Cook called it by this name* from his having
anchored in it on the 10th of August, which is St. Lawrence's Day. It is worthy
of remark, that Beering sailed by this very place on August 10, 1728; for which
reason, he denominated the neighboring islands after the same saint.
is, at the entrance, at least five leagues in breadth, and about four leagues
deep, growing narrower toward the bottom, where it seemed to be pretty well
sheltered from the sea winds, provided there is a competent depth of water for
ships. The Commodore did not wait to examine it, though he was extremely
desirous of finding a convenient harbor in those parts, to which he might
resort in the succeeding spring. But he wished to meet with one where wood
might be obtained; and he knew that none could be found here. From the southern
point of this bay, which is situated in the latitude of 65 30 north, the coast
trends west by south for the space of about nine leagues, and there seems to
form a deep bay or river; or else the land in that part is so low that we could
not discern it.

In the afternoon, about one o'clock, we saw what was first supposed to be a
rock; but it was found to be a dead whale, which some Asiatics had killed, and
were then towing ashore. They seemed to endeavor to conceal themselves behind
the fish, in order to avoid being seen by us. This, however, was unnecessary,
for we proceeded on our course without taking notice of them. On the 4th, at
break of day, we hauled to the north-westward, for the purpose of gaining a
nearer view of the inlet seen the day before; but the wind, not long after,
veering to that direction, the design was abandoned; and, steering toward the
south along the coast, we passed two bays, each about six miles deep. The most
northerly one is situate before a hill, which is rounder than any other we had
observed upon the coast. There is an island lying before the other bay. It is a
matter of doubt whether there is a sufficient depth of water for ships in
either of these bays, as, when we edged in for the shore, we constantly met
with shoal water. This part of the country is extremely naked and hilly. In
several places on the lower grounds, next the sea, were the habitations of the
natives, near all of which were erected stages of bones, like those
beforementioned. This day, at noon, our latitude was 64 38 north, and our
longitude 188 15 east; the nearest part of the shore was at the distance of
three or four leagues; and the most southern point of the continent in sight
bore south 48 west.

The wind, by this time, had veered to the north, and blew a light breeze: the
weather was clear, and the air sharp. The Commodore did not think proper to
follow the direction of the coast, as he perceived that it inclined westward
toward the gulf of Anadir, into which he had no motive for going. He
therefore steered a southerly course, that he might have a sight of the isle of
St. Lawrence, which had been discovered by Beering. This island was quickly
seen by us; and, at eight in the evening, it bore south 20 east, supposed to be
at the distance of eleven leagues. The most southerly point of the main land
was, at that time, twelve leagues distant, bearing south 83 west. Captain Cook
conjectured, that this was the point which is called by Beering the eastern
point of Suchotski, or Cape Tschukotski; an appellation which he gave it with
some propriety, because the natives, who said they were of the nation of the
Tschutski, came off to him from this part of the coast. Its latitude is 64 13
north, and its longitude 185 36 east.

The more the Captain was convinced of his being at present upon the Asiatic
coast, the more he was at a loss to reconcile his observations with Mr.
Staehlin's map of the New Northern Archipelago; and he could find no other
method of accounting for so important a difference, than by supposing that he
had mistaken some part of what Mr. Staehlin denominates the island of Alaschka
for the continent of America, and had missed the channel by which they are
separated. But even on that supposition there would still have been a
considerable variation. The Captain considered it as an affair of some
consequence to clear up this point during the present season, that he might
have only one object in view in the following one. And as these northerly
islands were said to abound with wood, he had some hopes, if he should find
them, of procuring a competent supply of that article, of which we began to
stand in great need. With this view he steered over for the coast of America;
and the next day, about five o'clock in the afternoon, land was seen bearing
south three quarters east, which we imagined was Anderson's Island, or some
other land near it. On Sunday the 6th, at four in the morning, we had a sight
of the American coast, near Sledge Island; and, at six in the evening of the
same day, that island was at the distance of about ten leagues, bearing north 6
east, and the most easterly land in view bore north 49 east. If any part of
what Captain Cook had conjectured to be the coast of the American continent,
could possibly be the island of Alaschka, it was that now in sight; in which
case he must have missed the channel between it and the main land, by steering
toward the west, instead of the east, after he had first fallen in with it. He
was, therefore, at no loss where to go, for the purpose of clearing up these
doubts.

On the 7th, at eight o'clock in the evening, we had made a near approach to
the land. Sledge Island bore north 85 west, about eight leagues distant; and
the eastern part of the coast bore north 70 east, with elevated land in the
direction of east by north. At this time we perceived a light on shore; and two
canoes, with people in them, came off toward us. We brought to, in order to
give them time to approach; but they resisted all our tokens of amity, and kept
at the distance of a quarter of a mile* We therefore left them, and proceeded
along the coast. The next morning, at one o'clock, observing that the water
shoaled pretty fast, we anchored in ten fathoms, and remained in that situation
till daylight came on. We then weighed, and pursued our course along the
coast, which trended east, and east half south. At seven o'clock in the evening
we were abreast of a point, situated in the longitude of 197 east, and in the
latitude of 64 21 north; beyond which the coast assumes a more northerly
direction. At eight this point, which received the appellation of Cape Darby,
bore south 62 west; the most northern land we had in view, bore north 32 east;
and the distance of the nearest part of the shore was one league. In this
situation we let go our anchors in thirteen fathoms, over a muddy bottom.

On the 9th, at break of day, we weighed and made sail along the coast. We now
saw land, which we supposed to be two islands; the one bearing east, the other
south 70 east. Not long afterward, we found oursevles near a coast covered
with wood; a pleasing sight to which we had not been lately accustomed. As we
advanced northward, land was seen in the direction of north-east, half north,
which proved a continuation of the coast upon which we now were: we likewise
perceived high land over the islands, apparently, at a considerable distance
beyond them. This was imagined to be the continent, and the other land the isle
of Alaschka; but it was already a matter of doubt, whether we should discover a
passage between them, for the water gradually shoaled, as we proceeded further
toward the north. In consequence of this, two boats were dispatched ahead to
sound: and the Commodore ordered the Discovery, as she drew the least water, to
lead, keeping nearly in the middle channel, between the coast and the most
northerly island. In this manner we continued our course till three o'clock in
the afternoon, when having passed the island, our soundings did not exceed
three fathoms and a half, and the Resolution once brought up the mud from the
bottom. In no part of the channel could a greater depth of water be found,
though we had sounded it from one side to the other; we therefore deemed it
high time to return.

At this time, a head-land on the western shore, to which the name of Bald-head
was given, was about one league distant, bearing north by west. The coast
extended beyond it as far as north-east by north, where it appeared to
terminate in a point; behind which, the coast of the high land, that was seen
over the islands, stretched itself. The shore on the western side of Bald-head,
forms a bay, in the bottom of which is a beach, where we perceived many huts of
the natives.

We continued to ply back during the whole night; and, by daybreak on the
10th, had deepened our water six fathoms. At nine o'clock, when we were about
three miles from the west shore, Captain Cook, accompanied by Mr. King, went
with two boats in search of wood and water. They landed in that part where the
coast projects into a bluff head composed of perpendicular strata of a dark
blue rock, intermixed with glimmer and quartz. Adjoining to the beach is a
narrow border of land, which was at this time covered with long grass, and
where they observed some angelica. The ground, beyond this, rises with some
abruptness: toward the top of this elevation, they found a heath, that
abounded with berries of various kinds: further onwards the country was rather
level, and thinly covered with small spruce-trees, birch, and willows. They saw
the tracts of foxes and deer upon the beach; in many parts of which, there was
a great abundance of drift-wood: there was also no want of fresh water.

Our gentlemen and their attendants having returned on board, the Commodore had
thoughts of bringing the ships to an anchor here; but the wind then shifting to
north-east, and blowing rather on this shore, he stretched over to the opposite
one, expecting to find wood there likewise. At eight in the evening, we
anchored near the southern end of the most northerly island, for such we then
imagined it to be. The next morning, however, we found that it was a peninsula,
connected with the continent by a low isthmus, on each side of which, a bay is
formed by the coast. We plied into the southernmost of these bays, and cast
anchor again, about twelve o'clock, in five fathoms water, over a muddy bottom;
the point of the peninsula, to which the appellation of Cape Denbigh was given,
being one league distance, in the direction of north 68 west.

We observed on the peninsula, several of the natives; and one of them came off
in a small canoe. Captain Cook gave this man a knife and some beads, with which
he appeared to be well pleased; we made signs to him to bring us some
provision, upon which he instantly quited us, and paddled ^owards the shore.
Happening to meet another man coming off, who had two dried salmons, he got
them from him; and when he returned to our ship, he refused to give them to any
body except Captain Cook. Some of our people fancied, that he asked for him
under the name of Captain; but, in this, they were perhaps mistaken. Others
of the inhabitants came off soon afterward, and gave us a few dried fish, in
exchange for such trifles as we had to barter with them. They showed no dislike
for tobacco, but they were most desirous of knives.

In the afternoon, Mr. Gore was dispatched to the peninsula, to procure wood
and water; of the former of which articles, we observed great plenty upon the
beach. At the same time, a boat from each of the ships was sent to sound round
the bay, and at three o'clock, the wind freshening at north-east, we weighed
anchor and endeavored to work further in. But that was quickly found to be
impracticable, by reason of the shoals, which extended entirely round the bay,
to the distance of upwards of two miles from the shore; as the officers, who
had been sent out for the purpose of sounding, reported. We therefore stood off
and on with the ships, waiting for Lieutenant Go^^, who returned about eight
o'clock in the evening, with the launch loaded with wood. He informed the
Commodore, that he had found but little fresh water, and that the wood could
not be procured without difficulty on account of the boats grounding at some
distance from the beach. As this was the case we stood back to the other shore;
and the next morning, at eight, all the boats, and a detachment of men, with an
officer, were sent to get wood from the place where Captain Cook had landed on
the 10th.

After having continued, for some time, to stand off and on with the ships, we
at length cast anchor in less than five fathoms, at the distance of half a
league from the coast, whose southern point bore south 26 west. Cape Denbigh
was about twenty-six miles distant, bearing south 72 east; Bald-head was nine
leagues off, in the direction of north 60 east; and the island near the eastern
shore, south of Cape Denbigh, named by Captain Cook, Besborough Island, was
fifteen leagues distant, bearing south 52 east

This being a very open road, and therefore not a secure station for the ships,
the Commodore resolved not to wait till our stock of water was completed, as
that would take up some time; but only to furnish both ships with wood, and
afterward to seek a more commodious place for the former article. Our people
carried off the drift-wood that lay on the beach, and performed that business
with great expedition; for, as the wind blew along the shore, the boats were
enabled to sail both ways. In the afternoon Captain Cook went on shore, and
took a walk into the country; which, in those parts where there was no wood,
abounded with heath, and other plants, several of which had plenty of berries,
all ripe. Scarce a single plant was in flower. The underwood, such as birch,
alders, and willows, occasioned walking to be very troublesome among the trees,
which were all spruce, and none of which exceeded seven or eight inches in
diameter; but some were observed lying on the beach, that were above twice that
size. All the drift-wood that we saw in these northern parts was fir.

The following day, which was Sunday the 13th, a family of the natives came
near the spot where our people were occupied in taking of wood. The Captain saw
only the husband and wife, and their child, besides a fourth person, who was
the most deformed cripple he had ever seen. The husband was nearly blind, and
neither he, nor his wife, were such well looking people as many of those whom
we had met with on this coast. Both of them had their lower lips perforated;
and they were in possession of some glass-beads, resembling those we had seen
before among their neighbors. Iron was the article that pleased them most. For
four knives which had been formed out of an old iron hoop, the Captain obtained
from them near four hundred pounds weight of fish, that had been lately caught
by them. Some of these were trout, and others were, with respect to size and
taste, somewhat between a herring and a mullet. The Captain gave a few beads to
the child, who was a female; upon which the mother immediately burst into
tears, then the father, next after him the cripple, and at last, to add the
finishing stroke to the concert, the child herself. This music, however, was
not of long duration.

Mr. King had, on the preceding day, been in company with the same family. His
account of this interview is to the following purport: While he attended the
wooding party, a canoe, filled with natives, approached, out of which an
elderly man and woman (the husband and wife above mentioned) came ashore. Mr.
King presented a small knife to the woman, and promised to give her a much
larger one in exchange for some fish. She made signs to him to follow her.
After he had proceeded with them about a mile, the man fell down as he was
crossing a stony beach, and happened to cut his foot very much. This occasioned
Mr. King to stop; upon which the woman pointed to her husband's eyes, which
were covered with a thick, whitish film. He afterward kept close to his wife,
who took care to apprize him of the obstacles in his way. The woman had a child
on her back, wrapped up in the hood of her jacket. After walking about two
miles, they arrived at an open skin-boat, which was turned on one side, the
unequal part toward the wind, and was made to serve for the habitation of this
family. Mr. King now performed a remarkable operation on the man's eyes. He was
first desired to hold his breath, then to breathe on the distempered eyes, and
afterward to spit on them. The woman then took both the hands of Mr. King, and
pressing them to the man's stomach, held them there for some time, while she
recounted some melancholy history respecting her family; sometimes pointing to
her husband, sometimes to her child, and at other times to the cripple, who was
related to her. Mr. King purchased all the fish they had, which consisted of
excellent salmon, salmon-trout, and mullet. These fish were faithfully
delivered to the person he sent for them.

The woman was short and squat, and her visage was plump and round. She wore a
jacket made of deer skin, with a large hood, and had on a pair of wide boots.
She was punctured from the lip to the chin. Her husband was well made, and
about five feet two inches in height. His hair was black and short and he had
but little beard. His complexion was of a light copper cast. He had two holes
in his lower lip, in which, however, he had no ornaments. The teeth of both of
them were black, and appeared as if they had been filed down level with the
gums.

Before night, on the 13th, we had amply furnished the ships with wood, and had
conveyed on board about a dozen ton of water to each. On the 14th a party was
detached on shore to cut brooms, and likewise the branches of spruce-trees for
brewing beer. About twelve o'clock all our people were taken on board, for the
wind freshening had raised so heavy a surf on the beach, that our boats could
not continue to land without extreme difficulty and danger.

As doubts were still entertained whether the coast, upon which we now were,
belonged to an island, or to the continent of America, lieutenant King was
dispatched by the Commodore, with two boats, well manned and armed, to make
such search as might tend to remove all difference of opinion on the subject.
He was instructed to proceed toward the north as far as the extreme point seen
on Wednesday the 9th, or a little further, if he should find it necessary; to
land there, and, from the heights, endeavor to discover whether the land he
was then upon, imagined to be the island of Alaschka, was really an island, or
was connected with the land to the eastward, supposed to be the American
continent. If it proved to be an island, he was to examine the depth of water
in the channel between it and the continent, and which way the flood-tide came:
but if he should find the two lands united, he was to return immediately to the
ship. He was directed not to be absent longer than four or five days; and it
was also mentioned in his instructions, that, if any unforeseen or unavoidable
accident should force our ships off the coast, the rendezvous was to be at the
harbor of Samganoodha.

On Tuesday the 15th, the ships removed over to the bay on the south-eastern
side of Cape Denbigh, where we cast anchor in the afternoon. Not long after,
several of the inhabitants came off in canoes, and gave us some (...) salmon in
exchange for trifling articles. Early the next morning, nine men, each in a
separate canoe, paid us a visit, with the sole view of gratifying their
curiosity. They approached the ship with caution, and drawing up abreast of
each other, under our stern, favored us with a song; while one of their number
made many ludicrous motions with his hands and body, and another beat upon a
sort of drum. There was nothing savage, either in the song, or the gestures
with which it was accompanied. There seemed to be no difference, either with
respect to size or features, between these people, and those whom we had seen
on every other part of the coast, except King George's Sound. Their dress,
which chiefly consisted of the skins of deer, was made after the same mode; and
they had adopted the practice of perforating their lower lips, and affixing
ornaments to them.

The habitations of these Americans were situated close to the beach. They
consist merely of a sloping roof, without any side walls, formed of logs, and
covered with earth and grass. The floor is likewise laid with logs. The
entrance is at one end, and the fireplace is just within it. A small hole is
made near the door of the hut, for the purpose of letting out the smoke.

A party of men was dispatched, this morning, to the peninsula for brooms and
spruce. Half the remainder of the people of both ships were, at the same time,
permitted to go ashore and gather berries. These returned on board about twelve
o'clock and the other half then landed for the same purpose. The berries found
here were hurtle-berries, heath-berries, partridge-berries, and wild
currant-berries. Captain Cook also went ashore himself, and took a walk over
part of the peninsula. He met with very good grass in several places, and
scarcely observed a single spot on which some vegetable was not growing. The
low land by which this peninsula is united to the continent, abounds with
narrow creeks, and likewise with ponds of water, several of which were at this
time frozen over. There were numbers of bustards and geese, but they were so
shy, that it was impossible to get within musket shot of them. Some snipes
were also seen; and on the higher grounds, were partridges of two species;
where there was wood, musquitoes were numerous. Some of the officers, who went
further into the country than Captain Cook did, met with some of the natives of
both sexes, who treated them with civility and kindness.

The Commodore was of opinion, that this peninsula had been an island in some
distant period; for there were marks of the sea having formerly flowed over the
isthmus; and even at present, it appeared to be kept out by a bank of sand
stones, and wood which the waves had thrown up: It was manifest from this bank,
that the land here encroached upon the sea, and it was not difficult to trace
its gradual formation.

Lieutenant King returned from his expedition about seven o'clock this evening.
He had set out at eight o'clock at night, on the 14th. The crews of the boats
rowed without intermission toward the land, till one in the morning of the
15th. They then set their sails, and stood across the bay, which the coast
forms to the westward of Bald-Head. They afterward, about three o'clock, again
made use of their oars, and by two in the afternoon, had got within two miles
of Bald-Head, under the lee of the high land. At that time all the men in the
boat belonging to the Resolution, except two, were so oppressed with fatigue
and sleep, that Mr. King's utmost endeavors to make them put on were perfectly
ineffectual. They, at length, were so far exhausted, as to drop their oars, and
fall asleep at the bottom of the boat. In consequence of this, Mr King, and two
gentlemen who were with him, were obliged to lay hold of the oars; and they
landed, a little after three o'clock, between Bald-Head and a point that
projects to the eastward.

Mr. King, upon his landing, ascended the heights, from which he could see the
two coasts join, and that the inlet terminated in a small creek or river,
before which there were banks of sand or mud, and in every part shoal water.
The land, for some distance toward the north, was low and swampy; then it rose
in hills; and the perfect junction of those, on each side of the inlet, was
traced without the least difficulty.

From the elevated situation in which Mr. King took his survey of the Sound, he
could discern many spacious valleys, with rivers flowing through them, well
wooded, and bounded by hills of a moderate height. One of the rivers toward
the north-west seemed to be considerable; and he was inclined to suppose, from
its direction, that it discharged itself into the sea at the head of the bay.
Some of his people, penetrating beyond this into the country, found the trees
to be of a larger size the further they proceeded.

To this inlet Captain Cook gave the name of Norton's Sound, in honor of Sir
Fletcher Norton, now Lard Grantley, a near relation of Mr. King. It extends
northward as far as the latitude of 64 55 north. The bay, wherein our ships
were now at anchor, is situated on the south-eastern side of it, and is
denominated Chacktoole by the natives. It is not a very excellent station,
being exposed to the south and south-west winds. Nor is a harbor to be met
with in all this Sound. We were so fortunate, however, as to have the wind from
the north-east and the north, during the whole time of our continuance here,
with very fine weather. This afforded an opportunity of making a great number
of lunar observations, the mean result of which gave 197 13 east, as the
longitude of the anchoring-place on the western side of the Sound, while its
latitude was 64 31 north. With respect to the tides, the night-flood rose two
or three feet, and the day flood was scarcely perceivable.

Captain Cook being now perfectly convinced, that Mr. Staehlin's map was
extremely erroneous, and having restored the continent of America to the space
which that gentleman had occupied with his imaginary island of Alaschka,
thought it now high time to quit these northerly regions, and retire to some
place for the winter, where he might obtain provisions and refreshments. He did
not consider Petropaulowska, or the harbor of St. Peter and St. Paul in
Kamtschatka, as likely to furnish a sufficient supply. He had likewise other
reasons for not going thither at present; the principal of which was, his great
unwillingness to remain inactive for six or seven months, which would have been
the consequence of passing the winter in any of these northern countries. He at
length concluded, that no situation was so convenient for our purpose as the
Sandwich Islands. To them, therefore, he formed a resolution of repairing. But
a supply of water being necessary before he could execute that design, he
determined, with a view of procuring this essential article, to search the
coast of America for a harbor, by proceeding along it to the southward. If he
should not meet with success in that search, his intention was to reach
Samganoodha, which was appointed for our place of rendezvous, in case the ships
should happen to separate.

CHAP. XI.
Stuart's Island discovered -- Its Situation, Extent, etc. -- Cape Stephens --
Point Shallow Water -- Shoals on the Coast of North America -- Clerke's Island
-- Gore's Island -- Pinnacle Island -- The Resolution springs a Leak -- The
ships arrive at Oonalashka -- Plentiful supplies of Fish -- Intercourse with
the natives, and the Russian Traders -- Mr. Ismyloff comes on board --
Intelligence received from him -- Two Charts produced by him -- Account of the
Islands visited by the Russians -- Of their settlement at Oonalashka --
Description of the Natives -- Their Dress -- Food -- Manner of Building --
Manufactures -- Canoes -- Implements for Hunting and Fishing -- Fish, and other
Sea Animals -- Water Fowls -- Land-Birds -- Quadrupeds -- Vegetables -- Stones
-- Repositories of the Dead -- Diseases -- Resemblance of the Inhabitants of
this Side of America to the Esquimaux and Greenlanders -- Tides, Longitude, etc.

IN the morning of the 17th of September, we weighed anchor with a light
easterly breeze, and steered to the southward, attempted to pass within
Besbourough Island; but, though it is six or seven miles distant from the
continent, we were prevented, by meeting with shoal water. Having but little
wind all the day, we did not pass that island before it was dark; and the night
was spent under an easy sail.

At daybreak, on the 18th, we resumed our progress along the coast. At noon,
our soundings were no more than five fathoms. Besborough Island, at this time,
bore north 42 east; the most southerly land in sight, which also proved to be
an island, bore south 66 west; the passage between it and the continent, was in
the direction of south 40 west, and the nearest land was at the distance of
about two miles.

We continued to steer for this passage, till the boats which were ahead made
the signal for having no more than three fathoms water. In consequence of this,
we hauled without the island, and displayed the signal for the Resolution's
boat to keep between the shore and the ships.

This island, to which the name of Stuart's Island was given, lies in the
latitude of 63 35 north, and is seventeen leagues distant from Cape Denbigh, in
the direction of south 27 west. It is six or seven leagues in circumference.
Though some parts of it are of a moderate height, yet, in general, it is low,
with some rocks off the western part. The greatest part of the coast of the
continent is low land, but we perceived high land up the country. It forms a
point, opposite the island, which was distinguished by the name of Cape
Stephens, and is situated in the latitude of 63 33 north, and in the longitude
of 197 41 east. Some drift wood was observed on the shores, both on the island
and of the continent; but not a single tree was seen growing upon either.
Vessels might anchor, upon occasion, between the continent and the north-east
side of this i^ and in a depth of five fathoms, sheltered from the easterly,
westerly, and southerly winds. But this station would be entirely exposed to
the northerly winds, the land, in that direction, being too remote to afford
any security. Before we reached Stuart's Island, we passed two little islands,
situate between us and the main land; and as we ranged along the coast, several
of the natives made their appearance upon the shore, and by signs, seemed to
invite us to approach.

We were no sooner without the island, than we steered south by west, for the
most southern part of the continent in sight, till eight in the evening, when,
the depth of water having decreased from six fathoms to less than four, we
tacked and stood to the northward into five fathoms, and then passed the night
in standing off and on. At the time we tacked, the southernmost point of land
abovementioned, which we named Point Shallow-Water, bore south half east, at
the distance of seven leagues. On the 19th, at daybreak, we resumed our
southerly course; but shoal water soon obliged us to haul more to the westward.
We were at length so far advanced upon the bank, that we could not hold a
north-north-west course, as we sometimes met with only four fathoms. The wind
blowing fresh at east-north-east, it was now high time to endeavor to find a
greater depth of water, and quit a coast upon which we would no longer navigate
with safety. We therefore hauled the wind to the northward, and the water
gradually increased in depth to eight fathoms.

At the time of our hauling the wind, we were about twelve leagues distant from
the continent, and nine to the west of Stuart's Island. We saw no land to the
southward of Point Shallow-Water, which Captain Cook judged to lie in the
latitude of 63 north; so that between this latitude and Shoal Ness, in latitude
60, the coast has not been explored. It is probably accessible only to boats,
or very small vessels; or, if there are channels for vessels of greater
magnitude, it would require some time to find them. From the mast-head, the sea
within us appeared to be checquered with shoals; the water was very muddy and
discolored, and much fresher than at any of the places where our ships had
lately anchored. From this we inferred, that a considerable river runs into the
sea, in this unexplored part.

After we had got into eight fathoms water, we steered to the westward, and
afterward more southerly, for the land discovered by us on the 5th of
September, which at noon on the 20th, bore south-west by west, at the distance
of ten or eleven leagues. We had now a fresh gale at north, and, at intervals,
showers of hail and snow, with a pretty high sea. To the land before us, the
commodore gave the appellation of Clerke's Island. It stands in the latitude of
63 15, and in the longitude of 190 30. It seemed to be an island of
considerable extent, in which are several hills, all connected by low ground,
so that it looks, at a distance, like a group of Islands. Near its eastern part
is a little island, which is remarkable for having on it three elevated rocks.
Both the greater island, and this smaller one, were inhabited

About six o'clock in the afternoon, we reached the northern point of Clerke's
Island; and having ranged along its coast till dark, we brought too, during the
night. Early the next morning, we again stood in for the coast, and proceeded
along it in quest of an harbor, till twelve o'clock, when finding no
probability of success, we left it and steered south-south-west, for the land
discovered by us on the 29th of July; having a fresh gale at north, accompanied
with showers of snow and sleet.

On Wednesday the 23d, at daybreak, the land abovementioned made its
appearance, bearing south-west, at the distance of six or seven leagues. From
this point of view it resembled a cluster of islands; but it was found to be
only one, of about thirty miles in extent, in the direction of north-west and
south-east; the south-eastern extremity being Cape Upright, which we have
mentioned before. The island is narrow, particularly at the low necks of land
by which the hills are connected. Captain Cook afterward found, that it was
entirely unknown to the Russians, and, therefore, considering it as a discovery
of our own, he named it Gore's Island. It appeared to be barren and destitute
of inhabitants, at least we saw none. Nor did we observe such a number of birds
about it, as we had seen when we first discovered it. But we perceived some
sea-otters, an animal which we had not found to the north of this latitude.
About twe^^e miles from Cape Upright, in the direction of ^^uth 72 west, stands
a small island, whose lofty summit terminates in several pinnacle rocks, for
which reason it obtained the name of the Pinnacle Island.

At two o'clock in the afternoon, after we had passed Cape Upright, we steered
south-east by south, for Samganoodha, with a gentle breeze at north-north-west,
being resolved to lose no more time in searching for an harbor among islands,
which we now began to suspect had no existence; at least, not in the latitude
and longitude in which they have been placed by modern delineators of charts.
On the 24th, in the evening, the wind veered to south-west and south, and
increased to a fresh gale.

We continued our easterly course till eight in the morning of the 25th, when
in the longitude of 191 10, and in the latitude of 58 32 we tacked and stood to
the westward; soon after which, the gale increasing, we were reduced to two
courses, and close-reefed main-top-sails. In a short time after, the Resolution
sprung a leak, under the starboard buttock, which was so considerable, as to
keep one pump constantly employed. We would not venture to put the ship upon
the other tack, from the apprehension of getting upon the shoals that lie to
the north-west of Cape Newenham; but continued to steer toward the west, till
six in the evening of Saturday the 26th, when we wore and stood to the
eastward; and then the leak gave us no further trouble. This proved, that it
was above the water-line, which gave us great satisfaction. The gale had now
ceased, but the wind continued at south, and south-west, for some days longer.

At length, on Friday the 2d of october, at daybreak, we saw the isle of
Oonalashka, in a south-east direction. But as the land was obscured by a thick
haze, we were not certain with respect to our situation till noon, when the
observed latitude determined it. We hauled into a bay, ten miles to the
westward of Samganoodha, known by the appellation of Egoochshac; but finding
very deep water, we speedily left it. The natives visited us at different
times, bringing with them dried salmon, and other fish, which our sailors
received in exchange for tobacco. Only a few days before, every ounce of
tobacco that remained in the ship, had been distributed among them, and the
quantity was not half sufficient to answer their demands. Notwithstanding this,
so thoughtless and improvident a being is an English sailor, that they were as
profuse in making their bargains, as if we had arrived at a port in Virginia;
by which means, in less than two days, the value of this commodity was lowered
above a thousand per c^nt.

The next day at one o'clock in the afternoon, we anchored in the harbor of
Samganoodha, and, on the morning of the 4th, the carpenters were employed in
ripping off the sheathing of and under the wale of the Resolution on the
starboard side. Many of the seams were found entirly open; it was therefore not
to be wondered at, that so much water had got into the ship. We cleared the
fish and spirit rooms, and the after-hold; and disposed things in such a
manner, that, in case of any future leaks of the same nature the water might
find its way to the pumps. Besides this work, and completing our stock of
water, we cleared the fore-hold, and took in a quantity of ballast.

The vegetables we had met with when we were here before, were now, for the
most part, in a state of decay. There being great plenty of berries, one third
of the people, by turns, had permission to go ashore and gather them.
Considerable quantities of them were also brought to us by the inhabitants. If
there were any seeds of the scurvy, among the people of either ship, these
berries, and the use of spruce beer, which the were allowed to drink every
other day, effectually eradicated them.

We likewise procured abundance of fish, at first, chiefly salmon, both fresh
and dried, which the natives brought us. Some of the fresh salmon was in the
highest perfection; but there was one sort, which, from the figure of its head,
we called hook-nosed, that was but indifferent. Drawing the seine several
times, at the head of they bay, we caught many salmon trout, and a halibut that
weighed two hundred and fifty-four pounds. We afterward had recourse to hooks
and lines. A boat was sent out every morning, which seldom returned without
eight or ten halibut, a quantity more than sufficient to serve all our people.
These fish were excellent, and there were few who did not perfer them to
salmon. Thus we not only obtained a supply of fish for present consumption, but
had some to carry with us to sea.

Captain Cook received, on the 8th, by the hands of a native of Oonalashka,
named Derramoushk, a very singular present, considering the place we were in.
It was a rye loaf, or rather a pie in the form of a loaf, as it enclosed some
salmon, well seasoned with pepper. This man had brought a similar present for
Captain Clerk, and a note for each of the Captains, written in a character
which none of us understood. It was natural to imagine, that these two presents
were from some Russians now in our neighborhood, and therefore the Captains
sent, by the same messenger, to these unknown friends, a few bottles of rum,
wine and porter, which they supposed would be highly acceptable. Captain Cook
also sent, in company with Derramoushk, Corporal Lediard, of the marines, an
intelligent man, for the purpose of gaining farther information; with orders
that if he met with any Russians, he should endeavor to make them understand,
that we were Englishmen, the friends and allies of their nation.

On Saturday the 10th, Corporal Lediard returned with three Russian seamen, or
furriers, who, with several others, resided at Egoochshac, where they had some
storehouses, a dwelling house, and a sloop of about thirty ton burden. One of
these Russians was either Master or Mate of this vessel. They were all three
intelligent, well behaved men, and extremely ready to give us all the
information we could desire. But, for want of an interpreter, we found it very
difficult to understand each other. They appeared to have a perfect knowledge
of the attempts which their countrymen had made to navigate the Frozen Ocean,
and of the discoveries that had been made from Kamtschatka, by Beering,
Tscherik off, and Spangenberg. But they had not the least idea to what part of
the world Mr. Staehlin's map referred, when it was laid before them. When
Captain Cook pointed out Kamtschatka, and some other places, upon this map,
they asked him whether he had seen the islands there represented; and, on his
answering in the negative, one of them put his finger upon a part of the map,
where a number of islands are laid down, and said, that he had cruised there in
search of land, but could not meet with any. The Captain then showed them his
own chart, and found that they were strangers to every part of the coast of
America, except that which lies opposite this island.

One of these men said, that he had been with Beering in his American voyage;
but he must then have been very young; for even now, at the distance of
thirty-seven years, he had not the appearance of being aged. Never was greater
respect paid to the memory of any eminent person, than by these men to that of
Beering. The trade in which they are engaged, is very advantageous, and its
being undertaken and extended to the eastward of Kamtschatka, was the immediate
result of the second voyage of that distinguished navigator, whose misfortunes
proved the source of much private benefit to individuals, and of public utility
to the Russian empire. And yet, if his distresses had not accidentally carried
him to the island which bears his name, where he ended his life, and from
whence the remainder of his ship's crew brought back specimens of its valuable
furs, the Russians would probably have undertaken no future voyages, which
could lead them to make discoveries in this sea, toward the American coast.
Indeed, after his time, their ministry seem to have paid less attention to this
object; and, for what discoveries have been since made, we are principally
indebted to the enterprizing spirit of private merchants, encouraged, however,
by the superintending care of the court of Petersburgh.

The three Russians having remained all night with the Commodore, visited
Captain Clerk the following morning, and then departed, perfectly satisfied
with the reception they had met with. They promised to return in a few days,
and bring with them a chart of the islands situate between Kamtschatka and
Oonalashka.

In the evening of the 14th, while Captain Cook and Mr. Webber were at a
village, not far from Samganoodha, a Russian landed there, who proved to be the
principal person among his countrymen in this and the adjacent isles. His name
was Erasim Gregorioff Sin Ismyloff. He arrived in a canoe that carried three
persons, attended by twenty or thirty smaller canoes, each conducted by one
man. Immediately after landing, they constructed a small tent for Ismyloff, of
materials which they had brought with them, and they afterward made others for
themselves, of their canoes and paddles, which they covered with grass.
Ismyloff having invited the Captain and Mr. Webber into his tent, set before
them some dried salmon and berries. He appeared to be a man of sense; and the
Captain felt no small mortification in not being able to converse with him
except by signs, with the assistance of figures, and other characters. The
Captain requested him to favor him with his company on board the next day, and
accordingly he came with all his attendants. He had indeed, moved into the
neighborhood of our station, for the express purpose of waiting upon us.

Captain Cook was in hopes of receiving from him the chart which his three
countrymen had promised, but he was disappointed. However, Ismyloff assured him
he should have it, and he kept his word. The Captain found him very well
acquainted with the geography of those parts, and with all the discoveries
which had been made in this quarter by the Russians. On seeing the modern maps,
he instantly pointed out their errors: he said, he had accompanied Lieutenant
Syndo, or (as he called him) Synd, in his northern expedition; and according to
his account, they did not proceed farther than Tschukotskoi Noss, or rather
than St Lawrence's Bay; for he pointed on our chart to the very place where
Captain Cook landed. From thence, he said, they went to an island, in the
latitude of 63 north, upon which they did not land. He did not recollect the
name of that island; but the Captain conjectured, that it was the same with
that to which the appellation of Clerke's Island had been given. To what place
Synd repaired afterward, or in what particular manner he employed the two
years, during which, according to Ismyloff, his researches lasted, he was
either unable or unwilling to inform us. Perhaps he did not comprehend our
inquiries on this point; and yet, in almost every other thing, we found means
to make him understand us. This inclined us to suspect, that he had not really
been in this expedition, notwithstanding what he had asserted.

Not only Ismyloff, but also the others affirmed that they were totally
unacquainted with the American continent to the northward; and that neither
Lieutennant Synd, nor any other Russian, had seen it of late years. They called
it by the same name which Mr. Staehlin has assi^ted to his large island, that
is Alaschka.

According to the information we obtained from Ismyloff and his countrymen, the
Russians have made several attempts to gain a footing upon that part of the
North American continent, that lies contiguous to Oonalashka and the adjacent
islands, but have constantly been repulsed by the inhabitants, whom they
represent as a very treacherous people. They made mention of two or three
captains, or chief men, who had been murdered by them; and some of the Russians
showed us wounds which they declared they had received there.

Ismyloff also informed us, that in the year 1773, an expedition had been
undertaken into the Frozen Ocean in sledges over the ice, to three large
islands, that are situate opposite the mouth of the river Kovymy. But a voyage
which he said he himself had performed, engaged our attention more than any
other. He told us that on the 12th of May, 1771, he sailed from Bolcheretzk, in
Kamtschataka, in a Russian vessel, to Mareekan, one of the Kurile Islands,
where there is an harbor, and a Russian settlement. From this island he
proceeded to Japan, where his continuance appears to have been but short; for,
as soon as the Japanese knew that he and his companions professed the Christian
faith, they made signs for them to depart; but did not so far as we could
understand him, offer any insult or violence. From Japan he repaired to Canton
in China; and from thence in a French ship, to France. He then traveled to
Petersburg, and was afterward sent out again to Kamtschatka. We could not
learn what became of the vessel in which he first embarked, nor what was the
principal intention of the voyage. His being unable to speak one word of the
French language, rendered this story rather suspicious; he seemed clear,
however, as to the times of his arrival at the different places, and of his
departure from them, which he put down in writing.

The next morning (Friday the 16), he offered Captain Cook a sea-otter skin,
which he said, was worth eighty roubles at Kamtschatka. The Captain, however,
thought proper to decline the offer; but except of some dried fish, and several
baskets of the lily, or saranne root. In the afternoon, Ismyloff, after having
dined with Captain Clerk, left us with all his retinue, but promised to return
in a few days. Accordingly, on the 19th, he paid us another visit, bringing
with him the charts above mentioned, which he permitted Captain Cook to copy;
and the contents of which are the foundation of the following remarks.

The charts were two in number, they were both manuscripts, and bore every mark
of authenticity. One of them comprehended the Penshinskian sea; the coast of
Tartary, as low as the latitude of 41 north; the Kurile Islands, and the
peninsula of Kamtschatka. Since this chart had been made Wawseelee Irkeechoff,
a naval captain explored, in the year 1758, the coast of Tartary, from Okotsk,
and the river Amur, to Japan, or 41 of northern latitude. We were informed by
Mr. Ismyloff, that a great part of the seacoast of Kamtschatka had been
corrected by himself; and he described the instrument used by him for that
purpose, which must have been a theodolite. He also told us, that there were
only two harbors proper for shipping, on all the eastern coast of Kamtschatka,
viz. the bay of Awatska, and the river Olutora, in the bottom of the gulf of
the same name; that there was not one harbor on its western coast; and that
Yamsk was the only one except Okotsk, on all the western side of the
Penshinskian sea, till we come to the river Amur. The Kurile Islands contain
but one harbor, and that is on the north-east side of Mareekan; where as we
have already mentioned, the Russians have a settlement.

The other chart comprehended all the discoveries that the Russians had made to
the eastward of Kamtschatka, toward America. That part of the American coast,
with which Tscherikoff fell in, is laid down in this chart between the latitude
of 58 and 50 north and 75 of eastern longitude, from Okotsk, or 218 from
Greenwich; and the place where Beering anchored in 59 of latitude, and 63 of
longitude from Okotsk, or 207 from Greenwich. To say nothing of the longitude,
which may, from several causes, be erroneous, the latitude of the coast,
discovered by Beering and Tscherikoff, particularly that part of it which was
discovered by the latter, differs considerably from Mr. Muller's chart. Whether
the chart now produced by Ismyloff, or that of Muller, be most erroneous in
this respect, it may be difficult to determine.

According to Ismyloff's account, neither the number nor the situation of the
islands which are dispersed between 52 and 55 of latitude, in the space between
Kamtschatka and America, is properly ascertained. He struck out about a third
of them, assuring us that they did not exist; and he considerably altered the
situation of others; which, he said, was necessary, from the observations which
he himself had made; and there was no reason to entertain a doubt about this.
As these islands are nearly under the same parrallel, different navigators,
misled by their different reckonings, might easily mistake one island, or
cluster of islands, for another* and imagine they had made a new discovery,
when they had only found old ones, in a position somewhat different from that
which their former visitors had assigned to them.

The isles of St. Theodore, St. Stephen, St. Abraham, St. Macarius, Seduction
Islands, and several others, which are represented in Mr. Muller's chart, were
not to be found in this now produced to us; nay, Ismyloff, and the other
Russians, assured Captain Cook, that they had been frequently sought for
without effect. Nevertheless, it is difficult to believe, that Mr. Muller could
place them in his chart without some authority. Captain Cook, however*
confiding in the testimony of these people, whom he thought competent
witnesses, omitted them in his chart; and made such corrections respecting the
other islands, as he had reason to think were necessary.

We shall now proceed to give some account of the islands, beginning with those
which are nearest to Kamtschatka, and computing the longitude from the harbor
of Petropaulowska, in the bay of Awatska. The first is Beering's island, in 55
of no^^hern latitude, and 6 of eastern longitude. At the distance of ten
leagues from the southern extremity of this, in the direction of east by south,
or east south-east, stands Maidenci Ostroff or the Copper Islands. The next
island is Atakon, in the latitude of 52 45 and in the longitude of 15 or 16.
The extent of this island is about eighteen leagues in the direction of east
and west; and it is perhaps the same land which Beering fell in with, and to
which he gave the name of Mount St. John.

We next came to a cluster of six or more islands; two of which, Amluk and
Atghka, are of considerable extent, and each of them has a good harbor. The
middle of this group lies in the latitude of 52 30, and 28 of longitude, from
the bay of Awatska; and its extent is about four degrees, in the direction of
east and west. These are the isles that Ismyloff said were to be removed four
degrees to the eastward. In the situation they have in Captain Cook's chart,
was a group, comprehending ten little islands, which, we were informed, were
entirely to be struck out; and also two islands, situate between them and the
group to which Oonalashka appertains. In the place of these two, an island,
named Amoghta, was introduced.

The situation of many of these islands may, perhaps, be er^oneously laid down.
But the position of the largest group, of which Oonalashka is one of the most
considerable islands, is free from such errors. Most of the islands that
compose this cluster, were seen by us; their longitude and latitude were
therefore determined with tolerable accuracy, particularly the harbor of
Samganoodha, of Oonalashka, which must be considered as a fixed point. This
group may be said to extend as far as Halibut Isles, which are forty leagues
distant from Oonalashka, toward the east-north-east. Within these isles a
passage, communicating with Bristol Bay, was marked in Ismyloff's chart; which
converts about fifteen leagues of the coast, that Captain Cook had supposed to
be part of the continent, into an island, named Oonce, make. This passage might
easily escape us, being as we were informed, extremely narrow, shallow, and
only to be navigated through with boats, or vessels of very small burden.

From the chart, as well as from the testimony of Ismyloff and his countrymen,
it appears, that this is as far as the Russians have made any discoveries, or
have extended themselves, since the time of Beering. They all affirmed, that no
persons of that nation had settled themselves so far to the eastward, as the
place where the natives gave the note to Captain Clerk; which being delivered
to Ismyloff for his perusal, he said, that it had been written at Oomanak. From
him we procured the name of Kodiak A Russian ship had touched at Kodiak in the
year 1776.
, the largest of Schumagin's Islands; for it had no name assigned to it upon
the chart which he produced. It may not be improper to mention, that no names
were put to the Islands which Ismyloff said were to be struck out of the
charts; and Captain Cook, considered this as some confirmation, that they have
no existence.

The American continent is here called, by the Russians, as well as by the
islanders, Alaschka; which appellation, though it properly belongs only to that
part which is contiguous to Ooncemak, is made use of by them when speaking of
the American continent in general.

This is all the intelligence we obtained from these people, respecting the
geography of this part of the globe; and perhaps this was all the information
they were able to give. For they repeatedly assured Captain Cook, that they
knew of no other islands, besides those which were represented upon this chart,
and that no Russian had ever visited any part of the American continent to the
northward, except that which is opposite the country of the Tschutskis.

If Mr. Staehlin was not greatly imposed upon, what could induce him to publish
a map so singularly erroneous, as his map of the New Northern Archipelago, in
which many of these islands are jumbled together without the least regard to
truth? Nevertheless, he himself styles it a very accurate little map.

Ismyloff continued with us till the evening of the 21st, when he took his
final leave. Captain Cook entrusted to his care a letter to the Lords of the
Admiralty, enclosing a chart of all the northern coasts we had visited.
Ismyloff said there would be an opportunity of transmitting it to Kamtschatka,
Okotsk, in the course of the succeeding spring; and that it would be at
Petersburgh the following winter. He gave the Captain a letter to Major Behm,
Governor of Kamtschatka, who resides at Bolcheretsk in that peninsula; and
another to the commanding officers at Petropaulowska.

Mr. Ismyloff seemed to possess abilities that might entitle him to a higher
station than that in which we found him. He had considerable knowledge in
astronomy, and in the most useful branches of the mathematics. Captain Cook
made him a present of an Hadley's octant; and though, perhaps, it was the first
he had ever seen, he very quickly made himself acquainted with most of the uses
to which that instrument can be applied.

On Thursday the 22d, in the morning, we made an attempt to get out to sea,
with the wind at south-east, but did not succeed. In the afternoon of the 23d
we were visited by one Jacob Ivanovitch Soposnicoff, a Russian, who commanded a
small vessel a Oomanak. This man seemed very modest, and would drink no strong
liquor, of which the other Russians, whom we had met with here, were extremely
fond. He appeared to know what supplies could be obtained at the harbor of St.
Peter and St. Paul, and the price of the various articles, more accurately than
Mr. Ismyloff. But, by all accounts, every thing, we should have occoasion to
purchase at that place, was very scarce, and bore a high price. This man
informed us, that he was to be at Petropaulowska in the ensuing May; and, as we
understood, was to have the charge of Captain Cook's letter. He seemed very
desirous of having some token from the Captain to carry to Major Behm; and, to
gratify him, the Captain sent a small spying-glass.

After we had contracted an acquaintance with these Russians, several of our
gentlemen at different times, visited their settlements on the island, where
they always met with friendly treatment. It consisted of a dwelling house and
two storehouses. Besides the Russians, there was a number of the
Kamtschadales, and of the Oonalashkans, as servants to the former. Some other
natives of this island, who appeared to be independent of the Russians, lived
at the same place. Such of them as belonged to the Russians, were all of the
male sex; and they are either taken, or purchased from their parents when
young. There were, at present, about twenty of these who could be considered in
no other light than as children. They all reside in the same house, the
Russians at the upper end, the Kamtschadales in the middle, and the
Oonalashkans at the lower end, where is fixed a capacious boiler for preparing
their food, which principally consists of fish, with the addition of wild roots
and berries. There is no great difference between the first and last table,
except what is produced by cookery, by which the Russians can make indifferent
things palatable. They dress whales flesh in such a manner as to make it very
good eating; and they have a kind of pan-pudding of salmon-roe, beaten up fine
and fried, which is a tolerable substitute for bread. They may perhaps,
occasionally, taste real bread, or have a dish in which flour is one of the
ingredients. If we except the juice of berries, which they generally sip at
their meals, they drink no other liquor than pure water; and it seems to be
very fortunate for them that they have nothing stronger.

As the island furnishes them with subsistence, so it does, in some measure,
with clothing. This is chiefly composed of skins. The upper garment, which is
made like a waggoner's frock, reaches down to the knees. Besides this, they
wear a waistcoat or two, a pair of breeches, a fur cap, and a pair of boots,
the legs of which are formed of some kind of strong gut, but the soles and
upper leathers are of Russian leather. Their two chiefs, Ismyloff and
Ivanovitch, wore a calico frock, and they, as well as several others, had
shirts of silk.

Many Russians are settled upon all the most considerable islands between
Kamtschatka and Oonalashka, for the purpose of collecting furs. Their principal
object is the sea-beaver or otter; but skins of inferior value also make a part
of their cargoes. We neglected to inquire how long they have had a settlement
upon Oonalashka, and the neighboring islands; but if we form our judgment on
this point from the great subjection the natives are under, this cannot be of a
very late date According to Mr. Coxe, in his account of the discoveries of the
Russians, they began to frequent Oonalashka in the year 1762.
. These furriers are, from time to time, succeeded by others. Those we saw
arrived here from O^^^sk in 1776, and were to return in 1781.

As for the native inhabitants of this island, they are, to all appearance, a
very peaceable, inoffensive race of people; and, in point of honesty, they
might serve as a pattern to the most civilized nations. But, from what we saw
of their neighbors, with whom the Russians are unconnected, we have some doubt
whether this was their original disposition; and are rather inclined to be of
opinion, that it is the consequence of their present state of subjection.
Indeed, if we did not misunderstand the Russians, they had been under the
necessity of making some severe examples before they could bring the islanders
into tolerable order. If severities were really inflicted at first, the best
excuse for them is, that they have produced the most beneficial effects; and,
at present, the greatest harmony subsists between the Russians and the natives.
The latter have their own chiefs in each island, and seem to enjoy liberty and
p^^perty without molestation. Whether they are tributaries to the Russians, or
not, we could never learn; but we had some reason to suppose that they are.

The people of Oonalashka, are in general, rather low of stature, but plump,
and well shaped. Their necks are commonly short, and they have swarthy chubby
faces. They have black eyes, and small beards. Their hair is long, black, and
straight; the men wear it loose behind, and cut before; but the women generally
tie it up in a bunch.

The dress of both sexes is the same with respect to fashion, the only
difference is in the materials. The frock worn by the women is made of the
skins of seals; and that of the men, of the skins of birds; both reach below
the knees. This constitutes the whole dress of the females. But, over the
frock, the men wear another composed of gut, which water cannot penetrate; it
has a hood to it, which is drawn over the head. Some of them wear boots; and
all of them wear a sort of oval snouted cap, made of wood, with a rim that
admits the head. They dye these caps with green and other colors; and round
the upper part of the rim they fix the long bristles of some sea animal, on
which glass beads are strung; and on the front is a small image or two formed
of bone. They do not make use of paint; but the women puncture their faces
slightly, and both sexes perforate the lower lip, in which they fix pieces of
bone. But it is as uncommon here to see a man with this ornament, as to observe
a woman without it. Some fix beads to the upper lip under the nostrils; and
they all suspend ornaments in their ears.

Fish, and other sea animals, birds, roots, berries, and even sea-weed, compose
their food. They dry quantities of fish during the summer, which they lay up in
small huts for their use in winter; and, probably, they preserve berries and
roots for the same season of scarcity. They eat most of their provisions raw.
Boiling and broiling were the only methods of cookery that we saw practiced
among them; and the former they in all probability learnt from the Russians.
Some have in their possession small brass kettles: and those who have not, make
one of a flat stone, with sides of clay.

Captain Cook once happened to be present, when the chief of this island made
his dinner of the raw head of a large halibut, just caught. Before any part of
it was given to the chief, two of his servants eat the gills with no other
dressing than squeezing out the slime. After this, one of them having cut off
the head of the fish, took it to the sea, and washed it, then came with it, and
seated himself by the chief; but not before he had pulled up some grass, upon a
part of which the head was placed, and the rest was strewed before the chief.
He then cut large pieces off the cheeks, and put them within the reach of the
chief, who swallowed them with great satisfaction. When he had finished his
meal, the remains of the head been cut in pieces, were given to the servants,
who tore off the meat with their teeth, and knawed the bones like so many dogs.

As the Oonalashkans use no paint, they are less dirty in their persons than
those savages who thus besmear themselves; but they are full as filthy in their
houses. The following is their method of building: they dig, in the ground, an
oblong pit, which rarely exceeds fifty feet in length, and twenty in breadth;
but the dimensions are in general smaller. Over this excavation they form the
roof of wood, which they cover first with grass, and then with earth, so that
the external appearance resembles a dunghill. Near each end of the roof is
left a square opening, which admits the light; one of these openings being
intended only for this purpose, and the other being also used to go in and out
by, with the assistance of a ladder, or rather a post, in which steps are cut.
In some of the houses there is another entrance below, but this is rather
uncommon. Round the sides and ends of the habitations, the families, several of
which dwell together, have their separate apartments, where they sleep, and sit
at work; not on benches, but in a sort of concave trench, dug entirely round
the inside of the house and covered with mats, so that this part is kept pretty
clean and decent. The same cannot be said of the middle of the house, which is
common to all the families. For, though it is covered with dry grass, it is a
recepticle for every kind of dirt, and the place where the urine trough stands;
the stench of which is by no means improved by raw hides, or leather, being
almost continually steeped in it. Behind, and over the trench, they place the
few effects that they have in their profession, such as their mats, skins, and
apparel.

Their furniture consists of buckets, cans, wooden bowls, spoons, matted
baskets and sometimes a Russian kettle or pot. All these utensils are made in a
very neat manner; and yet we observed no other tools among them than the knife
and the hatchet; that is, a small flat piece of iron, made like an adze, by
fixing it into a crooked wooden handle.

Though the Russians live among these people, we found much less iron in
possession of the latter, than we had met with among other tribes on the
neighboring continent of America, who had never seen the Russians, nor perhaps
had any intercourse with them. Probably a few beads, and a small quantity of
tobacco and snuff, purchase all they have to spare. There are few of them that
do not both smoke and chew tobacco, and take snuff.

They did not appear to be very desirous of more iron, or to want any other
instruments, except sewing needles, their own being formed of bone. With these
they sew their canoes, and make their clothes, and also work very curious
embroidery. They use, instead of thread, the fibers of sinews, which they split
to the thickness which is required. All sewing is performed by the females.
They are the shoe-makers, tailors, and boat-builders, or boat-coverers; for the
men, in all probability, construct the wooden frame, over which the skins are
sewed. They manufacture mats, and baskets of grass, which are both strong and
beautiful. There is indeed, a neatness and perfection in most of their work,
that shows they are neither deficient in ingenuity nor perseverance.

We did not observe a fireplace in any one of their habitations. They are
lighted, as well as heated, by lamps; which though simple, effectually answer
the purpose for which they are intended. They consist of a flat stone, hollowed
on one side like a plate; in the hollow part they put the oil, mixed with some
dry grass, which serves for a wick. Both sexes often warm themselves over one
of these lamps, by placing it between their legs, under their garments, and
sitting thus over it for several minutes. These people produce fire both by
collision and attrition; the first by striking two stones against each other,
on one of which a quantity of brimstone has been previously rubbed. The latter
method is performed by means of two pieces of wood, one of which is flat, and
the other is a stick of the length of about a foot and a half. They press the
pointed end of the stick upon the other piece, whirling it nimbly round as a
drill, and thus fire is procured in a few minutes. This method is common in
many countries. It is not only practiced by these people, but also by the
Kamtschadales, the Greenlanders, the Otaheiteans, the New-Hollanders, and the
Brazilians, and probably by other nations. Some men of learning and genius have
founded an argument on this custom, to prove that this and that nation are of
the same extraction. But casual agreements, in a few particular instances, will
not wholly authorize such a conclusion; nor, on the other hand, will a
disagreement, either in manners or customs, between two different nations,
prove of course that they are of different extraction.

We saw no offensive, nor even defensive weapon among the natives of
Oonalashka. It can scarcely be supposed that the Russians found them in such a
defenseless state; it is rather to be imagined, that, for their own security,
they have disarmed them. Political motives, likewise, may have induced the
Russians not to permit these islanders to have any large canoes; for we can
hardly believe they had none such originally, as we found them among all their
neighbors. However, we observed none here except two or three that belonged to
the Russians.

The canoes in use among the natives, are smaller than any of those we had seen
upon the coast of America, from which however, they differ but little in their
construction. The form of these terminates somewhat abruptly; the head is
forked, and the upper point of the fork projects without the under one, which
is level with the surface of the water. It is remarkable that they should thus
construct them, for the fork generally catch^^ hold of every thing that comes
in the way; to prevent which, they fix a piece of small stick from one point to
the other. In other respects they build their canoes after the manner of those
of the Esquimaux and Greenlanders; the frame being of slender laths, and the
covering of the skins of seals. They are about twelve feet in length, eighteen
inches in breadth in the middle, and twelve or fourteen inches in depth. They
sometimes carry two persons, one of whom sits in the seat, or round hole, which
is nearly in the middle; and the other is stretched at full length in the
canoe. Round this hole is a rim or hoop of wood, about which, gut skin is
sewed, which can be drawn together, or opened like a purse, with leathern
strings fitted to the outer edge. The man sits in this place, draws the skin
tight about his body over his gut-frock, and brings the ends of the thongs, or
purse-strings, over his shoulder. The sleeves of his frock are fastened tight
round his wrists; and it being close round his neck, and the hood being drawn
over his head, where his cape confines it, water cannot easily penetrate,
either into the canoes, or to his body. If, however, any water should find
means to insinuate itself, the boatman dries it up with a piece of sponge. He
makes use of a double-bladed paddle, which is held with both hands in the
middle, striking the water first on one side, and then on the other, with a
quick regular motion. Thus the canoe is impelled at a great rate, and in a
direction perfectly straight. In sailing from Egoochshak to Samganoodha, though
our ship went at the rate of seven miles an hour, two or three canoes kept pace
with her.

Their implements for hunting and fishing lie ready upon their canoes, under
straps fixed for the purpose. They are all extremely well made of wood and
bone, and are not very different from those used by the Greenlanders. The only
difference is in the point of the missile dart; which, in some that we saw at
this island, does not exceed an inch in length; whereas those of the
Greenlanders, according to Crantz, are about eighteen inches long. Indeed these
darts, as well as some others of the instruments, are extremely curious. Their
darts are generally made of fir, and are about four feet in length. One end is
formed of bone, into which, by means of a socket, another small piece of bone,
which is barbed, is fixed, but contrived in such a manner, as to be put in and
taken out without trouble: this is secured to the middle of the stick by a
strong, though thin piece of twine, composed of sinews. The bird, fish, or
other animal is no sooner struck, than the pointed bone slips out of the socket
but remains fixed in its body by means of the barb. The dart then serves as a
float to trace the animal, and also contributes to fatigue it considerably, so
that it is easily taken. They throw these darts by the assistance of a thin
piece of wood, twelve or fourteen inches long; the middle of this is slightly
hollowed, for the better reception of the weapon; and at the termination of the
hollow, which does not extend to the end, is fixed a short pointed piece of
bone, to prevent the dart from slipping. The other extremity is furnished with
a hole for the reception of the forefinger, and the sides are made to coincide
with the other fingers and thumb, in order to grasp with greater firmness. The
natives throw these darts to the distance of eighty or ninety yards, with great
force and dexterity. They are exceedingly expert in striking fish, both in the
sea, and in rivers. They also use hooks and lines, nets and wears. The lines
are formed of twisted sinews, and the hooks of bone.

Whales, porpoises, grampuses, halibut, sword-fish, salmon, trout, cod, soals,
flat-fish, and several other sorts, are found here; and there may be many more
that we had not an opportunity of seeing. Salmon and halibut appear to be in
the greatest plenty; and on them the people of these isles principally subsist;
at least, they were the only sort of fish, except cod, that we observed to be
laid up for their winter store.

Seals, and all that tribe of sea animals, are not so numerous as they are in
many other seas. Nor can this be thought surprising, since there is hardly any
part of the coast, on either continent, nor any of these islands, situate
between them, but what is inhabited, and whose inhabitants hunt these animals
for their food and clothing. Sea-horses are, indeed, to be found in prodigious
numbers about the ice; and the sea-otter is scarce any where to be met with but
in this sea. An animal was sometimes seen by us, that blew after the manner of
whales. It had a head resembling that of a seal. It was larger than that
animal, and its color was white, with dark spots interspersed. This was
perhaps the manati, or sea-cow.

Water fowls are neither found here in such numbers, nor in such variety, as in
the northern parts of the Atlantic Ocean. However there are some in these
parts, that we do not recollect to have seen in other countries; particularly
the alca monochroa of Steller, and a black and white duck, which we judge to be
different from the stone-duck that Krasheninikoff has described in his history
of Kamtschatka. All the other birds we saw are mentioned by this author, except
some which we observed near the ice; and the greatest part of these, if not
all, have been described by Martin, in his voyage to Greenland. It is somewhat
extraordinary, that penguins, which are so frequently met with in many parts of
the world, should not be found in this sea. Albatrosses too are extremely
scarce here.

The few land-birds seen by us are the same with those of Europe; but there
were probably many others which we had no opportunity of observing. A very
beautiful bird was shot in the woods at Norton Sound; which, we understand, is
sometimes found in England, and known by the appellation of chatterer. Our
people saw other small birds there, but in no great abundance or variety; such
as the bullfinch, the wood pecker, the yellosh-finch, and tit-mouse.

Our excursions and observations being confined to the seacoast, we cannot be
expected to have much knowledge of the animals or vegetables of the country.
There are few other insects besides musquetoes, and we saw few reptiles except
lizards. There are no deer at Oonalishka, or any of the neighboring islands;
nor are there any domestic animals, not even dogs. Weasels and foxes were the
only quadrupeds we observed; but the natives told us, that they had likewise
hares, and the marmottas mentioned by Krasheninikoff. Hence it appears, that
the inhabitants procure the greatest share of their food from the sea and
rivers. They are also indebted to the sea for all the wood which they use for
building, and other necessary purposes; as there is not a tree to be seen
growing upon any of the islands, nor upon the neighboring coast of the
continent.

The seeds of plants are said to be coveyed, by various means, from one part of
the world to another; even to islands lying in the midst of extensive oceans,
and far distant from any other lands. It is therefore remarkable, that there
are no trees growing on this part of the American continent, nor upon any of
the adjacent isles. They are doubtless as well situated for receiving seeds, by
the various ways we have heard of, as those coasts which have plenty of wood.
Nature has, perhaps, denied to some soils the power of raising trees, without
the assistance of art. With respect to the drift-wood, upon the shores of these
islands, we have no doubt of its coming from America. For though there may be
none on the neighboring coast, a sufficient quantity may grow farther up the
country, which may be broken loose by torrents in the spring, and brought down
to the sea; and not a little may be conveyed from the woody coasts, though
situated at a more considerable distance.

Plants are to be found in great variety at Oonalashka. Several of them are
such as we meet with in Europe, and also in Newfoundland, and other parts of
America; and others of them, which are likewise found in Kamtschatka, are eaten
by the natives both there and here. Of these, Krasheninikoff has favored us
with descriptions. The principal one is the saranne or lily root; which is
about as large as a root of garlic, round, and composed of a number of small
cloves and grains. When boiled, it somewhat resembles saloop; the taste of it
is not disagreeable. It does not appear to be in great abundance.

Among the food of the natives we may reckon some other wild roots; the stalk
of a plant not unlike angelica; and berries of different species, such as
cranberries, hurtle-berries, bramble-berries, and heath-berries; besides a
small red berry, which, in Newfoundland, is denominated partridge berry; and
another brown berry, with which we were unacquainted. This has somewhat of the
taste of a sloe, but is different from it in every other respect. When eaten in
a considerable quantity it is very astringent. Brandy may be distilled from it.
Captain Clerk endeavored to preserve some; but they fermented, and became as
strong as if they had been steeped in spirits.

There were several plants which were serviceable to us, but are not used
either by the Russians or natives. These were pea-tops, wild purslain, a sort
of scurvy grass, cresses, and a few others. We found all these very palatable,
whether dressed in soups or in sallads. The valleys and low grounds abound with
grass, which grows very thick, and to a great length. We are of opinion, that
cattle might subsist at Oonalashka in every season of the year, without being
housed. The soil, in many places, appeared to be capable of producing grain and
vegetables. But, at present, the Russian traders, and the natives, seem
contented with the spontaneous productions of nature.

We observed native sulphur among the people of this island; but we could not
learn where they procured it. We also found ochre, and a stone that affords a
purple color; besides another that gives a good green. This last, in its
natural state is of a greyish green hue, coarse, and heavy. It readily
dissolves in oil; but when it is put into water, it altogether loses its
properties. As for the stones about the shore and hills, we perceived in them
nothing that was extraordinary.

The Oonalashkans inter their dead on the tops of hills, and raise over the
grave a little hillock. One of the natives, who attended Captain Cook in a walk
into the country, pointed out several of these repositories of the dead. There
was one of them by the side of a road, that had a heap of stones over it; and
all who passed it, added a stone to the heap. In the country were seen several
stone hillocks, that seemed to have been artificially raised. Some of them
were, to appearance, of great antiquity.

We are unacquainted with the notions of these people respecting the deity, and
a future state. We are equally uninformed with regard to their diversions;
having seen nothing that could give us an insight into either.

They are extremely cheerful and friendly among each other; and they always
treated us with great civility. The Russians said they never had any connection
with their women, on account of their not being christians. Our people,
however, were less scrupulous; and some of them had reason to repent, that the
women of Oonalashka encouraged their addresses; for their health was injured by
a distemper that is not wholly unknown here. The natives are also subject to
the cancer, or a complaint of a similar nature, which those who are attacked by
it are studious to conceal. They do not appear to be long-lived. We did not see
a person, man or woman, whom we could suppose to be sixty years of age; and we
observed very few who seemed to exceed fifty.

We have occasionally mentioned, from the time of our arrival in Prince
William's Sound, how remarkably the inhabitants on this north-western side of
America resemble the Esquimaux and Greenlanders in various particulars of
person, dress, weapons, canoes and the like. We were; however, much less struck
with this, than with the affinity subsisting between the dialects of the
Greenlanders and Esquimaux, and those of Oonalashka and Norton's Sound. But we
must observe, with respect to the words which were collected by us on this side
of America, that too much stress is not to be laid upon their being accurately
represented; for, after the death of Mr. Anderson, we had few who took any
great degree of pains about such manners; and we have often found that the same
word, written down by two or more persons, from the mouth of the same native,
differed considerably, on being compared together. Nevertheless, enough is
certain to authorize this judgment, that there is great reason to suppose, that
all these nations are of the same extraction; and if that be the case, there is
little doubt of there being a northen communication by sea, between the western
side of America, and the eastern side, through Baffin's Bay; which
communication, however, is perhaps effectually shut up against ships, by ice,
and other obstructions; such, at least, was Captain Cook's opinion at this time.

The tides in these parts are not very considerable, except in Cook's River.
The flood comes from the south or south-east, following the direction of the
coast to the north-west. Between Cape Prince of Wales and Norton's Sound we
found a current setting toward the north-west, particularly off that Cape, and
within Sledge Island. This current, however, extended but a little way from the
coast, and was neither consistent nor uniform. To the north of Cape Prince of
Wales, we observed neither tide nor current, either on the coast of America, or
that of Asia. This circumstance gave rise to an opinion which some of our
peo^^^ entertained, that the two coasts were connected either by land or ice;
and that opinion received some degree of strength, from our never having any
hollow waves from the northward, and from our seeing ice almost the whole way
across.

From the observations made during our continuance in the harbor of
Samganoodha, its latitude is 53 5 north, and its longitude 193 29 45 east.

CHAP. XII.
Departure from Samganoodha -- Amoghta -- An elevated Rock -- Repass the Strait
between Oonalashka and Oonella -- Proceed to the South -- One Man killed, and
three or four wounded on board the Discovery -- Mowee discovered -- Visits from
the Natives -- A Visit from a Chief named Terreeoboo -- Owhyhee, an island,
discovered -- Ships ply to Windward -- An Eclipse of the Moon -- Ship's Crew
refuse to taste Sugar-cane Beer -- Comparative View of the Cordage in the Navy
and Merchants Service -- Eulogium on the Natives of Owhyhee -- The Resolution
accomplishes the Intention of getting to Windward of the Island -- The Progress
-- Visits from the Islanders -- Joined by the Discovery -- Mr. Bligh examines
Karakakooa Bay -- Multitudes of People -- Anchor in the Bay.

ON Monday the 26th of October, we sailed from Samganoodha harbor, when, the
wind being southerly, we stood to the westward. We intended to proceed to the
Sandwich Islands, in order to pass a few of the winter months there, if we
should meet with the necessary refreshments, and then advance in our progress
to Kamtschatka, so as to arrive there about the middle of May in the ensuing
year. This being determined on, the Commodore gave Captain Clerk instructions
for proceeding in case of separation; Sandwich Islands being appointed for the
first place of rendezvous; and, for the second, Petropaulowska, in Kamtschatka.

Having got out of the harbor, the wind veered to the south-east, with which
we were carried to the western part of Oonalashka, by the evening. Here the
wind was as south, and we stretched to the westward till the next morning at
seven, at which time we wore, and stood to the east. The wind had now so
greatly increased, as to reduce us to our three courses. It blew in heavy
squalls, accompanied with rain, hail, and snow.

In the morning of the 28th, at about nine o'clock, Oonalashka bore south-east,
about four leagues distant. The strength of the gale was much abated, and,
toward the evening, insensibly veered round to the east, and soon after got to
north-east, increasing to a very hard gale, attended with rain.

At half after six in the morning of the 29th, we discovered land, which we
supposed to be the island Amoghta. At eight, the wind having veered to the
westward, we could not weather the island, and gave over plying; bearing away
for Oonalashka, in order to go to the north of it* not daring, in so hard a
gale of wind, to attempt a passage to the south-east of it. When we bore away,
the land was about four leagues distant. The longitude was 191 17, and the
latitude 53 38. The Russian map is very inaccurate in the situation of this
island.

Steering to the north-east, we discovered, at eleven o'clock, a rock, elevated
like a tower, bearing north-north-east, at the distance of about four leagues.
The latitude was 53 57, and the longitude 191 2. We got sight of Oonalashka
about three in the afternoon, when we shortened sail, and hauled the wind,
being unable to get through the passage before night. On the 20th at daybreak
having a very hard gale at west-north-west, with heavy squalls and snow, we
bore away under courses, and close-reefed topsails. About noon we were in the
middle of the strait, and got through it at three in the afternoon, Cape
Providence bearing west-south-west; the wind at west-north-west, blew a strong
gale, with fair weather.

On the 2d of November, the wind was at south; and, in the evening, blew a
violent storm, which occasioned us to bring too. Several guns were fired by the
Discovery, which we immediately answered. We lost sight of her at eight, and
saw her no more till eight the next morning. She joined us at ten; when, the
height of the gale being over, and the wind having veered to west-north-west,
we made sail, and pursued our course to the southward.

In the morning of Saturday the 7th, a shag, or cormorant, slew often round the
ship. As it is not common for these birds to go far out of the sight of land,
we supposed there was some at no great distance; though we could not discover
any. Having but little wind in the afternoon, Captain Clerk came on board with
some melancholy intelligence. He informed us that, the second night after we
departed from Samganoodha, the main tack of the Discovery gave way, by which
accident one man was killed, and the boatswain, with two or three others,
wounded. He added, that his sails and rigging received considerable damage on
the 3d, and that he fired the guns as a signal to bring too.

On the 8th, we had a gentle breeze at north, with clear weather. On the 9th,
we had eight hours calm. To this succeeded a wind from the south, accompanied
with fair weather. Such of our people as could handle a needle, were now
employed to repair the sails; and the carpenters were directed to put the boats
in order.

At noon, on the 12th, the wind returned to the northward, and veered to the
east on the 15th. We now saw a tropic bird, and a dolphin; the first we had
observed in our passage. On the 17th, the wind was southward, where it remained
till the 19th in the afternoon, when it was instantly brought round by the west
to the north, by a squall of wind and rain. The wind in^reased to a very strong
gale, and brought us under double reefed topsails. In lowering the main
top-sail, in order to reef it, the force of the wind tore it out of the
foot-rope, and it was split in several parts. We got, however, another top-sail
to the yard the next morning. We steered to the southward till the 25th, at
daylight, when we were in the latitude of 20 55.

The next morning, at daybreak, land was discovered, extending from
south-south-east to west. We stood for it and at eight o'clock, it extended
from south-east to west, the nearest part about two leagues distant. We now
perceived that our discovery of the group of the Sandwich Islands had been very
imperfect, those which we had visited in our progress northward, all lying to
the leeward of our present station.

An elevated hill appeared in the country, whose summit rose above the clouds.
The land, from this hill, fell in a gradual slope, terminating in a steep rocky
coast; the sea breaking against it in a most dreadful surf. Unable to weather
the island, we bore up, and ranged to the westward. We now perceived people on
many parts of the shore, and several houses and plantations. The country
appeared to be well supplied with wood and water, and streams were seen, in
various places, falling into the sea.

It being of the utmost importance to procure a proper supply of provisions at
these islands, which could not possibly be accomplished, if a free trade with
the natives were to be permitted; Captain Cook published an order, prohibiting
all persons on board the ship from trading, except those appointed by himself
and Captain Clerk; and these were under limitations of trading only for
provisions and refreshments. Injunctions were also laid against the admittance
of women into the ships, but under certain restrictions. But the evil, which
was intended to have been prevented by this regulation, had already got amongst
them.

About noon, the coast extended from south-east to north-west, the nearest
shore three miles distant, in the latitude of 20 59, and the longitude of 203
50. Some canoes came off, and, when they got along-side, many of the conductors
of them came into the ship without hesitation. We perceived that they were of
the same nation as those islanders more to the leeward, which had already been
visited by us; and, as we understood, they were no strangers to our having been
there. It was, indeed, too evident; these people having got the venereal
disease among them; which they probably contracted by an intercourse with their
neighbors, after we had left them.

Our visitors supplied us with a quantity of cuttle-fish, in exchange for nails
and iron. They brought but little fruit or roots, but said they had plenty of
them on their island, as well as of hogs and fowls. The horizon being clear, in
the evening, we supposed the westernmost land that we could see, to be an
island, distinct from that off which we now were. Expecting the natives would
return the next day, with the produce of their island, we plied off the whole
night, and stood close in shore the next morning. At first we were visited but
by few, but toward noon, many of them appeared, bringing with them potatoes,
tarro, bread-fruit, plantains and small pigs* all which were bartered for iron
tools and nails, we having few other articles to give them. We traded with them
till about four in the afternoon, at which time they had disposed of all their
cargoes; and not expressing any inclination to fetch more, we immediately made
sail.

On the 30th, in the afternoon, being off the north-east end of the island,
some more canoes came off. These principally belonged to Terreeoboo, a chief
who came in one of them. He made the commodore a present of two or three pigs;
and we procured a little fruit by bartering with the other people. In about two
hours they all left us, except seven or eight who chose to remain on board.
Soon after, a double sailing canoe arrived to attend upon them, which we towed
astern the whole night. In the evening, another island was seen to the
windward, called, by the natives, Owhyhee. That, which we had been off for some
days, was called Mowee.

At eight in the morning, on the first of December, Owhyhee extended from
south-east to south-west. Perceiving that we could fetch Owhyhee, we stood for
it, when our visitors from Mowee thought proper to embark in their canoes, and
went ashore. We spent the night, standing off and on, the north side of Owhyhee.

On the 2d of December, in the morning, to our great surprise, we saw the
summits of the mountains covered with snow. Though they were not of an
extraordinary height, the snow, in some places, appeared to be of a
considerable depth, and to have remained there some time. Drawing near the
shore, some of the natives approached us, who appeared a little shy at first,
but we prevailed on some of them to come on board; and, at length, induced them
to return to the island, to bring a supply of what we wanted. We had plenty of
company after these had reached the shore, who brought us a tolerable supply of
pigs, fruit, and roots. We traded with them till about six in the evening, when
we stood off, in order to ply to windward round the island.

An eclipse of the moon was observed in the evening of the 4th. Mr. King used,
for the purpose of observing, a night telescope, with a circular aperture at
the object end. The Commodore observed with the telescope of one of Ramsden's
sextants.

In the evening of the 6th, being near the shore, and five leagues farther up
the coast, we again traded with the natives; but, receiving only a trifling
supply, we stood in the next morning, when the number of our visitors was
considerable, with whom we trafficked, till two in the afternoon. We had now
procured pork, fruit, and roots, sufficient to supply us for four or five days.
We therefore made sail, and still plied to windward.

Captain Cook having procured a great quantity of sugar cane, and having, upon
a trial, discovered that a decoction of it made very palatable beer, he ordered
some of it to be brewed for our general use; but, on the broaching of the
casks, not one of the crew would even taste it. The commodore, having no other
motive in preparing this beverage, than that of preserving our spirits for a
colder climate, neither exerted his authority, nor had recourse to persuasion,
to induce them to drink it; well knowing that, so long as we could be
plentifully supplied with other vegetables, there was no danger of the scurvy.
But, that he might not be disappointed in his views, he ordered that no grog
should be served in either of the ships. The Commodore, and his officers,
continued to drink this sugarcane beer, whenever materials could be procured
for brewing it. Some hops which we had on board, improved it much; and, it was,
doubtless, extremely wholesome; though the Captain's inconsiderate crew, could
not be persuaded but that it was injurious to their health.

Innovations, of whatever kind, on board a ship, are sure to meet with the
disapprobation of the seaman, though ever so much to their advantage. Portable
soup, and sour krout, were condemned, at first, as improper food for human
beings. Few commanders have introduced more useful varieties of food and drink
into their ships, than Captain Cook has done. Few others, indeed, have had the
opportunities, or have been driven to the necessity of trying such experiments.
It was, nevertheless, owing to certain deviations from established practice,
that he was enabled, in a great degree, to preserve his people from the scurvy,
a distemper that has often made more havoc in peaceful voyages, than the enemy
in military expeditions.

Having kept at some distance from the coast, till the 13th, we stood in again,
six leagues more to windward; and, after trading with the natives who came off
to us, returned to sea. We also intended to have approached the shore again on
the 15th, to get a fresh supply of fruit and roots; but the wind happening to
be then at south-east, we embraced the opportunity of stretching to the
eastward, in order to get round the south-east end of the island. The wind
continued at south-east the greatest part of the 16th; on the 17th, it was
variable; and on the 18th, it was continually veering* Sometimes it blew in
hard squalls; and, ^t other times, it was calm with thunder, lightning, and
rain. The wind was westerly for a few hours in the afternoon; but it shifted,
in the evening, to east by south. The south-east point of the island now bore
south-west by south, distant about five leagues, and we expected that we should
be able to weather it; but it became calm at one the next morning* and we were
left wholly at the mercy of a north-easterly swell, which greatly impelled us
toward the land; insomuch, that, before morning, lights were seen upon the
shore, which was then at the distance of about a league. It was a dark night,
with thunder, lightning, and rain.

A breeze from the south-east succeeded the calm at about three, blowing in
squalls, with rain. At daybreak, the coast extended from north by west, to
south-west by west, about half a league distant; a most dreadful surf breaking
upon the shore. We had certainly been in the most imminent danger; from which
we were not yet secure, the wind veering more easterly; so that for a
considerable time, we were but ju^^ able to keep our distance from the coast.
Our situation was rendered the more alarming, by the leach-rope of the main
top-sail giving way, in consequence of which the sail was rent in two; the
top-gallant-sails giving way in the sam^ manner. We soon, however, got others
to the yards, and left the land astern. The Discovery was at some distance to
the north, entirely clear from the land; nor did she appear in sight till eight
o'clock.

It is an obvious remark, that the bolt-ropes to our sails are extremely
deficient in strength or substance. This has frequently been the source of
infinite labor and vexation; and occasioned the loss of much canvass by their
giving way. It was, upon this occasion, observed by Captain Cook, that the
cordage, canvass, and other stores, made use of in the navy, are inferior, in
general, to those used in the merchant service.

The Commodore also observed, that an opinion prevailed among all naval
officers, that the king's stores were superior to any others; no ships being so
well fitted out as those of the navy. They might be right, he admits, as to the
quantity; but, he apprehends, not with respect to the quality of the stores.
This, indeed, is not often tried; for these things are usually condemned, or
converted to other uses, before they are half worn out. Only such voyages as
ours afford an opportunity of making the trial; our situation being such, as to
render it necessary to wear every thing to the extreme Captain Cook, in this
particular, appears to be mistaken; the best of cordage being made in the
King's yard. In time of war, indeed, when the cordage is, from necessity
supplied by contract, some of an inferior quality may sometimes be made.
.

When daylight appeared, the natives ashore exhibited a white flag, as a
signal, we imagined, of peace and friendship. Many of them ventured out after
us; but, as the wind freshened* and we were unwilling to wait, they were
presently left astern. In the afternoon, we made another attempt to weather the
eastern extreme, in which we failed; when the Commodore gave it up, and ran
down to the Discovery.

Our getting round the island was, indeed, a matter of no importance; for we
had seen the extent of it to the south-east, which was all the Commodore aimed
at: the natives having informed us, that there was no other island to the
windward of this. But as we were so near accomplishing our design, we did not
entirely abandon the idea of weathering it, and continued to ply.

At noon, on the 20th, the south-east point bore south, at the distance of
three leagues. The snowy hills bore west-north-west; and we were within four
miles of the nearest shore. We were visited, in the afternoon, by some of the
natives, who came off in their canoes, bringing with them pigs and plantains.
The latter were highly acceptable, we having been without vegetables for some
days; but this was so inconsiderable a supply (hardly sufficient for one day)
that we stood in the next morning, till within about four miles of the land,
when a number of canoes came off laden with provisions. The people in them
continued trading with us till four o'clock, in the afternoon; at which time we
had got a good supply; we therefore made sail, stretching off to the northward.

We met with less reserve and suspicion, in our intercourse with the people of
this island, than we had ever experienced among any tribe of savages. They
frequently sent up into the ship the articles they meant to barter, and
afterward came in themselves, to traffic on the quarter deck. The inhabitants
of Otaheite, who we have so often visited, have not that confidence in our
integrity. Whence it may be inferred, that those of Owhyhee are more faithful
in their dealings with each other, than the Otaheitans.

It is but justice to observe, that they never attempted to overreach us in
exchanges, nor to commit a single theft. They perfectly understand trading, and
clearly comprehended the reason of our plying upon the coast. For, though they
brought off plenty of pigs, and other provisions, they were particular in
keeping up their price; and, rather than dispose of them at an undervalue,
would carry them to shore again.

At eight in the morning of the 22d, we tacked to the southward. At noon, the
snowy peak bore south-west. We stood to the south-east till midnight, when we
tacked to the north till four. We had hopes of weathering the island, and
should have succeeded, if a calm had not ensued, and left us to the mercy of a
swell, which impelled us toward the land, from which we were not above the
distance of two leagues. Some light puffs of wind, however, took us out of
danger. Whilst we lay in this situation, some islanders came off with hogs,
fowls, and fruit. From one of the canoes we got a goose, which was not larger
than a Muscovy duck. The color of its plumage was dark gray, and the bill and
legs were black.

After purchasing what the natives had brought off, we made sail, and stretched
to the north. At midnight, we tacked and stood to the south-east. Imagining the
Discovery would see us tack, we omitted the signal; but it afterward appeared
that she did not see us, and continued standing to the north; for, the next
morning, at daylight, she was not to be seen. But, as the weather was now
hazy, we could not see far; it was therefore possible that the Discovery might
be following us. At noon, we were in the latitude of 19 55, and in the
longitude of 205 3; and were two leagues from the nearest part of the island.
In the evening, at six, the southernmost part of the island bore south-west,
the nearest shore about seven miles distant. We had, therefore, now succeeded
in our endeavors, in getting to the windward of the island.

The Discovery was not yet within sight, but as the wind was favorable for her
to follow us, we expected she would shortly join us. We kept cruising off this
point of the island, till Captain Clerk was no longer expected here. It was,
at length, conjectured, that he was gone to leeward, in order to meet us that
way, not having been able to weather the north-east part of the island.

Keeping generally from five to ten leagues from the land, only one canoe came
off to us till the 28th; at which time we were attended by about a dozen,
bringing, as usual, the produce of the island. We were concerned that the
people had been at the trouble of coming, as we could not possibly trade with
them, not having yet consumed our former stock; and experience had convinced
us, that the hogs could not be kept a live, nor the roots be many days
preserved from putrefaction. We meant, however, not to leave this part of the
island till we had got a supply, as we could not easily return to it, if it
should hereafter be found necessary. On the 30th, we began to be in want, but a
calm prevented us from approaching the shore. A breeze, however, sprung up at
midnight, which enabled us to stand in for the land at daybreak. At ten
o'clock the islanders visited us, bringing with them a quantity of fruit and
roots, but only three small pigs. This scanty supply was, perhaps, occasioned
by our not having purchased those which had lately been brought off.

For the purposes of traffic we brought too, but we were shortly interrupted
with an excessive rain; and, indeed, we were too far from the shore; nor could
we venture to go nearer, as we could not, for a moment, depend upon the wind's
continuing where it was. The swell too, was extremely high, and set obliquely
upon the shore, where it broke in a most frightful surf. We had fine weather in
the evening, and passed the night in making boards. Before daybreak, on the
1st of January, 1779, the atmosphere was laden with heavy clouds; and the new
year was ushered in with a heavy rain. We had a light breeze southerly, with
some calms. At ten, the rain ceased, the sky became clear, and the wind
freshened.

Being now about four or five miles from the shore, some canoes arrived with
hogs, fruit, and roots. We traded with the people in the canoes, till three in
the afternoon; when, being pretty well supplied, we made sail, in order to
proceed to the lee side of the island, in search of the Discovery. We stretched
to the eastward, till midnight, when the wind favored us, and we went upon the
other tack.

The 2d, 3d, and 4th, were passed in running down the south-east side of the
island, standing off and on during the nights, and employing part of each day
in laying too, to give the natives an opportunity of trading with us. They
frequently came off to us, at the distance of five leagues from the shore, but
never brought much with them, at those times, either from a fear of losing
their articles in the sea, or from the uncertainty of a market. We procured a
quantity of salt, of a most excellent quality.

In the morning of the 5th, we passed the south point of the island, in the
latitude of 18 54, beyond which the coast trends north 60 west. A large village
is situated on this point, many of whose inhabitants thronged off to the ship
with hogs and women. The lattter could not possibly be prevented from coming on
board, and they were less reserved than any women we had ever seen. They
seemed, indeed, to have visited us with no other view than to tender us their
persons.

Having now got a quantity of salt, we purchased only such hogs as were large
enough for salting; refusing all those that were under size. But we could
seldom procure any that exceeded the weight of sixty pounds. Happily for us, we
had still some vegetables remaining, as we were now supplied with but few of
those productions. Indeed, from the appearance of this part of the country, it
seemed incapable of affording them. Evident marks presented themselves of its
having been laid waste by the explosion of a volcano; and though ye had not
seen any thing of the kind, the devastation it had made in the neighborhood
was but too visible.

Though the coast is sheltered from the reigning winds, it had no anchorage; a
line of an hundred and sixty fathoms not reaching the bottom within half a mile
of the shore. The natives having now left us, we ran a few miles down the coast
in the evening, and passed the night in standing off and on.

We were again visited by the natives the next morning. They came laden with
the same articles of commerce as before. Being not far from the shore, Captain
Cook sent Mr. Bligh, in a boat in order to sound the coast, and also to go
ashore in search of fresh water. He reported, on his return, that, within two
cables lengths of the shore, he found no soundings with a line of one hundred
and sixty fathoms; that on the land, he could discover no stream or spring;
that there was some rain water in holes, upon the rocks, which the spray of the
sea had rendered brackish; that the whole surface of the country was composed
of flags and ashes interspersed with a few plants.

To our great satisfaction, the Discovery made her appearance between ten and
eleven, coming round the south point of the island, and she joined us about
one. Captain Clerk then came on board the Resolution, and acquainted us, that
having cruised four or five days where we were separated, he plied round the
east side of the island; where meeting with unfavourable winds, he had been
driven to some distance from the coast. One of the islanders continued on board
the whole time, at his own request, having refused to leave the ship, though
opportunities had presented themselves. The night was spent in standing off and
on. In the morning we stood in again, and were visited by many of the natives.
At noon, the latitude was 19 1, and the longitude 203 26; the nearest part of
the island two leagues distant. On the 8th, at daybreak, we perceived, that
whilst we were plying in the night, the currents had carried us back
considerably to windward; and that we were now off the south-west point of the
island, where we brought too, in order to enable the inhabitants to trade with
us.

The night was spent in standing off and on. Four men and ten women, who came
on board the preceding day, were with us still. The Commodore not liking the
company of the latter, we stood in shore, on the 9th, about noon, solely with a
view of getting rid of our guests; when, some canoes coming off, we embraced
that opportunity of sending them away.

On the 10th, in the morning, we had light airs from north-west, and calms; at
eleven, the wind freshened at north north-west, which so greatly retarded us,
that, in the evening at eight, the south snowy hill bore north, 1 east.

At four o'clock in the morning of the 11th, the wind being at west, we
approached the land in expectation of getting some refreshments. The natives
seeing us so near them, began to come off, and we continued trading with them
the whole day; though we procured but a very scanty supply, many of those who
came off in their canoes, not having a single thing to barter. From this
circumstance, it appeared, that this part of the island was extremely poor, and
had already furnished us with every thing they could spare.

The 12th was employed in plying off and on, with a fresh gale at west. A mile
from the shore we found ground, at the depth of fifty-five fathoms. At five we
stood to the southward, and at midnight we had a calm. The next morning, at
eight, we had a small breeze at south-south-east, and steered for the land.

A few canoes came off to us with some hogs: but they brought no vegetables,
which were now much wanted. In the evening we had got the length of the
south-west point of the island, but, by the veering of the wind, we lost in the
night all that we had gained in the day. Being in the same situation the next
morning, some more canoes attended us; but they brought nothing which we stood
in need of. We were now destitute of roots and fruit, and therefore obliged to
have recourse to our sea provisions. Some canoes, however, arrived from the
northward, which supplied us with some hogs and roots.

On the 15th, we had variable light airs till five in the afternoon, when a
breeze at east-north-east sprung up, and enabled us to steer along shore to the
northward. The weather was this day remarkably fine, and we had plenty of
company; many of whom continued with us on board all night, and their canoes
were towed astern. On the 16th, at daybreak, seeing the appearance of a bay,
the Commodore sent Mr. Bligh, with a boat from each ship, to survey it, being
now about three leagues off.

Canoes arrived from all quarters; insomuch that by ten o'clock in the morning,
there were at least a thousand about the two ships, crowded with people, and
laden with hogs and other provisions. We were perfectly convinced of their
having no hostile intentions; not a single person having a weapon with him of
any sort. Trade and curiosity were their only inducements to visit us. Such
numbers as we had frequently on board, it might be expected that some of them
should betray a thievish disposition. One of them took a boat's rudder from the
ship, and was not detected till it was too late to recover it. Captain Cook
imagined this to be a proper opportunity to show these islanders the use of
fire arms; two or three m^squets, and as many four pounders, were, by his
orders, fired over the canoe which went away with the rudder. But as the shot
was not intended to take effect, the surrounding multitude were more surprised
than frightened.

Mr. Bligh, when he returned in the evening, reported, that he had found a bay
with good anchorage, and fresh water, in a desirable situation. Into this bay,
the Commodore determined to take his ships, in order to refit, and supply
ourselves with refreshments. At the approach of night, the most considerable
part of our visitors retired to the shore; but many, at their own earnest
request, were permitted to sleep on board. Curiosity, at least with some of
them, was not the only motive, for several articles were missing the next
morning; in consequence of which, the Commodore came to a resolution not to
admit so many on any future night.

On the 17th, at eleven in the forenoon, we anchored in the bay, called by the
natives Karakakooa, within a quarter of a mile of the north-east shore. The
south point of the bay bearing south by west, and the north point west half
north. After we were moored, the ships continued much crowded with the natives,
and surrounded by a vast multitude of canoes. In the course of our voyages, we
had no where seen such vast numbers of people assembled at one place. Besides
those who visited us in canoes, all the shore was covered with spectators, and
hundreds were swimming about the ships, like shoals of fish. We were struck
with the singularity of this scene: and few of us lamented that we had not
succeeded in our late endeavors, to find a northern passage homeward. To this
disappointment we were indebted for revisiting the Sandwich Islands, and for
enriching our voyage with a discovery, in many respects the most important that
has been made by the Europeans in the Pacific Ocean.

A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK. V. JOURNAL OF THE TRANSACTIONS ON
RETURNING TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.
CHAP. I
Karakakooa Bay described -- Multitudes of the Natives surround the Ships --
Despotic Authority of the Chiefs over the inferior People -- A Visit received
from Koah -- Description of the Moral at Kakoa -- Offering made to Captain Cook
at the Morai -- Mr. King erects Observatories -- The Spot on which they are
situated, tabooed -- Method of curing Meat in Tropical Climates -- Society of
Priests accidentally discovered -- Their Munificence -- Ceremony at the
Reception of Captain Cook -- Mean Artifice of Koah -- Arrival of Terreeoboo --
The Bay tabooed upon that Occasion -- Bring the Inhabitants to Obedience, by
firing a Musket -- Remarkable Ceremony -- Visit from Terreeoboo -- Captain
Cook returns it.

THE Bay of Karakakooa is situated in the district of Acona, on the west side
of the island of Owhyhee. It extends about a mile in depth, and is bounded by
two points of land, bearing south-east and north-west from each other, at the
distance of half a league. The north point is flat and barren, on which is
situated the village of Kowrowa. A more considerable village, called Kakooa,
stands in the bottom of the bay, near a grove of stately cocoa-trees. A high
rocky cliff, inaccessible from the seashore, runs between them. Near the
coast, on the south side, the land has a rugged appearance; beyond which the
country gradually rises, and abounds with cultivated enclosures, and groves of
cocoa-trees. The habitations of the people are scattered about in great plenty.
Round the bay the shore is covered with a black coral rock, except at Kakooa,
where there is an excellent sandy beach, with a Morai at one extremity, and a
spring of fresh water at the other. We moored at the north side of this bay,
and within a quarter of a mile from the shore.

The inhabitants, perceiving our intention to anchor in the bay, came off in a
stonishing numbers, expressing their joy by singing, shouting, and the most
extravagant gestures. The decks, fides, and riggings of our ships were covered
with them. Women and boys, who were unable to procure canoes, came swimming
round us in great multitudes; some of whom, not finding room to get on board,
amused themselves the whole day by playing in the water.





One of the chiefs, who visited the Resolution, was named Pareea. Though a
young man, we soon discovered him to be a person of great authority. He told
Captain Cook that he was Jackane We could not learn with certainty whether this
was a name of offi^^* or expressive of some degree of affinity.
to the sovereign of the island, who was then on a military expedition at
Mowee; whence he was expected to return in a few days. Some presents from the
Commodore attached him to our interests, and we found him exceedingly useful to
us. Before we had been long at anchor, the Discovery had so many people hanging
on one side, that she was observed to heel considerably; and our people found
it impossible to prevent the crowds from pressing into her. Captain Cook,
apprehensive that she might receive some injury, communicated his fears to
Pareea, who instantly cleared the ship of its incumberances, and dispersed the
canoes that surrounded her.

From this circumstance, it appears that the chiefs have a most despotic
authority over the inferior people. An instance, similar to this, happened on
board the Resolution; where the crowd so far impeded the ordinary business of
the ship, that we found it necessary to apply to Kaneena, another chief, who
had also attached himself particularly to Captain Cook. The inconvenience we
suffered was no sooner mentioned, than he ordered the natives immediately to
quit the vessel; when, without a moment's hesitation* we saw them all jump
overboard; except one person, who loitered behind, and, by his manner,
expressed some degree of unwillingness to obey. Kaneena observing this contempt
of his authority, took hold of him immediately, and threw him into the sea.

These two chiefs were exceedingly well proportioned, and had countenances
remarkable pleasing. Kaneena, whose portrait was drawn by Mr. Webber, was as
fine a figure as can be seen. His height was about six feet, his features were
regular and expressive, his deportment was easy, firm, and graceful, and he had
dark lively eyes.

Mention has already been made, that while we were cruizing off this island,
the inhabitants had acted fairly and honestly, without manifesting the least
propensity to theft; which was the more remarkable, because those with whom we
had hitherto any dealings, were people of the lowest rank, such as fishermen or
servants. The case was now exceedingly altered. The multitude of islanders, who
blocked up every part of the ships, afforded opportunity of pilfering without
danger of discovery, and even if detected, must have escaped with impunity from
our inferiority in number. To the encouragement of their chiefs this alteration
might also be attributed; for, as we frequently traced the booty into the
possession of some great men, there is little doubt but these depredations were
made at their instigation.

The Resolution having got into her station, the two chiefs, Pareea and
Kaneena, brought a third on board, whose name was Koah. He was represented to
us as a priest, and one who, in his early days, had distinguished himself as a
warrior. He was a little old emaciated figure, having sore red eyes, and his
body covered with a leprous scurf, occasioned by the immoderate use of the ava.
Being conducted to the cabin, he approached the Commodore with the greatest
deference, threw a piece of red cloth over his shoulders, and retreated a few
paces, made an offering of a small pig, at the same time pronouncing a
discourse of a considerable length.

During our coutinuance at Owhyhee, this ceremony was repeated often, and from
a variety of circumstances, appeared to us to be a kind of religious adoration.
Red cloth is an article with which their idols are arrayed, and a pig is their
common offering to the Eatooas. Their speeches were delivered with a volubility
that indicated them to be conformable to some ritual.

At the conclusion of this ceremony, Koah dined with the Commodore, and eat
plentifully of the viands before him; but, like most of the islanders in these
seas, he could hardly be induced to taste our wine or spirits a second time. In
the evening, the Commodore, Mr. King, and Mr. Baily, accompanied him on shore.
As soon as we landed on the beach, we were preceded by four men, bearing each a
wand tipped with dog's hair, and pronouncing, with a loud voice, a short
sentence, in which the word Orono This was Captain Cook's general appellation
among the natives of Owhyhee. Sometimes it was applied by them to an invisible
being inhabiting heaven. It was also a title of great rank in the Island.
was very distinguishable. The crowd which had assembled on the shore, retired
at our approac^; and not an individual was to be seen, except a few who had
prostrated themselves on the ground, near the habitations of the adjacent
village.

Before we relate an account of the peculiar ceremonies respecting the
adoration paid to Captain Cook, it may not be unnecessary to describe the
Morai, already mentioned, situated on the beach at Kakooa. It consisted of a
square solid pile of stones, of the length of forty yards, the breadth of
twenty, and the height of fourteen. The top of it was flat, and a wooden rail
surrounded it, on which were displayed the skulls of those natives, who had
been sacrificed on the death of their chiefs. A ruinous wooden building was
situated in the center of the area, connected with the rail by a stone wall,
dividing the whole space into two parts. Five poles of about twenty feet in
height, supported an irregular kind of scaffold, on the side next the country;
and, on the side toward the sea, were too small houses, with a covered
communication.

Koah conducted us to the top of this pile. At our entrance we beheld two large
wooden images, with most distorted features, having a long piece of wood,
proceeding from the top of their heads, of a conical form inverted; the other
parts were covered with red cloth. Here Captain Cook was received by a tall
young man, having a long beard, who presented him to the images, and chanted a
kind of hymn, in which he was assisted by Koah. We were then led to the side of
the Morai where the poles were erected; at the foot of which twelve images were
ranged in the form of a semicircle; the middle figure having a high table
before it like the Whatta of Otaheite, on which we saw a putrid hog, and under
it some cocoa-nuts, plantains, potatoes, bread-fruit, and pieces of sugar-cane.
The Commodore was conducted under this stand by Koah; who, taking down the hog,
held it toward him: when, having again addressed him in a long and vehement
speech, he suffered it to fall upon the ground, and ascended the scaffolding
with him, though at the peril of their falling.

We now beheld, advancing in solemn procession, and entering the top of the
Morai, ten men bearing a live hog, and a piece of large red cloth of
considerable dimensions. Advancing a few paces, they stopped, and prostrated
themselves; and Kaireekeea, the tall young man already mentioned approaching
them, received the cloth, and carried it to Koah, who wrapped it round the
Commodore, and made him an offering of the hog.

Captain Cook was now aloft, in a situation truly whimsical, swathed in red
cloth, and hardly able to keep his hold in the rotten scaffolding. In this
situation he was entertained with the chanting of Koah and Kaireekeea,
sometimes in concert, and sometimes alternately. After this office was
performed, which was of considerable duration, Koah let the hog drop, and he
and the Commodore immediately descended. He then conducted him to the images
just mentioned, to each of which he expressed himself in a sneering tone,
snapping his fingers at them as he passed. He then presented him to that in the
center; which, from its being habited in red cloth appeared to be in the
highest estimation. He fell prostrate before this figure, and kissed it,
requesting Captain Cook would do the same; which he readily submitted to, being
determined to follow Koah's directions throughout the whole of this ceremony.

We were now conveyed into the other division of the Morai, where a space, of
about twelve feet square, was sunk three feet below the level of the area. We
descended into this, and the Commodore was immediately seated between two
idols; one of his arms being supported by Koah, and Mr. King was requested to
support the other. A second procession of natives, at this time, arrived with a
baked hog, a pudding, some cocoa-nuts, bread-fruit, and other vegetables. As
they drew near, Kaireekeea placed himself before them, and presented the hog to
the Commodore, in the usual manner; chanting as before, and his companions
making regular responses. Their speeches and responses, we observed, grew
gradually shorter and shorter and, toward the conclusion, Kaireekeea's did not
exceed three or four words, which was answered by the word orono.

At the conclusion of this offering, the natives seated themselves fronting us,
and began to cut up the baked hog, to break the cocoa-nuts, and to peel the
vegetables. Others were employed in brewing the ava, by chewing it in the same
manner as at the Friendly Islands. Kaireekeea then chewed part of the kernel of
a cocoa-nut, and wrapped it in a piece of cloth, with which he rubbed the
Captain's head, face, hands, arms, and shoulders. The ava was afterward handed
round, and when we had all tasted it, Koah and Pareea pulled the flesh of the
hog in pieces, and proceeded to put some of it into our mouths. Mr. King had no
particular objection to being fed by Pareea, who was remarkably cleanly in his
person; but Captain Cook, to whom a piece was presented by Koah, could not
swallow a morsel, the putrid hog being strong in his recollection; and as the
old man, from motives of civility, had chewed it for him, his reluctance was
much increased.

This ceremony being concluded, we quitted the Morai, after distributing among
the populace some pieces of iron, and other articles, with which they were much
delighted. We were then conducted in procession to the boats; the men, with
wands, attending, and pronouncing sentences as before. Most of the natives
again retired, and the remaining few prostrated themselves as we passed along
the shore.

We went immediately on board, full of the idea of what we had seen, and
perfectly satisfied with the honest dispositions of our new friends. Of the
singularity and novelty of the various ceremonies performed upon this occasion,
we can only form conjectures; but they were certainly, highly expressive of
respect on the part of the inhabitants; and, as far as related to the
Commodore, they approached to adoration.

Mr. King went on shore, the next morning, with a guard of eight marines;
having received orders to erect the observatory in a proper situation; by which
means the waterers, and other working parties, on shore, might be superintended
and protected. Observing a convenient spot for this purpose, almost in the
center of the village, Pareea immediately offered to exercise his power in our
behalf, and proposed that some houses should be taken down, that our
observations might not be obstructed. This generous offer, however, we
declined, and we made choice of a potatoe field, adjoining to the Morai, which
was granted us most readily; and to prevent the intrusion of the natives, the
place was consecrated by the priests, by placing their wands round the walls
which enclosed it.

This interdiction the natives call taboo, a term frequently repeated by these
islanders, and seemed to be a word of extensive operation. In this instance, it
procured us more privacy than we could have wished. No canoes attempted to land
near us; the natives only sat on the wall, not daring to come within the
tabooed space without obtaining our permission. The men, indeed, at our
request, would bring provisions into the field; but our utmost endeavors were
ineffectual to induce the women to approach us. Presents were tried, but
without success. Attempts were made to prevail on Pereea and Koah to bring
them, but to no purpose; the Eatooa and Terreeoboo, they said, would kill them
if they did.

This circumstance afforded great amusement to our friends on board, whither
multitudes of people (particularly women) continually flocked; insomuch that
they were frequently obliged to clear the vessel, in order to have room to
perform their necessary duties. Two or three hundred women were sometimes
obliged to jump, at once, into the water; where they continued to swim and play
till they could be readmitted.

Pareea and Koah left us on the 19th of January, in order to attend Terreeoboo,
who had landed on a distant part of the island; and nothing material happened
on board till the 24th. The caulkers were employed on the sides of the ships,
and the rigging was repaired. The salting of hogs was also a principal object
of the Commodore's attention; and as we had improved in this operation since
the former voyages, a detail of the process of it may not be thought improper.

To cure the flesh of animals, in tropical climates, by salting, has long been
thought impracticable; putrefaction making so rapid a progress as not to allow
the salt to take effect before the meat gets tainted. Captain Cook appears to
be the first navigator who has attempted to make experiments relative to this
business. His first attempts in 1774, in his second voyage to the Pacific
Ocean, so far succeeded, as to convince him of the error of the general
opinion. As his present voyage was likely to be protracted a year beyond the
time that provisions had been supplied for the ships, he was obliged to
contrive some method of procuring subsistence for the crews, or relinquish the
prosecution of his discoveries. He, therefore, renewed his attempts, and his
most sanguine expectations were completely answered.

The hogs we cured were of various sizes from four to ten or twelve stone,
fourteen pound to the stone. They were always slaughtered in the afternoon;
and, after scalding off the hair, and removing the entrails, the hog was cut
into pieces, from four to eight pounds each, and the bones taken out of the
legs and chine: in the larger sort, the ribs were also taken out. The pieces
were then carefully examined and wiped, and the coagulated blood taken from the
veins. After this they were given to the salters whilst they continued warm,
and, when they were well rubbed with salt, placed in a heap on a stage in the
open air, covered with planks, and pressed with very heavy weights. The next
evening they were again well wiped and examined, when the suspicious parts were
taken away. This done, they were put into a tub of strong pickle, after which
they were examined once or twice a day; and, if it happened that any piece had
not taken the salt, which might be discovered by the smell of the pickle, they
were instantly taken out and examined again, the sound pieces being put into
fresh pickle. This however, did not often happen. At the end of six days they
were examined for the last time; and, after being slightly pressed, they were
put into barrels, having a thin layer of salt between them. Mr. King brought
home some barrels of this pork, that had been pickled at Owhyhee, in January
1779, which was tasted here, by several persons, about Christmas, 1780, who
declared it to be perfectly sound and wholesome.

But to return from this digression. We had not been long settled at the
observatory, before we discovered the habitation of a society of priests, who
had excited our curiosity by their regular attendance on the morai. Their huts
were erected round a pond, enclosed within a grove of cocoa-trees, by which
they were separated from the beach and the village, and gave the situation an
air of religious retirement. Captain Cook being made acquainted with these
circumstances, he was determined to visit them; and expecting the manner of his
reception would be singular, he took Mr. Webber with him, to enable him to
represent the ceremony in a drawing.

When he arrived at the beach, he was conducted to Harre-no-Orono, or the house
of Orono. On his approaching this sacred place, he was seated at the foot of a
wooden idol, resembling those which he had seen at the morai. Here Mr. King
again supported one of his arms. He was then arrayed in red cloth, and
Kaireekeea, assis^ed by twelve priests, presented a pig with the usual
solemnities. After this ceremony, the pig was strangled, and thrown into the
embers of a fire, prepared for that purpose. When the hair was signed off, a
second offering was made, and the chanting repeated as before; after which, the
dead pig was held, for some time, under Captain Cook's nose; and then laid,
with a cocoa-nut at his feet. This part of the ceremony being concluded, the
performers sat down; and the ava was brewed and handed about; a baked hog was
brought in, and we were fed, as in the former ceremony.

While we continued on the bay, whenever the Commodore came on shore, he was
preceded by one of these priests, who proclaimed the landing of the Orono, and
ordered the inhabitants to prostrate themselves. He was constantly attended by
the same person, on the water, where he was stationed in the bow of the boat,
having a wand in his hand, to give notice of his approach to the natives, who
where in canoes; on which they instantly ceased paddling, and fell on their
faces till he had passed. Whenever he visited the observatory. Kairkeereea and
his assistants presented themselves before him, making an offering of hogs,
bread-fruit, cocoa-nuts, etc. with the accustomed solemnities. Upon these
occasions, some of the inferior chiefs entreated permission to make an offering
to the Orono. If their request was complied with, they presented the hog
themselves; in the performance of which, their countenances displayed that they
were greatly impressed with awe and terror. Kaireekeea, and the priests
assisted, and accompanied the ceremony with their accustomed hymns.

But their civilities extended beyond parade and ceremony; our party, on shore,
were daily supplied by them with hogs and vegetables, sufficient for our
subsistence, and to spare; and canoes, laden with provisions, were as regularly
sent off to the ships. Nothing was demanded in return, nor was the most distant
hint ever given that any compensation was expected. Their manner of conferring
favors, appeared more like the discharge of a religious duty, than to result
from mere liberality. On asking to whom we were indebted for all this
munificence, we were informed, that it was at the expense of Kaoo, the chief
priest, and grandfather to Kaireekeea, who was then in the suit of the
sovereign of the island.

We had, indeed, less reason to be satisfied with the behavior of the warrior
chiefs, than with that of the priests. In our intercourse with the former, they
were always sufficiently attentive to their own interests; and, besides their
propensity to stealing, which may admit of palliation from its universality in
these seas, they had other artifices equally dishonorable. The following is
one instance, in which we discovered, with regret, that our good friend Koah
was a party principally concerned.

The chiefs, who made us presents of hogs, were always generously rewarded; in
consequence of which, we were supplied with more than we could consume. On
these occasions Koah, who constantly attended us, usually petitioned for those
that we did not absolutely want, and they were given to him of course. A pig
was, one day, presented to us by a man whom Koah introduced as a chief; which
we knew to be the pig that had, a short time before been given to Koah.
Suspecting we had been imposed upon, we found, on further enquiry, that the
pretended chief was one of the common people; and from other concurrent
circumstances, we were perfectly convinced that, in many instances, we had been
the dupes of similar imposition.

On Sunday the 24th, we were now a little surprised to find, that no canoes
were permitted to put off, and that the natives confined themselves to their
houses. At length, however, we were informed, that the bay was tabooed, and
that all intercourse with us was interdicted, oh account of the arrival of
Terreeoboo their king. Not apprehending an accident of this kind, the ships
were deprived of their usual supply of vegetables.

On Monday the 25th, in the morning, we endeavored, by threats and promises,
to induce the inhabitants to approach us. At length, some of them were
venturing to put off, and a chief was observed to be very active in driving
them away. In order to make him desist, a musket was instantly fired over his
head, which operated as it was intended, and refreshments were soon after to be
had as usual. In the afternoon, the ships were privately visited by Terreeoboo,
attended only by one canoe, which had his wife and family on board. After
staying till almost ten o'clock, he returned to the village of Kowrowa.

About noon the next day, the king, in a large canoe, with some attendants in
two others, paddled from the village, in great state, toward the ships. Their
appearance was noble and magnificent. Terreeoboo, and his chiefs, were in the
first canoe, arrayed in feathered cloaks and helmets, and armed with spears and
daggers. In the second, came Kaoo, the chief priest, together with h^s
brethern, having their idols displayed on red cloth. These idols were figures
of an enormous size, made of wicker-work, and curiously ornamented with small
feathers of a variety of colors. Their eyes were large pearl oysters, with a
black nut placed in the center; a double row of the fangs of dogs was fixed in
each of their mouths, which, as well as the rest of their features appeared
strangely distorted. The third canoe was laden with hogs and vegetables. As
they advanced, the priests, in the secon canoe, chanted their hymns with great
solemnity. After paddling round the vessels, they did not come on board, as we
expected, but made immediately TERREEOBOO. KING of OWHYHEE, bringing PRESENTS
to CAPT. COOK.
toward the shore, at the beach where we were stationed.

When Mr. King beheld them approaching, he ordered our little guard to receive
the king; and Captain Cook, seeing that he intended to go on shore, went
thither also, and landed almost at the same instant. We ushered them into the
tent, and the king had hardly been seated, when he rose up, and gracefully
threw over the Captain's shoulders, the rich feathered cloak that he himself
wore, placed a helmet on his head, and presented him with a curious fan. Five
or six other cloaks, of great beauty and value, were spread at the Commodore's
feet.

Four hogs were then brought forward, by the king's attendants, together with
bread-fruit, cocoa-nuts, and sugarcanes. Then followed the ceremony of
Terreeoboo's changing names with Captain Cook; the strongest pledge of
friendship among all the islanders of the Pacific Ocean. A solemn procession
now advanced, consisting of priests, preceded by a venerable old personage,
followed by a train of people leading large hogs; others being laden with
potatoes, plantains, etc. We could instantly perceive, by the countenance and
gestures of Kaireekeea, that the old man who headed the procession, was the
chief priest, on whose bounty we were told we had so long subsisted. He wrapped
a piece of red cloth round the shoulders of Captain Cook, and, in the usual
form presented him with a pig. He was then seated next the king, and
Kaireekeea, and his attendants began their vocal ceremonies, Kaoo and the
chiefs assisting in the responses.

In the person of this king, we were surprised to recognize the same emaciated
old man, who came on board the Resolution, from the north-east side of the
island of Mowee; and we perceived, that several of his attendants were the same
persons, who, at that time, continued with us the whole night. Among these were
the king's two youngest sons, the eldest about the age of sixteen; and
Maiha-Maiha, his nephew, whom we could not immediately recollect, having had
his hair plastered over with a dirty paste and powder, which was no bad
improvement to the most savage countenance we had ever seen.

The formalities of the meeting being ended, Captain Cook conducted Terreeoboo,
and several of his chiefs, on board the Resolution. They were received with
every possible attention and respect; and the Commodore as a compensation for
the feathered cloak, put a linen shirt upon the sovereign, and girt his own
hanger round him. Kaoo, and about half a dozen other ancient chiefs, remained
on shore.

All this time, not a canoe was permitted to appear in the bay, and those
natives who did not confine themselves to their huts, lay prostrate on the
ground. Before the king quitted the Resolution, he granted leave for the
natives to trade with the ships, as usual; but the women (we know not upon what
account) were still interdicted by the taboo; that is, to remain at home, and
not have any kind of intercourse with us.

CHAP. II.
The Civility and Hospitality of the Natives -- Much addicted to thieving --
Their Alacrity in conducting a Party of us up the Country -- A Boxing-Match
described -- Death of William Watman, a Seaman -- Attention of the Priests at
his Funeral -- Ceremony of the Natives at his Funeral -- A Gravestone erected
-- The Rail and Images on the Morai purchased -- The Natives very inquisitive
about our Departure -- What they supposed to be the Object of our Voyage --
Entertained by the Buffoonery of one of the Natives -- Magnificent Presents
from Terreeoboo -- The Natives regret our Departure -- Wish to prevail on Mr.
King to remain amongst them -- The vessels quit the Island -- The Resolution
damaged in a Gale of Wind, and obliged to return.

THE behavior of the inhabitants was so civil and inoffensive, that all
apprehensions of danger were totally vanished. We trusted ourselves amongst
them at all times, and upon all occasions, without the least hesitation. The
officers ventured frequently up the country, either singly, or in small
parties, and sometimes continued out the whole night. To relate all the
instances of generosity and civility, which we experienced upon these
occasions, would require volumes. In all places the people flocked about us,
anxious to afford every assistance in their power, and appeared highly
gratified if we condescended to accept of their services. Variety of innocent
arts were practiced to attract our notice, or to delay our departure. The boys
and girls ran through their villages before us, stopping us at every opening,
where there was a commodious place to form a group for dancing. We were, at one
time, solicited to take a draught of the milk of cocoa-nuts, or accept of such
other refreshment as their huts afforded; at another we were encircled by a
company of young women, who exerted their skill and agility in amusing us with
songs and dances.

But though their gentleness and hospitality were pleasing to us, they were
addicted to stealing, like all the other islanders of these seas. This was a
distressing circumstance, and sometimes obliged us to exercise severity, which
we should have been happy to have avoided, if it had not been essentially
necessary. Some expert swimmers were one day detected under the ships, drawing
out the filling nails from the sheathing, which they ingeniously performed with
a flint stone, fastened to the end of a short stick. This practice was so
injurious to our vessels, that we fired small shot at the offenders; but that
they easily evaded, by diving under the ships bottom, It therefore became
highly necessary to make an example of one of them, by flogging him on board
the Discovery.

A large party of gentlemen, from both ships, set out, about this time, on an
excursion into the country, in order to examine its natural productions; an
account of which will be hereafter given. At present, however, we shall
observe, that it afforded Kaoo a fresh opportunity of exercising his civility
and generosity. No sooner was he informed of their departure, than he sent
after them a large quantity of provisions, with orders, that every attention
and assistance should be granted them by the inhabitants of those districts
through which they were to pass. His conduct, on this occasion, was so delicate
and disinterested, that even the people he employed were not permitted to
accept of the smallest present. At the end of six days, the gentlemen returned,
without having penetrated more than twenty miles into the island; owing partly
to improper guides, and partly to the impracticability of the country.

On the 27th, the Resolution's rudder was unhung, and sent on shore, in order
to undergo a thorough repair. The carpenters at the same time, where sent into
the country, under the guidance of some of Kaoo's people, to get planks for the
head rail work, which was become rotten and decayed.

Captain Clerk, who was generally confined on board by ill health, paid
Terreeoboo his first visit on the 28th, at his habitation on shore. The
ceremonies observed with Captain Cook, were performed in honor of Captain
Clerk; and, on his return, he received a present of thirty large hogs, and
such a quantity of vegetables as could not be consumed, by his crew, in less
than a week. This was the more extraordinary, as it was quite an unexpected
visit.

Not having seen any of their sports or exercises, the natives, at our
particular request, entertained us in the evening with a boxing match. Though
these games were inferior, in every respect, to those we had seen exhibited at
the Friendly Islands; yet, as they were somewhat different, a short account of
them may not be thought improper.

A vast concourse of people assembled on an even spot of ground, not far
distant from our tents. A long vacant space was left in the center of them, at
the upper end of which the judges presided, under three standards. Slips of
cloth, of various colors, were pendent from these standards; as were the skins
of two wild geese, some small birds, and a few bunches of feathers.

The sports being ready to begin, the judges gave the signal, and two
combatants appeared in view. They advanced slowly, drawing up their feet very
high behind and rubbing their hands upon the soles. As they came forward, they
frequently surveyed each other from head to foot, with an air of contempt,
looking archly at the spectators distorting their features, and practicing a
variety of unnatural gestures. When they were advanced within the reach of each
other, they held both arms straight out before their faces, at which part they
always aimed their blows. They struck with a full swing of the arm, which to us
had a very awkward appearance. They did not attempt to parry; but endeavored
to elude their adversary's attack, by stopping, or retreating. The battle was
expeditiously decided; for if either of them fell, whether by accident, or from
a blow he was deemed vanquished; and the victor expressed his triumph by a
variety of strange gestures, which usually excited a loud laugh among the
spectators, for which purpose it seemed to be calculated. The successful
combatant waited for a second antagonist; and, if again victorious, for a
third; and so on, till he was at last defeated.

It was very singular, in these combats, that when any two were preparing to
attack each other, a third may advance, and make choice of either of them for
his antagonist, when the other is under the necessity of withdrawing. If the
comba^ proved long and tedious, or appeared unequal, a chief generally
interfered, and concluded it by putting a stick between the combatants. As this
exhibition was at our desire, it was universally expected that some of us would
have engaged with the natives; but, though our people received pressing
invitations to bear a part, they did not hearken to the challenges, not having
forgot the blows they received at the Friendly Islands.

William Whatman, a seaman of the gunner's crew, died this day; this event is
more particularly mentioned, as death had hitherto been uncommon amongst us. He
was a man in years, and much respected for his attachment to Captain Cook. He
had served twenty-one years as a marine, and then entered as a seaman in 1772,
on board the Resolution, and served with the Commodore in his voyage toward
the south pole. On their return, he got admittance into Greenwich Hospital,
through the interest of Captain Cook, at the same time with himself; and,
anxious to follow the fortunes of his benefactor, he also quitted it with him,
on his appointment to the command of the present expedition. He had been often
subject to slight fevers, in the course of the voyage, and was infirm when we
arrived in the bay; where, having been sent for a few days on shore, he thought
himself perfectly restored, and requested to return on board. Hi^ request was
complied with; but the day following he had a stroke of the palsy, which, in
two days afterward, put a period to his life.

At the request of Terreeoboo, the remains of this honest seaman were buried on
the morai; the ceremony being performed with great solemnity. Kaoo and his
brethren were present at the funeral, who behaved with great decorum, and paid
due attention while the service was performing. On our beginning to fill up the
grave, they approached it with great awe, and threw in a dead pig, together
with some cocoa-nuts and plantains. For three successive nights they surrounded
it, sacrificing hogs, and reciting hymns and prayers till morning.

We erected a post at the head of the grave, and nailed thereon a piece of
board; on which was inscribed the name and age of the deceased, and the day of
his departure from this life. These they assured us they would not remove, and
they will probably be permitted to remain, so long as such frail materials can
endure.

Our ships were much in want of fuel, therefore Captain Cook desired Mr. King
to treat with the priests for the purchase of the rail on the morai. Mr. King
had his doubts about the decency of this overture, and apprehended that the
bare mention of it might be deemed impious; but in this he was exceedingly
mistaken. They expressed no kind of surprise at the application, and the wood
was delivered without the least stipulation. Whilst our people were taking it
away, he saw one of them with a carved image; and, upon inquiry, was informed
that the whole semicircle (as mentioned in the description of the morai) had
been carried to the boats.

Though the natives were spectators of this business, they did not seem to
resent it; but, on the contrary, had even assisted in the removal. Mr. King
thought proper to mention the particulars to Kaoo: who seemed exceedingly
indifferent about the matter, begging him only to restore the center image;
which was immediately done, and it was conveyed to one of the priest's houses.

The king, and his chiefs, had, for some time, been very importunate to know
the time of our departure. Mr. King's curiosity was excited, from this
circumstance, to know the opinion these people had entertained of us, and what
they supposed to be the objects of our voyage. He took considerable pains to
satisfy himself on these points: but the only information he could get was,
that they supposed we had left our native country on account of the scantiness
of provisions, and that we had visited them for the sole purpose of filling our
bellies. This conclusion was natural enough, considering the meagre appearance
of some of our crew, the voracity with which we devoured their fresh
provisions, and our anxiety to purchase as much of it as we were able. One
circumstance may be added to these, which puzzled them exceedingly; that of our
having no women with us.

It was matter of entertainment to see the natives patting the bellies of the
sailors (who were much improved in sleekness since their arrival at the bay)
and telling them, in the best manner they could, that it was time for them to
depart; but, if they would return the next bread-fruit season, they should be
better able to supply them. We had now continued sixteen days in the bay,
during which time our consumption of hogs and vegetables had been so enormous,
that we need not be surprised at their wishing to see us take our leave. But
Terreeoboo had, perhaps, no other view, in his enquiries, than a desire of
having sufficient notice, to prepare suitable presents for us at our departure;
for when we informed him of our intention to quit the island in two days, a
kind of proclamation was immediately made, requiring the natives to bring in
their hogs and vegetables, for Terreeoboo to present to the Orono.

At the beach, we were this day much entertained, with the buffooneries of one
of the natives. In his hand he held an instrument of music, such as we have
already described; bits of sea-weed were fastened round his neck; and, round
each leg, some strong netting; on which were fixed some rows of dogs teeth,
hanging loose. His dancing was accompanied with strange grimaces, and unnatural
distortions of the features: which, though sometimes highly ridiculous, was,
upon the whole, without meaning or expression. Mr. Webber made a drawing of
this person; the manner in which the maro is tied; the figure of the
instrument, and of the ornaments round the legs.

Wrestling and boxing matches afforded us diversion for the evening; and we, in
return, exhibited the few fireworks we had remaining. Nothing could more
effectually excite the admiration of these islanders, or strike them with more
exalted ideas of our superioity, than such a representation. Though this was,
in every respect, much inferior to that at Hapaee, yet the astonishment of the
people was equally great.

The carpenters which had been sent up the country, to cut planks for the head
rail-work of the Resolution, had now been gone three days; and, not having
heard from them, we began to be alarmed for their safety. We expressed our
apprehensions to old Kaoo, who appeared equally concerned with ourselves; but
while we were planning measures with him, for sending proper persons after
them, they all safely arrived. They went farther into the country than they
expected, before they found any trees suitable for their purpose. This
circumstance, together with the badness of the roads, and the difficulty of
conveying the timber to the ships, had so long detained them. They bestowed
high commendations on their guides, who not only supplied them with provisions,
but faithfully protected their tools.

The 4th of February being fixed for our departure, Terreeoboo invited Captain
Cook and Mr. King, to attend him on the 3d, to Kaoo's residence. On our arrival
there we saw large quantities of cloth lie scattered on the ground; abundance
of red and yellow feathers, fastened to the fibers of cocoa-nut husks; and
plenty of hatchets and iron ware, which had been received from us in barter.
Not far from these was deposited an immense quantity of various kinds of
vegetables; and, at a little distance, a large herd of hogs. We supposed, at
the first, that the whole was intended as a present for us; but we were
informed by Kaireekeea, that it was a tribute to the king, from the inhabitants
of that district. And, we were no sooner seated, than the bundles were brought,
and laid severally at Terreeoboo's feet, and the cloth, feathers, and iron,
were displayed before him.

The king was perfectly satisfied with this mark of duty from his people; and
selected about a third of the iron utensils, a third of the feathers, and some
pieces of cloth; he ordered these to be set aside by themselves; and the
remainder of the cloth, hogs, vegetables, etc. were afterward presented to
Captain Cook and Mr. King. The value and magnitude of this present, far
exceeded any thing that we had met with. The whole was immediately conveyed on
board. The large hogs were selected, in order to be salted for sea store; but
the smaller pigs, and the vegetables, were divided between the crews.

We left the morai, and got our observatories on board. The taboo was removed,
and, with it, its magical effects. As soon as we had quitted the place, the
people rushed in, and vigilantly searched; hoping to find some valuable
articles left behind. Mr. King being the last on shore, and waiting for the
return of the boat, the inhabitants crowded about him, and having prevailed on
him to sit down among them, expressed their regret at our separation. It was
even with difficulty that they would suffer him to depart. He was, indeed,
highly esteemed among them, as will appear from the following relation.

Having had, while we were in the bay, the command of the party on shore, he
became more acquainted with the natives, and they with him, than those who were
required to be on board. He experienced great kindness and civility from the
inhabitants in general, but the friendship shown by the priests was constant
and unbounded.

He was anxious to conciliate their esteem: in which he so happily succeeded,
that, when they were acquainted with the time of our departure, he was urged to
remain behind, and received overtures of the most flattering kind. When he
endeavored to excuse himself, by alleging, that Captain Cook would not permit
it, they proposed to conduct him to the mountains, and there conceal him till
the departure of the ships. On Mr. King's assuring them, that the Captain would
not sail without him, the king and Kaoo repaired to Captain Cook, (whom they
supposed to be his father) formally requesting that he might be suffered to
remain behind. The Commodore, unwilling to give a positive refusal, to a
proposal so generously intended, assured them, that he could not then part with
him; but he should return thither the next year, when he would endeavor to
oblige them.

On Thursday the 4th of February, early in the morning, we unmoored, and the
Resolution and Discovery sailed out of the bay; attended by a vast number of
canoes. It was Captain Cook's intention to finish the survey of Owhyhee, before
he went to the other islands, hoping to meet with a road more sheltered than
Karakakooa Bay; and, if he should not succeed here, he meant to examine the
south-east part of Mowee, where he had been informed, there was a most
excellent harbor.

On the 5th, and the following, day, we had calm weather, and consequently our
progress was but slow. A great number of the natives followed us in their
canoes; and Terreeoboo gave an additional proof of his esteem for the
Commodore, by sending after him a large present of hogs and vegetables.

Having a little breeze, in the night of the 5th of February, we made some
progress to the northward; and on the 6th, in the morning, we were abreast of a
deep bay, which the natives call Toe-yah-yah. We flattered ourselves with hopes
of finding a commodious harbor in this bay, as we saw some fine streams of
water to the north-east; and the whole appeared to be well sheltered. These
observations seeming to tally with the accounts given us by Koah, who now
accompanied Captain Cook, the Master was sent in the pinnace, with Koah as his
guide, to observe and examine the bay; Koah having first altered his name, out
of compliment to us, to that of Britannee.

The weather became gloomy in the afternoon, and such violent gusts of wind
blew off the land, that we were obliged to take in all the sails, and bring
too, under the mizen-stay-sail. The canoes all left us as soon as the gale
began; and Mr. Bligh, on his return, preserved an old woman and two men from
drowning, whose canoes had been overset in the storm. We had several women
remaining on board, whom the natives, in their hurry to depart, had left to
shift for themselves.

Mr. Bligh reported, that he had landed at a village on the north side of the
bay, where he was shown some wells of water, that would not, by any means,
answer our purpose; that he proceeded further into the bay; where, instead of
meeting with good anchorage, he found the shores were low, and a flat bed of
coral rocks extended a long the coast* and upwards of a mile from the land; the
depth of water, on the outside, being twenty fathoms. During this survey,
Britannee had contrived to slip away, being, perhaps, afraid of returning, as
his information had proved erroneous.

The weather became more moderate in the evening, and we again made sail; but
it blew so violently about midnight, as to split the fore and main-top-sails.
We bent fresh sails in the morning of the 7th, and had a light breeze, and fair
weather. Being now about four or five leagues from the shore, and the weather
very unsettled, the canoes would not venture off, so that our guests were under
the necessity of remaining with us, though much against their inclination; for
they were all exceedingly sea-sick, and many of them had left their infants on
shore.

Though the weather continued squally, we stood in for the land in the
afternoon; and, being within three leagues of it, we saw two men in a canoe,
paddling toward us. We naturally conjectured that they had been driven off the
shore, by the late violent gale; and stopped the ship's way, in order to take
them in. They were so exhausted with fatigue, that had not one of the natives
on board jumped into the canoe to their assistance, they would hardly have been
able to fix it to the rope thrown out for that purpose. With difficulty,
however, we got them up the ship's side, together with a child about four years
of age, which had been lashed under the thwarts of the canoe with only its head
above the water. They informed us, that they had quitted the land the morning
before, since which time they had not had food or water. Provision was given
them with the usual precautions, and the child entrusted to the care of one of
the women; and, the next morning, they were all perfectly recovered.

A gale of wind coming on at midnight, we were obliged to double reef the
topsails. At daybreak, on the 8th, we found that the foremast had again given
way; the fishes being sprung and the parts so very defective, as to make it
absolutely necessary to unstep the mast. Captain Cook, for some time,
hesitated, whether he should return to Karakakooa, or take the chance of
finding a harbor in the islands to leeward. The bay was not so commodious, but
that a better might probably be met with, either for repairing the masts, or
procuring refreshment, the latter of which, it was imagined, the neighborhood
of Karakakooa had lately been pretty well drained of. It was, on the other
hand, considered as an unprudent step, to leave a tolerable good harbor, which
once lost, could not be regained, for the mere possibility of meeting with a
better, especially as the failure of such a contingency might have deprived us
of any resource.

We stood on toward the land, to give the natives on shore an opportunity of
releasing their friends on board; and about noon, when we were within a mile of
the shore, several canoes came off to us, but so loaded with people, that no
room could be found for any of our guests; the pinnace was therefore hoisted
out to land them; and the master who commanded it, was instructed to examine
the south coasts of the bay for water, but returned without success.

Variable winds, and a strong current to the northward, retarded our progress
in our return; and, in the evening of the 9th, about eight o'clock, it blew
very hard from the south-east, which occasioned us to close reef the topsails.
Early in the morning of the 10th, in a heavy squall, we found ourselves close
in with the breakers, to the northward of the west point of Owhyhee. We had
just room to avoid them, and fired several guns to alarm the Discovery, and
apprize her of the danger.

The weather, in the forenoon, was more moderate, and a few canoes ventured to
come off to us, when those on board them informed us, that much mischief had
been occasioned by the late storms, and that a great many canoes had been lost.
We kept beating to windward the remainder of the day; and, in the evening, were
within a mile of the bay; but we stood off and on till daylight the next
morning, when we anchored in our old station.

CHAP. III.
The Behavior of the Islanders, on our Return to Karakakooa Bay, somewhat
mysterious -- A Theft committed on board the Discovery -- The Thieves pursued
up the Country by Captain Cook and Mr. King -- Scuffle between the Natives and
our People, in which Pareea receives a severe Blow -- The Pinnace attacked and
plundered -- Crew obliged to quit her -- Captain Cook's Reflections on the
Occasion -- Attempt at the Observatory -- The Discovery's Cutter stolen from
the Buoy -- Steps taken for its Recovery -- Captain Cook goes on Shore to
invite the King and his two Sons on board -- His Wife and the Chiefs oppose his
going -- A Contest arises on the occasion -- Intelligence arrives of one of the
Chiefs being killed by one of our People -- The Consequences -- A Chief
threatens Captain Cook and is shot by him -- A general Attack ensues -- Death
of Captain Cook -- Account of his Services, and a Sketch of his Character.

THE whole of the 11th, and part of the 12th of February, we were engaged in
getting out the foremast, and conveying it on shore. Not only the head of the
mast had sustained damage, but the heel was become exceedingly rotten, having a
very large hole in the middle of it. Several days being probably required to
make the necessary repairs, Messieurs King and Baily got the observatory on
shore, and pitched their tents on the morai, guarded by a corporal, and six
marines. A friendly intercourse was renewed with the priests, who, for our
greater security, tabooed the place with their wands as before. The sail-makers
also repaired to the shore to repair the damages, in their department,
sustained by the late heavy gales. They occupied an habitation, lent us by the
priests, adjoining to the morai.

Our reception, on coming to anchor, was so different from what it had been
upon our first arrival, that we were all astonished: no shouts, bustle, or
confusion, but a solitary deserted bay, with hardly a canoe stiring. Their
curiosity, indeed, might be supposed to be diminished by this time; but the
hospitable treatment we had continually been favored with, and the friendly
footing on which we parted, induced us to expect that, on our return, they
would have received us with the greatest demonstrations of joy.

Various were our conjectures on the cause of this extraordinary appearance,
when the whole mystery was unravelled by the return of a boat, which we had
sent on shore, bringing intelligence that Terreeoboo was absent, and that the
bay was tabooed. This account appeared very satisfactory to many of us; but
others were of opinion, that there was at this time, something very suspicious
in the behavior of the natives; and that the taboo, or interdiction, on
pretense of Terreeoboo's absence, was artfully contrived, to give him time to
consult his chiefs in what manner we should be treated. We never could
ascertain whether these suspicions were well founded, or whether the natives
had given a true account. It is probable, indeed, that our sudden return, for
which they could assign no apparent cause, might create alarms in them; yet the
conduct of Terreeoboo, who, on his supposed arrival the next morning,
immediately waited on Captain Cook; and the natives, from that moment, renewing
their friendly intercourse with us, seem to evince that they neither meant, nor
apprehended, a different kind of conduct.

An account of another accident, similar to this, may be mentioned in support
of this opinion, which happened to us on our first visit, the day before the
king's arrival. A native having sold a hog on board the Resolution, and
received the price agreed on, Pareea, who saw the transaction, advised the
seller not to part with his hog, without an advanced price. For his
interference in this business, he was harshly spoken to, and pushed away; and
as the taboo was soon laid on the bay, we, at first, supposed it to be in
consequence of the affront offered to the chief.

These two circumstances considered, it is extremely difficult to draw any
certain conclusion from the action of a people, with whose language and customs
we are so imperfectly acquainted. Some idea, however, may be formed of the
difficulties those have to encounter, who in their intercourse with these
strangers, are obliged to steer their course in the midst of uncertainty, where
the most serious consequences may be occasioned by only imaginary offenses.
Whether these conjectures are erroneous or true, it is certain that things were
conducted in their usual quiet course, till the 13th of February, in the
afternoon.

At the approach of evening on that day, the commander of the Discovery's
watering party, came to inform Mr. King, that several chiefs were assembled
near the b^ach, and were driving away the natives, who assisted the sailors in
rolling the casks to the shore: at the same time declaring, that their
behavior seemed exceedingly suspicious, and that he imagined they would give
him some farther disturbance. He sent a marine with him, agreeably to his
request, but permitted him to take only his side-arms. The officer, in a short
time, returned, and informed Mr. King that the inhabitants had armed themselves
with stones, and were become tumultuous. He therefore went himself to the spot,
attended by a marine, with his musket. At their approach the islanders threw
away their stones, and, on Mr. King's application to some of the chiefs, the
mob was dispersed. Every thing being now quiet, Mr. King went to meet Captain
Cook, who was then coming on shore in the pinnace. He related to him what had
recently happened, and received orders to fire a ball at the offenders, if they
again behaved insolently, and began to throw stones. In consequence of these
directions, Mr. King gave orders to the corporal, that the sentinels pieces
should be loaded with ball, instead of shot.

On our return to the tents, we heard a continued fire of muskets from the
Discovery; which we perceived to be directed at a canoe, which was hastening
toward the shore, with one of our small boats in pursuit of it. This firing,
we concluded, was the consequence of some theft, and Captain Cook ordered Mr.
King to follow him with a marine armed, and to endeavor to seize the people as
they landed. They accordingly ran to the place, where the canoe was expected to
come ashore, but did not arrive in time; the people having quitted it, and fled
into the country before their arrival.

At this time they did not know that the goods had been already restored; and
thinking it probable, from what they had observed, that they might be of
importance, they did not choose to relinquish their endeavors to recover them;
and having inquired of the natives what course the people had taken, they
pursued them till it was almost dark, when they supposed themselves to be about
three miles from the tents; and, thinking the islanders amused them with false
information in their pursuit, they gave up the search and returned.

A difference of a more serious nature had happened during their absence. The
officer, who had been dispatched in the small boat after the thieves, and who
was returning on board, with the booty that had been restored, seeing Captain
Cook and Mr. King engaged in the pursuit of the offenders, seized a canoe,
which was drawn upon the shore. This canoe unfortunately belonged to Pareea,
who, at that instant arriving from on board of the Discovery, claimed his
property and protested his innocence. The officer persisted in detaining it, in
which he was encouraged by the crew of the pinnace, then waiting for Captain
Cook; in consequence of which a scuffle ensued, and Pareea was knocked down by
a violent blow on the head, with an oar. Several of the natives, who had
hitherto been peaceable spectators, began now to attack our people with such a
shower of stones, that they were forced to a precipitate retreat, and swam off
to a rock, at a considerable distance from the shore. The pinnace was plundered
immediately by the natives, and would have been entirely demolished, if Pareea
had not interposed; who had not only recovered from his blow, but had also
forgot it at the same instant. He ordered the crowd to disperse, and beckoned
to our people to come and take possession of the pinnace; and afterward
assured them that he would use his influence to get the things restored ^^^ch
had been taken out of it. After their ^^parture, he followed them in his canoe,
carrying them a midshipman's cap, and some other articles of the plunder; and,
expressing much conce^^ at what had happened, begged to know if the (...) would
kill him, and whether he might be permitted to come on board the next day? He
was assured that he would be well received, and therefore joined noses with the
officers (their usual token of friendship) and paddled over to Kowrowa.

Captain Cook, when these particulars were represented to him, was exceedingly
concerned; and, when he and Mr. King were returning on board, he expressed his
fears that these islanders would oblige him to pursue violent measures; adding
they must not be permitted to suppose, that they have gained any advantage over
us. It was then, however, too late to take any steps that evening; he therefore
only gave orders that every islander should be immediately turned out of the
ship. This order being executed, Mr. King returned on shore; and the events of
the day having much abated our former confidence in the natives, a double guard
was posted on the morai, with orders to let Mr. King know, if any men were seen
lurking about the beach. At eleven o'clock, five of the natives were seen
creeping round the bottom of the morai; they approached with great caution,
and, at last, perceiving they were discovered, immediately retired out of
sight. About midnight one of them ventured himself near the observatory, when a
sentinel fired over him; on which they all fled, and we had no farther
disturbance during the remainder of the night.

At daylight the next morning Mr. King went on board the Resolution, in order
to get the timekeeper; and in his way thither was hailed by the Discovery, and
received information that their cutter, had some time in the night been stolen,
from the buoy, where it had been moored.

On Mr. King's arrival on board, he found the marines were arming themselves,
and Captain Cook busied in loading his double-barrelled gun. Whilst he was
acquaintng him with what had happened in the night at the morai, he eagerly
interrupted him, and informed him of the loss of the Discovery's cutter, and
the preparations he was making to recover it. It was his usual practice in all
the islands of this ocean, when any thing of consequence had been stolen from
him, by some stratagem, to get the king, or some of the principal Erees, on
board; where he detained them as hostages, till the property was restored. This
method having hitherto proved successful, he meant to adopt on the present
occasion; and gave orders to stop every canoe that should attempt to leave the
bay; resolving to seize and destroy them if the ^utter could not be recovered
by peaceable means. In pursuance of which, the boats of both ships, properly
manned and armed, were stationed across the bay; and before Mr. King quitted
the ship, some great guns were fired at two canoes, that were attempting to
escape.

Between seven and eight o'clock Captain Cook and Mr. King quitted the ship
together; the former in the pinnace, with Mr. Phillips, and nine marines; and
the latter in the small boat. The last orders Mr. King received from Captain
Cook were to quiet the minds of the people, on our side of the bay, by the
strongest assurances that they should not be injured; to keep his people
together, and to be continually on his guard. Captain Cook and Mr. King then
separated; the Captain going toward Kowrowa, where Terreeoboo resided, and Mr.
King proceeded to the beach: his first business, when he arrived on shore, was
to issue strict orders to the marines to continue within the tent, to charge
their muskets with ball, and not on any consideration, to quit their arms. He
then attended old Kaoo and the priests at their respective huts, and explained
to them, as well as he was able, the reason of the hostile preparations, which
had so exceedingly alarmed them. He found they were no strangers to the
circumstance of the cutter's being stolen, and assured them, that though the
Commodore was not only resolved to recover it, but also to punish, in the most
exemplary manner, the authors of the theft; yet that they, and all the
inhabitants of the village, on our side, had not the least occasion to be
alarmed, or to apprehend the least danger from us. He importuned the priests to
communicate this to the people, and entreat them not to entertain an idea of
fear, but to continue peaceable and quiet. Kaoo interrogated Mr. King, with
great emotion, if any harm was to happen to Terreeoboo? He assured him there
was not; and both he and his brethren appeared much satisfied with this
assurance.

Captain Cook having, in the mean time, called off the launch, from the north
point of the bay, and taken it with him, landed at Kowrowa, with tile
lieutenant and nine marines. He proceeded immediately into the village, where
he was respectfully received; the people, as usual, prostrating themselves
before him, and making their accustomed offerings of small hogs. Perceiving
that his design was not suspected, his next step was, to inquire for the king,
and the two boys, his sons, who had been almost continually his guests on board
the Resolution. The boys presently returned with the natives, who had been
searching for them, and immediately conducted Captain Cook to the habitation
where Terreeoboo had slept. The old man had just awoke; and after some
conversation respecting the loss of the cutter, from which the Commodore was
convinced that he was not in any wise privy to it, he invited him to accompany
him, and spend the day on board the Resolution. The king accepted the
invitation, and rose immediately to accompany him.

Every thing had now a prosperous appearance; the two boys were already in the
pinnace, and the rest of the party approaching the water side, when a woman,
named Kanee-kabareea the mother of the boys, and one of Terreeoboo's favorite
wives, followed him, beseeching him, with tears and entreaties, not to venture
to go on board. Two chiefs, who came with her, took hold of him, and insisted
he should proceed no farther, obliged him to sit down. The islanders, now
collecting in vast numbers along the shore, who had probably been alarmed by
the discharging of the great guns, and the hostile appearances in the bay,
gathered together round Captain Cook and Terreeoboo. Thus situated, the
lieutenant of marine, perceiving that his men were huddled together in the
crowd, and consequently unable to use their arms, if there should appear to be
a necessity for it* proposed to Captain Cook, to draw them up along the rocks,
close to the edge of the water. The populace making way for them to pass, the
lieutenant drew them up in a line; within about thirty yards of the place where
Terreeoboo was sitting,

The old king continued, all this time, on the ground, bearing the most visible
marks of terror and dejection in his countenance. Captain Cook, unwilling to
abandon the object which occasioned him to come on shore, urged him most
earnestly to proceed: whilst, on the other hand, if the king expressed any
inclination to follow him, the chiefs who surrounded him, interposed; at first
they had recourse to prayers and entreaties, but afterward to force and
violence, and even insisted on his remaining on shore. Captain Cook, at length,
perceiving that the alarm had spread too generally, and that there was not a
probability of getting him off without much bloodshed, gave up the point; at
the same time observing, to Mr. Phillips, that to compel him to go on board,
would probably occasion the loss of many of the lives of the inhabitants.

Notwithstanding this enterprise had now failed, and was abandoned by Captain
Cook, yet it did not appear that his person was in the least degree of danger,
till an accident happened, which occasioned a fatal turn to the affair. The
boats, stationed across the bay, having fired at some canoes, for attempting to
get out, unfortunately had killed one of their principal chiefs. Intelligence
of his death arrived at the village where Captain Cook then was, just as he had
parted from the king, and was proceeding with great deliberation toward the
shore. The ferment it immediately occasioned, was but too conspicuous; the
women and children were instantly sent away, and the men were soon clad in
their war-mats, and armed with spears and stones. One of the natives having
provided himself with a stone, and a long iron spike (called by the natives a
pahooa) advanced toward the Captain, flourishing his weapon in defiance, and
threatening to throw the stone. The Captain requested him to desist; the
islander repeated his menace, he was highly provoked, and fired a load of small
shot at him. The man was shielded in his war-mat, which the shot could not
penetrate; his firing therefore, served only to irritate and encourage them.
Vollies of stones were thrown at the marines; and one of the erees attempted
the life of Mr. Phillips with his pahooa; but, not succeeding in the attempt,
he received from him a blow with the butt end of his piece. Captain Cook
immediately discharged his second barrel, loaded with ball, and killed one of
the most violent of the assailants. A general attack with stones succeeded,
which was followed on our part, by a discharge of musquetry, not only from the
marines, but also from the people in the boats. The natives, to our great
astonishment, received our fire with great firmness; and without giving time
for the marines to charge again, they rushed in upon them with dreadful shouts
and yells. What followed was a scene of horror and confusion, which can more
easily be conceived than properly related. Though a view of Karakakoo^ ^ay, by
Mr. Webber, has appeared in Captain Cook's Voyage in Quarto, no engraving has
there been given of the death of the much-lamented Commander. As so interesting
a subject will tend to gratify the curiosity of the reader, uncommon diligence
has been exerted to procure a masterly representation of so affecting a
catastrophe.


Four of the marines retreated among the rocks, and fell a sacrifice to the
fury of the enemy; three others were dangerously wounded; and the lieutenant
stabbed between the shoulders with a pahooa; but having fortunately reserved
his fire, shot the man from whom he had received the wound, at the instant he
was preparing to repeat his blow. The last time our unfortunate Commodore was
distinctly seen, he was standing at the water's edge, and ordering the boats to
cease firing and pull in.

It was imagined by some of those who were present, that the marines, and those
who were in the boats, fired without Captain Cook's orders, and that he was
anxious to prevent the farther effusion of blood; it is therefore probable,
that, on this occasion, his humanity proved fatal to him: for it was observed,
that while he faced the natives, no violence had been offered him, but, when he
turned about, to give directions to THE DEATH of CAPTAIN JAMES COOK, F.R.S. at
OWHYHEE in MDCCLXXIX.
the boats, he was stabbed in the back, and fell with his face into the water.
A general shout was set up by the islanders on seeing him fall, and his body
was dragged inhumanly on shore, where he was surrounded by the enemy, who
snatching the dagger from each other's hands, displayed a savage eagerness to
join in his destruction.

Such was the fa^e of our most excellent Commander! After a life, distinguished
by such successful enterprise, his death can hardly be reckoned premature;
since he lived to accomplish the great work for which he seemed particularly
designed; being rather removed from the enjoyment, than the acquisition of
glory. How sincerely his loss was lamented, by those who owed their security to
his skill and conduct, and every consolation, to his tenderness and humanity,
it is impossible to describe; and the task would be equally difficult to
represent the horror, dejection, and dismay, which followed so dreadful and
unexpected a catastrophe. Let us, therefore, turn from so calamitous a scene,
to the pleasing contemplation of his character and virtues, and pay our last
just tribute to the memory of this worthy man, in a short history of his life,
and public services.

Captain James Cook was born in the year 1727, near Whitby, in Yorkshire; and
at an early age, commenced an apprenticeship to a shopkeeper in a neighboring
village. This not being suitable to his natural propensity, he soon quitted the
counter, and contracted for nine years, with the master of a vessel in the coal
trade. In 1755, at the commencement of the war, he entered into the king's
service on board the Eagle, then Commanded by Captain Hamer, and afterward by
Sir Hugh Palliser, who perceiving his merit, advanced him to the quarter deck.

In 1758, we find him master of the Northumberland, Lord Colville's flag ship,
who then commanded the squadron, stationed on the coast of America. Here, as he
has frequently declared, he first read Euclid, and closely applied himself to
the study of the mathematics, with the assistance of only a few books, and his
own industry. While he thus found means to cultivate his understanding, and
supply, in some degree, the deficiencies of an early education, he was engaged
in most of the active scenes of war in America. At the siege of Quebec, he was
entrusted by Sir Charles Saunders with the execution of important services, in
the naval department. He was the pilot who conducted the boats to the attack of
Montmorency; managed the embarkation to the heights of Abraham; and pointed
out, by buoys, how the large ships might proceed with security up the river.
The manner in which he acquitted himself in these important services, procured
him the esteem and friendship of Sir Charles Saunders and Lord Colville, who
continued his zealous patrons during the remainder of their lives. At the
conclusion of the war, he was appointed, through the interest of Lord Colville
and Sir Hugh Palliser, to make a survey of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, and the
coasts of Newfoundland. He was thus employed till the year 1767, when Sir
Edward Hawke appointed him to the command of an expedition to the South Seas;
in order to make an observation of the transit of Venus, and to prosecute
discoveries in that part of the globe.

His services, since this period, are too generally known to require
enumeration. His reputation has proportionably advanced beyond the effect of
panegyric. He seems, indeed, to have been peculiarly qualified for this species
of enterprise. His natural inclination, the nature of his services, and
indefatigable application, all conspired to complete him for it: so that he
acquired such a degree of professional knowledge, as can fall to the lot of
very few.

His frame and constitution were robust, and such as enabled him to undergo the
severest hardships. When necessity required it, he could feed, with
satisfaction, upon the coarsest and most ungrateful food; and he submitted to
every kind of self-denial with the greatest composure and indifference. Nor
were the qualities of his mind less vigorous than those of his body. His
understanding was strong and perspicuous: his judgment, especially in those
matters in which he was more particularly engaged, quick and sure. His designs
and operations, were the natural result of a great original genius. His valor
was cool, deliberate, and determined; accompanied with a most astonishing
presence of mind on the approach of danger. His manners were plain, easy, and
unaffected. His temper, it must be admitted, was too much subject to hastiness
and passion; but this should be forgotten, when it is considered, that this
disposition was the most benevolent and humane.

These are a few traits or outlines of the character of Captain Cook; but its
distinguishing feature was, the most unremitting perseverance to accomplish his
design, in opposition to dangers, difficulties and hardships. During all his
long and tedious voyages, his eagerness and activity were never in the least
abated. No alluring incitement could detain him for a moment; even those
intervals of recreation, which unavoidably occured in the course of our
services, and were joyfully embraced by many of his officers, were submitted
to, by him with impatience, if they could not be made subservient to the more
effectual prosecution of his designs.

It would be unnecessary to recapitulate the instances in which these qualities
were displayed. The result of his services, however, we shall just touch upon,
under two principal heads, viz. geography and navigation, placing each in a
separate and distinct point of view.

No science, it is presumed, has ever received greater additions from the
labors of one man, than geography has done from those of Captain Cook. In his
first voyage, he discovered the Society Islands; ascertained the insularity of
New Zealand; and discovered the straits which separate the two islands, and are
called after his name. He explored the eastern coast of New Holland, till then
unknown; an extent of twenty-seven degrees of latitude, and upwards of two
thousand miles.

He gave, in his second expedition, a resolution to the great problem of a
southern continent; having so completely traversed that hemisphere, as not to
leave a possibility of its existence, unless it is so near the pole, as to be
beyond the reach of navigation. New Caledonia, the largest island in the
Southern Pacific, except New Zealand, was discovered in this voyage. Also the
island of Georgia; and an unknown coast, which the Captain named Sandwich land;
and having twice visited the tropical seas, he settled the situations of the
old, and made several new discoveries.

His third and last voyage, however, is distinguished above the rest, by the
extent and importance of its discoveries. Not to mention the several smaller
islands in the Southern Pacific, he discovered the group, called the Sandwich
islands; which, on account of their situation and productions, may perhaps
become an object of more co^^equence than any other discovery in the South Sea.
He explored what had before remained unknown of the western coast of America,
an extent of three thousand seven, hundred miles; ascertained the proximity of
the two continents of Asia and America; sailed through the straits between
them, and surveyed the coasts on each side, so far as to be satisfied of the
impracticability of a passage in that hemisphere, from the Atlantic into the
Pacific Ocean, by an eastern or western course. He has, in short, completed
the hydrography of the habitable globe, if we except the Japanese Archipelago,
and the sea of Amur, which are still imperfectly known by Europeans.

His services, as a navigator, are not less important and meritorious. The
method which he invented, and so successfully put in practice, of preserving
the health (and consequently the lives) of seamen, will transmit his name to
future ages, as a friend and benefactor to mankind.

It is well known among those who are conversant in naval history, that the
advantages which have been sought, through the medium of long sea-voyages, have
always been purchased at a dear rate. That dreadful disorder which is pecullar
to this servire, must, without exercising an unwarrantable degree of tyranny
over our seamen, have been an insuperable obstacle to our enterprises. It was
reserved for Captain Cook to convince the world, that voyages might be
protracted to three or even four years, in unknown regions, and under every
change of climate, without affecting the health in the smallest degree, and
even without diminishing the probability of life. His method has been fully
explained, in a paper which was read before the Royal Society, in 1776 S^r
Godsr^^ Copl^y's gold medal was awarded him, on that (...)
.

Respecting his professional abilities, they must be submitted to the judgment
of those who are acquainted with the services in which he was engaged. They
cannot but acknowledge, that to have conducted three such dangerous and
difficult expeditions, of so unusual a length, with invariable success, must
not only have required an accurate knowledge of his business, but also a most
powerful and comprehensive genius.

Having thus given a faithful, though a concise account of the death of our
much lamented Commander, and also of his character and services, his memory
must now be lest to the gratitude and the admiration of posterity.

CHAP. IV.
Transactions at Owhyhee, subsequent to the death of Captain Cook -- Bravery of
Mr. Phillips -- The Islanders forced to retire -- Situation of our Party at the
Morai -- The natives annoy them with stones -- Attempts to storm the Morai -- A
short Truce -- Our People quit the Morai -- Pacific Measures determined on --
Mr. King sent to obtain a Conference with some of the Chiefs -- His Interview
with Koah -- Contemptuous Behavior of the Natives -- Precaution taken by us --
Two of the Islanders, in a Canoe, fired at, but not hurt -- A Piece of Captain
Cook's Flesh brought us by one of them -- Further Provocations from the Natives
-- Some great Guns fired at them -- Our Watering Party harrassed with stones --
The Village of Kakoa burned by our People -- ^ravery of one of the Natives -- A
Procession, headed by Kaireekeea, who comes on board the Resolution -- The
Bones of Captain Cook brought to us -- They are committed to the Deep -- The
Ships leave Karakakooa Bay.

WE have before observed that four of the marines, who accompanied Captain
Cook, were killed by the natives on the spot. The others, with their
lieutenant, Mr. Phillips, threw themselves into the sea, and made their escape,
being protected by a smart fire from the boats. On this occasion, a striking
instance of gallant behavior, and of affection for his men, was displayed by
Mr. Phillips; for he had scarcely got into the boat, when seeing one of the
marines, who was not a very expert swimmer, struggling in the water, and in
danger of being taken by the islanders, he instantly leaped into the sea to his
assistance, though considerably wounded himself; and after receiving a blow on
his head from a stone, which had almost sent him to the bottom, he caught the
marine by the hair, and brought him off in safety. Our people for some time
kept up a constant fire from the boats (which during the whole transaction,
were at no greater distance from the land than twenty yards), in order to
afford their unfortunate companions, if any of them should still remain alive,
an opportunity of effecting their escape. These continued efforts, seconded by
a few guns, that were at the same time fired from the Resolution, having at
length compelled the enemy to retire, a small boat, manned by five midshipmen,
pulled toward the shore where they perceived the bodies lying on the ground,
without any signs of life. However, they judged it dangerous to attempt to
bring them off with so inconsiderable a force; and their ammunition being
nearly consumed, they returned to the ships, leaving the bodies in possession
of the natives, together with ten stand of arms.

When the general consternation, which the news of this misfortune had diffused
throughout the whole company of both ships, had in some degree subsided, their
attention was called to the party of the morai, where the mast and sails were
on shore, guarded by only six marines. It is difficult to describe the emotions
that agitated the minds of Mr. King and his attendants, at this station, during
the time in which these occurrences had happened, at the other side of the bay.
Being at the distance only of a mile from the village of Kowrowa, they could
distinctly perceive a vast multitude of people collected on the spot where
Captain Cook had just before landed. They heard the firing of the muskets, and
observed an uncommon bustle and agitation among the crowd. They afterward saw
the islanders retreating, the boats retiring from the shore, and passing and
repassing, with great stillness between the ships. Mr. King's heart soon
misgave him on this occasion. Where so valuable a life was concerned, he could
not avoid being alarmed by such new and threatening appearances. Besides this,
he knew that Captain Cook, from a long series of success, in his transactions
with the natives of this ocean, had acquired a degree of confidence, which
might, in some ill-fated moment, put him too much off his guard; and Mr. King
now saw all the dangers to which that confidence might lead, without deriving
much consolation from the consideration of the experience which had given rise
to it. His first care, on hearing the report of the muskets, was to assure the
islanders, considerable numbers of whom were assembled round the wall of our
consecrated field, and seemed at a loss how to account for what they had heard
and seen, that they should meet with no molestation; and that, at all events,
he was inclined to continue on peaceable terms with them.

Mr. King and his attendants remained in this situation, till the boats had
returned on board, when Captain Clerk perceiving, by means of his telescope,
that our party was surrounded by the natives, who, he thought, designed to
attack them, ordered two four-pounders to be fired at the islanders. These
guns, though well aimed, did no mischief; but they gave the natives a
convincing proof of their powerful effects. A cocoa-nut-tree, under which some
of them were sitting, was broken in the middle by one of the balls; and the
other shivered a rock, which stood in an exact line with them. As Mr. King had,
just before, given them the strongest assurances of their safety, he was
extremely mortified at this act of hostility, and, to prevent its being
repeated, instantly dispatched a boat to inform Captain Clerk, that he was, at
present, on the most amicable terms with the islanders, and that, if any future
occasion should arise for changing his conduct toward them, he would hoist a
jack, as a signal for Captain Clerk to afford him his assistance.

Mr King waited the return of the boat with the greatest impatience; and after
remaining for the space of a quarter of an hour, under the utmost anxiety and
suspense, his fears were at length confirmed, by the arrivel of Mr. Bligh, with
orders to strike the tents immediately, and to send on board the sails, that
were repairing. At the same instant, Kaireekeea having also received
information of the death of Captain Cook, from a native who had arrived from
the other side of the bay, approached Mr. King, with great dejection and sorrow
in his countenance, inquiring whether it was true.

The situation of the party, at this time, was highly critical and important.
Not only their own lives, but the issue of the expedition, and the return of at
least one of the ships, were involved in the same common danger. They had the
mast of the Resolution, and the greater part of the sails, on shore, protected
by only half a dozen marines. The loss of these would have been irreparable;
and though the islanders had not as yet testified the smallest disposition to
molest the party, it was difficult to answer for the alteration, which the
intelligence of the transaction at Kowrowa might produce. Mr. King therefore
thought proper to dissemble his belief of the death of Captain Cook, and to
desire Kaireekeea to discourage the report; apprehending that either the fear
of our resentment, or the successful example of their countrymen, might perhaps
lead them to seize the favorable opportunity, which at this time presented
itself, of giving us a second blow. He, at the same time, advised him to bring
old Kaoo, and the other priests, into a large house adjoining to the morai,
partly from a regard to their safety, in case it should have been found
necessary to have recourse to violent measures; and partly from a desire of
having him near our people, in order to make use of his authority with the
natives, if it could be instrumental in maintaining peace.

Mr. King having stationed the marines on the top of the morai, which formed a
strong and advantageous post, entrusted the command to Mr. Bligh, who received
the most positive directions to act solely on the defensive, went on board the
Discovery, in order to confer with Captain Clerk on the dangerous situation of
our affairs. He had no sooner left the spot, than the islanders began to annoy
our people with stones; and just after he had reached the ship, he heard the
firing of the marines. He therefore hastily returned on shore, where he found
affairs growing every moment more alarming. The natives were providing arms,
and putting on their mats; and their numbers augmented very fast. He also
observed several large bodies advancing toward our party along the cliff, by
which the village of Kakooa is separated from the north side of the bay, where
Kowrowa is situate.

They at first attacked our people with stones from behind the walls of their
enclosures, and meeting with no resistance, they soon became more daring. A few
courageous fellows, having crept along the beach, under cover of the rocks,
suddenly presented themselves at the foot of the morai, with an intention of
storming it on the side next the sea, which was its only accessible part; and
they were not dislodged before they had stood a considerable quantity of shot,
and had seen one of their number fall.

The courage of one of these assailants deserves to be recorded. Having
returned with a view of carrying off his companion, amidst the fire of our
whole party, he received a wound, which obliged him to quit the body, and
retire; but, a few minutes afterward, he again made his appearance, and
receiving another wound, was under the necessity of retreating a second time.
At that moment Mr. King arrived at the morai, and saw this man return a third
time, faint from the loss of blood and fatigue. Being informed of what had
happened, he forbad the soldiers to fire; and the islander was suffered to
carry off his friend, which he was just able to accomplish; and then fell down
himself, and breathed (...).

A strong reinforcement from both ships having landed about this time, the
natives retreated behind their walls; which affording Mr. King access to the
priests, he sent one of them to exert his endeavors to bring his countrymen to
some terms, and to propose to them, that if they would desist from throwing
stones, he would not allow our men to fire. This truce was agreed to, and our
people were suffered to launch the mast, and carry off the sails, astronomical
instruments, etc. without molestation. As soon as our party had quitted the
morai, the islanders took possession of it, and some of them threw a few
stones, which, however did no mischief.

Between eleven and twelve o'clock, Mr. King arrived on board the Discovery,
where he found that no decisive plan had been adopted for the regulation of our
future proceedings. The recovery of Captain Cook's body, and the restitution of
the boat, were the objects, which, on all hands, we agreed to insist on; and
Mr. King declared it as his opinion, that some vigorous methods should be put
in execution, if the demand of them should not be instantly complied with.

Though it may justly be supposed that Mr. King's feelings, on the death of a
beloved and respected friend, had some share in this opinion, yet there were
doubtless other reasons, and those, of the most serious nature that had some
weight with him. The confidence which the success or the natives in killing our
Commander, and obliging us to leave the shore, must naturally have inspired;
and the advantage, however inconsiderable, which they had gained over us the
preceding day, would, he had on doubt, excite them to make farther dangerous
attempts; and the more particularly, as they had no great reason, from what
they had hitherto observed, to dread the effects of our firearms. This kind of
weapon, indeed, contrary to the expectation of us all, had produced in them no
signs of terror. On our side, such was the condition of our vessels, and the
state of discipline among us, that, had a vigorous attack been made on us,
during the night, the consequences might perhaps have been highly disagreeable.
Mr. King was supported, in these apprehensions, by the opinon of the greater
part of the officers on board; and nothing seemed to him more likely to
encourage the islanders to make the attempt, than the appearance of our being
inclined to an accommodation, which they could only impute to weakness, or fear.

On the other hand it was urged, in favor of more conciliatory measures, that
the mischief was already done, and was irreparable! that the natives, by reason
of their former friendship and kindness, had a strong claim to our regard; and
the more particularly, as the late calamitous accident did not appear to have
taken its rise from any premeditated design; that, on the part of Terreeoboo,
his ignorance of the theft, his willingness to accompany Captain Cook on board
the Resolution, and his having actually sent his two sons into the pinnace,
must rescue his character, in this respect, from the smallest degree of
suspicion; that the behavior of his woman, and the chiefs, might easily be
accounted for, from the apprehensions occasioned in their minds by the armed
force, with which Captain Cook landed, and the hostile preparations in the bay;
appearances so unsuitable to the confidence and friendship, in which both
parties had hitherto lived, that the arming of the islanders was manifestly
with a design to resist the attempt, which they had some reason to expect would
be made, to carry off their sovereign by force, and was naturally to be
expected from a people who had a remarkable affection for their chiefs.

To these dictates of humanity, other motives of a prudential kind were added;
that we were in want of a supply of water, and other refreshments; that the
Resolution's foremast would require seven or eight days work, before it could
be stepped; that the spring was advancing very fast; and that the speedy
prosecution of our next expedition to the northward, ought now to be our sole
object; and that, therefore, to engage in a vindictive contest with the
natives, might not only subject us to the imputation of needless cruelty, but
would require great delay in the equipment of our ships.

Captain Clerk concurred in this latter opinion; and though Mr. King was
convinced, that an early and vigorous display of our resentment would have more
effectually answered every object both of prudence and humanity, he was, upon
the whole, not sorry, that the measures he had recommended were rejected. For
though the contemptuous behavior of the islanders, and their subsequent
opposition to our necessary occupations on shore, arising, most probably, from
a misconstruction of our lenity, obliged us at last to have recourse to
violence in our own defense; yet he was not certain, that the circumstances of
the case would, in the opinion of the generality of people, have justified the
use of force, on our part, in the first instance. Cautionary severity is ever
invidious, and the rigor of a preventive measure, when it is the most
successful, leaves its expediency the least apparent.

While we were thus engaged, in concerting some plan for our future operations,
a very numerous concourse of the natives still kept possession of the shore;
and some of them, coining off in canoes, approached within pistol-shot of the
ships, and insulted us by various marks of defiance and contempt. It was
extremely difficult to restrain the seamen from the use of their arms on these
occasions; but, as pacific measures had been resolved on, the canoes were
allowed to return unmolested.

Mr. King was now ordered to proceed toward the shore, with the boats of both
ships, well manned and armed, with a view of bringing the islanders to a
parley, and of obtaining, if possible, a conferrence with some of the Erees. If
he should succeed in this attempt, he was to demand the dead bodies, and
particularly that of Captain Cook; to threaten them, in case of a refusal, with
our resentment; but by no means to fire, unless attacked, and not to go ashore
on any account whatever. These instructions were delivered to Mr. King before
the whole party, in the most positive manner.

Mr. King and his detatchment left the ships about four o'clock in the
afternoon; and, as they approached the shore, they perceived every indication
of a hostile reception. The natives were all in motion; the women and children
retiring; the men arming themselves with long spears and daggers, and putting
on their war-mats. It also appeared, that, since the morning, they had thrown
up breast-works of stone along the beach, where Captain Cook had landed; in
expectation, perhaps, of an attack at that place.

As soon as our party were within reach, the islanders began to throw stones at
them with slings, but without doing any mischief. Mr. King concluded, from
these appearances, that all attempts to bring them to a parley would be in
effectual, unless he gave them some ground for mutual confidence: he therefore
ordered the armed boats to stop, and advanced alone, in the small boat, holding
in his hand a white flag; the meaning of which, from an uni^ersal shout of joy
from the natives, he had the satisfaction to find was immediately understood.
The women instantly returned from the side of the hill, whither they had
retired; the men threw of their mats and all seated themselves together by the
seaside, extending their arms, and inviting Mr. King to land.

Though such behavior seemed expressive of a friendly disposition, he could
not avoid entertaining suspicions of its sincerity. But when he saw Koah, with
extraordinary boldness and assurance swimming off toward the boat, with a
white flag in his hand, he thought proper to return this mark of confidence,
and accordingly received him into the boat, though he was armed; a circumstance
which did not contribute to lessen Mr. King's suspicions. He had, indeed, long
harbored an unfavourable opinion of Koah. The priests had always represented
him as a person of a malicious temper, and no friend to us; and the repeated
detections of his fraud and treachery, had convinced us of the truth of their
assertions. Besides, the melancholy transactions of the morn-part, inspired Mr.
King with the utmost horror at finding himself so near him; and as he
approached him, with seigned tears, and embraced him, Mr. King was so
distrustful of his intentions that he took hold of the point of the phaooa,
which the chief held in his hand and turned it from him. He informed the
islander, that he had come to demand the body of Captain Cook and to declare
war against the natives, unless it was restored without delay. Koah assured him
that this should be done as soon as possible, and that he would go himself for
that purpose; and after requesting a piece of iron of Mr. King, with marks of
great assurance, he leaped into the water, and swam ashore, calling out to his
countrymen, that we were all friends again.

Our people waited with great anxiety, near an hour, for his return. During
this interval, the other boats had approached so near the shore, that the men
who were in them entered into conversation with a party of the islanders, at a
little distance; by whom they were informed, that the Captains body had been
cut to pieces, and carried up the country; but of this circumstance, Mr. King
was not apprized till his return to the ships.

Mr. King now began to express some degree of impatience at Koah's delay; upon
which the chiefs pressed him exceedingly to land; assuring him, that, if he
would go in person to Terreeohim. When they found they could not prevail on Mr.
King to go ashore, they endeavored, on pretense of conversing with him with
greater case, to decoy his boat among some rocks, where they might have had it
in their power to separate him from the other boats. It was easy to see through
these artifices, and he was, therefore, very desirous of breaking off all
communication with them, when a chief approached, who had particulary attached
himself to Captain Clerk, and the officers of the Discovery, on board which
ship he had sailed, when we last quitted the bay, intending to take his passage
to the island of Mowee. He said (...) came from Terreeoboo, to acquaint our
people that the body was carried up the country, but that it should be brought
back the following morning. There appeared much sincerity in his manner; and
being asked, if he uttered a falsehood, he hooked together his two fore
fingers, which is here understood as the sign of veracity, in the use of which
these islanders are very scrupulous.

Mr. King being now at a loss how to proceed, sent Mr. Vancouver to inform
Captain Clerk of all that had passed; that it was his opinion, the natives did
not intend to keep their word with us; and, far from being grieved at what had
happened, were, on the contrary, inspired with great confidence on account of
their late success, and sought only to gain time, till they could plan some
scheme for getting our people into their power. Mr. Vancouver came back with
orders for Mr. King to return on board, after giving the islanders to
understand, that if the body was not restored the next morning, the town should
be destroyed.

When they perceived our party retiring, they endeavored to provoke them by
the most contemptuous and insulting gestures. Several of our people said, they
could distinguish some of the natives parading about in the clothes which had
belonged to our unhappy countrymen, and among them, an Eree brandishing Captain
Cook's hanger and a woman holding the scabbard.

In consequence of Mr. King's report to Captain Clerk, of what he supposed to
be the present temper and disposition of the inhabitants, the most effectual
methods were taken to guard against any attack they might make during the
night. The boats were moored with top-chains; additional sentinels were
stationed in each of our ships; and guard-boats were directed to row round
them, in order to prevent the islanders from cutting the cables.

In the night, we saw a vast number of lights on the hills, which induced some
of us to imagine, that they were removing their effects farther up into the
country, in consequence of our menaces. But it seems more probable, that they
were kindled at the sacrifices that were performing on account of the war, in
which they supposed themselves likely to be engaged* and, perhaps, the bodies
of our slain countrymen were, at that time, burning. We afterward observed
fires of the same kind, as we passed the island of Morotoi; and which,
according to the information we received from some of the natives then on
board, were made on account of a war they had declared against a neighboring
island. This agrees with what we learned among the Friendly and Society Isles,
that, previous to any hostile expedition, the chiefs always endeavored to
animate the courage of the people, by feasts and rejoicings in the night.

We passed the night without any disturbance, except from the howlings and
lamentations which were heard on shore. Early the next morning, (Monday the
15th) Koah came along-side the Resolution, with a small pig, and some cloth,
which he desired permission to present to Mr. King. We have already mentioned,
that this officer was supposed, by the islanders, to be the son of Captain
Cook; and as the latter had always suffered them to believe it, Mr. King was
probably considered as the chief after his death. As soon as he came on deck,
he interrogated Koah with regard to the body; and, on his returning evasive
answers, refused to accept his presents; and was on the point of dismissing him
with expressions of anger and resentment, had not Captain Clerk, with a view
of keeping up the appearance of friendship, judged it more proper, that he
should be treated with the customary respect.

This chief came frequently to us in the course of the morning, with some
trifling present or other; and as we always observed him eyeing every part of
the ship with a great degree of attention, we took care he should see we were
well prepared for our defense.

He was extremely urgent both with Captain Clerk and Mr. King to go on shore,
imputing the detention of the bodies to the other chiefs; and assuring those
gentlemen, that every thing might be adjusted to their satisfaction, by a
personal interview with the king. However, they did not think it prudent to
comply with Koah's request; and, indeed, a fact came afterward to their
knowledge, which proved his want of veracity. For, they were informed, that,
immediately after the action in which Captain Cook had lost his life,
Terreeoboo had retired to a cave in the steep part of a mountain, that hangs
over the bay, which was accessible only by means of ropes, and where he
continued for several days, having his provisions let down to him by cords

After the departure of Koah from the ships, we observed that his countrymen,
who had assembled by daybreak, in vast crowds on the shore, flocked around him
with great eagerness on his landing, as if they wished to learn the
intelligence he had gained, and what steps were to be taken in consequence of
it. It is highly probable, that they expected we should attempt to put our
threats in execution; and they appeared fully determined to stand their ground.
During the whole morning, we heard conchs blowing in various parts of the
coast; large parties were perceived marching over the hills; and, upon the
whole, appearances were so alarming, that we carried out a stream anchor, for
the purpose of hauling the ship abreast of the town, in case of an attack; and
boats were stationed off the northern point of the bay, in order to prevent a
surprise from the natives in that quarter.

The warlike posture in which they appeared at present, and the breach of their
engagement to restore the bodies of the slain, occasioned fresh debates among
us, concerning the measures which should now be pursued. It was at length
determined, that nothing should be permitted to interfere with the repair of
the Resolution's mast, and the preparations for our departure; but that we
should, nevertheless, continue our negociations for the restoration of the
bodies of our countrymen.

The greater part of the day was employed in getting the foremast in a proper
situation on deck, that the carpenters might work upon it and also in making
the requisite alteration in the commissions of the officers. The chief command
of the expedition having devolved on Captain Clerk, he removed on board the
Resolution, promoted Lieutenant Gore to the rank of Captain of the Discovery,
appointed Messrs King and Williamson first and second Lieutenants of the
Resolution, and nominated Mr. Harvey, a Midshipman, who had accompanied Captain
Cook during his two last voyages, to fill the vacant lieutenancy. During the
whole day, we sustained no interruption from the islanders; and, in the
evening, the launch was moored with a top-chain, and guard-boats stationed
round each of the ships as before.

About eight o'clock, it being exceedingly dark, we heard a canoe paddling
toward the ship; and it was no sooner perceived, than both the sentinels on
deck fired into it. There were two of the natives in this canoe, who
immediately roared out " Tinnee," (which was their method of pronouncing Mr.
King's name), and said they were friends, and had something with them which
belonged to Captain Cook. When they came on board, they threw themselves at the
feet of our officers, and seemed to be extremely terrified. It fortunately
happened, that neither of them was hurt, notwithstanding the ball of both
pieces had gone through the canoe.

One of them was the person, who has been already mentioned, under the
appellation of the taboo man, who constantly attended Captain Cook with the
particular ceremonies we have before described; and who, though a man of
distinction in the island, could scarcely be prevented from performing for him
the most humiliating offices of a menial servant. After bewailing, with many
tears, the loss of the Orono, he informed us, that he had brought a part of his
body. He then gave us a small bundle which he brought under his arm; and it is
impossible to describe the horror with which we were seized, upon finding in
it, a piece of human flesh, of the weight of about nine or ten pounds. This, he
said, was all that now remained of the body; that the rest had been cut in
pieces, and burnt; but that the head, and all the bones, except those which
belonged to the trunk, were in the possession of Terreeoboo and the other
chiefs; that what we saw had been allotted to Kaoo, the chief of the priests,
for the purpose of being used in some religious ceremony; and that he had sent
it as a testimony of his innocence, and of his attachment to us.

We had now an opportunity of learning whether they were cannibals; and we did
not neglect to avail ourselves of it. We first endeavored, by several indirect
questions, but to each of them apart, to gain information respecting the manner
in which the other bodies had been treated and disposed of; and, finding them
very constant in one account, that, after the flesh had been cut off, the whole
of it was burnt; we at last put the direct question, whether they had not fed
on some of it? they immediately testified as much horror at such an idea, as
any European would have done; and asked, whether that was the practice among
us. They afterward asked us, with great earnestness, and with an appearance of
apprehension, when the Orono would come again? and how he would treat them on
his return; the same inquiry was often made in the sequel by others; and this
idea is consistent with the general tenor of their conduct toward him, which
indicated, that they considered him as a being of a superior species.

Though we pressed our two friendly visitants to continue on board till the
next morning, we could not prevail upon them. They informed us, that, if this
transaction should come to the knowledge of the king, or any of the other
Erees, it might be attended with the most fatal consequences to their whole
society; to prevent which, they had been* under the necessity of coming to us
in the dark; and the same precaution, they said, would be requisite in
returning on shore. They further told us, that the chiefs were eager to take
revenge on us for the death of their countrymen; and particularly cautioned us
against trusting Koah, who, they assured us, was our implacable enemy; and
ardently longed for an opportunity of fighting us, to which the blowing of the
conchs, that we had heard in the morning was intended as a challenge.

It also appeared from the information of these men, that seventeen of their
countrymen were slain, in the first action, at the village of Kowrowa, five of
whom were chiefs; and that Kaneena and his brother, our particular friends,
were of that number. Eight, they said, had lost their lives at the observatory;
three of whom likewise were persons of the first distinction.

The two natives left us about eleven o'clock, and took the precaution to
desire, that one of or guard-boats might attend them, till they had passed the
Discovery, lest they should again be fired upon, which by alarming their
countrymen on shore, might expose them to the danger of detection. This request
was readily complied with, and we had the satisfaction to find, that they
reached the land safe and undiscovered.

We heard, during the remainder of this night, the same loud lamentations, as
in the preceding one. Early the following morning, we received a visit from
Koah. Mr. King was piqued at finding, that notwithstanding the most glaring
marks of treachery in his conduct, and the positive declaration of our friends
the priests, he should still be suffered to carry on the same farce, and to
make us at least appear the dupes of his hypocrisy. Our situation was, indeed;
become extremely awkward and unpromising; none of the purposes for which this
pacific plan of proceedings had been adopted, having hitherto been, in any
respect, promoted by it. No satisfactory answer had been given to our demands;
we did not seem to have made any progress toward a reconciliation with the
natives; they still remained on the shore in hostile postures, as if determined
to oppose any endeavors we might make to go ashore; and yet it was become
absolutely necessary to attempt landing, as the completing our stock of water
would not admit of any longer delay.

We must remark, however, in justice to the conduct of Captain Clerk, that it
was highly probable, from the great numbers of the islanders, and from the
resolution with which they seemed to expect our approach, that an attack could
not have been made without danger; and that the loss of even a very few men,
might have been severely felt by us, during the remainder of our voyage;
whereas the delaying to put our menaces into execution, though, on the one
hand, it diminished their opinion of our valor, had the effect of occasioning
them to disperse on the other. For this day, about twelve o'clock, upon finding
that we persisted, in our inactivity, great bodies of them, after blowing their
conchs, and using every method of defiance, marched off, over the hills, and
never made their appearance afterward. Those, however, who remained, were not
the less daring and presumptuous. One of them had the insolence to come within
musket shot, ahead of the Resolution, and, after throwing several stones at
us, waved over his head the hat which had belonged to Captain Cook, while his
countrymen ashore were exulting and encouraging his audacity.

Our people were highly enraged at this insult, and coming in a body on the
quarter deck, begged they might no longer be obliged to put up with such
reiterated provocations, and requested Mr. King to endeavor to obtain
permission for them, from Captain Clerk, to take advantage of the first fair
occasion of avenging the death of their much-lamented Commander. On Mr. King's
acquainting the Captain with what was passing, he ordered some great guns to be
fired at the islanders on shore; and promised the crew, that, if they should be
molested at the watering-place, the next day, they should then be permitted to
chastise them.

Before we could bring our guns to bear, the natives had suspected our
intentions, from the bustle and agitation they observed in the ship; and had
retired behind their houses and walls. We were consequently obliged to fire, in
some degree at random; notwithstanding which, our shot produced all the effects
we could desire. For, in a short time afterward, we perceived Koah paddling
toward us, with the greatest haste; and when he arrived, we learned, that some
people had lost their lives, and among the rest Maihamaiha, a principal Eree In
the language of these islands, the word matee is generally used either to
express killing or wounding; and we were afterward informed, that this chief
had only received a trifling blow on the face, from a stone which had been
struck by one of our balls.
, nearly related to Terreeoboo.

Not long after Koah's arrival, two boys swam off from the morai toward our
vessels, each armed with a long spear; and after, they had approached pretty
near, they began, in a very solemn manner, to chant a song; the subject of
which, from their frequently mentioning the word Orono, and pointing to the
village where Captain Cook had been slain, we concluded to be the late
calamitous occurrence. Having sung for near a quarter of an hour in a plaintive
strain, during all which time they continued in the water, they repaired on
board the Discovery, and delivered up their spears; and, after remaining there
a short time, returned on shore. We could never learn who sent them, or what
was the object of this ceremony.

During the night we took the usual precautions for the security of the ships;
and, as soon as it was dark, the two natives, who had visited us the preceding
evening, came off to us again. They assured us, that though the effects of our
great guns, this afternoon, had greatly alarmed the chiefs, they had by no
means relinquished their hostile intentions, and they advised us to be on our
guard.

The following morning, which was the 17th, the boats of both ships were
dispatched ashore to procure water; and the Discovery was warped close to the
beach, in order to protect the persons employed in that service. We soon found
that the intelligence which had been sent us by the priests, was not destitute
of foundation, and that the islanders were determined to neglect no opportunity
of annoying us, when it could be done without much hazard.

The villages, throughout this whole cluster of islands, are, for the most
part, situated near the sea; and the adjacent ground is enclosed with stone
walls, of the height of about three feet. These, we at first supposed, were
designed for the division of property; but we now discovered that they served
for a defense against invasion, for which purpose they were, perhaps, chiefly
intended. They consist of loose stones, and the natives are very dexterous in
shifting them, with great quickness, to such particular situations, as the
direction of the attack may occasionally require. In the sides of the mountain,
that stands near the bay, they have likewise holes, or caves, of considerable
depth; whose entrance is secured by a fence of a similar kind. From behind both
these stations, the islanders perpetually harrassed our watering party with
stones; nor could the inconsiderable force we had on shore, with the advantage
of muskets, compel them to retreat.

Thus opposed, our people were so occupied in attending to their own safety,
that, during the whole forenoon, they filled only one ton of water. It being
therefore impossible for them to perform this service, till their assailants
were driven to a greater distance, the Discovery was ordered to dislodge the
enemy with her great guns; which being accomplished by means of a few
discharges, the men landed without molestation.

The natives, however, made their appearance again, soon afterward, in their
usual method of attack; and it was now deemed absolutely necessary to burn down
some straggling huts, near the wall behind which they had sheltered themselves.
In executing the orders that were given for that purpose, our people were
hurried into acts of unnecessary devastation and cruelty. Some allowance ought
certainly to be made for their resentment of the repeated insults, and
contemptuous behavior of the islanders, and for their natural desire of
revenging the death of their beloved and respected Commander. But, at the same
time, their conduct strongly evinced, that the greatest precaution is requisite
in trusting, even for a moment, the discretionary use of arms, in the hands of
private soldiers, or seamen, on such occasions. The strictness of discipline,
and the habits of obedience, by which their force is kept directed to suitable
objects, lead them to conceive, that whenever they have the power, they have
likewise a right to perform. Actual disobedience being almost the only crime
for which they expect to receive punishment, they are apt to consider it as the
sole measure of right and wrong; and hence they are too ready to conclude, that
what they can do with impunity, they may also do consistently with honor and
justice; so that the feelings of humanity, and that generosity toward an
unresisting enemy, which, at other times, is a striking distinction of brave
men, become but feeble restraints to the exercise of violence, when set in
opposition to the desire they naturally have of showing their own power and
independence.

It has been before observed, that directions had been given to burn only a few
straggling houses, which afforded shelter to the islanders. We were therefore
greatly surprised on perceiving the whole village in flames; and before a boat,
that was sent to stop the progress of the mischief, could reach the land, the
habitations of our old and constant friends, the priests, were all on fire. Mr.
King had, therefore, great reason to lament the illness that confined him on
board this day. The priests had always been under his protection; and,
unfortunately, the officers then on duty having seldom been on shore at the
morai, were but little acquainted with the circumstances of the place. Had he
been present himself, he might in all probability, have been the means of
preserving their little society from destruction.

In escaping from the flames, several of the inhabitants were shot; and our
people cut off the heads of two of them, and brought them on board. The fate of
one unhappy native was much lamented by all of us. As he was repairing to the
well for water, he was shot at by one of the marines. The ball happened to
strike his calibash, which he instantly threw from him, and ran off. He was
pursued into one of the caves abovementioned, and no lion could have defended
his den with greater bravery and fierceness; till at length, after he had found
means to keep two of our people at bay for a considerable time, he expired,
covered with wounds. This accident first brought us acquainted with the use to
which these caverns are applied.

About this time a man, advanced in years, was taken prisoner, bound, and
conveyed on board the Resolution, in the same boat, with the heads of his two
countrymen. We never observed horror so strongly portrayed, as in the face of
this person, nor so violent a transition to immoderate joy, as when he was
untied, and given to understand, that he might depart in safety. He showed us
that he was not deficient in gratitude, as he not only often returned
afterward with presents of provisions, but, also did us other services.

In a short time after the destruction of the village, we saw coming down the
hill, a man, accompanied by fifteen or twenty boys, who held in their hands
pieces of white cloth, plantains, green boughs, etc. It happened that this
pacific embassy, as soon as they were within reach, received the fire of a
party of our men. This, however, did not deter them from continuing their
procession, and the officer on duty came up in time, to prevent a second
discharge. As they made a nearer approach, the principal person proved to be
our friend Kaireckeea, who had fled when our people first set fire to the
village, and had now returned, and expressed his desire of being sent on board
the Resolution.

On his arrival we found him extremely thoughtful and grave. We endeavored to
convince him of the necessity there was of setting fire to the village, by
which his house, and those of his brethren were unintentionally destroyed. He
expostulated with us on our ingratitude and want of friendship; and indeed, it
was not till the present moment, that we knew the whole extent of the injury
that had been done them. He informed us, that, confiding in the promises Mr.
King had made them, and as well as in the assurances they had received from the
men, who had brought us some of Captain Cook's remains, they had not removed
their effects back into the country, as the other inhabitants had done, but had
put every valuable article of their own, as well as what they had collected
from us, into a house adjoining the morai, where they had the mortification to
see it all set on fire by our people. He had, on coming on board, perceived the
heads of his two countrymen lying on deck, at which he was greatly shocked, and
earnestly desired that they might be thrown overboard. This request, by the
directions of Captain Clerk, was immediately complied with.

Our watering party returned on board in the evening, having sustained no
farther interruption. We passed a disagreeable night; the cries and
lamentations we heard from the shore being far more dreadful than ever. Our
only consolation, on this occasion, arose from the hopes that a repetition of
such severities might not be requisite in future.

It is remarkable, that amidst all these disturbances, the female natives who
were on board, did not offer to leave us, or discover any apprehensions either
for themselves or their friends on shore. They appeared, indeed, so perfectly
unconcerned, that some of them, who were on deck when the village was in
flames, seemed to admire the spectacle, and frequently exclaimed, that it was
maitai, or very fine.

The next morning the treacherous Koah came off to the ships, as usual. There
being no longer any necessity for keeping terms with him, Mr. King was allowed
to treat him as he thought proper. When he approached the side of the
Resolution, singing a song, and offering a hog, and some plantains, to Mr.
King, the latter ordered him to keep off, and cautioned him never to make his
appearance again without the bones of Captain Cook, lest his life should pay
the forfeit of his repeated breach of faith. He did not appear much mortified
with this unwelcome reception, but immediately returned on shore, and joined a
party of his countrymen, who were throwing stones at our waterers. The body of
the young man, who had been killed the preceding day, was found this morning
lying at the entrance of the cave; and a mat was thrown over him by some of our
people; soon after which they saw several of the natives carrying him off on
their shoulders, and could hear them chanting, as they marched, a mournful song.

The islanders being at length convinced that it was not the want of ability to
chastize them which had induced us at first to tolerate their provocations,
desisted from molesting our people; and, toward the evening, a chief, named
Eappo, who had seldom visited us, but whom we knew to be a man of the first
distinction, came with presence from Terreeoboo to sue for peace. These
presents were accepted, and the chief was dismissed with the following answer:
That no peace would be granted, till the remains of Captain Cook should be
restored.

We were informed by Eappo, that the flesh of all the bones of our people who
had been slain, as well as the bones of the trunks, had been burnt; that the
limb-bones of the marines had been distributed among the inferior chiefs; and
that the remains of Captain Cook had been disposed of as follows: the head to a
great Erce called Kahooopeou; the hair to Maiha-maiha; and the arms, legs, and
thighs, to Terreeoboo. After it was dark, many of the natives came off with
various sorts of vegetables; and we also received from Kaireekeea two large
presents of the same articles.

The next day was principally employed in sending and receiving the messages
that passed between Captain Clerk and the old king. Eappo was very urgent,
that one of our officers should go on shore; and offered to remain on board, in
the mean time, as an hostage. This request, however, was not complied with; and
he left us with a promise of bringing the bones the following day. Our watering
party, at the beach, did not meet with the least opposition from the islanders;
who, notwithstanding our cautious behavior, again ventured themselves amongst
us without any marks of diffidence or apprehension.

On Saturday the 20th, early in the morning we had the satisfaction of getting
the foremast stepped. This operation was attended with considerable
difficulty, and some danger, our ropes being so extremely rotten, that the
purchase several times gave way.

This morning, between the hours of ten and eleven, we saw a numerous body of
the natives descending the hill, which is over the beach, in a sort of
procession, each man carrying on his shoulders two or three sugarcanes, and
some bread-fruit, plantains, and taro, in his hand. They were preceeded by two
drummers, who, when they reached the waterside, seated themselves by a white
flag, and began beating their drums, while those who had followed them,
advanced, one by one, and deposited the presents they had brought with them;
after which they retired in the same order. Soon afterward Eappo appeared in
his long feathered cloak, bearing something with great solemnity in his hands;
and having stationed himself on a rock, he made signs that a boat should be
sent him.

Captain Clerk, supposing that the chief had brought the bones of Captain Cook
(which, indeed, proved to be the case), went himself in the pinnace to receive
them, and ordered Mr. King to attend him in the cutter. When they arrived at
the beach, Eappo, entering the pinnace, delivered the bones to Captain Clerk,
wrapped up in a great quantity of fine new cloth, and covered with a spotted
cloak of black and white feathers. He afterward attended our gentlemen to the
Resolution, but could not be prevailed on to accompany them on board; being,
perhaps, from a sense of decency, unwilling to be present at the opening of the
parcel.

We found, in this bundle, both the hands of Captain Cook entire, which were
well known to us from a scar on one of them, that divided the fore finger from
the thumb, the whole length of the metacarpal bone; the skull, but with the
scalp separated from it, and the bones of the face wanting; the scalp, with the
ears adhering to it, and the hair upon it cut short; the bones of both the
arms, with the skin of the fore-arms hanging to them; the bones of the thighs
and legs joined together, but without the feet. The ligaments of the joints
were observed to be entire; and the whole showed sufficient marks of having
been in the fire, except the hands, which had the flesh remaining upon them,
and were cut in several places, and crammed with salt, most probably with a
view of preserving them. The skull was free from any fracture, but the scalp
had a cut in the back part of it. The lower jaw and feet, which were wanting,
had been seized, as Eappo informed us, by different Erees; and he also told us,
that Terreeoboo was using every means to recover them.

Eappo, and the king's son, came on board the next morning, and brought with
them not only the remaining bones of Captain Cook, but likewise the barrels of
his gun, his shoes, and some other trifles which had belonged to him. Eappo
assured us, that Terreeoboo, Maiha-maiha, and himself were extremely desirous
of peace; that they had given us the most convincing proofs of it; and that
they had been prevented from giving it sooner by the other chiefs, many of whom
were still disaffected to us. He lamented, with the most lively sorrow, the
death of six chiefs, who had been killed by our people; some of whom, he said,
were among our best friends. He informed us, that the cutter had been taken
away by Pareea's people, probably in revenge for the blow that he had received;
and that it had been broken up the following day. The arms of the marines,
which we had also demanded, had been carried off, he said, by the populace, and
were irrecoverable.

Nothing now remained, but to perform the last solemn offices to our excellent
Commander. Eappo was dismissed with orders to taboo all the bay; and, in the
afternoon, the bones having been deposited in a coffin, the funeral service was
read over them, and they were committed to the deep with the usual military
honors. Our feelings, on this mournful occasion, are more easy to be conceived
than expressed.

During the morning of the 22d, not a canoe was seen in the bay. The taboo,
which Eappo, at our desire, had laid on it the preceding day, not being yet
taken off. At length that chief came off to us. We assured him, that we were
now perfectly satisfied; and that, as the Orono was buried, all remembrance of
the late unhappy transactions was buried with him. We afterward requested him
to take off the taboo, and to make it known, that the islanders might bring
provisions to us as usual. The ships were soon surrounded with canoes, and many
of the Erees came on board, expressing their grief at what had happened, and
their satisfaction at our reconciliation. Several of our friends, who did not
favor us with a visit, sent presents of large hogs, and other provisions.
Among the rest, the old treacherous Koah came off to us, but we refused him
admittance.

As we were now prepared for putting to sea, Captain Clerk imagining, that, if
the intelligence of our proceedings should reach the islands to leeward before
us, it might have a bad effect, gave orders, that the ships should be unmoored.
About eight in the evening, we dismissed all the natives; and Eappo, and the
friendly Kaireekeea, took their leave of us in a very affectionate manner. We
immediately weighed anchor, and stood out of Karakakooa bay. The islanders were
assembled in great numbers on the shore; and, as we passed along, received our
last farewels, with every mark of good will and affection.

CHAP. V.
Leave Karakakooa Bay -- In quest of an Harbor on the South-East Side of Mowee
-- Driven to Leeward by the Current, and strong easterly Winds -- Pass
Tohoorowa -- South-west Side of Mowee described -- Proceed to Woahoo -- The
north-east coast of Woahoo described -- Disappointed in attempting to water --
Proceed to Atooi -- Anchor in Wymoa Bay -- The Natives not so friendly as
before -- The watering Party guarded by Marines -- Insolence of the Natives,
who demanded a Hatchet for every Cask of Water -- The islanders treat our
People with Contempt -- They steal Mr. King's Hanger out of his Hand -- Their
Insolence at the Waterside -- Are fired at by two Marines -- One of them
wounded -- Visit from the contending Chiefs -- Anchor off Oneeheow -- Departure.

HAVING cleared the land about ten, we stood to the northward, with a view of
searching for an harbor, which the natives had often mentioned, on the
south-east side of Mowee. We found ourselves, the next morning, driven to
leeward, by a swell from the north-east; and a fresh gale, from the same
quarter, drove us still farther to the westward. At midnight we tacked, and
stood four hours to the south, to keep clear of the land; and, at daybreak, on
the 24th, we were standing toward a small barren island, named Tahoorow, about
seven miles south-west of Mowee.

Giving up all prospect of making a closer examination of the south-east parts
of Mowee, we bore away, and kept along the south-east side of Tahoorowa.
Steering close round its western extremity, in order to fetch the west side of
Mowee, we suddenly shoaled our water, and saw the sea breaking on some rocks,
almost right ahead. We then kept away about a league and a half, and again
steered to the northward; when we stood for a passage between Mowee, and an
island named Ranai. In the afternoon, the weather was calm, with light airs
from the west. We stood to the north-north-west; but, observing a shoal about
sunset, and the weather being unsettled, we stood toward the south.

We had now passed the south-west side of this island, without being able to
approach the shore. This side of the island forms the same distant view as the
north-east, as seen when we returned from the north, in November, 1778; the
hilly parts, connected by low flat isthmus, having, at the first view, the
appearance of two separate islands. This deceptive appearance continued till we
were within about ten leagues of the coast, which, bending a great way inward,
formed a capacious bay. The westernmost point off which the shoal runs that we
have just now mentioned, is rendered remarkable by a small hillock; south of
which is a fine sandy bay; and on the shore, are several huts, with plenty of
cocoa-trees about them.

In the course of the day, several of the natives visited us, and brought
provisions with them. We presently discovered, that they had heard of our
unfortunate disaster at Owhyhee. They were extremely anxious to be informed of
the particulars, from a woman who had hid herself in the Resolution, in order
to obtain a passage to Atooi; making particular enquiries about Pareea, and
some other chiefs; and seeming much agitated at the death of Kaneena, and his
brother. But, in whatever light this business might have been represented by
the woman, it produced no bad effect in their behavior, which was civil and
obliging to an extreme.

During the night, the weather varied continually, but on the 25th, in the
morning, the wind being at east, we steered along the south side of Ranai, till
almost noon, when we had baffling winds and calms till the evening; after
which, we had a light easterly breeze, and steered for the west of Morotoi. The
current, which had set from the north-east, ever since we left Karakakooa bay,
changed its direction, in the course of this day, to the south-east.

The wind was again variable during the night; but, early in the morning of the
26th, it settled at east; blowing so fresh, as to oblige us to double-reef the
topsails. At seven, we opened a small bay, distant about two leagues, having a
fine sandy beach; but not perceiving any appearance of fresh water, we
endeavored to get to the windward of Woahoo, an island which we had seen in
January, 1778. We saw the land about two in the afternoon, bearing west by
north at the distance of about eight leagues. We tacked, as soon as it was
dark, and again bore away at daylight on the 27th. Between ten and eleven, we
were about a league of the shore, and near the middle of the north-east side of
the island.

To the northward, the coast consists of detached hills, ascending
perpendicular from the sea; the sides being covered with wood, and the valleys
between them appearing to be fertile, and well cultivated. An extensive bay was
observable to the southward, bounded, to the south-east, by a low point of
land, covered with cocoa-nut trees; off which, an insulated rock appeared, at
the distance of a mile from the shore.

The wind continuing to blow fresh, we were unwilling to entangle ourselves
with a lee-shore. Instead of attempting, therefore, to examine the bay, we
hauled up and steered in the direction of the coast. At noon, we were about two
leagues from the island, and abreast of the north point of it. It is low and
flat, having a reef stretching off almost a mile and an half. Between the north
point, and a head-land to the south-west, the land bends inward, and seemed to
promise a good road. We therefore steered along the shore, at about a mile
distance. At two, we were induced, by the sight of a fine river, to anchor in
thirteen fathoms water. In the afternoon, Mr. King attended the two Captains on
shore, where few of the natives were to be seen, and those principally women.
The men, we were informed, were gone to Morotoi, to fight Tahyterree; but their
chief, Perreeorance, remained behind, and would certainly attend us, as soon as
he was informed of our arrival.

The water, to our great disappointment, had a brackish taste, for about two
hundred yards up the river; beyond which, however, it was perfectly fresh, and
was a delightful stream. Farther up, we came to the conflux of two small
rivulets, branching off to the right and left of a steep romantic mountain. The
banks of the river, and all that we saw of Woahoo, are in fine cultivation, and
full of villages; the face of the country being also remarkably beautiful and
picturesque.

As it would have been a laborious business to have watered at this place, Mr.
King was dispatched to search about the coast to leeward; but, being unable to
land, on account of a reef of coral, which extended along the shore, Captain
Clerk resolved to proceed immediately to Atooi. In the morning, about eight,
we weighed, and stood to the northward; and, on the 28th, at daylight, we bore
away for that island, and were in sight of it by noon. We were off its eastern
extremity, which is a green flat point, about sunset.

It being dark, we did not venture to run for the road on the south-west side,
but spent the night in plying on and off, and anchored, at nine the next
morning, in twenty-five fathoms water. In running down, from the south-east
point of the island, we saw, in many places, the appearance of shoal water, at
some distance from the land.

Being anchored in our old station, several canoes came to visit us; but it was
very observable, that there was not that appearance of cordiality in their
manner, and complacency in their countenances, as when we saw them before. They
had no sooner got on board, but one of them informed us, that we had
communicated a disorder to the women, which had ^^lled many persons of both
sexes. He, at that time, was afflicted with the venereal disease, and minutely
described the various symptoms which had attended it. As no appearance of that
disorder had been observed amongst them, on our first arrival, we were, it is
to be feared, the authors of this irreparable mischief.

The principal object in view, at this place, was to water the ships with as
much expedition as possible; and Mr. King was sent on shore in the afternoon,
with the launch and pinnace, laden with casks. He was accompanied by the gunner
of the Resolution, who was instructed to trade for some provisions; and they
were attended by a guard of five marines. Multitudes of people were collected
upon the beach, by whom, at first, we were kindly received; but, after we had
landed the casks, they began to be exceedingly troublesome.

Knowing, from experience, how difficult a task it was to repress this
disposition, without the interposition of their chiefs, we were sorry to be
informed, that they were all at a distant part of the island. Indeed we both
felt and lamented the want of their assistance; for we could hardly form a
circle, as our practice usually was, for the safety and convenience of the
trading party. No sooner had we taken this step, and posted marines to keep off
the populace, than a man took hold of the bayonet belonging to one of the
soldier's muskets, and endeavored to wrench it forcibly from his hand. Mr.
King immediately advanced toward them, when the native quitted his hold, and
retired; but immediately returned, having a spear in one hand, and a dagger in
the other; and it was with difficulty that his countrymen could restrain him
from engaging with the soldier. This affray was occasioned by the native's
having received, from the soldier, a slight prick with his bayonet, to induce
him to keep without the line.

Our situation, at this time, required great management and circumspection; Mr.
King accordingly enjoined, that no one should presume to fire, or proceed to
any other act of violence, without positive commands. Having given these
instructions, he was summoned to the assistance of the watering party, where he
found the natives in the same mischievous disposition. They had peremptorily
demanded, for every cask of water, a large hatchet; which not being complied
with, they would not permit the sailors to roll them to the boats.

As soon as Mr. King had joined them, one of the natives approached him, with
great insolence, and made the same demand. Mr. King told him, that, as a
friend, he was welcome to a hatchet, but he certainly would carry off the
water, without paying for it; and instantly ordered the pinnace men to proceed;
at the same time calling for three marines, from the trading party, to protect
them.

This becoming spirit so far succeeded, as to prevent any daring attempt to
interrupt us, but they still persevered in the most teasing and insulting
behavior. Some of them, under pretense of assisting the sailors in rolling the
casks toward the shore, gave them a different direction; others stole the hats
from off our people's heads, pulled them backward by the skirts of their
clothes, and tripped up their heels; the populace, during all this time,
shouting and laughing, with a mixture of mockery and malice. They afterward
took an opportunity of stealing the cooper's bucket, and forcibly took away his
bag. Their principal aim, however, was to possess themselves of the muskets of
the marines, who were continually complaining of their attempts to force them
from their hands. Though they, in general, preserved a kind of deference and
respect for Mr. King, yet they obliged him to contribute his share toward
their stock of plunder. One of them approached him, in a familiar manner, and
diverted his attention, whilst another seized his hanger, which he held
carelessly in his hand, and ran away with it.

Such insolence was not to be repelled by force. Prudence dictated that we must
patiently submit to it; at the same time, guarding against its effects as well
as we were able. Mr. King was, however, somewhat alarmed, on being soon after
informed by the sergeant of marines, that, turning suddenly round, he saw a man
behind him, armed with a dagger, in the position of striking. Though he might,
perhaps, be mistaken, in this particular, our situation was truly critical and
alarming; and the smallest error, or mistake, on our part, might have been of
fatal consequences.

Our people being separated into three small parties; one filling casks at the
lake; another rolling them to the shore; and a third purchasing provisions; Mr.
King had some intentions of collecting them together, in order to protect the
performance of one duty at a time. But, on due reflection, he thought it more
advisable to let them proceed as they had begun. If a real attack had been
made, even our whole force could have made but a poor resistance. He thought,
on the other hand, that such a step might operate to our disadvantage, as being
an evident token of our fears. Besides, in the present case the crowd was kept
divided, and many of them wholly occupied in bartering.

The principal cause of their not attacking us was, perhaps, their dread of the
effects of our arms; and, as we appeared to place so much confidence in this
advantage, as to oppose only five marines to such a multitude of people, their
ideas of our superiority must have been greatly exalted. It was our business to
cherish this opinion; and, it must ever be acknowledged, to the honor of the
whole party, that it was impossible for any men to behave better, in order to
strengthen these impressions. Whatever could be considered as a jest, they
received with patience and goodnature; but, if they were interrupted by any
serious attempt, they opposed it with resolute looks and menaces. At length, we
so far succeeded, as to get all our casks to the seaside, without any accident
of consequence.

While our people were getting the casks into the launch, the inhabitants
thinking they should have no farther opportunity of plundering, grew more
daring and insolent. The sergeant of marines luckily suggested to Mr. King, the
advantage of sending off his party first into the boats, by which means the
muskets would be taken out of their reach; which, as above related, were the
grand objects the islanders had in view: and, if they should happen to attack
us, the marines could more effectually defend us, than if they were on shore.

Every thing was now in the boats, and only Mr. King, Mr. Anderson, the gunner,
and a seaman of the boat's crew, remained on shore. The pinnace laying beyond
the surf, which we were under a necessity of swimming through, Mr. King ordered
the other two to make the best of their way to it, and told them he would
follow them.

They both refused to comply with this order, and it became a matter of
contest, who should be the last on shore. Some hasty expression, it seems Mr.
King had just before made use of to the sailor, which he considered as a
reflection on his courage, and excited his resentment; and the old gunner, as a
point of honor was now started, conceived it to be his duty to take a part in
it. In this whimsical situation, they, perhaps, might have long remained, had
not the dispute been settled by the stones, which began to fly plentifully
about us, and by the exclamations of the people from the boats, begging us to
be expeditious, as the natives were armed with clubs and spears, and pursuing
us into the water. Mr. King arrived first at the pinnace, and, perceiving Mr.
Anderson was so far behind, as not to be entirely out of danger, he ordered one
musket to be fired; but in the hurry of executing his orders, the marines
fired two. The natives immediately ran away, leaving only one man and woman on
the beach. The man attempted to rise several times, but was not able, having
been wounded in the groin. The islanders, in a short time, returned; and,
surrounding the wounded man, brandished their spears at us, with an air of
defiance; but, by the time we reached the ships, some persons arrived which we
supposed to be the chiefs, by whom they were all driven from the shore.

Captain Clerk, during our absence, had been under terrible apprehensions for
our safety; which had been considerably increased by his misunderstanding some
of the natives, with whom he had had some conversation on board. The name of
Captain Cook being frequently mentioned, accompanied with circumstantial
descriptions of death and destruction, he concluded that they had received
intelligence of the unfortunate events at Owhyhee, to which they alluded. But
they were only endeavoring to make him understand, that wars had arisen on
account of the goats, which Captain Cook had left at Oneeheow, and that the
poor goats had been slaughtered, during the contest for the property of them.
Captain Clerk, applying these shocking representations to our misfortunes at
Owhyhee, and to an indication of revenge, fixed his telescope upon us the whole
time: and, as soon as he saw the smoke of the muskets, ordered the boats to be
put off to our assistance.

On the 2d of March, being the next day, Mr. King was again ordered on shore,
with the watering party. Ae we had so narrowly escaped the preceding day,
Captain Clerk augmented our force from both ships, and we had a guard of forty
men under arms. This precaution, howver, was found to be unnecessary; for the
beach was left entirely to ourselves, and the ground, extending from the
landing-place to the lake, tabooed. Hence we concluded, that some of the chiefs
had visited this quarter; who, being unable to stay, had considerately taken
this step, that we might be accommodated with safety. Several men appeared with
spears and daggers, on the other side of the river, but never attempted to
molest us. Their women came over, and seated themselves close by us, on the
banks; and about the middle of the day, some of the men were prevailed on to
bring us hogs and roots, and also to dress them for us. When we had left the
beach, they came down to the seaside, and one of them had the audacity to
throw a stone at us; but, as his conduct was highly censured by the rest, we
did not express any kind of resentment.

On the 3d, we completed our watering, without much difficulty; and, on
returning to the ships, we were informed, that several chiefs had been on
board, and had apologized for the conduct of their countrymen, attributing
their riotous behavior to the quarrels then subsisting among the principal
people of the island, and which had destroyed all order and subordination.

The government of Atooi was disputed between Toneoneo, who had the supreme
power when we were there the preceding year, and a youth named Teavee. By
different fathers, they are both the grandsons of Perreeorannee, king of
Woahoo; who gave Atooi to the former, and Oneeheow to the latter. The quarrel
originated about the goats which we had left at Oneeheow the year before; they
being claimed by Toneoneo, as that island was a dependency of his. The
adherents of Teavee insisting on the right of possession, both parties prepared
to support their pretensions, and a battle ensued just before our arrival,
wherein Toneoneo had been defeated. ^^neoneo was likely to become more affected
by (...) consequence of this victory, than by the loss of the objects in
dispute; for the mother of Teavee having married a second husband, who was not
only a chief at Atooi, but also at the head of a powerful faction there, he
thought of embracing the present opportunity of driving Toneoneo out of the
island, that his son-in-law might succeed to the government. The goats, which
had increased to six, and would probably have stocked these islands in a few
years, were destroyed in this contest.

On the 4th we were visited, on board the Resolution, by the father-in-law, the
mother, and the sister of the young prince, who made several curious presents
to Captain Clerk. Among the rest, were some fish-hooks, which were made from
the bones of Terreeoboo's father, who had been killed in an unsuccessful
descent upon Woahoo. Also a fly-flap, from the hands of the prince's sister,
which had a human bone for its handle, and had been given to her by her
father-in-law, as a trophy. They were not accompanied by young Teavee, he being
then engaged in the performance of some religious rites, on account of the
victory he had obtained.

This day, and the 5th and 6th, were employed in completing the Discovery's
water. The carpenters were engaged in caulking the ships, and preparing for our
next cruise. We no longer received any molestation from the natives, who
supplied us plentifully with pork and vegetables.

We were now visited by an Indian, who brought a piece of iron on board, to be
formed into the shape of a pahooa. It was the bolt of some large ship timbers,
but neither the officers nor men could discover to what nation it belonged;
though, from the shape of the bolt, and the paleness of the iron, they were
convinced it was not English. They enquired strictly of the native how he came
possessed of it, when he informed them, that it was taken out of a large piece
of timber, which had been driven upon their island, since we were there in
January, 1778.

We received a visit, on the 7th, from Toneoneo, at which we were surprised.
Hearing the dowager princess was on board, he could hardly be prevailed on to
enter the ship. When they met, they cast an angry lowering look at each other.
He did not stay long, and appeared much dejected. We remarked, however, with
some degree of surprise, that the women prostrated themselves before him, both
at his coming and going away; and all the natives on board, treated him with
that respect which is usually paid to persons of his rank. It was somewhat
remarkable, that a man, who was then in a state of actual hostility with
Teavee's party, should venture alone within the power of his enemies. Indeed
the civil dissensions, which are frequent in all the south sea islands, seem to
be conducted without much acrimony; the deposed Governor still enjoying the
rank of an Eree, and may put in practice such means as may arise; to regain the
consequence which he has lost.

At nine, in the morning of the 8th, we weighed, and proceeded toward
Oneeheow, and came to anchor in twenty fathoms water, at about three in the
afternoon, nearly on the spot where we anchored in 1778. With the other anchor,
we moored in twenty-six fathoms water. We had a strong gale from the eastward
in the night, and, the next morning, the ship had driven a whole cable's
length, both anchors being almost brought ahead; in which situation we were
obliged to continue, this and the two following days.

The weather being more moderate on the 12th, the Master was dispatched to the
north-west side of the island, in search of a more commodious place for
anchoring. In the evening, he returned, having found a fine bay, with good
anchorage, in eighteen fathoms water. The points of the bay were in the
direction of north by east, and south by west. A small village was situated on
the north side of the bay, to the eastward of which were four wells of good
water. Mr. Bligh went far enough to the north to convince himself that
Oreehoua, and Oneeheow, were too separate islands.

CHAP. VI.
The Number, Names, and Situation, of the Sandwich Islands -- Extent of
Owhyhee, which is the largest of the whole Group -- Account of its Districts --
Its Coasts and the adjacent Country, described -- Snowy Mountains -- Volcanic
Appearances -- Account of a Journey into the interior Parts of Owhyhee
Plantations -- Account of a Hermit -- The Country cultivated to the greatest
Advantage -- A remarkable Cave -- Description of Mowee -- Ranai -- Morotoi --
Tahoorowa -- Woahoo -- Atooi -- Oneeheow -- Ore^houa -- Tahoora -- Climate of
the Sandwich Isles -- Winds -- Currents -- Tides -- Quadrupeds -- Amazing
Supply of Pork procured by us -- Birds -- Vegetables.

BEING now on the point of taking our final leave of the Sandwich Islands, we
shall here give a general account of their situation and natural history, as
well as of the customs and manners of the natives. This will serve as a kind of
supplement to the former description, which was the result of our first visit
to these islands.

This group is composed of eleven Islands, extending in longitude from 190 36
to 205 6, east, and in latitude from 18 54, to 22 15 north. Their names,
according to the natives, are, 1. Owhyhee. 2. Atooi, Atowi, or Towi; which is
also some times called Kowi. 3. Woahoo, or Oahoo. 4. Mowee. 5. Morotoi, or
Morokoi. 6. Oreehoua, or Reehoua. 7. Morotinnee, or Morokinnee. 8. Tahoora. 9.
Ranai, or Oranai. 10. Oneeheow, or Neeheehow. 11. Kahowrowee, or Tahoorowa.
These are all inhabited except Tahoora and Morotinnee. Besides those we have
enumerated, we heard of another island named Modoo-papapa, or Komodoo-papapa,
situated to the west-south-west of Tahoora: it is low and sandy, and is visited
solely for the purpose of catching turtle and waterfowl. As we could never
learn that the natives had knowledge of any other islands, it is most probable
that no others exist in their neighborhood.

Captain Cook had distinguished this cluster of islands by the name of the
Sandwich Islands, in honor of the Earl of Sandwich, then first Lord of the
Admiralty, under whose administration he had enriched Geography with so many
valuable discoveries; a tribute justly due to that nobleman, for the
encouragement and support which these voyages derive from his power, and for
the zealous eagerness with which he seconded the views of our illustrious
navigator.

Owhyhee, the most easterly of these islands, and by far the largest of them
all, is of a triangular figure, and nearly equilaterial. The angular points
constitute the northern, southern, and eastern extremities. The latitude of the
northern extreme is 20 17 north, and its longitude 204 2 east: the southern end
stands in the longitude of 204 15 east, and in the latitude of 18 54 north; and
the eastern extremity is in the latitude of 19 34 north, and in the longitude
of 205 6 east. The circumference of the whole island is about 255 geographical
miles, or 293 English ones. Its breadth is twenty-four leagues; and its
greatest length, which lies nearly in a north and south direction, is
twenty-eight leagues and a half. It is divided into six extensive districts,
namely, Akona and Koaara, which are on the west side; Kaoo and Opoona, on the
south-east; and Aheedoo and Amakooa, on the north-east.

A mountain named Mouna Kaah, (or the mountain Kaah) which rises in three
peaks, continually covered with snow, and may be discerned at the distance of
forty leagues, separates the district of Amakooa from that of Aheedoo. The
coast, to the northward of this mountain, is composed of high and abrupt
cliffs, down which fall many beautiful cascades of water. We once flattered
ourselves with the hopes of finding a harbor round a bluff head, on a part of
this coast, in the latitude of 20 10 north, and the longitude of 204 26 east;
but after we had doubled the point, and were standing close in, we found that
it was connected, by a low valley, with another elevated head to the
north-westward. The country rises inland with a gradual ascent, and is
intersected by narrow deep glens, or rather chasms; it seemed to be well
cultivated, and to have many villages scattered about it. The snowy mountain
abovementioned is very steep, and its lowest part abounds with wood.

The coast of Aoeedoo is of a moderate elevation; and the interior parts have
the appearance of being more even than the country toward the north-west. We
cruised off these two districts for near a month; and, whenever our distance
from the shore would permit, were surrounded by canoes laden with refreshments
of every kind. On this side of the island we often met with a very heavy sea,
and a great swell; and, as there was much foul ground off the shore, we seldom
made a nearer approach to the land than two or three leagues.

The coast toward the north-east of Apoona, which constitutes the eastern
extreme of the island, is rather low and flat. In the inland parts the
acclivity is very gradual; and the country abounds with bread-fruit and
cocoa-nut trees. This appeared to us to be the finest part of the whole island;
and we were afterward informed, that the king occasionally resided here. The
hills, at the south-western extremity, rise with some abruptness from the
seaside, leaving only a narrow border of low land toward the beach. The sides
of these hills were covered with verdure; but the adjacent country seemed
thinly inhabited.

When our ships doubled the east point of the island, we had sight of another
snowy mountain, called by the natives Mouna Roa (or the extensive mountain)
which, during the whole time we were sailing along the south-eastern side,
continued to be a very conspicuous object. It was flat at the summit, which was
perpetually involved in snow; and we once observed its sides also slightly
covered with it for a considerable way down. According to the tropical line of
snow, as determined by Monsieur Condamine, from observations made on the
Cordilleras in America, the height of this mountain must be, at least, 16,020
feet. It therefore exceeds the height of the Pico de Teyde, or Peak of
Teneriffe, by 3680 feet, according to the computation of the Chevalier de
Borda, or 724, according to that of Dr. Heberden. The peaks of Mouna Kaah
seemed to be of the heigh^ of about half a mile; and, as they are wholly
covered with snow, the altitude of their summits must at least be 18,400 feet.

The coast of Kaoo exhibits a most horrid and dismal prospect; the whole
country having, to appearance, undergone an entire change from the consequences
of some dreadful convulsion. The ground is, in all parts, covered with cinders;
and, in many places, intersected with blackish streaks, which seem to mark the
progress of a lava that has flowed, not many centuries ago, from Mouna Roa to
the shore. The south promontory appears like the mere dregs of a volcano. The
head-land consists of broken and craggy rocks, terminating in acute points, and
irregularly piled on each other. Notwithstanding the dreary aspect of this part
of the island, it contains many villages, and is far more populous than the
verdant mountains of Apoona. Nor is it difficult to account for this
circumstance. These islanders not being possessed of any cattle, have no
occasion for pasturage; and are therefore inclined to prefer such ground, as is
either more conveniently situated for fishing, or best adapted to the
cultivation of plantains and yams. Now amidst these ruins, there are many spots
of rich soil, which are, with great care, laid out in plantations; and the
neighboring sea abounds with excellent fish of various kinds.

Off this part of the coast, at less than a cable's length from the shore, we
did not strike ground with one hundred and sixty fathoms of line, except in a
small bight to the east of the southern point, where we found from fifty to
fifty-eight fathoms of water, over a sandy bottom. It may be proper to observe,
before we proceed to give an account of the western districts, that the whole
coast we have described from the northern to the southern extreme, affords not
a single harbor, nor the least shelter for shipping.

The south-western parts of Akona are in a condition similar to that of the
adjoining district of Kaoo; but the country, further toward the north, has
been carefully cultivated, and is exceedingly populous. In this division of the
island, lies Karakakooa Bay, of which we have already given a description.
Scarce any thing is seen along the coast, but the fragments of black scorched
rocks; behind which, the ground, for the space of about two miles and a half,
rises gradually, and seems to have been once covered with loose burnt stones.
These have been cleared away by the inhabitants, frequently to the depth of
three feet and upwards; and the fertility of the soil has amply repaired their
labor. Here they cultivate in a rich ashy mould, the cloth-plant and sweet
potatoes. Groves of cocoa-nut-trees are scattered among the fields, which are
enclosed with stone fences. On the rising ground beyond these, they plant
bread-fruit trees, which flourish with surprising luxuriance.

The district of Koaarra extends from the most westerly point to the northern
extreme of the island. The whole coast between them forms a spacious bay, which
is called by the natives Toe-yah-yah, and is bounded to the northward by two
conspicuous hills. Toward the bottom of this bay there is foul corally ground,
that extends to the distance of upwards of a mile fron the shore, without which
there is good anchorage. The country, as far as the eye could discern, appeared
to be fruitful and populous; but no fresh water was to be found. The soil
seemed to be of the same kind with that of the district of Kaoo.

Having thus given an account of the coasts of the Island of Owhyhee, and the
adjacent country, we shall now relate some particulars respecting the interior
parts, from the information we obtained from a party, who set out on the 26th
of January, on an expedition up the country, principally with an intention of
reaching the snowy mountains. Having previously procured two of the islanders
to serve them as guides, they quitted the village about four o'clock in the
afternoon. Their course was easterly, inclining a little to the south. Within
three or four miles from the bay, they found the country as already described;
but the hills afterward rose with a less gradual ascent, which brought them to
some extensive plantations, consisting of the taro or eddy root, and sweet
potatoes, with plants of the cloth-tree. Both the taro and the sweet potatoes
are here planted at the distance of four feet from each other. The potatoes are
earthed up almost to the top of the stalk, with a proper quantity of light
mould. The taro is left bare to the root, and the mould round it is put in the
form of a basin, for the purpose of holding the rainwater; this root requiring
a certain degree of moisture. At the Friendly and Society Isles, the taro was
constantly planted in low and moist situations, and generally in those places
where there was the convenience of a rivulet to flood it. This mode of culture
was considered as absolutely necessary; but we now found that this root, with
the precaution beforementioned, succeeds equally well in a more dry situation.
It was indeed, remarked by all of us, that the taro of the Sandwich Islands was
the best we had ever tasted.

The walls, by which these plantations are separated from each other, are
composed of the loose burnt stones, which are met with in clearing the ground;
and, being totally concealed by sugarcanes, that are planted close on each
side, form the most beautiful fences that can be imagined.

Our party stopped for the night at the second hut they observed among the
plantations, where they supposed themselves to be six or seven miles distant
from our ships. The prospect from this spot was described by them as very
delightful: they had a view of our vessels in the bay before them; to the left
they saw a continued range of villages, interspersed with groves of
cocoa-nut-trees, spreading along the shore; a thick wood extending itself
behind them; and, to the right, a very considerable extent of ground, laid out
with great regularity in well-cultivated plantations, displayed itself to their
view. Near this spot the natives pointed out to them, at a distance from every
other dwelling, the residence of a hermit, who, they said, had, in the former
part of his life, been a great chief and warrior, but had long ago retired from
the seacoast of the island, and now never quitted the environs of his cottage.
As they approached him, they prostrated themselves, and afterward presented
him with some provisions. His behavior was easy, frank and cheerful. He
testified little astonishment at the sight of our people, and though pressed to
accept of some European curiosities, he thought proper to decline the offer,
and soon withdrew to his cottage. Our party represented him as the most aged
person they had ever seen, judging him to be, at a moderate computation,
upwards of a hundred years of age.

As our people had supposed that the mountain was not more than ten or a dozen
miles distant from the bay, and consequently expected to reach it with ease
early the following morning, they were now greatly surprised to find the
distance scarce perceivably diminished. This circumstance, with the uninhabited
state of the country, which they were on the point of entering, rendering it
necessary to provide a supply of provisions, they dispatched one of their
conductors back to the village for that purpose. Whilst they waited his return,
they were joined by several of Kaoo's servants, whom that generous old man had
sent after them, loaded with refreshments, and fully authorized, as their route
lay through his grounds, to demand, and take away with them whatever they might
want.

Great was the surprise of our travelers, on finding the cold here so intense.
But, as they had no thermometer with them, they could only form their judgment
of it from their feelings; which, from the warm atmosphere they had quitted
must have been a very fallacious method of judging. They found it, however, so
cold, that they could scarce get any sleep, and the islanders could not sleep
at all; both parties being disturbed during the whole night, by continual
coughing, As they, at this time, could not be at any very great height, their
distance from the sea being no more than six or seven miles, and part of the
road on a very moderate ascent, this uncommon degree of cold must be attributed
to the easterly wind blowing fresh over the snowy mountains.

They proceeded on their journey early the next morning, and filled their
calibashes at a well of excellent water, situate about half a mile from their
hut. After they had passed the plantations, they arrived at a thick wood which
they entered by a path that had been made for the convenience of the islanders,
who frequently repair thither for the purpose of catching birds, as well as
procuring the wild or horse-plantain. Their progress now became extremely slow,
and was attended with great labor; for the ground was either swampy, or
covered with large stones; the path narrow, and often interrupted by trees
lying across it, which they were obliged to climb over as the thickness of the
underwood, on each side, rendered it impracticable to pass round them. They
saw, in these woods, pieces of white cloth fixed on poles, at small distances,
which they imagined were landmarks for the division of property, as they only
observed them where the wild plantains grew. The trees were of the same kind
with the spice-tree of New Holland; they were straight and lofty, and their
circumference was from two to four feet.

Our party having advanced nine or ten miles in the wood, had the mortification
of finding themselves, suddenly, within sight of the sea, and not very far from
it; the path having turned off imperceptibly to the south, and carried them to
the right of the mountain, which it was their intention to reach. Their
disappointment was considerably heightened by the uncertainty under which they
now were with respect to its true bearings, as they could not, at present, gain
a view of it from the top of the highest trees. They, therefore, thought proper
to walk back six or seven miles to an unoccupied hut, where they had left two
of their own people, and three of the natives, with the small remnant of their
provisions. Here they passed the second night, during which the air was so
extremely sharp, that, by the morning, their guides were all gone off except
one.

Being now in want of provisions, which laid them under the necessity of
returning to some of the cultivated parts of the island, they left the wood by
the same path by which they had entered it. When they arrived at the
plantations, they were surrounded by the islanders, from whom they purchased a
fresh supply of necessaries; and prevailed upon two of them to accompany them
as guides, in the room of those who had gone away. Having procured the best
information they could possibly obtain, with regard to the direction of their
road, the party, who were now nine in number, marched for about half a dozen
miles along the skirts of the wood, and then entered it again by a path leading
toward the east. They passed, for the first three miles, through a forest of
lofty spice-trees, which grew on a rich loam. At the back of these trees they
met with an equal extent of low shrubby trees, together with a considerable
quantity of thick under-wood, upon a bottom of loose burnt stones. This led
them to another forest of spice-trees, and the same rich brownish soil, which
was again succeeded by a barren ridge of a similar kind with the former. These
ridges, as far as they could be seen, appeared to run parallel with the
seashore, and to have Mouna Roa for their center.

As they passed through the woods they found many unfinished canoes, and huts
in several places; but they saw none of the inhabitants. After they had
penetrated almost three miles into the second wood, they arrived at two, huts,
where they stopped, being greatly fatigued with the days journey, in the course
of which they had walked, according to their own computation, at least twenty
miles. Having found no springs from the time they quitted the plantations, they
had greatly suffered from the violence of their thirst; in consequence of which
they were obliged, before the evening came on, to separate into small parties,
and go in quest of water. They, at last, met with some that had been left by
rain in the bottom of a half-finished canoe; which, though of a reddish color,
was by no means unwelcome to them.

During the night, the cold was more intense than before; and though they had
taken care to wrap themselves up in mats and cloths of the country, and to keep
a large fire between the two huts, they could get but very little sleep, and
were under the necessity of walking about for the greatest part of the night.
Their elevation was now, in all probability, pretty considerable, as the
ground, over which their journey lay, had been generally on the ascent.

The next morning, which was the 29th, they set out early, with an intention of
making their last and greatest effort to reach the snowy mountain; but their
spirits were considerably depressed, on finding that the miserable pittance of
water, which they had discovered the preceding night, was expended. The path,
which reached no farther than where canoes had been built, being now
terminated, they were obliged to make their way as well as they could;
frequently climbing up the most lofty trees, to explore the surrounding
country. They arrived, about eleven o'clock, at a ridge of burnt stones, from
the top of which they had a prospect of the Mouna Roa, which then appeared to
be at a distance of between twelve and fourteen miles from them.

They now entered into a consultation, whether they should proceed any further,
or rest contented with the view they now had of the snowy mountain. Since the
path had ceased, their road had become highly fatiguing, and was growing still
more so, every step they advanced. The ground was almost every where broken
into deep fissures, which, being slightly covered with moss, made them stumble
almost continually; and the intervening space consisted of a surface of loose
burnt stones, which broke under their feet. Into some of these fissures they
threw stones, which seemed from the noise they made, to fall to a considerable
depth; and the ground sounded hollow as they walked upon it. Besides these
circumstances, which discouraged them from proceeding, they found their
conductors so averse to going on, that they had reason to think they would not
be prevailed on to remain out another night. They, therefore, at length came to
a determination of returning to the ships, after taking a survey of the country
from the highest trees they could find. From this elevation, they perceived
themselves surrounded with wood toward the sea; they were unable to
distinguish, in the horizon, the sky from the water; and betwixt them and the
snowy mountain, was a valley of about eight miles in breadth.

The travelers passed this night at a hut in the second forest; and the
following day before noon, they had passed the first wood, and found themselves
nine or ten miles to the north-east of the ships, toward which they marched
through the plantations. As they walked along, they did not observe a spot of
ground, that was susceptible of improvement, left unplanted; and, indeed, the
country, from their account, could scarcely be cultivated to greater advantage
for the purposes of the natives.

They were surprised at seeing several fields of hay; and upon their enquiry,
to what particular use it was applied, they were informed, that it was intended
to cover the ground where the young taro grew, in order to preserve them from
being scorched by the rays of the sun. They observed among the plantations, a
few huts scattered about, which afforded occasional shelter to the laborers:
but they did not see any villages at a greater distance from the sea than four
or five miles. Near one of them, which was situated about four miles from the
bay, they discovered a cave, forty fathoms in length, three in breadth, and of
the same height. It was open at each end; its sides were fluted, as if wrought
with a chissel; and the surface was glazed over, perhaps by the action of fire.

Having thus related the principal circumstances that occurred in the
expedition to the snowy mountain at Owhyhee, we shall now proceed to describe
the other islands of this groupe.

That which is next in size, and nearest in situation to Owhyhee, is Mowee. It
stands at the distance of eight leagues north-north-west from Owhyhee, and is
one hundred and forty geographical miles in circuit. It is divided by a low
isthmus into two circular peninsulas, of which that to the eastward is named
Whamadooa, and is twice as large as that to the west, called Owhyrookoo. The
mountains in both rise to a very great height, as we were able to see them at
the distance of above thirty leagues. The northern shores, like those of the
isle of Owhyhee, afford no soundings; and the country bears the same aspect of
fertility and verdure. The east point of Mowee is in the latitude of 20 50
north, and in the longitude of 204 4 east.

To the southward, between Mowee and the adjacent islands, we found regular
depths with one hundred and fifty fathoms over a bottom of sand. From the
western point, which is rather low, runs a shoal, extending toward the island
of Ranai, to a considerable distance; and to the south of this, is an extensive
bay, with a sandy beach, shaded with cocoa-trees. It is not improbable, that
good anchorage might be met with here, with shelter from the prevailing winds;
and that the beach affords a commodious landing-place. The country further back
is very romantic in its appearance. The hills rise almost perpendicularly,
exhibiting a variety of peaked forms; and their steep sides, as well as the
deep chasms between them, are covered with trees, among which those of the
bread-fruit principally abound. The summits of these hills are perfectly bare,
and of a reddish brown hue. The natives informed us, that there was a harbor
to the south of the eastern point, which they asserted was superior to that of
Karakakooa; and we also heard that there was another harbor, named
Keepoo-keepoo, on the north-western side.

Ranai is about nine miles distant from Mowee and Morotoi, and is situate to
the south-west of the passage between those two isles. The country, toward the
south, is elevated and craggy; but the other parts of the island had a better
appearance, and seemed to be well inhabited. It abounds in roots, such as sweet
potatoes, taro, and yams; but produces very few plantains and bread
fruit trees. The south point of Ranai is in the latitude of 20 46 north, and in
the longitude of 203 8 east.

Morotoi lies at the distance of two leagues and a half to the west-north-west
of Mowee. Its south-western coast, which was the only part of it we approached,
is very low; but the land behind rises to a considerable elevation; and, at the
distance from which we had a view of it, appeared to be destitute of wood. Yams
are its principal produce; and it may probably contain fresh water. The coast,
on the southern and western sides of the island, forms several bays that
promise a tolerable shelter from the trade winds. The west point of Morotoi is
in the longitude of 202 46 east, and in the latitude of 21 10 north.

Tahoorowa is a small island situated off the south-western part of Mowee, from
which it is nine miles distant. It is destitute of wood, and its soil seems to
be sandy and unfertile. Its latitude is 20 38 north, and its longitude 203 27
east. Between it and Mowee stands the little island of Morrotinnee, which has
no inhabitants.

Woahoo lies about seven leagues to the north-west of Morotoi. As far as we
were enabled to judge, from the appearance of the north-western and
north-eastern parts (for we had not an opportunity of seeing the southern side)
it is by far the finest of all the Sandwich Islands. The verdure of the hills,
the variety of wood and lawn, and fertile well-cultivated valleys, which the
whole face of the country presented to view, could not be exceeded. Having
already described the bay in which we anchored, formed by the northern and
western extremes, it remains for us to observe, that, in the bight of the bay,
to the southward of our anchoring-place, we met with foul rocky ground, about
two miles from the shore. If the ground ^ackling of a ship should happen to be
weak, and the wind blow with violence from the north, to which quarter the road
is entirely open, this circumstance might be attended with some degree of
danger: but, provided the cables were good, there would be no great hazard, as
the ground from the anchoring-place, which is opposite the valley through which
the river runs, to the northern point, consists of a fine sand. The latitude of
our anchoring-place is 21 43 north, and the longitude 202 9 east.

Atooi is about twenty-five leagues to the north-west of Woahoo. Toward the
north-east and north-west, the face of the country is ragged and broken; but,
to the southward, it is more even; the hills rise from the seaside with a
gentle acclivity, and, at a little distance back, are covered with wood. Its
produce is the same with that of the other islands of this cluster; but its
inhabitants greatly excel the people of all the neighboring islands in the
management of their plantations. In the low grounds, contiguous to the bay
wherein we anchored, these plantations were regularly divided by deep ditches;
the fences were formed with a neatness approaching to elegance, and the roads
through them were finished in such a manner, as would have reflected credit
even on an European engineer. The longitude of Wymoa Bay, in this island, is
200 20 east, and its latitude 21 57 north.

Oneeheow is five or six leagues to the westward of Atooi. Its eastern coast is
high, and rises with abruptness from the sea; but the other parts of the island
consist of low ground, except a round bluff head on the south-eastern point. It
produces plenty of yams, and of the sweet root calle^ ^ee. The anchoring-place
at this island lies in the latitude of 21 50 north, and in the longitu^^ of 129
45 east.

Oreehoua and Tahoora are two little islands, situate in the neighborhood of
Oneeheow. The former an elevated hummock, connected with the northern extreme
of Oneeheow, by a reef of coral rocks. Its latitude is 22 2 north, and its
longitude 199 52 east. The latter stands to the south-east, and is uninhabited:
its longitude is 199 36 east, and its latitude 21 43 north.

The climate of the Sandwich Isles is, perhaps, rather more temperate than that
of the West India islands, which are in the same latitude; but the difference
is very inconsiderable. The thermometer, on shore near Karakakooa Bay, never
rose to a greater height than 88, and that but one day: its mean height, at
twelve o'clock, was 83. Its mean height at noon, in Wymoa Bay, was 76, and,
when out at sea, 75. In the island of Jamaica, the mean height of the
thermometer, at twelve o'clock, is about 86; at sea 80.

Whether these islands are subject to the same violent winds and hurricanes
with the West Indies, we could not ascertain, as we were not here during any of
the tempestuous months. However, as no vestiges of their effects were any where
to be seen, and as the islanders gave us no positive testimony of the fact, it
is probable, that in this particular, they resemble the Friendly and Society
Isles, which are, in a great degree, free from such tremendous visitations.

There was a greater quantity of rain, particularly in the interior parts,
during the four winter months that we continued among the islanders, than
commonly falls in the West Indies in the dry season. We generally observed
clouds collecting round the summits of the hills, and producing rain to
leeward; but, after the wind has separated them from the land, they disperse,
and are lost, and others supply their place. This occurred daily at Owhyhee;
the mountainous parts being usually enveloped in a cloud; showers successively
falling in the inland country; with a clear sky, and fine weather, in the
neighborhood of the shore.

The winds were, for the most part, from east-south-east to north-east. In the
harbor of Karakakooa we had every day and night a sea and land breeze. The
currents sometimes set to windward, and at other times to leeward, without the
least regularity. They did not seem to be directed by the winds, nor by any
other cause that we can assign: they often set to windward against a fresh
breeze.

The tides are exceedingly regular, ebbing and flowing six hours each. The
flood-tide comes from the east, and, at the full and change of the moon, it is
high water at three quarters of an hour after three o'clock. Their greatest
rise is two feet seven inches.

With respect to the quadrupeds of these islands they are confined to three
sorts, namely, hogs, dogs, and rats. The dogs are of the same species with
those we saw at Otaheite, having pricked ears, long backs, and short crooked
legs. We did not observe any variety in them, except in their skins; some being
perfectly smooth, and others having long rough hair. They are about as large as
a common turnspit, and seem to be extremely sluggish in their nature; though
this may, probably, be more owing to the manner in which they are treated, than
to their natural disposition. They are generally fed with the hogs, and left to
herd with those animals; and we do not recollect a single instance of a dog
being made a companion here, as is the custom in Europe. Indeed, the practice
of eating them seems to be an insuperable bar to their being admitted into
society; and as there are no beasts of prey, nor objects of chase, in these
islands, the social qualities of the dog, its attachment, fidelity, and
sagacity, will, in all probability, remain unknown to the natives.

It did not appear that the dogs in the Sandwich islands were near so numerous,
in proportion as at Otaheite. But, on the other hand, they have a much greater
plenty of hogs, and the breed is of a larger kind. We procured from them an
amazing supply of provisions of this sort. We were upwards of three months,
either cruising off the coast, or in harbor at Owhyhee; during all which time
the crews of both ships had constantly a large allowance of fresh pork,
insomuch that our consumption of that article was computed at about sixty
puncheons of five hundred weight each. Besides this quantity, and the
extraordinary waste, which, amidst such abundance, could not be entirely
prevented, sixty more puncheons were salted for sea store. The greater part of
this supply was drawn from the isle of Owhyhee alone; and yet we did not
perceive that it was at all exhausted, or even that the plenty had decreased.

The birds of these islands are numerous, though the variety is not great. Some
of them may vie with those of any country in point of beauty. There are four
species that seem to belong to the trochili, or honey-suckers of Linnaeus. One
of them is somewhat larger than a bullfinch; its color is a glossy black, and
the thighs and rumpvent are of a deep yellow. The natives call it hoohoo.
Another is of a very bright scarlet; its wings are black, with a white edge,
and its tail is black. It is named eeeeve by the inhabitants. The third is
variegated with brown, yellow, and red, and seems to be either a young bird, or
a variety of the preceding. The fourth is entirely green, with yellow tinge,
and is called akaiearooa. There is also a small bird of the fly-catcher kind; a
species of thrush, with a greyish breast; and a rail, with very short wings,
and no tail. Ravens are met with here, but they are extremely scarce; they are
of a dark brown color, inclining to black, and their note is different from
that of the European raven.

We found here two small birds, that were very common, and both of which were
of one genus. One of these was red, and was usually observed about the
cocoa-trees, from whence it seemed to derive a considerable part of its
subsistence. The other was of a green color. Both had long tongues, which were
ciliated, or fringed at the tip. A bird with a yellow head was likewise very
commom here: from the structure of its beak, our people called it a prrroquet:
it, however, does not belong to that tribe, but bears a great resemblance to
the lexia flavicans, or yellowish cross bill of Linnaeus. Here are also owls,
curlews, petrels, and gannets; plovers of two species, one nearly the same as
our whistling plover; a large white pigeon; the common water-hen; and a long
tailed bird, which is of a black color, and the vent and feathers under the
wings yellow.

The vegetable produce of the Sandwich Isles is not very different from that of
the other islands of the Pacific Ocean. We have already observed that the taro
root, as here cultivated, was superior to any we had before tasted. The
bread-fruit-trees thrive here, not indeed in such abundance as at Otaheite, but
they produce twice as much fruit as they do on the rich plains of that island.
The trees are nearly of the same height; but the branches shoot out from the
trunk considerably lower, and with greater luxuriance of vegetation. The
sugarcanes of these islands grow to an extraordinary size. One of them was
brought to us at Atooi, whose circumference was eleven inches and a quarter;
and it had fourteen feet eatable. At Oneeheow we saw some large brown roots,
from six to ten pounds in weight, resembling a yam in shape. The juice, of
which they yield a great quantity, is very sweet, and is an excellent
succedaneum for sugar. The natives are exceedingly fond of it, and make use of
it as an article of their common diet; and our people likewise found it very
palatable and wholesome. Not being able to procure the leaves of this
vegetable, we could not ascertain to what species of plant it belonged; but we
supposed it to be the root of some kind of fern.

CHAP. VII.
General Account of the Sandwich Isles continued -- Origin of the Natives --
Their Persons described -- Instances of Deformity -- Pernicious Consequences
arising from the immoderate Use of the Ava -- Population of these Islands --
Disposition and Manners of the Inhabitants -- Restraints imposed on their Women
-- Their Ingenuity and Docility -- Mr. King's Reasons for supposing that they
are not Cannibals at present -- Methods of wearing their Hair -- Various
Ornaments -- Dress of the Men -- Feathered Cloaks and Helmets -- Dress of the
Women -- A beautiful Kind of Ruff described -- Other Ornaments -- Villages --
Houses -- Food -- Occupations -- Diversions -- Their Fondness for Gaming --
Astonishing Dexterity in Swimming -- Canoes -- Arts and Manufactures -- Mode of
painting Cloth -- Beauty of their Mats -- Their Fishing-Hooks -- Cordage --
Various Uses of Gourd-Shells -- Salt-Pans -- Weapons.

THE natives of the Sandwich Isles are doubtless of the same extraction with
the inhabitants of the Friendly and Society Islands, of New-Zealand, the
Marquesas, and Easter Island; a race which possesses all the known lands
between the longitudes of 157 and 260 east, and between the latitudes of 47
south, and 22 north. This fact, extraordinary as it is, is not only evinced by
the general resemblance of their persons, and the great similarity of their
manners and customs, but seems to be established, beyond all controversy, by
the identity of their language. It may not, perhaps, be very difficult to
conjecture, from what continent they originally emigrated, and by what steps
they have diffused themselves over so immense a space. They bear strong marks
of affinity to some of the Indian tribes, which inhabit the Landrones and
Caroline Isles; and the same affinity and resemblance, may also be traced among
the Malays and the Battas. At what particular time these migrations happened is
less easy to ascertain; the period, in all probability, was not very late, as
they are very populous, and have no tradition respecting their own origin, but
what is wholly fabulous; though, on the other hand, the simplicity which is
still prevalent in their manners and habits of life, and the unadulterated
state of their general language, seem to demonstrate, that it could not have
been at any very remote period.

The Sandwich Islanders, in general, exceed the middle size, and are well made.
They walk in a very graceful manner, run with considerable agility, and are
capable of enduring a great degree of fatigue* but, upon the whole, the men are
inferior, with respect to activity and strength, to the inhabitants of the
Friendly Islands, and the women are less delicate in the formation of their
limbs than the Otaheitean females. Their complexion is somewhat darker than
that of the Otaheiteans; and they are not altogether so handsome in their
persons as the natives of the Society Isles. Many of both sexes, however, had
fine open countenances The annexed representation of a man of the Sandwich
Isles, was taken from a portrait of our friend Kaneena.
; and the women, in particular, had white well set teeth, good eyes, and an
engaging sweetness and sensibility of look.

The hair of these people is of a brownish black, neither uniformly curling
like that of the African negroes, nor uniformly straight, as among the Indians
of America; but varying, in this respect, like the hair of Europeans. There is
one striking peculiarity in the features of every part of this great nation;
which is, that, even in the most handsome faces, there is always observable, a
fullness of the nostril, without any flatness or spreading of the nose, that
distinguishes them from the inhabitants of Europe. It is not wholly improbable,
that this may be the effect of their customary method of salutation, which is
performed by pressing together the extremities of their noses.

The same superiority that we generally observed at other islands in the
persons of the Erees, is likewise found here. Those that were seen by us were
perfectly well formed; whereas the lower class of people, besides their general
inferiority, are subject to all the variety of figure and make, that is met
with in the populace of other parts of the world.

There are more frequent instances of deformity here, than in any of the other
islands we visited. While we were cruising off Owhyhee, two dwarfs came on
board; one of whom was an old man, of the height of four feet two inches, but
very well proportioned; and the other was a woman, nearly of the same stature.
We afterward saw, among the natives, three who were humpbacked, and a young
man who had been destitute of hands and feet, from the very moment of his
birth. Squinting is also common among them; and a man, who, they told us, had
been born blind, was brought to us for the purpose of being cured. Besides
these particular defects, they are, in general, extremely subject to boils and
ulcers, which some of us ascribed to the great quantity of salt they usually
eat with their fish and flesh. Though the Erees are free from these complaints,
many of them experience still more dreadful effects from the too frequent use
of the ava. Those who were the most affected by it, had their eyes red and
iflamed, their limbs emaciated, their bodies covered with a whitish scurf, and
their whole frame trembling and paralytic, attended with a disability of
raising their heads.

Though it does not appear that this drug universally shortens life, (for
Terreeoboo, Kaoo, and several other chiefs, were far advanced in years) yet it
invariably brings on a premature and decrepid old age. It is a fortunate
circumstance for the people, that the use of it is made a peculiar privilege of
the chiefs. The young son of Terreeoboo, who did not exceed twelve or thirteen
years of age, frequently boasted of his being admitted to drink ava; and showed
us, with marks of exultation, a small spot in his side that was beginning to
grow scaly.

When Captain Cook first visited the Society Isles, this pernicious drug was
very little known among them. In his second voyage, he found it greatly in
vogue at Ulietea; but it had still gained little ground at Otaheite. During the
last time we were there, the havoc it had made was almost incredible, insomuch
that Captain Cook scarce recognized many of his former acquaintances. It is
also constantly drank by the chiefs of the Friendly Isles, but so much diluted
with water, that it scarcely produces any bad consequences. At Atooi, likewise,
it is used with great moderation; and the chiefs of that island are, on this
account, a much finer set of men than those of the neighboring islands. It was
remarked by us, that, upon discontinuing the use of this root, its noxious
effects quickly wore off. We prevailed upon our friends Kaoo and Kaireekeea, to
abstain from it; and they recovered surprisingly during the short time we
afterward remained among them.

To form any probable conjectures with regard to the population of islands,
with many parts of which we have but an imperfect acquaintance, may be thought
highly difficult. There are two circumstances, however, which remove much of
this objection. One is, that the interior parts of the country are almost
entirely uninhabited: if, therefore, the number of those who inhabit the parts
adjoining to the coast, be ascertained, the whole will be determined with some
degree of accuracy. The other circumstance is, that there are no towns of any
considerable extent, the houses of the islanders being pretty equally scattered
in small villages round all their coasts. On these grounds we shall venture at
a rough calculation of the number of persons in this cluster of islands.

Karakakooa bay, in Owhyhee, is about three miles in extent, and comprehends
four villages of about eighty houses each, upon an average, in all three
hundred and twenty; besides many straggling habitations, which may make the
whole amount to three hundred and fifty. If we allow six people to each house,
the country about the bay will then contain two thousand one hundred persons.
To these we may add fifty families, or three hundred souls, which we imagine to
be nearly the number employed among the plantations in the interior parts of
the island; making, in all, two thousand four hundred. If this number be
applied to the whole coast round the island, a quarter being deducted for the
uninhabited parts, it will be found to contain a hundred and fifty thousand
persons. The other Sandwich Islands, by the same method of calculation, will
appear to contain the following number of inhabitants: Mowee, sixty-five
thousand four hundred; Atooi, fifty-four thousand; Morotoi, thirty-six
thousand; Woahoo, sixty thousand two hundred; Ranai, twenty thousand four
hundred; Oneeheow, ten thousand; and Oreehoua, four thousand. These numbers,
including the hundred and fifty thousand in Owhyhee, will amount to four
hundred thousand: In this computation we have by no means exceeded the truth in
the total amount.

It must be acknowledged, notwithstanding the great loss we sustained from the
sudden resentment and violence of these islanders, that they are of a very mild
and affectionate disposition, equally remote from the distant gravity and
reserve of the natives of the Friendly Isles, and the extreme volatility of the
Otaheiteans. They seem to live in the greatest friendship and harmony with each
other. Those women who had children, showed a remarkable affection for them,
and paid them a particular and constant attention; and the men, with a
willingness that did honor to their feelings, frequently afforded their
assistance in those domestic employments. We must, however, remark, that they
are greatly inferior to the inhabitants of the other islands, in that best
criterion of civilized manners, the respect paid to the female sex. Here the
women are not only deprived of the privilege of eating with the men, but are
forbidden to feed on the best sorts of provisions. Turtle, pork, several kinds
of fish, and some species of plantains, are denied them; and we were informed,
that a girl received a violent beating, for having eaten, while she was on
board one of our ships, a prohibited article of food. With regard to their
domestic life, they seem to live almost wholly by themselves, and meet with
little attention from the men, though no instances of personal ill-treatment
were observed by us.

We have already had occasion to mention the great kindness and hospitality,
with which they treated us. Whenever we went ashore, there was a continual
struggle who should be most forward in offering little presents for our
acceptance, bringing provisions and refreshments, or testifying some other mark
of respect. The aged persons constantly received us with tears of joy, appeared
to be highly gratified with being permitted to touch us, and were frequently
drawing comparisons between us and themselves, with marks of extreme humility.
The young women, likewise, were exceedingly kind and engaging, and attached
themselves to us, without reserve, till they perceived, notwithstanding all our
endeavors to prevent it, that they had cause to repent of our acquaintance. It
must, however, be observed, that these females were, in all probability of the
inferior class; for we saw very few women of rank during our continuance here.

These people, in point of natural capacity, are, by no means below the common
standard of the human race. The excellence of their manufactures, and their
improvements in agriculture, are doubtless adequate to their situation and
natural advantages. The eagerness of curiosity, with which they used to attend
the armourer's forge, and the various expedients which they had invented, even
before our departure from these islands, for working the iron obtained from us,
into such forms as were best calculated for their purposes, were strong
indications of docility and ingenuity. Our unhappy friend, Kaneena, was endowed
with a remarkable quickness of conception, and a great degree of judicious
curiosity. He was extremely inquisitive with respect to our manners and
customs. He enquired after our sovereign; the form of our government; the mode
of constructing our ships; the productions of our country; our numbers; our
method of building houses; whether we waged any wars; with whom, on what
occasion, and in what particular manner they were carried on; who was our
Deity; besides many other questions of a similar import, which seemed to
indicate a comprehensive understanding. We observed two instances of persons
disordered in their senses; the one a woman at Oneeheow, the other a man at
Owhyhee. From the extraordinary respect and attention paid to them, it
appeared, that the opinion of their being divinely inspired, which prevails
among most of the oriental nations, is also countenanced here.

It is highly probable, that the practice of feeding on the bodies of enemies
was originally prevalent in all the islands of the Pacific Ocean, though it is
not known by positive and decisive evidence, to exist in any of them, except
New-Zealand. The offering up human victims, which is manifestly a relic of
this barbarous custom, still universally prevails among these islanders; and it
is not difficult to conceive why the inhabitants of New-Zealand should retain
the repast, which was, perhaps, the concluding part of these horrid rites, for
a longer period than the rest of their tribe who were situated in more fertile
regions. As the Sandwich islanders, both in their persons and disposition, bear
a nearer resemblance to the New-Zealanders, than to any other people of this
very extensive race, Mr. Anderson was strongly inclined to suspect, that, like
them, they are still cannibals. The evidence, which induced him to entertain
this opinion, has been already laid down in the tenth chapter of the third
book; but, as Mr. King had great doubts of the justness of his conclusions, we
shall mention the grounds on which he ventured to differ from him. With regard
to the intelligence received on this head from the natives themselves, it may
not be improper to observe, that most of the officers on board took great pains
to inquire into so curious a circumstance; and that, except in the instances
above referred to, the islanders invariably denied that any such practice
existed among them.

Though Mr. Anderson's superior knowledge of the language of those people ought
certainly to give considerable weight to his judgment, yet when he examined the
man who had the little parcel containing a piece of salted flesh, Mr. King, who
was present on that occasion, was strongly of opinion, that the signs made use
of by the islander intimated nothing more, than that it was designed to be
eaten, and that it was very agreeable or wholesome to the stomach. In this
sentiment Mr. King was confirmed, by a circumstance of which he was informed,
after the decease of his ingenious friend Mr Anderson, namely, that most of the
inhabitants of these islands carried about with them a small piece of raw pork,
well salted, either put into a callibash, or wrapped up in some cloth, and
fastened round the waist: this they esteemed a great delicacy, and would
frequently taste it. With regard to the confusion the lad was in, (for his age
did not exceed sixte^n or eighteen years) no person could have been surprised
at it, who had been witness of the earnest and eager manner in which Mr.
Anderson interrogated him.

Mr. King found it less easy to controvert the argument deduced from the use of
the instrument made with sharks teeth, which is of a similar form with that
used by the New-Zealanders for cutting up the bodies of their enemies. Though
he believed it to be an undoubted fact, that they never make use of this
instrument in cutting the flesh of other animals, yet, as the practice of
sacrificing human victims, and of burning the bodies of the slain, still
prevails here, he considered it as not altogether improbable, that the use of
this knife (if it may be so denomin^^ed) is retained in those ceremonies. He
was, upon the whole, inclined to imagine, and particularly from the
last-mentioned circumstance, that the horrible custom of devouring human flesh
has but lately ceased in these and other islands of the Pacific Ocean. Omai
acknowledged, that his countrymen, instigated by the fury of revenge, would
sometimes tear with their teeth the flesh of their slain enemies; but he
peremptorily denied that they ever eat it. The denial is a strong indication
that the practice has ceased; for in New-Zealand, where it is still prevalent,
the natives never scrupled to confess it.

The Sandwich Islanders, almost universally, permit their beards to grow. There
were, however, a few who cut off their beards entirely, among whom was the aged
king; and others wore it only on their upper lip. The same variety that is
found among the other islanders of this ocean, with respect to the mode of
wearing the hair, is likewise observable here. They have besides a fashion
which seems to be peculiar to themselves: they cut it close on each side of
their heads, down to their ears and leave a ridge, of the breadth of a small
hand, extending from the forehead to the neck; which, when the hair is pretty
thick and curling, resembles, in point of form, the crest of the helmet of an
ancient warrior. Some of them wear great quantities of false hair, flowing in
long ringlets down their backs; while others tie it into one round bunch on the
upper part of their heads, nearly as large as the head itself; and some into
six or seven separate bunches. They use, for the purpose of daubing or smearing
their hair, a greyish clay, mixed with shells reduced to powder, which they
keep in balls, and chew into a sort of paste, whenever they intend to make use
of it. This composition preserves the smoothness of the hair, and changes it,
in process of time, to a palo yellow.

Necklaces, consisting of strings of small variegated shells, are worn by both
men and women. They also wear an ornament, about two inches in length, and half
an inch in breadth, shaped like the handle of a cup, and made of stone, wood,
or ivory, extremely well polished; this is hung round the neck by fine threads
of twisted hair, which are sometimes doubled an hundred fold. Some of them,
instead of this ornament, wear a small human figure on their breast, formed of
bone, and suspended in a similar manner.

Both sexes make use of the fan, or fly-flap, by way of use and ornament. The
most common sort is composed of cocoa-nut fibers, tied loosely in bunches, to
the top of a polished handle. The tail-feathers of the cock, and those of the
tropic-bird, are used for the same purpose. Those that are most in esteem, are
such as have the handle formed of the leg or arm bones of an enemy killed in
battle; these are preserved with extraordinary care, and are handed down, from
father to son, as trophies of the highest value.

The practice of tatooing, or puncturing the body, prevails among these people;
and of all the islands in this ocean, it is only at New-Zealand, and the
Sandwich Isles, that the face is tatooed. There is this difference between
these two nations, that the New-Zealanders perform this operation in elegant
spiral volutes, and the Sandwich Islanders in straight lines, that intersect
each other at right angles.

Some of the natives had half their body, from head to foot tatooed, which gave
them a most striking appearance. It is generally done with great neatness and
regularity. Several of them have only an arm thus marked; others, a leg; some,
again, tatoo both an arm and a leg; and others only the hand. The hands and
arms of the women are punctured in a very neat manner; and they have a
remarkable custom of tatooing the tip of the tongues of some of the females. We
had some reason to imagine, that the practice of puncturing is often intended
as a sign of mourning, on the decease of a chief, or any other calamitous
occurrence: for we were frequently informed that such a mark was in memory of
such a chief; and so of the others. The people of the lowest order are tatooed
with a particular mark, which distinguishes them as the property of the chiefs
to whom they are respectively subject.

The common dress of the men of all ranks consists, in general, of a piece of
thick cloth called the maro, about a foot in breadth, which passes between the
legs, and is fastened round the waist. Their mats, which are of various sizes,
but, for the most part, about five feet in length, and four in breadth, are
thrown over their shoulders, and brought forward before. These, however, are
rarely made use of, except in time of war, for which purpose they appear to be
better calculated than for common use, since they are of a thick heavy texture,
and capable of breaking the blow of a stone or of any blunt weapon. They
generally go barefooted, except when they travel over burnt stones, on which
occasion they secure their feet with a kind of sandal, which is made of cords,
twisted from cocoa-nut fibers.

Besides their ordinary dress, there is another, which is appropriated to their
chiefs, and worn only on extraordinary occasions. It consists of a feathered
cloak and cap, or helmet, of uncommon beauty and magnificence. This dress
having been minutely described, in a former part of our work, we have only to
add, that these cloaks are of different lengths, in proportion to the rank of
the person who wears them; some trailing on the ground, and others no lower
than the middle. The chiefs of inferior rank have likewise a short cloak, which
resembles the former, and is made of the long tail-feathers of the cock, the
man-of-war bird, and the tropic-bird, having a broad border of small yellow and
red feathers, and also a collar of the same. Others are composed of white
feathers with variegated borders. The cap or helmet, has a strong lining of
wicker-work, sufficient to break the blow of any warlike weapon; for which
purpose it appears to be intended. These feathered dresses seemed to be very
scarce, and to be worn only by the male sex. During our whole continuance in
Karakakooa Bay, we never observed them used, except on three occasions; first
in the remarkable ceremony of Terreeoboo's first visit to our ships; secondly,
by some chiefs, who appeared among the crowd on shore, when our unfortunate
commander was killed; and thirdly, when his bones were brought to us by Eappo.

The striking resemblance of this habit to the cloak and helmet which the
Spaniards formerly wore, excited our curiosity to enquire, whether there might
not be some reasonable grounds for imagining that it had been borrowed from
them. After all our endeavors to gain information on this head, we found, that
the natives had no immediate acquaintance with any other people whatever; and
that no tradition existed among them of these islands having ever before
received a visit from such vessels as our's. However, notwithstanding the
result of our enquiries on this subject, the form of this habit seems to be a
sufficient indication of its European origin; particularly when we reflect on
another circumstance, viz. that it is a remarkable deviation from the general
agreement of dress, which is prevalent among the several branches of this great
tribe, dispersed over the Pacific Ocean. From this conclusion, we were induced
to suppose, that some Buccaneer, or Spanish ship, might have been wrecked in
the neighborhood of these islands. When it is considered, that the course of
the Spanish trading vessels from Acapulco to Manilla, is not many degrees to
the south of the Sandwich Isles, in their passage out, and to the north, on
their return, this supposition will not, we think, be deemed improbable.

There is very little difference between the common dress of the men and that
of the women. The latter wear a piece of cloth wrapped round the waist, which
descends half way down their thighs; and sometimes, during the cool of the
evening, they throw loose pieces of fine cloth over their shoulders, like the
Otaheitean females. The pan is another dress, which the younger part of the sex
often wear; it consists of the thinnest and finest cloth, wrapped several times
about the middle, and reaching down to the leg; so that it has the appearance
of a full short petticoat. They cut their hair short behind, and turn it up
before, as is the custom among the New-Zealanders and Otaheiteans. One woman,
indeed, whom we saw in Karakakooa Bay, had her hair arranged in a very singular
mode; she had turned it up behind, and having brought it over her forehead, and
doubled it back, so that it formed a sort of shade to her face, and somewhat
resembled a small bonnet.

Besides their necklaces, which are composed of shells, or of a shining, hard,
red berry, they wear dried flowers of the Indian mallow, formed into wreaths;
and likewise another elegant ornament, termed craie, which is sometimes
fastened round the hair, in the manner of a garland, but is usually put round
the neck; though it is occasionally worn in both these ways at once, as may be
seen in the annexed representation of the woman of the Sandwich Islands. It is
a kind of ruff, about as thick as a finger, formed with great ingenuity, of
very small feathers, woven together so closely, that the surface may be said to
equal the richest velvet in smoothness. The ground is, in general, red, with
alternate circles of black, yellow, and green.

We have already described their bracelets, of which they have a great variety.
Some of the women of Atooi wear small figures of the turtle, made very neatly
of ivory or wood, fastened on their fingers in the same manner that rings are
worn by us. There is likewise an ornament consisting of shells, tied in rows on
a ground of strong network, so as to strike against each other, while in
motion; which both sexes, when they dance, fasten either round the ankles, or
just below the knee, or round the arm. They sometimes, instead of shells, use
for this purpose, the teeth of dogs, and a hard red berry.

Another ornament, if indeed it deserves that appellation, remains to be
described. It is a sort of mask, composed of a large gourd, having holes cut in
it for the nose and eyes. The top of it is stuck full of little green twigs,
which appear, at some distance, like a waving plume; and the lower part has
narrow stripes of cloth hanging from it, somewhat resembling a beard, These
masks we never saw worn but on two occasions, and both times by a number of
persons assembled in a canoe, who approached the side of the ship, laughing and
making droll gesticulations. We could never learn whether they were not also
made use of as a defense for the head against stones, or in some of their
public sports and games, or were disguised merely for the purposes of mummery.

They dwell together in small towns or villages, which contain from about one
hundred to two hundred houses, built pretty close to each other without order
or regularity, and have a winding path that leads through them. They are
frequently flanked toward the seaside, with loose detached walls, which are,
in all probability, intended for shelter, and defense. The form of their
habitations, we have before described. They are of various dimensions, from
forty-five feet by twenty-four, to eighteen by twelve. Some are of a larger
size, being fifty feet in length, and thirty in breadth, and entirely open at
one end. These, we were informed, were designed for the accommodation of
strangers or travelers, whose stay was likely to be short.

Their furniture having been already mentioned, we have only to add, that, at
one end of their houses, are mats, on which they repose, with wooden pillows,
or sleeping-stools, perfectly resembling those of the Chinese. Some of the best
houses have a courtyard before them, railed in very neatly, with smaller
habitations for servants erected round it: in this area the family usually eat
and sit in the daytime. In the sides of the hills and amongst the steep rocks,
we saw several holes or caves, which seemed to be inhabited; but, the entrance
being defended by wicker-work, and, in the only one that we visited, a stone
fence being observed running across it within, we supposed that they were
chiefly intended as places of retreat, in case of an attack from enemies.

The people of an inferior class feed principally on fish, and vegetables, such
as plantains, bread-fruit, sweet-potatoes, sugarcanes, yams, and taro. To
these, persons of superior rank add the flesh of dogs and hogs, dressed after
the same method that is practiced in the Society's Isles. They likewise eat
fowls of a domestic kind, which, however, are neither plentiful, nor in any
great degree of estimation.

Though, on our first arrival at these islands, yams and bread-fruit seemed
scarce, we did not find this to be the case on our second visit: it is
therefore probable, that, as these vegetable articles were commonly planted in
the interior parts of the country, the islanders had not had sufficient time
for bringing them down to us, during our short continuance in Wymoa bay, on our
first visit.

They salt their fish, and preserve them in gourd-shells; not, indeed, with a
view of providing against an occasional scarcity, but from the inclination they
have for salted provisions; for we also found, that the chiefs frequently had
pieces of pork pickled in the same manner, which they considered as a great
delicacy. Their cookery is much the same as at the Friendly and Society
Islands; and though some of our people disliked their taro puddings, on account
of their sourness, others were of a different opinion. It is remarkable, that
they had not acquired the art of preserving the bread-fruit, and making of it
the sour paste named maihee, as is the practice at the Society Isles; and it
afforded us great satisfaction, that we had it in our power to communicate to
them this useful secret, in return for the generous and hospitable treatment we
received from them.

They are very cleanly at their meals; and their method of dressing both their
vegetable and animal food, was universally acknowledged to be superior to ours.
The Erees constantly begin their meals with a dose of the extract of
pepper-root, or ava, prepared in the usual mode. The women eat apart from the
other sex, and are prohibited, as before observed, from feeding on pork,
turtle, and some particular species of plantains. Notwithstanding this
interdiction, they would privately eat pork with us; but we could never prevail
on them to taste the two latter articles of food.

They generally rise with the sun; and, after having enjoyed the cool of the
evening, retire to their repose a few hours after sunset. The Erees are
occupied in making canoes and mats; the Towtows are chiefly employed in the
plantations, and also in fishing; and the women are engaged in the manufactory
of cloth. They amuse themselves in their leisure hours, with various
diversions. Their young persons, of both sexes, are fond of dancing; and, on
more solemn occasions, they entertain themselves with wrestling and boxing
matches, performed after the manner of the natives of the Friendly Islands; to
whom, however, they are greatly inferior in all these respects.

Their dances, which bear a greater resemblance to those of the New-Zealanders,
than of the Friendly or Society Islanders, are introduced with a solemn kind of
song, in which the whole number join, the same time slowly moving their legs,
and gently striking their breasts; their attitudes and manner being very easy
and graceful. So far they resemble the dances of the Society Isles. After this
has continued for the space of about ten minutes, they gradually quicken both
the tune and the motions, and do not desist till they are oppressed with
fatigue. This part of the performance is the counterpart of that of the
inhabitants of New-Zealand; and, as among those people, the person whose action
is the most violent, and who continues this exercise the longest, is applauded
by the spectators as the best dancer. It must be remarked, that, in this dance,
the females only engage; and that the dances of the men resemble what we saw of
the small parties at the Friendly Isles; and which may, perhaps, more properly
be termed the accompaniment of songs, with correspondent motions of the whole
body. But as we saw some boxing exhibitions, of the same kind with those we had
seen at the Friendly Isles, it is not improbable that they had likewise here
their grand ceremonious dances, wherein numbers both of men and women were
performers.

The music of these people is of a rude kind; for the only musical instruments
that we observed among them, were drums of various sizes. Their songs, however,
which they are said to sing in parts, The circumstance of their singing in
parts, has been doubted by several persons of great skill in music. Captain
Burney, however, and Captain Phillips of the marines, both of whom have some
knowledge of music, are strongly of opinion, that they did sing, in parts; that
is, they sung together in different notes.
and which they accompany with a gentle motion of their arms, like the
inhabitants of the Friendly Islands, have a very pleasing effect.

They are greatly addicted to gambling. One of their games resembles our game
of draughts; but, from the number of squares, it seems to be much more
intricate. The board is of the length of about two feet, and is divided into
two hundred and thirty-eight squares, fourteen in a row. In this game they use
black and white pebbles, which they move from one square to another. Another of
their games consists in concealing a stone under some cloth, which is spread
out by one of the parties, and rumpled in such a manner, that it is difficult
to distinguish where the stone lies. The antagonist then strikes, with a stick,
that part of the cloth where he supposes the stone to be: and the chances
being, upon the whole, against his hitting it, odds of all degrees, varying
with the opinion of the dexterity of the parties, are laid on the occasion.
Their manner of playing at bowls nearly resembles ours: the bowls have been
before described.

They often entertain themselves with races between boys and girls, on which
occasions they lay wagers with great spirit. We saw a man beating his breast,
and tearing his hair, in the violence of rage, for having lost three hatchets
at one of these races, which he had purchased from us with near half his
property a very little time before.

Both sexes are surprisingly expert in swimming, which, among these people, is
not only deemed a necessary art, but is also a favorite diversion. One
particular method, in which we sometimes saw them amuse themselves with this
exercise, in Karakakooa Bay, deserves to be related. The surf, that breaks on
the coast around this bay, extends about one hundred and fifty yards from the
shore; and, within that space, the surges of the sea are dashed against the
beach with extreme violence. Whenever the impetuosity of the surf is augmented
to its greatest height, they make choice of that time for this amusement, which
they perform in the following manner. About twenty or thirty of the islanders
take each a long narrow board, rounded at both ends, and set out from the shore
in company with each other. They plunge under the first wave they meet, and,
after they have suffered it to roll over them, rise again beyond it, and swim
further out into the sea. They encounter the second wave in the same manner
with the first. The principal difficulty consists in seizing a favorable
opportunity of diving under it; for if a person misses the proper moment, he is
caught by the surf, and forced back with great violence; and his utmost
dexterity is then required, to prevent his being dashed against the rocks.
When, in consequence of these repeated efforts, they have gained the smooth
water beyond the su^^ ^hey recline themselves at length upon their board, and
prepare for their return to shore. As the surf is composed of a number of
waves, of which every third is observed to be considerable larger than the
rest, and to flow higher upon the shore, while the others break in the
intermediate space; their first object is to place themselves on the top of the
largest surge, which drives them along with astonishing rapidity toward the
land. If they should place themselves, by mistake, on one of the smaller waves,
which breaks before they gain the shore, or should find themselves unable to
keep their board in a proper direction on the upper part of the swell, they
remain exposed to the fury of the next; to avoid which, they are under the
necessity of diving again, and regaining the place whence they set out. Those
persons who succeed in their object of reaching the shore, are still in a very
hazardous situation. As the coast is defended by a chain of rocks, with a small
opening between them in several places, they are obliged to steer their planks
through one of these openings; or, in case of ill success in that respect, to
quit it before they reach the rocks, and, diving under the wave, make their way
back again as well as they are able. This is considered as highly disgraceful,
and is attended with the loss of the plank, which we have seen dashed to
pieces, at the very instant the native quitted it. The amazing courage and
address, with which they perform these dangerous maneuvers, are almost
incredible.

The following accident shows at how early a period they are so far accustomed
to the water, as to lose all apprehensions of it, and set its perils at
defiance. A canoe, in which was a woman with her children, happening to be
overset, one of the children, an infant about four years of age, appeared to be
greatly delighted with what had happened, swimming about at its ease, and
playing a number of tricks, till the canoe was brought to its former position.

Among the amusements of the children, we observed one that was frequently
played at, and which showed a considerable share of dexterity. They take a
short stick, through one extremity of which runs a peg sharpened at both ends,
extending about an inch on each side; then throwing up a ball formed of green
leaves molded together, and fastened with twine, they catch it on one of the
points of the peg; immediately after which, they throw it up again from the
peg, then turn the stick round, and catch the ball on the other point of the
peg. Thus, for some time, they continue catching it on each point of the peg
alternately, without missing it. They are equally expert at another diversion
of a similar nature, throwing up in the air, and catching, in their turns, many
of these balls; and we have often seen little children thus keep five balls in
motion at once. This latter game is also practiced by the young people at the
Friendly Isles.

The figure and dimensions of the canoes seen by us at Atooi, have been already
described. Those of the other Sandwich Islands were made exactly in the same
manner; and the largest we saw was a double canoe that belonged to Terreeoboo,
measuring seventy feet in length, twelve in breadth, and between three and four
in depth; and each was hollowed out of one tree.

Their method of agriculture, as well as navigation, resembles that of the
other islands of the Pacific. They have made considerable proficiency in
sculpture, and their skill in painting or staining cloth, and in the
manufacture of mats, is very great. The most curious specimens of their
sculpture, that we had an opportunity of observing, were the wooden bowls, in
which the Erees drink ava. These are, in general, eight or ten inches in
diameter, perfectly round, and extremely well polished. They are supported by
three or four small human figures, represented in different attitudes. Some of
them rest on the shoulders of their supporters, others on the hands extended
over the head; and some on the head and hands. The figures are very neatly
finished, and accurately proportioned; and even the anatomy of the muscles is
well expressed.

They manufacture their cloth in the same manner, and of the same materials, as
at the Society and Friendly Isles. That which they intend to paint, is of a
strong and thick texture, several folds being beaten and incorporated together;
after which they cut it in breadths, two or three feet wide, and then paint it
in a great variety of patterns, with such regularity and comprehensiveness of
design, as show an extraordinary portion of taste and fancy. The exactness with
which even the most intricate patterns are continued, is really astonishing, as
they have no stamps, and as the whole is performed by the eye, with a piece of
bamboo cane dipped in paint; the hand being supported by another piece of the
same sort of cane. They extract their colors from the same berries, and other
vegetable articles, which are made use of at Otaheite for this purpose.

The operation of staining or painting their cloth, is confined to the females,
and is denominated kipparee. It is remarkable, that they always called our
writing by this name. The young women would frequently take the pen from our
hands, and show us, that they were as well acquainted with the use of it as we
ourselves were; telling us, at the same time, that our pens were inferior to
theirs. They considered a manuscript sheet of paper, as a piece of cloth
striped after the mode of our country; and it was with the greatest difficulty
that we could make them understand, that our figures contained a meaning in
them which theirs were destitute of.

They make their mats of the leaves of the pandanus; and these, as well as
their cloths, are beautifully worked in various patterns, and stained with
various colors. Some of them have a ground of a straw color, embellished with
green spots; others are of a pale green, spotted with squares, or rhomboids, of
red; and some are ornamented with elegant stripes, either in straight or waving
lines of brown and red. In this branch of manufacture, whether we regard the
fineness, beauty, or strength, these islanders may be said to excel the whole
world.

Their fishing-hooks are of various sizes and figures; but those which are
principally made use of, are about two or three inches in length, and are
formed in the shape of a small fish, serving as a bait, with a bunch of
feathers fastened to the head or tail. They make their hooks of bone,
mother-of-pearl, or wood, pointed and barbed with little bones or
tortoise-shells. Those with which they fish for sharks, are very large, being,
in general, of the length of six or eight inches. Considering the materials of
which these hooks are composed, their neatness and strength are amazing; and,
indeed, upon trial, we found them superior to our own.

Of the bark of the touta, or cloth-tree, neatly twisted, they form the line
which they use for fishing, for making nets, and for some other purposes. It is
of different degrees of fineness, and may be continued to any length. They have
also a finer sort, which they make of the bark of a shrub, named areemah; and
the finest is composed of human hair: this last, however, is chiefly made use
of for matters of ornament.

They likewise make cordage of a stronger kind, from cocoa-nut fibers for the
rigging of their canoes. Some of this, which was purchased by us for our own
use, was found to be well calculated for the smaller kinds of running rigging.
They also manufacture another sort of cordage, which is flat, and extremely
strong, and is principally used for the purpose of lashing the roofs of their
houses. This last is not twisted after the manner of the former sorts, but is
formed of the fibrous strings of the coat of the cocoa-nut, plaited with the
fingers, in the same mode which is practiced by our seamen in making their
points for the reefing of sails.

They apply their gourds to various domestic purposes. These grow to such an
enormous magnitude, that some of them will contain from ten to a dozen gallons.
In order to adapt them the better to their respective uses, they take care to
give them different shapes, by fastening bandages round them during their
growth. Thus, some of them are in the form of a dish, serving to hold their
puddings, vegetables, salted provisions, salt, etc. Others are of a long
cylindrical form, and serve to contain their fishing-tackle, which two sorts
are furnished with neat close covers, made also of the gourd. Others are in the
shape of a long-necked bottle; and, in these, water is kept. They frequently
score them with a heated instrument, so as to communicate to them the
appearance of being painted, in a great variety of elegant designs.

Their pans, in which they make salt, are made of earth, lined with clay; and
are in general, six or eight feet square, and about two-thirds of a foot in
depth. They are elevated on a bank of stones near the high water mark, whence
the salt water is conducted to the bottom of them, in trenches out of which
they are all filled; and, in a short time, the sun performs the process of
evaporation. The salt we met with at Oneeheow and Atooi, during our first
visit, was brownish and rather dirty; but that which we afterward procured at
Karakakooa Bay, was white, and of an excellent quality; and we obtained an
ample supply of it, insomuch that, besides the quantity used by us in salting
pork, we filled all our empty casks with it.

The warlike weapons of these people are daggers, which they call by the name
pahooa; spears, slings, and clubs. The pahooa is made of a black heavy wood,
that resembles ebony. It is commonly from one to two feet in length; and has a
string passing through the handle, by which it is suspended to the arm. The
blade is somewhat rounded in the middle; the sides are sharp, and terminate in
a point. This instrument is intended for close engagements; and, in the hands
of the natives, is a very destructive one.

Their spears are of two kinds, and are formed of a hard wood, which, in its
appearace, is not unlike mahogany. One sort is from six to eight feet in
length, well polished, and increasing gradually in thickness from the extremity
till within the distance of six or seven inches from the point, which tapers
suddenly, and has five or six rows of barbs. It is probable, that these are
used in the way of javelins. The other sort, with which the warriors we saw at
Atooi and Owhyhee were chiefly armed, are from twelve to fifteen feet in
length; and, instead of being barbed, terminate toward the point in the manner
of their daggers.

Their slings are the same with our common slings, except in this respect, that
the stone is lodging on matting instead of leather. Their clubs are formed
indifferently of several kinds of wood: they are of various sizes and shapes,
and of rude workmanship.

CHAP. VIII.
Continuation of the Account of the Sandwich Islands -- Division of the People
into three classes -- Superior Power of the Eree-taboo -- Genealogical Account
of the Kings of Owhyhee and Mowee -- Authority of the Erees -- Tyranny of
Pareea, exercised on an inferior Chief -- Punishment of Offenses -- Account of
their Religion -- Society of Priests -- The Orono -- Idols -- Eatooas of
deceased Chiefs -- Religious Ceremonies, Chantings, etc. previous to the
drinking of Ava -- Human Sacrifices very frequent among them -- Religious
Custom of knocking out the Fore-Teeth -- Their ideas of a future State --
Particular Explanation of the Word Taboo -- Marriages -- Remarkable Instance of
Jealousy -- Funeral Ceremonies at the Death of an old Chief, etc.

IN the Sandwich Islands, the inhabitants are divided into three classes. The
Erees, or chiefs of each district, are the first; and one of these is superior
to the rest, who is called, at Owhyhee, Eree-taboo, and Eree Moee; the first
name expressing his authority, and the latter signifying that, in his presence,
all must prostrate themselves. Those of the second class appear to enjoy a
right of property, but have no authority. Those who compose the third class,
are called towtows, or servants, and have not either rank or property.

The superior power and distinction of Terreeoboo, the Eree-taboo of Owhyhee,
was sufficiently evident from his reception at Karakakooa, on his first
arrival. The inhabitants all prostrated themselves at the entrance of their
houses; and the canoes were tabooed, till he discharged the interdict. He was
then just returned from Mowee, an island he was contending for, in behalf of
his son Tewarro, whose wife was the only child of the king of that place,
against Taheeterree, his surviving brother. In this expedition, he was attended
by many of his warriors; but we could never learn whether they served him as
volunteers, or whether they held their rank and property by that tenure.

That the subordinate chiefs are tributary to him, is evidently proved in the
instance of Kaoo, which has been already related. It has also been observed,
that the two most powerful chiefs of the Sandwich Islands, are Terreeoboo, and
Perreeoranne; the former being chief of Owhyhee, and the latter of Woahoo; all
the smaller isles being governed by one of these sovereigns; Mowee was at this
time, claimed by Terreeoboo, for his son and intended successor; Atooi and
Oneehow being in the possession of the grandsons of Perreeorannee.

Without entering into the genealogy of the kings of Owhyhee and Mowee, it may
be necessary to mention, that when we were first off Mowee, Terreeoboo and his
warriors were there to support the claims made by his wife, his son, and his
daughter-in-law; and a battle had then been fought with the opposite party, in
which Terreeoboo had been victorious. Matters, however, were afterward
compromised; Taheeterree was to have possession of the three neighboring
islands, during his life; Teewarro to be acknowledged the Chief of Mowee, and
to succeed to Owhyhee, on the death of Terreeoboo; together with the three
islands contiguous to Mowee, after the decease of Taheeterre. If Teewarro, who
has lately married his half sister, should die, and leave no issue behind him,
those islands descend to Maiha-maiha, whom we have frequently mentioned, he
being the son of Terreeoboo's deceased brother: and should he die without issue
it is doubtful who would be the successor, for Terreeoboo's two youngest sons,
being born of a mother who had no rank, would be debarred all right of
succession. We did not see Queen Rora-rora, whom Terreeoboo had left at Mowee;
but we had an opportunity of seeing Kanee Kaberaia, the mother of the two
youths of whom he was so extremely fond.

From what has been already mentioned, it appears pretty clearly that their
government is hereditary; whence it appears probable, that the inferior titles
as well as property, descend in the same course. Respecting Perreorannee, we
only discovered that he is an Eree-taboo; that he was, on some pretense,
invading the possession of Taheeterree, and that the islands to leeward were
governed by his grandsons.

The Erees appear to have unlimited power over the inferior classes of people;
many instances of which occurred daily whilst we continued among them. On the
other hand, the people are implicitly obedient. It is remarkable, however, that
we never saw the chiefs exercise any acts of cruelty, injustice, or insolence
toward them; though they put in practice their power over each other, in a
most tyrannical degree: which is fully proved by the two following instances.

One of the lower order of chiefs, having shown great civility to the master of
the ship, on his examination of Karakakooa Bay; Mr. King, some time afterward,
took him on board the Resolution, and introduced him to Captain Cook, who
engaged him to dine with us. While we remained at table, Pareea entered, whose
countenance manifested the highest indignation at seeing our guest so
honorably entertained. He seized him by the hair of the head, and would have
dragged him out of the cabin, if the Captain had not interfered. After much
altercation, we could obtain no other indulgence (without quarrelling with
Pareea) than that our guest should be permitted to remain in the cabin, on
condition that he seated himself on the floor, while Pareea occupied his place
at the table. An instance somewhat similar, happened when Terreeoboo came first
on board the Resolution; when Maiha-maiha, who attended him, seeing Pareea upon
deck, turned him most ignominiously out of the ship; even though we knew Pareea
to be a man of the first consequence.

Whether the lower class have their property secured, from the rapacity of the
great chiefs, we cannot certainly say, but it appears to be well protected
against theft and depredation. All their plantations, their houses, their hogs,
and their cloth, are left unguarded, without fear or apprehension. In the plain
country, they separate their possessions by walls; and, in the woods where
horse plantains grow, they use white flags to discriminate property, in the
same manner as they do bunches of leaves at Otaheite. These circumstances
strongly indicate, that, where property is concerned, the power of the chiefs
is not arbitrary; but so far limited, as to afford encouragement to the
inferior orders to cultivate the soil, which they occupy distinct from each
other.

The information we could obtain, respecting their administration of justice,
is exceedingly imperfect. If a quarrel arose among the lower class of people,
the matter was referred to the decision of some chief. If an inferior chief had
offended one of superior rank, his punishment was dictated by the feelings of
the superior at that moment. If he should fortunately escape the first
transports of his rage, he, perhaps, found means, through the mediation of
others, to compound for his offense, by all, or a part of his effects.

Their religion resembles that of the Society and Friendly Islands. In common
with each other, they have all their Morais, their Whattas their sacred songs,
and their sacrifices. These are convincing proofs that their religious opinions
are derived from the same source. The ceremonies here are, indeed, longer and
more numerous than in the islands abovementioned. And though in all these
places, the care and performance of their religious rights, is committed to a
particular class of people; yet we have never found a regular society of
priests, till we arrived at Kakooa, in Karakakooa Bay. Orono was the title
given to the principal of this order; a title which seemed to imply something
highly sacred, and which almost received adoration in the person of Omeeah. The
privilege of holding the principal offices in this order, is doubtless limited
to certain families. Omeeah, the Orono, was Kaoo's son, and Kaireekeea's
nephew. Kaireekeea presided in all religious ceremonies at the morai, in the
absence of his grandfather. It was observed, likewise, that the son of Omeeah,
an infant of about the age of five years, had always a number of attendants,
and such other marks of attention and esteem were shown him, as we never
observed in any similar instance. Hence we concluded, that his life was an
object of much consequence, and that he would eventually succeed to the high
dignity of his father.

The title of Orono, we have already observed, was bestowed upon Captain Cook;
and it is very certain that they considered us as a race of beings superior to
themselves; frequently repeating, that great Eatooa lived in our country. The
favorite little idol (which has been already described) on the morai, in
Karakakooa Bay, is called Koonoorackaiee, and is said to be Terreoboo's god,
who also resided amongst us.

Infinite variety of these images were to be seen, both on the morai, and about
their houses, on which they bestow different names; but they certainly were
held in very little estimation, from their contemptuous expressions of them,
and from their exposing them to sale for trifles; though they generally had one
particular figure in high favor, to which, whilst it continued a favorite,
all their adoration was addressed. They arrayed it in red cloth, beat their
drums, and sang hymns before it; placed bunches of red feathers, and different
vegetables at its feet; and frequently exposed a pig, or a dog, to rot on the
Whatta, near which it was placed.

A party of us were conducted to a large house, in a bay to the southward of
Karakakooa, in which we beheld the black figure of a man, resting on his toes
and fingers, and his head was inclined backwards; the limbs were well
proportioned, and the whole was beautifully polished. This figure was called
Maee; round which thirteen others were placed, with shapes rude and distorted.
These, we were told, were the Eatooas of deceased chiefs, whose names they
repeated. Plenty of Whattas were seen within the place, with the remains of
offerings on many of them. They also admit into their houses, many ludicrous
and obscene idols, not unlike the Priapus of the ancients.

Former voyagers have remarked, that the Society and Friendly Islanders, pay
adoration to particular birds; and it seems to be a custom that is prevalent in
these islands. Ravens are perhaps the object of it here; for Mr. King saw two
of these birds perfectly tame, at the village of Kakooa, and was told they were
Eatooas; he offered several articles for them, which were all refused; and he
was particularly cautioned not to hurt or offend them.

The prayers and offerings, made by the priests before their meals, may be
classed among their religious ceremonies. As they always drink ava before they
begin their repast, whilst that is chewing, the superior in rank begins a sort
of hymn, in which he is soon after joined by one or more of the company; the
bodies of the others are put in motion, and their hands are gently clapped
together in concert with the singers. The ava being ready, cups of it are
presented to those who do not join in the hymn, which are held in their hands
till it is concluded; when, with united voice, they make a loud response, and
drink their ava. The performers are then served with some of it which they
drink, after the same ceremony has been repeated. And, if any person of a very
superior rank should be present, a cup is presented to him last of all. After
chanting for a short time, and hearing a responsive chant from the others, he
pours a small quantity on the ground, and drinks the rest. A piece of the
flesh, which has been dressed, is then cut off, and, together with some of the
vegetables, is placed at the foot of the figure of the Eatooa; and after
another hymn has been chanted, they begin their meal. A ceremony, in many
respects resembling this, is also performed by the chiefs, when they drink ava
between their regular meals.

According to the accounts given by the natives, human sacrifices are more
common here, than in any of the islands we have visited. They have recourse to
these horrid rites on the commencement of a war and previous to every great
battle, or other signal enterprise. The death of a chief demands a sacrifice of
one or more towtows, according to the rank he bears; and we were informed that
no less than ten were doomed to suffer, on the death of Terreeoboo. This
practice, however, is the less horrible, as the unhappy victims are totally
unacquainted with their fate. Those who are destined to fall, are attacked with
large clubs, wherever they may happen to be; and after they are dead, are
conveyed to the place where the subsequent rites are to be performed. This
brings to our remembrance the skulls of those who had been sacrificed on the
decease of some principal chief, and were fixed to the morai at Kakooa. At the
village of Kowrowa, we received further information upon this subject; where we
were shown a small piece of ground, within a stone fence, which we were told
was an Heree-eere, or burying place of a chief. The person who gave us this
information, pointing to one of the corners added, -- and there lie the tangata
and waheene-taboo, or the man and woman who became sacrifices at his funeral.

The knocking out their fore-teeth may be, with propriety, classed among their
religious customs. Most of the common people, and many of the chiefs, had lost
one or more of them; and this we understood was considered as a propitiatory
sacrifice to the Eatooa, to avert his anger; and not like the cutting off a
part of the finger at the Friendly Islands, to express the violence of their
grief at the decease of a friend.

Of their opinions, with respect to a future state, we had very defective
information. On enquiring of them, whither the dead were gone? We were told
that the breath, which they seemed to consider as the immortal part, was fled
to the Eatooa. They seemed also to give a description of some place, which they
suppose to be the abode of the dead; but we could not learn that they had any
idea of rewards or punishments.

An explanation of the word taboo, may not, in this place, be improperly
introduced. On asking the reason of the intercourse being in^erdicted, between
us and the Islanders, the day preceding Terreeoboo's arrival, we were informed,
that the bay was tabooed. The same interdiction took place, by our desire, when
we interred the remains of Captain Cook. The most implicit obedience, in these
two instances, was rendered by the natives; but whether on religious
principles, or in deference to civil authority, we cannot pretend to determine.

The ground on which our observatories were fixed, and the place where our
masts were deposited, were tabooed, and the operation was equally efficacious.
This consecration was performed only by the priests; and yet, at our request,
the men ventured on the spot which was tabooed; whence it should seem they
entertained no religious apprehensions, their obedience being limited merely to
our refusal. No inducements could bring the women near us; on account, it is
presumed, of the morai adjoining; which they are, at all times, prohibited from
approaching; not only here, but in all the islands of these seas.

Women, it has been observed, are always tabooed, or forbidden to eat certain
articles of food. We have seen many of them, at their meals, have their meat
put into their mouths by others; and, on our requesting to know the reason of
it, we were informed, that they were tabooed, and not permitted to feed
themselves. This prohibition was always the consequence of assisting at any
funeral, touching a dead body, and many other occasions. The word taboo is
indifferently applied, either to persons or things; as, the natives are
tabooed, the bay is tabooed, etc. This word is also expressive of any thing
sacred, devoted or eminent. The king of Owhyhee was called Eree-taboo, and a
human victim, tangata taboo: and, among the Friendly Islanders, Tonga, where
the king resides, is called Tongataboo.

Very little can be said respecting their marriages, except that such a compact
seems to exist among them. It has already been mentioned, that, when Terreeoboo
had left his queen Rora-rora at Mowee, another woman cohabited with him, by
whom he had children, and seemed particularly attached to her; but, whether
polygamy is allowed, or whether it is mixed with concubinage, either among the
principal or inferior orders, we saw too little of, to warrant any conclusions.
From what we saw of the domestic concerns of the lower class of people, one man
and one woman seemed to have the direction of the house, and the children were
subordinate to them, as in civilized countries.

The following is the only instance of any thing like jealousy, which we have
seen among them; and which shows, that among married women of rand not only
fidelity, but even a degree of reserve is required.

At one of their boxing matches, Omeah rose two or three times from his place,
and approached his wife with strong marks of displeasure, commanding her, as we
supposed, to withdraw. Whether he thought her beauty engaged too much of our
attention, or whatever might be his motives, there certainly existed no real
cause of jealousy. She, however, continued in her place, and, at the conclusion
of the entertainment, joined our party; and even solicited some trifling
presents. She was informed that we had not any about us; but that, if she would
accompany us to the tent, she should be welcome to make a choice of what she
liked. She was accordingly, proceeding with us; which being observed by Omeah,
he followed in great rage, seized her by the hair, and, with his fists, began
to inflict severe corporal punishment. Having been the innocent cause of this
extraordinary treatment, we were exceedingly concerned at it; though we
understood it would be highly improper for us to interfere, between husband and
wife of such superior rank. The natives, however, at length, interposed; and
the next day, we had the satisfaction of meeting them together, perfectly
satisfied with each other; and, what was extremely singular, the lady would not
permit us to rally the husband on his behavior; which we had an inclination to
do; plainly telling us, that he had acted very properly.

At Karakakooa Bay, we had twice an opportunity of seeing a part of their
funeral rites. Hearing of the death of an old chief, not far from our
observatories, some of us repaired to the place, where we beheld a number of
people assembled. They were seated round an area, fronting the house where the
deceased lay; and a man, having on a red feathered cap, came to the door,
constantly putting out his head, and making a most lamentable howl, accompanied
with horrid grimaces, and violent distortions of the face. A large mat was
afterward spread upon the area, and thirteen women and two men, who came out
of the house, sat down upon it in three equal rows; three of the women, and the
two men, being in front. The women had feathered ruffs on their necks and
hands; and their shoulders were decorated with broad green leaves, curiously
scolloped. Near a small hut, at one corner of this area, half a dozen boys were
placed, waving small white banners, and taboo sticks, who would not suffer us
to approach them. Hence we imagined, that the dead body was deposited in the
^ut, but we were afterward informed that it remained in the house, where the
tricks were playing at the door, by the manin the red cap. The company, seated
on the mat, sung a melancholy tune, accompanied with a gentle motion of the
arms and body. This having continued some time, they put themselves in a
posture between kneeling and sitting, and their arms and bodies into a most
rapid motion, keeping pace at the same time with the music. These last
exertions being too violent to continue, at intervals they had slower motions.
An hour having passed in these ceremonies, more mats were spread upon the area,
when the dead chief's widow, and three or four other elderly women, came out of
the house with slow and solemn pace; and seated themselves before the company,
began to wail most bitterly, in which they were joined by the three rows of
women behind them; the two men appearing melancholy and pensive. They continued
thus, with little variation, till late in the evening, when we left them; and,
at daylight in the morning, the people were dispersed, and every thing
appeared perfectly quiet. We were then given to understand, that the body was
removed; but we could not learn how it was disposed of. While we were directing
our enquiries to this object, we were approached by three women of rank, who
signified to us, that our presence interrupted the performance of some
necessary rites. Soon after we had left them, we heard their cries and
lamentations; and when we met them a few hours afterward, the lower part of
their faces were painted perfectly black.

We had also an opportunity of observing the ceremonies on the funeral of one
of the ordinary class. Hearing some mournful cries, issuing from a miserable
hut, we entered it, and discovered two women, which we supposed to be mother
and daughter, weeping over the body of a man who had that moment expired. They
first covered the body with a cloth; then, lying down by it, they spread the
cloth over themselves, beginning a melancholy kind of song, often repeating,
Aweb medoaah! Aweb tanee! O my father! Oh my husband! In one corner of the
house, a young daughter lay prostrate on the ground, having some black cloth
spread over her, and repeating the same expressions. On our quitting this
melancholy scene, we found many of their neighbors, collected together at the
door, who were all perfectly silent, and attentive to their lamentations. Mr.
King was willing to have embraced this opportunity of knowing in what manner
the body would be disposed of; and therefore, after being convinced that it was
not removed when he went to bed, he ordered the sentries to walk before the
house, and if there were any appearances of removing the body, to acquaint him
with it. The sentries, however, were remiss in the performance of their duty,
for, before the morning, the body was taken away. On asking how it had been
disposed of, they pointed toward the sea, perhaps thereby indicating, that it
had been deposited in the deep, or that it had been conveyed to some
burying-ground beyond the bay. The place of interment for the chiefs, is the
morai, or heree erees, and those who are sacrificed on the occasion, are buried
by the side of them. The morai in which the chief was interred, who, after
making a spirited resistance, was killed in the cave, has a hanging of red
cloth round it.

A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK VI. TRANSACTIONS IN A SECOND EXPEDITION TO
THE NORTH, BY THE WAY OF KAMTSCHATKA, AND IN RETURNING HOME, BY THE WAY OF
CANTON, AND THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
CHAP. I.
Quit Oneeheow -- Unsuccessful Attempt to discover Modoopapappa -- Steer for
Awatska Bay -- See vast Quantities of oceanic Birds -- Prepare for a cold
Climate -- Seamen require directing like Children -- Sudden change of Climate
-- The leaking of the Resolution occasions great Distress -- See the coast of
Kamtschatka -- Continued Showers of Sleet, and great Severity of Weather --
Lose Sight of the Discovery -- The Resolution enters Awatska Bay -- With some
Difficulty discover the Town of St. Peter and St. Paul -- Party sent ashore --
Avoided by Inhabitants on a Sledge -- Their Reception by the Commander of the
Port -- Dispatches to the Commander at Bolcheretsk -- Arrival of the Discovery
in the Bay -- Return of the Messenger -- Curious Mode of Traveling -- Visit
from a Russian Merchant, and a German Servant.

WE weighed anchor on the 15th of March, at seven o'clock in the morning, and
stood to the south-west, in expectation of falling in with the island of
Modoopapappa; the native^ having assured us that it lay in that direction,
within five hours sail of Tahoora. About four in the afternoon, a large canoe
overtook us, in which were ten persons, who were inhabitants of Oneeheow, and
were proceeding to Tahoora to catch birds; particularly tropic and man-of-war
birds, which are said to be very numerous in that place. It has already been
observed, that the feathers of these birds are held in great esteem, being
principally used in the ornamental part of their dress.

Not having seen the island at eight in the evening, we hauled to the northward
till midnight, when we tacked and stood to the south-east till daybreak the
next morning; when Tahoora bore east-north-east, distant about five or six
leagues. We then steered west-southwest, making a signal for the Discovery to
spread four miles upon our starboard beam. We stood on till five, and then made
a signal for the Discovery to come under our stern, having given over all hopes
of seeing Modoopapappa. We supposed it might lie more southerly from Tahoora,
than the direction which we had taken; though it is very possible that we might
have passed it in the night, it having been described to us as a very small
island, and almost even with the sea.

On the 17th, we steered west, Captain Clerk meaning to keep nearly in the
same parallel of latitude, till we made the longitude of Awatska Bay; and then
to steer north for the harbor of St. Peter and St. Paul, which was also fixed
on as our rendezvous, if we should happen to separate. This track was chosen,
because we supposed it to be yet unexplored, and we might probably meet with
some new islands in our passage.

From the time of our losing sight of Tahoora, till the afternoon of the 18th,
we had hardly seen a bird: we then saw several boobies, and man-of-war birds,
which induced us to look out sharply for land. The wind lessened toward the
evening; and the heavy swell, which made the ships labor exceedingly on the
16th and 17th, was considerably abated. No land appeared the next day; and at
noon we steered west by south, in expectation of finding the trade winds (which
generally blew from the east by north) fresher as we advanced. It is
remarkable, that, though no birds appeared in the forenoon, we had a multitude
of boobies and man-of-war birds about us in the evening; whence we supposed
that we had passed the land, not far distant from where the former flights
appeared, and where approaching some other island.

We had fine weather and a moderate wind, till the 23d, when it increased to a
strong gale, and continued about twelve hours. Afterward it became more
moderate, and remained so till noon on the 25th; at which time we had only a
very light air.

In the morning of the 26th, we imagined we saw land to the west-south-west;
but we discovered our mistake, after sailing sixteen leagues in that direction;
and, night approaching, we again steered west. We pursued this course, without
much alteration in the wind, till the 29th, when it shifted about, and was in
the west for a few hours in the night; the weather being cloudy, accompanied
with a great deal of rain. For some days past, we had met with several turtles,
one of which was so remarkably small, as not to exceed three inches in length.
We were again visited by man-of-war birds and an uncommon kind of boobies. They
were entirely white, except a black spot at the tip of each wing, and had a
strong resemblance of gannets, at first sight.

The continuation of the light winds, with the very unsettled state of the
weather, and the little expectation we had of any change for the better,
induced Captain Clerk to give up his plan of keeping within the tropical
latitudes. In consequence of which, we began, at six o'clock this evening, to
steer north-west by north. The light winds almost constantly prevailed, after
our departure from the Sandwich Islands; during which time the air was hot and
sultry; the thermometer being generally from 80 to 83. We had also a
considerable swell from the north-east, in which the ships were strained
exceedingly.

On the first of April, in the morning, the wind changed to the north-east by
east, and continued to blow a fresh breeze till the 4th, in the morning, when
it altered two points. At noon it blew a strong gale, which continued till the
5th, in the afternoon. It then changed its direction to the south-east, and
blew moderate, with much rain. We kept steering, all this time, to the
north-west, against a slow current from that quarter. On the 4th, when our
latitude was 26 17, and our longitude 173 30, we saw great numbers of what are
called (by the sailors) Portuguese men-of-war, holothuria physalis. Vast
quantities of oceanic birds likewise attended us, among which we discovered the
sheer-water and albatross.

About noon on the 6th, we lost the trade-wind. We were then in the latitude of
29 50, and the longitude of 170 1. Our old running ropes having been
continually breaking in the late gales; we reeved all the new ones we had left,
and made other necessary preparations for the different climate we were shortly
to encounter. The fine weather which we experienced between the tropics, had
not been misemployed. The carpenters were sufficiently engaged in repairing the
boats. Our best bower cable having received so much injury in Karakakooa Bay,
and off Oneheow, as to occasion forty fathoms to be cut from it; we converted
that, together with some other old cordage into spun-yarn, and applied it to
various purposes. By which means, many of our people were kept wholly employed
by the boatswain. Besides, it was now become a troublesome and laborious part
of our duty, to air the sails, etc. which were continually growing wet, from
the leakness of the sides and deck of the vessels.

There were other cares, which had the preservation of the health of the crews
for their object; and these continually occupied a great number of our hands.
Captain Cook's established orders of airing the beds, having fires between
decks, smoking them with gunpowder, and washing them with vinegar, were
invariably observed. Even the mending of the sailors old jackets was now become
a duty of importance. Those who are acquainted with the habits and disposition
of seamen, require to be informed, that they are so accustomed to be directed
by their officers, respecting the care of themselves, that they contract the
thoughtlessness of infants. It is very certain, that had our people been
suffered to act according to their own discretion, the whole crew would have
been naked, before half the completion of the voyage. It might naturally be
supposed, from their having experienced a voyage to the north the last year,
that they would be thoroughly sensible of the necessity of paying attention to
these matters; but these reflections never operated upon them; for as soon as
we returned to the tropical climates, their fur jackets, and other articles
calculated for cold climates, were kicked about the decks as useless and
insignificant; though every one among us knew we were to make another voyage
toward the Pole. They were, however, taken up and put into casks, by the
officers, and, about this time, restored to their proper owners.

We perceived in the afternoon some of the sheathing floated by the ship; and
discovered, upon examination, that about fourteen feet had been washed off
under the lar-board bow; where the leak was supposed to have been, which had
kept the people employed at the pumps, ever since our departure from the
Sandwich Islands; making twelve inches water an hour. A number of small crabs,
of a pale blue color, we had this day a sight of; and were again accompanied
by sheer-waters of albatrosses. In the nightime, the thermometer sunk eleven
degrees; and, though it was then as high as 69, we endured much from the cold;
our feelings not being yet reconciled to that degree of temperature.

We had a fresh wind from the north, till Thursday the 8th, in the morning: it
then became more moderate, and was accompanied with fair weather. Afterward it
changed its direction to the east, and then to the south.

About noon, on the 9th, we were in the latitude of 32 16, and in the longitude
of 166 40. On the 10th, we crossed the track by which the Spanish galleons pass
from the Manillas to Acapulco, and expected to have seen the island of Rica de
Plata; who, according to De Lisle's chart, which points out the route of those
ships, ought to have appeared. Its latitude is there mentioned to be 34 30
north, and its longitude 166 east. Though so far advanced to the northward, we
this day saw a tropic bird; and several other kinds of oceanic birds; such as
sheer-waters, albatrosses, puffins, and sea-parrots.

At noon, on the 11th, our latitude was 35 30. and our longitude 165 45. We
this day saw plenty of sea-birds, and several bunches of sea-weed. The
Discovery also passed a log of wood; but no other signs of land appeared.

On the 12th, the wind veered to the east, and blew so strong a gale as to
oblige us to strike our top-gallant yards. We happened, unfortunately, to be
upon the most disadvantageous tack for our leak. But, having always kept it
under with the hand-pumps, it gave us but little concern till Tuesday the 13th,
at six in the afternoon, when a sudden inundation deluged the whole space
between decks, and alarmed us much. The water, which had made its way into the
coal-hole, not finding a passage into the well, had forced up the platforms
over it, and instantaneously set every thing afloat. Our situation was the more
distressing, as we could not immediately discover any means of relieving
ourselves. It could be of no service to place a pump through the upperdecks
into the coal-hole; and it was become impracticable to bale the water out with
buckets. We had, therefore, no other expedient left, than to cut a hole through
the bulk-head, which separated the coal-hole from the fore-hold, and thus form
a passage for the water into the well. Before this could be effected, however,
the casks of dry provisions were to be got out of the fore-hold, which took us
the remainder of the night; the carpenters, therefore, could not get at the
partition till the next morning. The passage being made, the principal part of
the water ran into the well, when we were enabled to get out the rest with
buckets. The leak was now greatly increased, insomuch that half of our people
were constantly employed in pumping and baleing, till the 15th, at noon. Our
men submitted cheerfully to this excessive fatigue; and, to add to their
sufferings, they had not a dry place to sleep in: but, in order to make them
some amends, they were permitted to have their full allowance of grog.

As the weather grew more moderate, and the swell abated, we cleared away the
rest of the casks from the fore-hold, and made a proper passage for the water
to the pumps. We saw a piece of drift wood, of a greenish hue; and sounded, bu^
sound no bottom with a hundred and fifty fathoms of line. At noon, this day, we
were in the latitude of 41 52, and in the longitude of 161 15.

At noon, on the 16th, our latitude was 42 12, and our longitude 160 5; and,
being near the situation where De Gama is said to have seen a great extent of
land, we were glad of an opportunity of contributing to remove the doubts, if
any yet remained, respecting this pretended discovery. It is somewhat
remarkable that it cannot be discovered who this John De Gama was, when he
lived, or at what time he made this discovery.

Muller relates, that the first account of it was in a chart published by
Texeira, in 1649; who places it between the latitude of 44 and 45, and calls it
"land seen by John De Gama, in a voyage from China to New Spain." Why the
French geographers have removed it five degrees to the eastward, we cannot
comprehend; unless we suppose it to have been to make room for another fresh
discovery made by the Dutch, called Company's land.

The wind was very unsettled the whole day, and blew in fresh gusts, which were
succeeded by dead calms. Though these were not unpromising appearances, yet,
after standing off and on the whole day, without perceiving land, we steered to
the northward; not choosing to lose much time in search of an object, the
existence of which was universally disbelieved. The whole of the 16th, our
people were employed in drying their wet things, and in airing the ships below.

The increasing inclemency of the northern climate was now severely felt. On
the 18th, in the morning, we were in the latitude of 45 40, and the longitude
of 160 25. We had snow, sleet, and strong gales from the south-west.
Considering the season of the year, and the quarter from which the wind came,
this is rather a remarkable circumstance. In the daytime of the 19th, the
thermometer remained at the freezing point, and fell to 29 at four in the
morning. On comparing the degree of heat, during the sultry weather at the
beginning of this month, with the extreme cold which we now endured, some idea
may be formed of our sufferings upon so rapid a change.

The gale which we had on the 18th, had split most of the sails we had bent;
and as these were our second suit, we were obliged to have recourse to our last
and best set. Captain Clerke's difficulties were augmented by the sea being
generally so rough, and the ships so extremely leaky, that there was no place
to repair the sails in, except his apartments, which was a serious
inconvenience to him, in his declining state of health.

At noon on the 20th, our latitude was 40 45 north, and our longitude 161 15
east, and we earnestly expected to fall in with the coast of Asia; when the
wind shifted to the north, where it continued the day following. Though our
progress was thus retarded, we were considerably refreshed by the fair weather
it produced. On the 21st, in the forenoon, we had the sight of a whale, and a
land bird; and, as the water appeared muddy, we founded in the afternoon, but
could not find ground with an hundred and forty fathoms of line. In the course
of the three preceding days, we saw a large quantity of wild-fowl, somewhat
resembling ducks. This usually indicates the vicinity of land, but no other
signs of it had been seen since the 16th, in which time we had sailed an
hundred and fifty leagues and upwards.

The wind shifted to the north-east, on the 22d, and was attended with misty
weather. The cold was so intense, and the ropes frozen to such a degree, that
it was a business of great difficulty to force them through the blocks. On
comparing our present position with the southern parts of Kamtschatka, as given
in the Russian charts, Captain Clerk thought it might be dangerous to run on
toward the land all night. We therefore tacked at ten, sounded, and had ground
with seventy fathoms of line.

At six in the morning of the 23d, the fog clearing away we saw mountains
covered with snow, and a high conical rock, at the distance of about three or
four leagues. soon after we had taken this imperfect view, a thick fog again
appeared. According to our maps, we were now but eight leagues from the
entrance of Awatska Bay; therefore, when the weather cleared up, we stood in to
take a nearer survey of the country; when a most dismal and dreary prospect
presented itself. The coast is straight and uniform, without bays, or inlets;
from the shore, the ground rises in moderate hills, and behind them are ranges
of mountains, whose summits penetrate the clouds. The whole was covered with
snow, except the sides of some cliffs, which rose too perpendicularly from the
sea, to permit the snow to lie upon them.

The wind blew strong from the north-east, with hazy weather and fleet, from
the 24th to the 28th; the thermometer, during that time, being never higher
than 30. The ship resembled a complete mass of ice; the shrouds being so
incrusted with it, as to double their dimensions: and, indeed, the oldest
seaman among us had never experienced such continued showers of fleet, and that
extremity of cold, which we had now to encounter. The inclemency of the
weather, the difficulty of working our ships, and the incessant duty required
at the pumps, rendered the service intolerable to many of our crew; some of
whom were much frost-bitten, and others were confined with colds. We continued
standing four hours on each tack, having soundings of sixty fathoms, when
within three leagues of the land* but no sounding at double that distance.

We had, on the 25th. an imperfect glance of the entrance of Awatska Bay, but
could not presume to venture into it, in the present condition of the weather.
We again stood off, when we lost sight of the Discovery, which gave us little
concern, being now almost arrived at the place of rendezvous.

In the morning of the 28th, the weather cleared up, with a light breeze
continuing from the same quarter. Having a fine warm day we were in expectation
of a thaw, and therefore the men were busied in taking the ice from the
rigging, sails, etc. that it might not fall upon our heads. At noon, when our
latitude was 52 44, and our longitude 159, the entrance of Awatska Bay bore
north-west, at the distance of about three or four leagues; and, at three in
the afternoon, we stood in with a fair wind from the southward, having
soundings from twenty-two to seven fathoms.

The mouth of Awatska Bay opens in the direction of north north-west. On the
south side, the land is moderately high: it rises, to the northward, into a
bluff-head. Three remarkable rocks lie in the channel between them, not far
from the north-east side; and, on the opposite side, a single rock of a
considerable size. There is a look-out house on the north-head, which is used
as a lighthouse when any of the Russian ships are expected upon the coast. It
had a flag-staff in it; but there did not appear to be any person there.

Passing the mouth of the bay, which extends about four miles in length, a
circular basin presents itself, of about twenty-five miles in circumference; in
which, at about four o'clock, we anchored in six fathom water; fearing to run
foul of a shoal mentioned by Muller to lie in the channel. Great quantities of
loose ice drifted with the tide in the middle of the bay; but the shores were
wholly blocked up with it. Plenty of wild-fowl, of various kinds, were seen;
also large flights of Greenland pigeons; together with ravens and eagles. We
looked at every corner of the bay, to see if we could discern the town of St.
Peter and St. Paul, which, from the accounts we had received at Oonalashka, we
supposed to be a place of strength and consequence. At last we perceived to the
north-east, some miserable log-houses, and a few conical huts, amounting, in
the whole to about thirty; which, from their situation we concluded to be
Petropaulowska. In justice, however, to the hospitable treatment we found here,
it may not be amiss to anticipate the reader's curiosity, by assuring him, that
our disappointment proved in the end, a matter of entertainment to us. In this
wretched extremity of the earth, beyond conception barbarous and inhospitable,
out of the reach of civilization, bound and barricadoed with ice, and covered
with summer snow, we experienced the tenderest feelings of humanity, joined to
a nobleness of mind, and elevation of sentiment, which would have done honor
to any clime or nation.

In the morning of the 29th, at daylight, Mr. King was sent with the boats to
examine the bay, and to present the letters to the Russian commander, which we
had brought from Oonalashka. We proceeded toward the village just mentioned,
and, having advanced as far as we could with the boats, we got upon the ice,
which reached about half a mile from the shore. Mr. King was attended by Mr.
Webber, and two of the seamen, whilst the master went to finish the survey; the
jolly boat being left to carry us back.

Probably the inhabitants had not, by this time, seen either the ships or the
boats; for, even on the ice, no appearance of a living creature could be seen
in the town. When farther advanced on the ice, a few men were seen hurrying
backwards and forwards; and afterward a sledge with one person in it, and
drawn by dogs, approached us.

Struck with the unusual sight, and admiring the civility of this stranger, who
we supposed was coming to our assistance, we were astonished to see him turn
short round, and direct his course toward the ostrog. We were equally
chagrined and disappointed at this abrupt departure; especially as our journey
over the ice began to be both difficult and dangerous. At every step we took,
we sunk almost knee-deep in the snow; and, though there was tolerable footing
at the bottom, the weak parts of the ice were not discoverable, and we were
continually exposed to the risk of breaking through it. Indeed this accident
actually happened to Mr. King; but, by the assistance of a boat-hook, he was
enabled to get upon firm ice again.

The nearer we approached the shore, we found the ice still more broken. The
sight of another sledge advancing toward us, however, afforded us some
comfort. But, instead of coming, to relieve us, the driver stopped short, and
called out to us. Mr. King immediately held up Ismyloff's letters. In
consequence of which, he turned about, and went full speed back again; followed
with the execrations of some of our party. Unable to draw any conclusion from
this unaccountable behavior, we still proceeded toward the ostrog, with the
greatest circumspection; and, when at the distance of about a quarter of a mile
from it, we observed a body of armed men advancing toward us. To avoid giving
them any alarm, and to preserve the most peaceable appearance, Mr. King and Mr.
Webber marched in front, and the men, who had boat-hooks in their hands, were
ordered in the rear. The armed party consisted of about thirty soldiers,
preceded by a person with a cane in his hand. Within a few paces of us, he
halted, and drew up his men in a martial order. Mr. King presented Ismaloff's
letters to him, and vainly endeavored to make him understand that we were
English, and had brought these dispatches from Oonalashka.

Having attentively examined us, he conducted us toward the village in solemn
silence, frequently halting his men, and making them perform different parts of
their manual exercise; in order to show us, perhaps, that if we should presume
to offer any violence, we should have to deal with those who knew what they
were about.

During the whole of this time, Mr. King was in his wet clothes, shivering with
cold; yet he could not avoid being diverted with this military parade, though
it was attended by an unseasonable delay. Arriving, at length, at the
habitation of the commanding officer of the party, we were ushered in; and,
after giving orders to the military without doors, our host appeared,
accompanied by the secretary of the port. One of the letters from Imyloff was
now opened, and the other sent express to Bolcheretsk, a town on the west side
of Kamtschatka, and the place of residence of the Russian commander of this
province.

It appears extraordinary, that the natives had not seen the Resolution the
preceding day, when we anchored in the bay; nor this morning till our A VIEW of
the TOWN and (...) of ST PETER and ST PAUL in KAMTSCHATKA.
boats approach the ice. The first sight of the ship, we understood, had struck
them with a considerable panic. The garrison was instantly put under arms; two
fieldpieces were placed before the commander's house; and powder, shot, and
lighted matches were all in readiness.

The officer, who had conducted us to his house, was a sergeant; and also the
commander of the ostrog. After he had recovered from the alarm which our
arrival had produced, the kindness and hospitality of his behavior was
astonishing. His house, indeed, was intolerably hot, but remarkably neat and
clean. After Mr. King had changed his clothes, by putting on a complete suit of
the serjeant's, at his earnest request; we were requested to partake of a
dinner, which was doubtless the best he could procure; and, considering our
visit was unexpected, was ingeniously conducted. To have prepared soup and
bouillit, would have required some time; instead of which, we had some cold
beef sliced, with boiling water poured over it. After that we were regaled with
a large roasted bird, the taste of which was most delicious, though we were
unacquainted with its species. Having eaten a part of this, it was removed, and
fish were served up, dressed in two different methods. Soon after which the
bird appeared again in savoury and sweet pates. Our liquor was such as the
Russians distinguished by the name of quass, and was the most indifferent part
of our entertainment. The serjeant's wife served up several of the dishes, and
was not permitted to sit down at table with us.

Our repast being finished, during which our conversation was limited to a few
bows, and other personal tokens of mutual respect, we strove to explain to our
host, the occasion of our visit to this port. Probably Ismaloff had written to
them on this subject, in the letters we had delivered, as we made him readily
conceive our meaning; but, as there was not a person in the place, who knew any
other language than Russian or Kamtschadale, we found it extremely difficult to
comprehend what he endeavored to communicate to us. After much time spent in
our attempts to understand each other, the sum of the intelligence we had
received appeared to be, that, though we could not be supplied with provisions
or stores at this place, yet those articles were to be procured, in great
plenty, at Bolcheretsk. That he doubted not, but the commander would readily
supply us with what we wanted; but that, till he had received his orders,
neither he, nor any of the natives, could even venture on board the vessel.

It being now time for us to depart, and as Mr. King's clothes were not yet
dry, he again had recourse to the serjeant's benevolence for his leave to carry
those on board which he had borrowed of him. This request was cheerfully
complied with; and a sledge, with five dogs, and a driver, was instantly
provided for each of our party. This mode of conveyance afforded high
entertainment for the sailors; and they were delighted still more, when they
found that the two boat-hooks had a sledge appropriated solely to themselves.
These sledges are so light, and so admirably constructed for the purposes they
are intended, that they went safely and expeditiously over the ice, which we
should have found extremely difficult to have passed on foot.

The boats, on our return, were towing the Resolution toward the village; and,
at seven, we moored close to the ice; the entrance of the bay bearing south by
east, and the ostreg north, at the distance of one mile and a half.

On the morning of the 30th, the casks and cables were taken to the
quarter deck, to lighten the vessel forward; and the carpenters proceeded to
stop the leak, which had occasioned us so much trouble. It appeared to have
been occasioned by some sheathing falling off from the larboard-bow, and the
oakum having been washed out from between the planks. We had such warm weather
in the middle of the day, that the ice began to break away very fast, and
almost choked up the entrance of the bay. Several of our officers waited upon
the sergeant, who received them with great civility; and Captain Clerk made
him a present of two bottles of rum, thinking he could not send him any thing
more acceptable. In our return, he received twenty fine trouts, and some
excellent fouls of the grouse kind. Though the bay swarmed with ducks and
Greenland pigeons, our sportsmen had no success, for they were so exceedingly
shy as not to come within shot.

On the first of May, in the morning, we saw the Discovery standing in the bay;
a boat was dispatched to her assistance, and she was moored, in the afternoon,
close by the Resolution. We were then informed, that, after the weather became
clear on the 28th, (the day she parted company) they were to leeward of the
bay; and the following day, when they got abreast of it, seeing the entrance
choked up with ice, they fired guns and stood off, supposing we could not be
here; but afterward, perceiving it was only drift ice, they ventured to come
in.

On Sunday the 2d, we had heavy showers of snow, and the weather was so
exceedingly unsettled, that the carpenters could not proceed in their business.
In the evening the thermometer stood at 28, and the frost in the night was
remarkably severe.

Two sledges being observed to drive into the village, on the morning of the
3d, Mr. King was ordered on shore, to learn whether any answer was arrived from
the commander of Kamtschatka, which the sergeant informed us might be
reasonably expected about this time. The distance from Bolcheretsk to St. Peter
and St. Paul's, is one hundred and thirty-five English miles. The dogs were
sent off with our dispatches, on the 29th at noon; and returned with an answer,
as we were afterward informed, early this morning: so that they performed a
journey of two hundred and seventy miles, in a little more than three days and
a half.

For the present, however, the return of the commander's answer was concealed
from us; and, on Mr. King's arrival at the serjeant's, he was informed that he
should hear from him the next day. While Mr. King was on shore, the boat in
which he came, and another belonging to the Discovery, were bound fast by the
ice. In this situation, the Discovery's launch was sent to their assistance,
which soon partook of the same fate; and, shortly after, they were surrounded
with ice to a great extent. Thus situated, we were obliged to continue on shore
till the evening; when, giving over the thoughts of getting the boats off at
that time, some of us were conveyed in sledges to the edge of the ice, where
the boats from the ship took us off, and the rest continued all night on shore.

It froze extremely hard during the night; but, in the morning of the 4th, the
floating ice was drifted away by a change of wind; and the boats were set at
liberty without sustaining the smallest damage.

At ten in the forenoon, several sledges arriving at the edge of the ice, a
boat was sent from the ship to conduct those who were in them on board. One of
them proved to be a Russian merchant from Bolcheretsk, whose name was
Fedositsch; and the other a German, named Port, with dispatches from Major
Behm, commander of Kamtschatka, to Captain Clerk.

Arriving at the edge of the ice, and seeing distinctly the magnitude of the
ships, which were then within two hundred yards of them, they were exceedingly
alarmed; and before they ventured to embark, stipulated that two of our boat's
crew should remain on shore, as hostages for their safety. It afterward
appeared, that Ismyloff, in the epistle he had written to the commander, (for
reasons which we cannot comprehend) had mentioned our vessels as two small
trading boats; and that the sergeant, having seen the ships but at a distance,
had not rectified that mistake.

After they were come on board, we perceived by their timorous and cautious
behavior, that they entertained some very extraordinary apprehensions. They
were greatly elated, however, when the German found a person among us, with
whom he could enter into conversation. Mr. Webber spoke that language fluently,
and convinced them, though not without difficulty, that we were Englishmen and
friends. Mr. Port was introduced to Captain Clerk, to whom he delivered the
commander's letter. It was written in the German language, and merely
complimental, giving him and his officers an invitation to Bolcheretsk. Mr.
Port also told Captain Clerk, that the Major had been misinformed, respecting
the size of the ships, and the service in which we were engaged; Ismyloff
having called our two vessels English packet-boats, and warned him to be
cautious; intimating, as he supposed, that he suspected we were pirates. This
letter, he said, had given birth to various conjectures about us at
Bolcheretsk; that the Major apprehended we might be on a trading plan, and
therefore had sent a merchant to us; but that the officer next in command,
imagined we were French, arrived with some hostile intentions, and that
measures ought to be pursued accordingly. He added, that the Major had been
obliged to exert all his authority to prevent the inhabitants from quitting the
town, so much were they alarmed, from the apprehension of our being French.

These alarms were principally occasioned by some circumstances in an
insurrection which had happened at Bolcheretsk, not many years ago, in which
the commander was killed. We were told, that Beniowski, an exiled Polish
officer, seeing the town in great confusion, took that opportunity of seizing
upon a galliot, lying at the entrance of the Bolchoireeka, and forced a
sufficient number of Russian sailors on board to navigate her; that part of the
crew were put on shore at the Kourile Islands, and Ismyloff among the rest;
who, as we have already observed, puzzled us exceedingly with a narrative of
this transaction at Oonalashka; though we then found it difficult to understand
all the circumstances attending it: that he had a view of Japan; made Luconia,
where he was instructed how to steer to Canton; that arriving there, he got a
passage to France in one of the French India ships; most of the Russians having
also returned to Europe in French ships; and afterward proceeded to
Petersburgh. We gathered the circumstances of the above story, from three of
Beniowski's crew, whom we met with in the harbor of St. Peter and St. Paul.

We received a farther corroboration of these facts, on our arrival at Canton,
from the gentlemen belonging to the English factory there; who informed us,
that a person in a Russian galliot had arrived there, who told them he came
from Kamtschatka, and that the French factory had furnished him with a passage
to Europe.

We were much diverted with the fears and apprehensions of these people; and
especially with an account, given by Mr. Port, of the serjeant's extreme
caution the day before. On seeing Mr. King and some other gentlemen come on
shore, he concealed him and the Russian merchant in the kitchen, to give them
an opportunity of listening to our conversation with each other, in order to
discover, whether we were Englishmen or not.

Imagining, from the appearance of Mr. Port, that he might probably be the
commander's secretary, we was considered in that light, and was invited, with
the Russian merchant, to dine with Captain Clerk. Soon, however, we began to
suspect, from the behavior of the merchant, that Mr. Port was no more than a
common servant; but, not choosing to sacrifice our little comforts at our
pride, we avoided an explanation, by not permitting such a question to be
proposed to him; he therefore continued upon a footing of equality with us, and
we, in return, reaped the advantage of his abilities as a linguist.

CHAP. II.
Stores and Provisions extremely scarce at St. Peter and St. Paul -- Exorbitant
Demands of a Merchant -- A party dispatched to Bolcheretsk in pursuit of Stores
and Provisions -- Proceed up the River Awatska -- Pass the night in a Marquee
on the Riverside -- Civility and Hospitality of the Town of Karatchin --
Dresses of the Kamtschadales -- Prosecute our Journey on Sledges -- Curious
account of that Mode of Traveling -- Arrive at Natcheenki -- Remarkable hot
Spring there -- Embark on the Bolchoireka River -- Arrival at the Capital --
Formal Procession into that town -- Generosity and Hospitality of Major Behm,
Commander of the Garrison -- Bolcheretsk described -- Presents received from
the Major -- Entertainments of Dancing -- Very affecting Departure from
Bolcheretsk -- Return to the Ships -- Remarkable Instance of Generosity in the
Sailors -- Major Behm carries Dispatches to Petersburgh -- His Departure, and
extraordinary Character,

BY the assistance of our interpreter, we were now enabled to converse with the
Russians, with some degree of facility; and the first objects of our enquiries,
were the means of procuring fresh provisions and naval stores; particularly the
latter, for the want of which we had been long in great distress. It appeared,
upon enquiry, that the whole country about the bay, could furnish no other live
cattle than two heifers; and these the sergeant engaged to procure for us. Our
next applications were made to the merchant, whose terms for serving us were so
exorbitant, that Captain Clerk thought it expedient to send an officer to the
commander at Bolcheretsk, to learn the price of stores at that place. This
determination being communicated to Mr. Port, he sent an express to the
commander to acquaint him with our intentions, and to remove the suspicions
that were entertained, respecting the purposes of our voyage.

Captain Clerk fixed upon Mr. King for this s^^vice, and ordered him to
prepare for setting out the next day, together with Mr. Webber, who was to
accompany him as interpreter. That day and the next, however, proved too stormy
for beginning a journey through so desolate and wild a country; but on the 7th
of May, the weather became more favorable, and we set out in the ship's boats,
early in the morning, in order to arrive at the entrance of the Awatska at high
water, on account of the shoals at the mouth of that river. The country boats
were to meet us here, to conduct us up the stream. Captain Core was also added
to our party; and we were accompanied by Mr. Port and the Russian merchant,
with two cossacks, having been previously furnished with warm furred clothing;
a very necessary precaution, as it began to snow briskly immediately after our
setting out. About eight o'clock, we were stopped by shoal water, within a mile
of the mouth of the river, when some Kamtschadales took us and our baggage, in
some small canoes, and conveyed us over a bank of sand, which the rapidity of
the river had thrown up, and which, we are informed, was continually shifting.
Having passed this shoal, the water again deepened, and we were furnished with
a commodious boat, resembling a Norway yawl, to convey us up the river;
together with canoes for the reception of our baggage.

The breadth of the mouth of the Awatska is about a quarter of a mile, but it
gradually narrowed as we advanced. Having proceeded a few miles, we passed
several branches; many of which we were told, emptied themselves into other
parts of the bay; and that some of those, on the left, ran into the Paratounca
river. For the first ten miles, the general direction of the river, from the
bay, is to the north; and afterward it turns to the westward. Except this
bend, it chiefly preserves a straight course; and flows through a low flat
country, to the distance of thirty miles from the sea, which is subject to
frequent inundations. Six men were employed in pushing us on with long poles,
three of them being at each end of the boat; and proceeded against the stream,
at the rate of about three miles an hour. Our conductors endured this seve^^
labor for ten hours; stopping only once, and that for a short space of time,
to take a little refreshment.

Being told, at our first setting out, that we could easily reach Karatchin
that night, we were greatly disappointed to find ourselves fifteen miles from
that place at sunset. This was attributed to the delay in passing the shoals,
both at the entrance of the river, and in many other places.

Our men being exceedingly fatigued, and as the difficulty of navigating the
river would have increased by the darkness of the night, we declined all
thoughts of proceeding on our journey that evening: we therefore fixed upon a
place that was tolerably well sheltered, and, clearing it of the snow, erected
a small marquee, which we had providentially taken with us; and, with the
assistance of a good fire, and some excellent punch, passed the night
agreeably. Our principal inconvenience was the being obliged to keep at a
considerable distance from the fire; for, as soon as it was lighted, it thawed
every part round it into an absolute puddle. The Kamtschadales were extremely
alert and expeditious in erecting our marquee, and cooking our provisions; but
we were much surprised at finding they had brought with them their utensils for
making tea, considering it as a most intolerable hardship if they cannot, two
or three times a day, regale themselves with drinking tea.

As soon as it was light, in the morning, we proceeded on our journey, and,
before we had made much progress, were met by the Toion, or chief of Karatchin,
who, being apprized of our coming, had provided canoes that were better
accommodated for navigating the higher parts of the river. A commodious vessel
(made by lashing two canoes together) furnished with fur cloaks, and lined with
bear-skins, was also procured for us. We now proceeded rapidly, the Toion's
people being remarkably expert in this kind of business. At ten we arrived at
the ostrog, named Karatchin, and the seat of his command; where we were
received by the Kamtschadale men and women, and some Russian servants belonging
to the merchant, Fedositch. They were all attired in their best habilments;
those of the women being gay and pleasing, and consisting of a loose robe of
white nankeen, gathered close round the neck, and fastened with a silk collar.
A short jacket, without sleeves, was worn over this, consisting of different
colored nankeens; and they had petticoats made of a slight Chinese silk. Their
shifts, which were also made of silk, had sleeves extending to the wrists; and
their heads were bound with colored silk handkerchiefs, which entirely
concealed the hair of the married women; but the unmarried ones placed the
handkerchief under the hair, permitting it to flow loosely down the shoulders.

Karatchin was pleasantly situated on the side of the river, and was composed
of three log-houses, nineteen balagans, or summer habitations, and three
jourts, which are houses under ground. The Toion, to whose dwellings we were
then conducted, was a plain decent man, sprung from a Russian mother, and a
Kamtschadale father. His house, like all others in this country, consisted of
only two apartments. All the furniture in the outer room, was a long narrow
table, with a bench round it; and the inner apartment, which was the kitchen,
was also very scantily furnished. But the hearty welcome, and kind attention of
our host, amply compensated for the poverty of his habitation.

The wife of the Toion was an excellent cook, and served us with various sorts
of fish and game, and different kinds of heath-berries, which had been
preserved since the last year. Whilst we were dining in this miserable hut, the
guests of absolutely strangers, and at the extremity of the habitable globe, a
solitary half-worn pewter spoon attracted our attention. Its form was familiar
to us, and the word London was stamped upon the back of it. It is impossible to
express the anxious hopes and tender remembrances, this circumstance excited in
us. Those who have been long absent from their native country, will readily
conceived what inexpressible pleasure such trifling incidents can give.

Having now quitted the river, the next part of our journey was to be performed
on sledges; but the thaw had been so great in the daytime, as not to permit us
to set out, till the snow was become hard and firm by the coldness of the
evening. This furnished us with an opportunity of walking about the village,
which was the only place in this country, that we had seen free from snow. It
was situated on a flat, of about a mile and an half in circuit. The leaves of
the trees were just budding, and the verdure was strongly contrasted with the
surrounding hills, which remained covered with snow. The soil appeared to be
capable of producing common vegetables, we were surprised to find that not a
spot of it was cultivated. Neither were the inhabitants possessed of cattle of
any sort. In short, their situation, during the winter months, must be wretched
beyond conception. They were now removing from their jourts to their balagans,
which gave us an opportunity of observing both these sorts of habitations. The
people invited us, very civilly, into their houses; cheerfulness and content
were visible in every countenance, to which the approaching change of season
might perhaps contribute.

On returning to our host's, supper was prepared for us, consisting of the same
articles which composed our former repast. When we had finished our meal, we
entertained the Toion and his wife with punch made of some of our spirits; and
Captain Gore, with his wonted generosity, made them some valuable presents:
after which, they retired to the kitchen, leaving us in the other room; on the
benches of which we spread our bear-skins, and sought a little repose; having
first settled with our conductors, to proceed on our journey, when the ground
was judged to be in a suitable condition.

The melancholy howlings of the dogs awakened us about nine the same evening.
During the whole time our baggage was lashing upon the sledges, their horrid
noise continued; but, when they were yoked, and prepared for traveling, a
cheerful yelping succeeded, which ceased the instant they marched off.

The annexed engraving will show the figure of the sledges: it was taken from
one brought over by Mr. King, and now in the possession of Sir Ashton Lever.
The length of the body is about four feet and an half, and the breadth one
foot. It is made in the form of a crescent, of light tough wood, fastened
together with wicker work; and, among the principal people, is elegantly
stained with red and blue; the seat being covered with furs or bear-skins. It
has four legs, about two feet in height, resting on two long flat pieces of
wood, of the breadth of five or six inches, extending a foot beyond the body of
the sledge, at each end. These run up before, somewhat like a skait, and are
shod with the bone of some sea-animal. The carriage is ornamented, at the fore
part with tassels off colored cloth, and leather thongs. It has a cross bar,
to which the harness is joined; and links of iron, or small bells, are hanging
to it, which, by the jingling, is supposed to encourage the dogs. They seldom
carry more than one person at a time, who sits a side, with his feet on the
lower part of the sledge, having his baggage and provisions, in a bundle behind
him. The usual number of dogs employed in drawing this carriage, is five; four
of them yoked two and two, and the other acting as leader. The reins being
fastened to the collar, instead of the head, have no great command; and are
therefore usually hung upon the sledge; the driver depending principally on
their obedience to his voice. Great care and attention are consequently used in
training up the leader, which frequently becomes very valuable on account of
his steadiness and docility; the sum of forty rubles (or ten pounds) being no
unusual price for one of them. The rider has also a crooked stick, answering
the purpose both of whip and reins; with which, by striking in the snow, he can
regulate the speed of the dogs, or even stop them at pleasure. When they are
inattentive to their duty, he often chastises them by throwing it at them. The
dexterity of the riders, in picking this stick up again, is very remarkable,
and is the most difficult maneuver in the exercise of their profession: nor is
it, indeed, surprising that they should be skilful in a practice in which they
are so materially interested; for, they assured us, that if a driver should
happen to lose his stick, the dogs immediately discover it; and, unless their
leader is both steady and resolute, they will instantly set off full speed, and
never stop till their strength is exhausted; or till the carriage is overturned
and dashed to pieces, or hurried down a precipice, when all were buried in the
snow. The accounts of the speed of these animals, and of the hardships and
fatigues they suffer, would have appeared incredible, had they not been
supported by the greatest authority. We ourselves were witnesses of the
extraordinary expedition with which the messenger returned, who had been
dispatched to Bolcheretsk with the news of our arrival at St. Peter and St.
Paul's, though the snow was exceedingly soft. The Governor of Kamtschatka
assured us, that this journey was usually performed in two days and an half;
and that he had once received an express from that harbor in twenty-three hours

During the winter, the dogs are fed on the offals of dried and stinking fish;
and, even this miserable food is withheld from them, a day before they set out
on a journey; and they are not permitted to eat a morsel of any thing till they
arrive at the end of it. They are frequently kept fasting for two entire days,
in which time they will perform a journey of great extent. The shape of these
resembles that of the Pomeranian breed, but they are considerably larger.

Not choosing to rely upon our own skill, we had each of us a man to conduct the
sledge, which, in the condition the roads then, were proved a very laborious
business: for, as the thaw had been prevalent in the valleys, through which was
our regular road, we were obliged to travel along the sides of the hills; our
guides being under the necessity of supporting the sledges, on the lower sides,
with their shoulders, for many miles together. Mr. King was attended by a
goodnatured Cossack, who was so imperfect in his business, that he was
continually overturned, which afforded entertainment to his companions. The
party consisted of ten sledges in the whole. That which conducted Captain Gore,
was formed of two lashed together, and was plentifully furnished with furs and
bear-skins. It was drawn by ten dogs, yoked four abreast; and those which were
laden with heavy baggage, were drawn by the same number.

We had proceeded about four miles on our journey, when it began to rain,
which, together with the darkness of the night, threw us into some confusion.
It was, after some little consultation, agreed, that we should continue where
we were till daylight; we therefore secured our sledges, wrapped ourselves up
in furs, and waited patiently for the morning. At three o'clock we were
summoned to proceed; our guides expressing their apprehensions, that if we
waited any longer, the thaw would perhaps stop us, and prevent our advancing or
returning. Though we had many difficulties to encounter, owing principally to
the bad condition of the road, we got safe to an ostrog about two in the
afternoon. It is called Natcheekin, and is situated on a small stream, which
falls into the Belchoireka, at some distance below the town. It is twenty-five
miles from Karatchin; which, by their account, we could have compassed in four
hours, had the frost continued; but the snow was so soft that the poor animals
sunk up to their bellies at almost every step; and it was indeed surprising
that they should be able to support themselves under so fatiguing a journey.

This inconsiderable ostrog consists of one loghouse, the residence of the
Toion, one jourt, and sive balagans. We were received here with the same
civility and hospitality as at Karatchin; and, in the afternoon, were conducted
to a remarkable hot spring, at a small distance from this village. Before we
came very near it, we saw a rising steam from it, as from a boiling caldron;
and, when we approached it, we perceived a strong sulphurous effluvia. A basin
of about, three feet in diameter, is formed by the main spring; besides which,
there are several lesser springs, of equal heat, in the adjacent ground; by
which means the whole spot, consisting of about an acre, was so very hot that
we could not remain two minutes in the same place. The water issuing from these
springs, supplies a small bathing pond, and afterward a little rivulet, which
conducts it into the river, at the distance of about an hundred and fifty
yards. Great cures they informed us, had been effected by this bath, in
rheumatisms, scorbutic ulcers, swelled and contracted joints, and many other
disorders. Where these springs flow, the ground is on a gentle ascent; have a
green hill of a moderate size behind it. Some plants seemed to thrive here with
great luxuriance, among which we observed the wild garlic.

On the morning of the 10th, we embarked on the Bolchoireeka; and going with
the stream, expected to arrive at our journey's end the following day. Th^^gh
Bolcheretsk is eighty miles from Natcheekin, we were informed, that, in the
summer, when the melting of snow on the mountains has rendered the river full
and rapid, the canoes have often gone there in a single day: but now they told
us we should be much longer, the ice having broken up only three days before
our arrival, and our's being the first boat that had attempted to pass. There
was but too much truth in this intelligence; for we were greatly impeded by the
shallows; and, though the stream was rapid in many places, we frequently had
ripplings and shoals, and were under the necessity of hauling the boats over
them. On each side of the river, the country was romantic, but not diversified:
the course of it being between craggy mountains, of a most dreary and barren
aspect; with nothing to vary the scene, except now and then the sight of a
bear, or a flock of wild fowl. This and the following night, we slept under our
marquee, on the banks of the river, and suffered greatly from the severity of
the weather.

On the 12th, at daylight, we had passed the mountains, and were proceeding
through a low extensive plain, on which were a number of shrubby trees. At nine
in the morning, we reached an ostrog, called Opatchin, of about the same
magnitude as Karatchin, and supposed to be fifty miles from Natcheekin. A
sergeant and four Russian soldiers had been here two day^, waiting for our
arrival; who instantly dispatched a light boat to Bolcheretsk to give
intelligence of our approach. A magnificent canoe, plentifully furnished with
skins and furs, was prepared for our reception, and we were very commodiously
equipped; but our fellow-travellers were excluded. It gave us some concern to
be separated from our old companion Mr. Port, who daily grew more shy and
distant, as we drew nearer to the completion of our journey. He acknowledged,
indeed, before we set out, that he was not entitled to the respect we had shown
him; but, finding him discreet, and not presuming, we had insisted on his
faring as we did, throughout the journey. We performed the remainder of our
passage, with the utmost ease and expedition; for, as we descended, the river
grew more rapid, and had very few obstructions.

On our approaching Kamtschatka, we judged, from an appearance of great stir
and bustle, that our reception was to be in form. This circumstance was
disagreeable to us; as decent clothing had long been scarce among us; and our
traveling habits formed a strange assemblage of the modes of India, Europe,
and Kamtschatka. To make a parade through the metropolis in this motley trim,
we thought would appear ridiculous; and, as we observed a crowd of people
collected on the banks of the river, and were informed that the commander would
receive us at the waterside, we stopped at the house of a soldier, about a
quarter of a mile before we came to the town. Here we dispatch Mr. Port with a
message to his excellency, acquainting him, that, as soon as we had put off our
traveling dresses, we would attend him at his own house, to pay our respects
to him; and entreated him not to think of waiting to conduct us. He persisted,
however, in his resolution of paying us this compliment, and we immediately
proceeded to join him at the entrance of the capital. We were all remarkably
awkward and defective in making our first salutations; not having been
accustomed to bowing and scraping, for at least two years and an half. The
commander received us in a most engaging manner; but we had the mortification
to discover, that he had almost wholly forgot the French language; so that only
Mr. Webber had the satisfaction of conversing with him, as he spoke the German,
which was his native tongue.

Major Behm was accompanied by Captain Shmelaff, the next in command, and
another officer; the whole body of merchants attended also. We were conducted
to the commander's house, where we were politely and respectfully received by
his lady; who had prepared tea and other refreshments for us. The first
compliments being over, Captain ^ore desired Mr. Webber to acquaint the Major,
that we were distressed for want of naval stores, fresh provisions, flour, and
other necessaries; and that we were convinced we could not receive much
assistance from him, in the country about Awatska Bay, from what we had already
seen and heard; that the impossibility of conveying heavy stores over the
peninsula, at that season, we were but too sensible of, from the difficulties
we had encountered in our journey; and that we could not delay the prosecution
of our voyage, to wait for any material change. Here the Major interrupted Mr.
Webber, by observing, that he knew not what they were capable of doing; that he
should not bestow a thought upon the difficulties of supplying our wants; he
only wished to know what articles we stood in need of, and the time he could be
allowed for procuring them. After expressing our acknowledgments for his
obliging condescension, we presented him an account of the naval stores,
cattle, and flour, we were directed to purchase; and informed him, that we
intended to prosecute our voyage about the 5th of June.

After this the conversation became more general, and it might naturally be
supposed, that we were anxious to obtain some information resqecting our native
country. Having been three years absent, we entertained the most flattering
expectations, of receiving some interesting intelligence from Major Behm: but
we were greatly disappointed, when he assured us, that he could not communicate
any intelligence of a much later date than that of our quitting* England. The
commander, supposing we might be fatigued, and desirous of repose, begged leave
to conduct us to our lodgings, at about seven o'clock. It was useless to
protest against a compliment, to which we had no other title than that of being
strangers. That alone, with this generous Livonian, was sufficient to
counterbalance every other consideration. In going along, we passed two
guard-houses, where the men were under arms in compliment to Captain Gore, and
were conducted to a neat decent house, which the Major had appointed for our
residence, while we continued at Kamtschatka. We had two sentinels posted at
our door, and a serjeant's guard in an adjoining house. Having disposed of us
in our apartments, the Major took his leave, promising to visit us the next
day. We were now at leisure to discover the conveniences which he had amply
provided for us. Our fellow-traveller, Mr. Port, and a soldier, of a rank
between that of a sergeant and a corporal, (called a pulpropersckaek) were
fixed upon to be our male domestics. We had also a housekeeper, and a cook, who
were ordered to obey Mr. Port's directions in dressing us a supper, after the
English mode of cookery. In the course of the evening, we were favored with a
number of civil messages, from the principal inhabitants of the town, politely
observing, that their attending to pay their respects to us at that time, would
add to our fatigues, but they would do themselves that honor the next morning.
Such attention and politeness, in so uncultivated and desolate a country,
formed a contrast highly in favor of its inhabitants; and, in addition to
their civility, at sunset, the sergeant brought the report of his guard to
Captain Gore.

In the morning of the 13th, compliments were sent us by the Major, Captain
Shmelaff, and the most respectable people of the town, from all whom we were
honored with visits soon after. The two former having, after we had retired to
rest, enquired of Mr. Port what articles we stood in the greatest need of on
board the ships; they insisted on our sharing with their garrison, in the small
stock of provisions they had then remaining; lamenting, at the same time, that
our arrival, should happen to be in that season of the year, when scarcity
reigned universally among them; the sloops from Okotsk not being yet arrived
with their annual supply.

We thankfully accepted the liberal offer of these hospitable strangers; on
condition, however, that we should be made acquainted with the price of the
articles we received from them, that Captain Clerk might draw upon the
Victualling Office, in London, for the amount. This was refused, in the most
positive terms; and, though repeatedly urged, the Major always stopped us
short, by saying, that his mistress would be highly gratified at his rendering
every assistance in his power to the English, who are her good friends and
allies; and that it would give her a peculiar satisfaction to find, that, in
such remote regions, her dominions had afforded any relief to vessels engaged
in such important services. He added, that he could not, therefore, act so
contrary to the principles of his Empress, as to think of receiving any bills;
but if we insisted on it, we might give him a bare certificate of the articles
he might supply us with, which he would transmit to the court of Russia, as
evidence of having performed his duty.. All farther acknowledgments, continued
he, must be submitted to the two courts, but you must excuse me from acceding
to your proposal.

This matter being adjusted, he requested to be informed respecting our private
wants, saying he should consider it as offering him an affront, if we applied
to any of the merchants, or had dealing with any other person except himself.

Not being able to make an adequate return for such singular generosity, he had
only our thanks and admiration. At this moment, Mr. King recollected, that
Captain Clerk had sent by him a set of the engravings to Captain Cook's second
voyage, desiring him to present it, in his name, to the commander. Nothing
could have been more acceptable to him than this present, the Major being an
enthusiast in all matters relative to discoveries. Captain Clerk had also
given Mr. King a discretionary power, of permitting the commander to see a
chart of the discoveries made in the present voyage; and judging from his
situation and disposition of mind, that he would be highly gratified by such a
communication; though, from motives of delicacy, he had only asked a few
general questions on the subject* Mr. King reposed in him that confidence,
which his whole conduct so justly merited.

He felt this compliment as it was intended he should; and was struck at
beholding, in one view, the whole of that coast on the side of Asia and
America, which his countrymen had been so long employed in acquiring an
imperfect knowledge of.

Except this mark of confidence, and the set of copper plates already
mentioned, we had nothing with us deserving of his acceptance; for it was
hardly worth noticing, that Mr. King prevailed on his son (who was quite a
youth) to accept of a silver watch; and contributed to his little daugter's
happiness, by presenting her with two pair of earrings, of French paste. He
also gave Captain Shmaleff the thermometer which he had used on his journey,
when he engaged to keep a register of the temperature of the air for one whole
year, and to transmit it to Mr. Muller, with whom he was acquainted.

This day we dined at the commander's, who, ever studious to gratify our
curiosity, had prepared a variety of dishes dressed after the Russian and
Kamtschadale manner, besides a number of others in the English style. In the
afternoon, we took a survey of the town, and the adjacent country. The
situation of Bolcheretsk is in a low swampy plain, extending to the sea of
Okotsk, being about forty miles in length, and of a considerable breadth. It
lies north of the Bolchoi-reka (or great river) and on a peninsula, which has
been separated from the continent by a large canal, under the directions of the
present commander; which has added strength to it as a fortress, and rendered
it much less subject to inundations. The depth of the river, below the town, is
from six to eight feet, and the breadth about a quarter of a mile. At the
distance of twenty-two miles, it empties itself into the sea of Okotsk; where
it is capable of admitting pretty large vessels. No corn, of any kind, is
cultivated in this part of the country; and the Major assured us, that his was
the only garden that had been planted. In general, the earth was covered with
snow: the parts which were free from it, were full of black turfy hillocks. We
saw about twenty or thirty cows; and the commander had six good horses. These,
and their dogs, are there only tame animals: being obliged to keep a great
number of the latter, they can rear only such cattle as are a match for them in
strength and size. For, during the whole of the summer season, the dogs are
turned loose, to provide entirely for themselves; and are sometimes so
ravenous, that they will even venture to attack the bullocks.

The buildings in Bolcheretsk are all in the same style; they consist of logs
of wood, and are thatched. The Major's house is considerably larger than the
rest, and has there capacious rooms neatly papered; but the talc, which covered
the windows, gave them a disagreeable and mean appearance. The town consist of
low buildings, in rows of five or six habitations each, connected together by a
passage extending the whole length of them; having the kitchen and storehouse
on one side, and the dwelling apartments on the other. There are also barracks
for the Russian soldiers and Cossacks; a tolerable church; a court-room; and,
at the end of the town, a number of Balagans. The number of the inhabitants is
between five or six hundred. A handsome entertainment was given by the Major,
in the evening, to which were invited all the respectable inhabitants of both
sexes.

We made a private application, the next day, to Fedositch, the merchant, in
order to purchase some tobacco; the sailors having been without that favorite
commodity for upwards of a year. This however, like other similar transactions,
came immediately to the knowledge of the commander; and, in a very short time
after, we were surprised to find four bags of tobacco in our house, each
containing upwards of a hundred pounds; which the Major requested might be
presented to our sailors, in his name, and that of the garrison under his
command. By the same conveyance, we received twenty loaves of sugar, and as
many pounds of tea, which they requested the officers to accept of; as they
understood that we were almost destitute of those articles. A present was also
sent by Madame Behm, for Captain Clerk, which consisted of honey, butter,
figs, rice, and other articles; accompanied with her best wishes, that in his
infirm state, they might prove serviceable to him. We strenuously endeavored
to oppose this profusion of bounty, and were extremely anxious to restrain it;
fully convinced that they were giving us almost the whole stock of their
garrison. But the answer we received from the Major, on these occasions,
generally was, That he had been in distress himself, and he was sensible that
we must now be in that situation. The length of time, indeed, since we had
touched at any known port, appeared to them almost incredible, and seemed to
require the evidence of our maps, and other concurrent circumstances, to obtain
their credit. Among the latter, we shall mention a curious fact, which Major
Behm related to us this morning, and which he said he should not have known how
to account for, but for our arrival.

Among the people of the north of Asia, it is well known, that the Tschutski
only have maintained their independence, and resisted all the efforts of the
Russians to reduce them. The last attempt was in 1750, and after variety of
temporary advantages on each side, the Russian forces retreated, after having
lost their commanding officer. The Russians afterward removed their frontier
frotress, from the Anadyr to the Ingiga a river which runs into the northern
extremity of the sea of Okotsk, and gives its name to a gulf, west of that of
Penshinsk. On the day of our arrival at Bolecheretsk, the Major had received
dispatches from this fort, acquainting him, that a party of the Tschutski had
arrived there, with voluntary offers of friendship and a tribute. That, on
asking the cause of so unexpected an alteration in their sentiments, they had
acquainted his people, that two large Russian boats had visited them, toward
the end of the preceding summer: that they had been shown the greatest kindness
by the people who were in them, and had entered into a league of amity with
them; and that, in consequence of this, they came to the Russian fort, in order
to settle a treaty upon terms agreeable to both nations. This remakable tale
had given rise to much speculation, both at Ingiginsk and Bolcheretsk; and must
have remained utterly unintelligible, had it not been elucidated by us. It was
no small satisfaction to us, to have thus shown the Russians, even by accident,
the best method of collecting tribute, and extending their dominions; in hopes
that the good understanding, which this event has produced, may rescue a brave
people from such powerful invaders.

We were this day engaged to dine with Captain Shmaleff, who in order to vary
our amusements, entertained us with an exhibition of dancing, in the Russian
and Kamtschadale style. It is impossible to convey an adequate idea of this
uncouth exhibition. The figure of the Russian dance, resembled those of our
hornpipes, and consisted of one, two, or four performers at a time. Their steps
were exceedingly short and quick, their feet being raised but a very little way
from the ground; their arms were hung down close to the sides, the body being
kept, the whole time, erect and immovable, except when the performers passed
each other, when the hand was suddenly raised with an awkward motion. But, if
the Russian dance was unmeaning and ridiculous, the Kamtschadale was infinitely
more so. The principle aim, in their performances, is to represent the clumsy
gestures of the bear, which the inhabitants of this country have frequent
opportunities of observing in various situations. To describe the awkward
postures, exhibited on these occasions, would appear tedious and uninteresting.
In general, however, the body was bowed, and the knees bent, whilst the arms
were employed in imitating the motions of that awkward animal.

Having spent much time in our journey to Bolcheretsk, and being informed that
our return might, perhaps, be more difficult and tedious we were obliged to
acquaint the Major, this evening with our intention of departing the next day.
We could not think of leaving our new acquaintance without regret; and were
agreeably surprised, when the Major promised to accompany us, if we would stay
but one day longer. He told us, that he had made up his dispatches, and
resigned the command of Kamtschatka to Captain Shmaleff; having made the
necessary preparations for his departure to Okotsk, which was shortly to take
place; but that he should be happy in postponing his journey, and at^^nding us
to St. Peter and St. Paul's, in order to be satisfied, that nothing which could
be done to serve us, should be omitted.

For the articles which Mr. King had given to the Major's children, he
received, the next morning, a most magnificent Kamtschadale dress, such as the
principal Toions wear on the most solemn occasions. This habit, as we are
informed by Fedositch, must have cost, at least, one hundred and twenty
roubles. He also at the same time, was presented with a handsome sable muff, as
a present from his daughter.

We dined this day (the 15th) with the commander, who, willing to give us an
opportunity of seeing as much as we could of the manners and customs of the
country, invited all the principal inhabitants of the town, to his house this
evening. The dresses of the women were splendid after the Kamtschadale manner.
Captain Shmaleff's lady, and the wives of the other officers of the garrison,
were dressed in a pretty taste, partly in the Siberian, and partly in the
European mode. Madame Behm, in particular, appeared in a grand European dress.
The richness and variety of the silks worn by the women, as well as the
singularity of their dress, was very striking: and the whole had the air of
some enchanted scene, in the midst of the most desert and dreary country in the
universe. The entertainments of this night were dancing and singing.

As we had fixed upon the next morning for our departure, we retired early to
our apartments, where three traveling dresses presented themselves to our
view, made after the Kamtschadale mode, which had been provided for us by the
commander. He came to us himself soon after, to see that proper care was taken
in packing up our things. We had, indeed, no inconsiderable load of baggage;
for exclusive of his liberal presents, Captain Shmaleff, and several other
individuals, showed us many instances of kindness and generosity.

On Sunday, the 16th, early in the morning, we were preparing for our
departure, when we were invited to take our leave of Madame Behm, in our
passage to the boats. Already impressed with sentiments of the warmest
gratitude, for the benevolent and generous treatment we had received at
Bolcheretsk, they were much heightened by the effecting scene which followed.
On quiting our apartments, we saw all the soldiers and cossacks of the garrison
drawn up on one side, and, on the other, were all the male inhabitants of the
town, in their best clothing; the whole body of the people joining in a
melancholy song, which, we were informed, it was usual to sing on the departure
of friends. Thus we marched till we arrived at the commander's house, preceded
by the drums and music belonging to the garrison. Here we were received by
Madame Behm, accompanied by several ladies, habited in long silk cloaks, lined
with furs of various colors: forming a most splendid appearance. Having
partook of some refreshment which had been provided for us, we proceeded to the
waterside, attended by the ladies, who joined with the rest of the people in
the song; and, having taken leave of Madame Behm, after assuring her that the
sense of the hospitality of Bolcheretsk, would be indelible in our hearts, we
were two much affected not to hasten into the boats. At putting off, we
received three cheers, which we immediately returned; and, on doubling a point,
where we last beheld our friendly entertainers, they still added to our
feelings, by a farewell cheer!

On our return, the stream was so exceedingly rapid, that, notwithstanding the
utmost exertions of our conductors, we did not arrive at the first village,
Opatchin, till the 17th in the evening, which did not exceed the rate of twenty
miles a day. On the 19th, we reached Natcheekin, and crossed the plain to
Karatchin on the 20th. The road was in much better order than when we passed it
before, as it froze smartly in the night of the 19th. We proceeded down the
Awatska river on the 21st, and passed over the shoals, at the entrance of the
bay, before it was dark. During the whole of our journey, we were highly
pleased with the willingness and alacrity, with which the Toions and their
Kamtschadales assisted us at the different ostrogs. On seeing the Major, joy
appeared in every countenance; and they were much affected upon being informed
that he would shortly leave them.

A messenger had been dispatched from Bolcheretsk to Captain Clerk,
acquainting him with the nature of our reception; and that the Major intended
to accompany us on our return; apprizing him, at the same time, of the day he
might expect us. We observed, with pleasure, as we approached the harbor, all
our boats coming toward us. The men were all clean, and the officers as well
arrayed as their wardrobes would then permit them to be. The Major was struck
at the healthly appearance of our sailors, and was surprised to see that many
of them had no other covering than a shirt and trowsers, though it actually
snowed at that very instant.

Major Behm had expressed an inclination to visit the ships before he landed;
but, being informed that Captain Clerk was extremely ill, he thought it would
be improper to disturb him at so late an hour; it being then after nine
o'clock. Mr. King therefore attended him to the serjeant's house, and
afterward went on board to communicate to Captain Clerk what had happened at
Bolcheretsk. He was much concerned to find that, during his absence, that
officer's health was considerably impaired; instead of growing better, as we
flattered ourselves it might, from undisturbed repose in the harbor, and a
milk and vegetable diet.

The next morning, Mr. King conducted the Major to the ships; where he was
received with every possible mark of distinction, and saluted with thirteen
guns. He was attended by the commander of a Russian galliot, two merchants from
Bolcheretsk, a master of a sloop, and the priest of the village of Paratounca.

Having visited the captain, and taken a view of the two ships, he returned to
dine on board the Resolution. In the course of the afternoon, the curiosities
which we had collected were shown him, and an assortment of each article
presented to him by Captain Clerk. Here we cannot suppress an instance of
great generosity and gratitude in our sailors; who, being informed of the
handsome present which had been made them by the Major, voluntarily requested
that their grog might be withheld, and their allowance of spirits presented to
the garrison of Bolcheretsk; saying they knew brandy was extremely scarce in
that country, the soldiers on shore having offered four roubles a bottle for
it. We could not but admire this extraordinary sacrifice, knowing how much the
sailors felt, when abridged or deprived of their grog. Indeed, they never had
that article withheld from them but in warm weather, that they might enjoy a
greater proportion when it was most necessary; but this generous proposal would
deprive them of it, even in the inclement season we had naturally to expect in
our northern expedition. The officers, however, would not permit them to suffer
by their generosity, and substituted, in the room of the small quantity of
brandy, which the Major consented to accept, an equal quantity of rum. A dozen
or two of Cape wine for Madame Behm, and some other trifling presents which we
were enabled to make, were accepted with great politeness. The tobacco was
distributed the next morning, among the crews of both vessels; every man that
chewed or smoked tobacco being allowed three pounds, and the others only one.

It has been observed that the Major had resigned the command of Kamtschatka,
and was speedily to repair to Petersburgh; and he now expressed his willingness
to convey any dispatches we might choose to commit to his care. Such an
opportunity was not to be neglected; and Captain Clerk requested him to take
the charge of some papers relative to our voyage, to the British Ambassador at
the Russian court. At first, we intended to transmit only a concise journal of
our proceedings; but, after mature consideration, Captain Clerk was of
opinion, that the whole account of our discoveries might safely be committed to
the care of a man, who had given the strongest proofs of probity and virtue.
Considering also, that a very hazardous part of the voyage was still to be
performed, he resolved to send, by him, the whole of Captain Cook's journal;
together with his own, from the death of that commander, till our arrival at
Kamtschatka; and also a chart of our discoveries. Mr. Bailey and Mr. King also
determined to send an account of our proceedings to the board of longitude.
From these precautions, had any accident befallen us, the Admiralty would have
become possessed of the principal facts of our voyage. It was farther resolved,
that a smaller packet should be dispatched from Okotsk, which the Major
supposed would reach Petersburgh by December; and that he expected to arrive
there himself in February or March.

The Major was entertained alternately in the two ships, as well as we were
able, the three following days. He departed on the 25th, and was saluted with
thirteen guns; the sailors, at their own request, expressing their regard for
him by three cheers. Mr. King and Mr. Webber attended him, the next morning,
some few miles up the Awatska river, where the Russian priest and his family
were waiting to bid a last adieu to their commander.

On taking our leave of the Major, it is difficult to say, whether the worthy
priest and his family or ourselves were most affected. Though our acquaintance
had been of short duration, his behavior had inspired us with the highest
esteem for him; and we could not part (perhaps for ever) with one, to whom we
were under such infinite obligations, without indulging the most tender
feelings. Exclusive of the stores, which might probably be carried to a public
account, the value of the private presents he bestowed on us, must have
amounted to upwards of two hundred pounds. But, however extraordinary this
generosity may appear, it was exceeded by his delicacy in conferring favors,
and his ingenious endeavors to prevent our feeling the weight of obligations,
which he knew we were unable to requite. In supporting a public character, and
maintaining the honor of his sovereign, he is still more entitled to our
admiration, as he was actuated by sentiments the most noble and enlarged. The
service in which we were engaged, he told us, was for the general benefit of
mankind; and entitled us to the offices of humanity, and the privileges of
citizens, in whatever country we might be driven. That by affording us such
relief as was in his power, he was certain that he was acting agreeably to the
wishes of his empress; and that h^ could not so entirely forget her character,
or his own honor, as to barter for the performance of a duty. Among other
things, he said, he made a particular point of setting a good example to the
Kamtschadales, who were just emerging from a state of barbarism; that they
considered the Russians as their patterns, in every respect; and that he hoped,
they would in future, think it a duty incumbent on them to render strangers
every assistance in their power, and believe it to be the universal practice of
all polished and civilized nations.

The Major, having so far as he was capable, relieved our present distresses,
he was not unmindful of our future wants; and imagining we should not be able
to discover the passage we were in search of, and that we should return to
Kamtschatka; he procured from Captain Clerk, the particulars of what flour and
cordage he should want, promising to send them from Okotsk, to wait our
arrival. He also presented the Captain with a written paper, enjoining every
Russian subject to assist us to the utmost of their abilities.

THE END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
LIFE OF CAPTAIN JAMES COOK.
WITH AN ELEGANT PORTRAIT.

CAPTAIN JAMES COOK, eminently distinguished as a navigator, was born at
Marton, a small village in the North Riding of Yorkshire, distant about six
miles from Stockton upon Tees, on the 27th of October 1728. His father, whose
name was also James, and who, from his dialect, was supposed to be a
Northumbrian, lived in the humble station of a farmer's servant; he married a
woman of the same rank with himself, and they were both noted in their
neighborhood for their honesty, sobriety and industry. Young Cook received the
first rudiments of his education at the place in which he was born, from the
schoolmistress of the village; but his father in consequence of the character
he had obtained for diligence and skill in his profession, having been
appointed bailiff, on a farm belonging to the late Thomas Scottow, Esquire. called
Airy Holme, he removed thither with his family, and his son James, being then
about eight years of age, was, at Mr. Scottow's expense, put to a day school in
Ayton, where he was instructed in writing and the principles of arithmetic.

Before he had attained to the age of thirteen, he was bound apprentice to a
shopkeeper at Staiths, a fishing town, ten miles north of Whitby; but as he had
a strong inclination for a seafaring life, and as his passion for it was,
perhaps, strengthened by the opportunities he had of frequenting the company of
those employed in that line, on some quarrel between him and his master, he
obtained his discharge, and soon after bound himself, for seven years, to
Messrs. J. and H. Walker of Whitby, who were Quakers, and principal owners of
two ships constantly employed in the coal trade. After the expiration of his
time, he continued to serve, in the coal and other branches of trade, as a
common sailor, till he was at length promoted to be mate of one of Mr. J.
Walker's ships. During this period, nothing very striking appeared either in
his character or conduct; nor did he exhibit any marks of those superior
abilities, which have done so much honor to the British nation, which give him
a title to be ranked amongst the most celebrated navigators, and which will
render his name immortal.

In the spring of the year 1755, hostilities commenced between Great Britain
and France. As an order had been issued from the Admiralty for impressing
seamen, Mr. Cook, who was then in the river with his ship, afraid of being
pressed, resolved if possible to conceal himself, but considering afterward,
that this might be difficult, if not impossible, he thought it would be best to
enter voluntarily into his Majesty's service, and to try his fortune in the
Royal Navy. In pursuance of this design, he repaired to a house of rendezvous
at Wapping, and entered with an officer belonging to the Eagle, a ship of sixty
guns, at that time commanded by Captain Hamer. To this ship, Captain, now Sir
Hugh Palliser, being appointed in the month of October 1755, Cook's d^ligence,
and his attention to the duties of his profession, did not escape his notice;
he soon distinguished him to be an able and active seaman, and as all the
officers were unanimous i^ opinion respecting him, and spoke highly in his
favor, the Captain gave him every encouragement which he possibly could.

Some time after this period, Mr. Osbaldeston, then Member of Parliament for
Scarborough, having been solicited by some of his neighbors, who had heard of
Cook's merit, and the notice taken of him by his Captain and officers, wrote a
lette^ in his favor to Captain Palliser, requesting he would point out in what
manner they could contribute toward his promotion. The Captain, in his reply,
did full justice to Cook's character, but he informed Mr. Osbaldeston, that as
he had been only a short while in the Navy, he could not be appointed a
commissioned officer; adding that a Master's warrant, might, perhaps, be
procured for him, by which he would be placed in a situation suited to his
talents, and in which he had no doubt, he would discharge his duty with credit
to himself, and with honor to those who patronised him.

On the 10th of May, 1759, he obtained a Master's Warrant for the Grampus
sloop; but this appointment did not take place, as the proper Master of that
vessel unexpectedly returned. Four days after, he was made Master of the
Garland; but here again he was disappointed, for, upon enquiry, it was found,
that he could not join the ship, as she had failed some days before: however,
on the 15th of May, he was appointed to the Mercury, which was destined for
North America, to join the fleet under the command of Sir Charles Saunders,
who, in conjunction with General Wolf, was then engaged in the siege of Quebec.
During that memorable siege, it was found necessary to take soundings in the
channel of the river St. Lawrence, directly opposite to the French camp at
Montmorency and Beauport, in order that the ^dmiral might be enabled to lay his
ships before the enemies batteries, and to cover the British army, in an attack
which the General intended to make on the French camp. As this was a dangerous
and difficult service, and as Cook's sagacity and resolution were now well
known, Captain Pallise^ recommended him as a proper person to undertake it, and
in this choice he was not disappointed; for Cook performed it in the completest
manner, and to the full satisfaction of his employers. He did not, however,
effect his purpose without great risk: having been engaged in this business
during night, for several nights successively, he was at length discovered by
the enemy, who sent a number of canoes filled with Indians, to surround him,
and he had no alternative, but to make for shore on the island of Orleans, near
the guard of the English hospital, to which he was so closely pursued, that he
had scarcely leaped from the bow of the boat, which belonging to one of the
ships of war when the Indians entered it by the stern, and having taken
possession of it, carried it off in triumph. There is reason to believe, that
before this period, Cook had scarcely used a pencil, and was entirely
unacquainted with drawing; but such were the powers of his mind, and his
aptitude for acquiring knowledge, that he soon made himself master of every
object to which he applied, and notwithstanding the disadvantages under which
he labored, he furnished the Admiral with as complete a draught of the channel
and soundings as could have been made by the most expert surveyor in the time
of profound peace.

Another important service which our navigator performed while on the American
station, does no less honor to his memory, and deserves also to be mentioned.
The navigation of the river St. Lawrence is both difficult and dangerous, and
was particularly so then to the English, who were not well acquainted with that
part of North America, and who had no chart, on the correctness of which they
could depend. The Admiral, therefore, who had received so favorable a specimen
of Mr. Cook's abilities, appointed him to survey those parts of the river below
Quebec which navigators accounted to be most dangerous, and this business he
executed with the same diligence, activity and skill, as he had displayed on
the former occasion. When he had completed his chart of the river it was
published, with soundings and directions for sailing in it, and so great was
its accuracy, that it has never since been found necessary to publish another.

After the expedition to Quebec, Mr. Cook, by a warrant from Lord Colvill, was
appointed Master of the Northumberland, on the 22d of September 1759. In this
ship his lordship staid the following winter, as Commodore, at Hali^ax, and
Cook's behavior in his new station did not fail to gain him the friendship and
esteem of his commander. Sensible that he was now in the road to promotion, he
spent the leisure hours which the winter season gave him, in acquiring such
branches of knowledge as might qualify him for future service. At Halifax he
first read Euclid, and studied astronomy. The books he was able to procure were
indeed few, but application and industry supplied many deficiencies, and
enabled him to make a progress superior to what could be expected from the
advantages he enjoyed.

While Mr. Cook was Master of the Northumberland, under Lord Colvill, that ship
came to Newfoundland in September, 1762, to assist in the recapture of the
island. After that object was accomplished, the English fleet remained some
days at Placentia, in order to put it in a better state of defense. During this
time Mr. Cook had again an opportunity of displaying his diligence, and
manifesting his zeal for the good of his Majesty's service; he surveyed the
harbor and heights of that place, and by this attracted the notice of Captain,
afterward Admiral Graves, who was at that time commander of the Antelope, and
Governor of Newfoundland. The Governor, from this circumstance, having been
induced to ask him a number of questions, his answers were so satisfactory,
that he thence conceived a very favorable opinion of his abilities and nautical
knowledge, and this was still farther increased by a longer acquaintance with
him. Possessed of an active genius, stimulated, perhaps, by the success which
had attended his past labors, and the hopes of promotion, Cook continued to
display the most unremitting assiduity, in order to make himself acquainted
with the American coast, and to facilitate its navigation, while the esteem
which Captain Graves entertain for him was greatly heightened by the repeated
testimonies of his good behavior, given by all the officers under whom he had
served.

In the latter end of the year 1762, Mr. Cook returned to England, and on the
21st of December he married, at Barking in Essex, a young lady of the name of
Batts, whom he tenderly loved and who had every claim to his warmest regard and
affection; but his situation in life, and the high and important services to
which he was called, did not suffer him long to enjoy matrimonial felicity
without interruption.

Peace being concluded in 1763 between England, France, and Spain, Captain
Graves was again sent out as Governor of Newfoundland. As this country was
considered to be of great value in a commercial view, and as it had been the
principal object of contention between the English and the French, the Governor
obtained, though with some difficulty, an establishment for the survey of its
coasts; and Mr. Cook, on the recommendation of Captain Graves, was appointed to
carry this plan into execution. He, therefore, went out with that gentleman,
and having surveyed the small islands of St. Pierre and Miquelon, which, by
treaty, had been ceded to the French, and which they were suffered to take
possession of, after the business was finished, he returned to England, toward
the conclusion of the season.

In the beginning of the year following, he accompanied his friend and patron
Sir Hugh Palliser, who was appointed Commodore and Governor of Labradore and
Newfoundland, in the same station in which he had been under Captain Graves.
For this employment Mr. Cook was well qualified, and the c^^rts of his surveys,
which he afterward published, reflected the highest credit on his abilities.
He explored the inland part of the island of Newfoundland, in a much more
accurate manner than had ever been done before, and by penetrating into the
heart of the country discovered several large lakes, the position of which is
distinctly marked out in the general chart. It appears, that Mr. Cook was
occasionally engaged in this service, returning to England for the winter
season, till the year 1767, which was the latest period of his being employed
as Marine Surveyor of Newfoundland. That he had by this time made a
considerable knowledge in practical astronomy is evident, from a short paper
written by him, which was inserted in the fifty-seventh volume of the
Philosophical Transactions, entitled An ohservation of an Eclipse of the sun at
the island of Newfoundland, August the 5 th, 1766, with the longitude of the
place of observation deduced from it. This observation was made at one of the
Burgeo islands, near Cape Ray, in lat. 47 36 19, on the south-west extremity of
Newfoundland, and Mr. Cook's paper having been communicated to Mr* Witchell, he
compared it with an observation made on the same eclipse by the Reverend Mr.
Hornsby, and thence computed the difference of longitude of the places of
observation making proper allowance for parallax, and the prolate spheroidal
figure of the earth. It appears from the Philosophical Transactions, that Cook
was at this time accounted an able mathematician.

Though many discoveries have been made at different periods, by British
navigators, it was reserved for the present reign to carry the spirit of
enterprise to its utmost extent, and to direct it for the accomplishment of the
noblest purposes. Soon after peace was concluded in 1763, two voyages round the
world were undertaken, under the patronage of his present Majesty, which were
performed by Captains Byron, Wallis, and Cartaret, and before the two latter
returned another was resolved upon, the principal object of which was the
improvement of astronomy. It having been calculated, that the planet Venus
would pass over the Sun's disk in 1769, it was judged that the best place for
observing this phenomenon, would be either at the Marquesas, or at one of those
islands which Tasman called Amsterdam, Rotterdam and Middleburgh, and which are
now better known by the appellation of the Friendly Isles. This being a matter
of the greatest importance to astronomy, the Royal Society, with a laudable
zeal for the advancement of that science, presented a memorial to his Majesty,
requesting among other things, that a vessel might be fitted out at the expense
of government, to convey proper persons to observe the transit of Venus at one
of the above mentioned places. This petition was readily complied with, and
orders having been sent to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty to provide
a vessel for that purpose, on the 3d of April Mr. Stephens informed the
Society, that a bark had been taken up, and would be got ready with all
convenient speed.

The person originally fixed upon to conduct this expedition was Mr. Dalrymple,
an eminent Member of the Royal Society, who had distinguished himself by his
enquiries respecting the geography of the southern ocean. Though this gentleman
had not been regularly bred to the sea, he insisted upon having a brevet
commission, as Captain of the vessel, before he should set out. Sir Edward
Hawke, who was then at the head of the Admiralty, violently opposed this
measure, and being pressed on the subject, declared, he would rather suffer his
right hand to be cut off than sign such a commission. Both parties were
inflexible; it was therefore found necessary to look out for some other person
to conduct the expedition, and Mr. Stephens, Secretary to the Admiralty, having
recommended Mr. Cook, and this recommendation being strengthened by the
testimony of Sir Hugh Palliser, who was well acquainted with his abilities and
merit, he was appointed to this important service by the Lords Commissioners,
and promoted to the rank of Lieutenant in the Royal Navy, on the 25th of May
1768.

As soon as this appointment had taken place, Sir Hugh Palliser was ordered to
provide a vessel suited for such a voyage. He examined a great many of those
which were then lying in the Thames, and with Mr. Cook's assistance of whose
judgment he entertained the highest opinion, he at length, fixed upon one of
three hundred and seventy tons burden, which was afterward named the
Endeavor.

Captain Wallis having returned from his voyage round the world while
preparations were making for Cook's expedition, and that gentleman having
signified to the Royal Society, that Port Royal harbor, in King George's
Island, which he discovered, and which is now known by the name of Otaheite,
would be the most convenient situation for observing the transit, Captain
Wallis's opinion was adopted, and orders were given to the observers to repair
thither. Mr. Charles Green, who had been under Dr. Bradley, at the Royal
Observatory, at Greenwich, was appointed to assist Mr. Cook, in conducting the
astronomical part of the voyage. He was accompanied also by Joseph Banks, Esquire.
now Sir Joseph Banks, Bart. and Dr. Solander, the former of whom, at an early
period of life, and at a great expense to himself, embarked in this tedious and
hazardous enterprise, with the noblest of all views, that of promoting the
cause of science, and enlarging the knowledge of mankind. Though the principal
intention of this voyage was to observe the transit of Venus, it was thought
proper, to make it comprehend other objects also; Mr. Cook, therefore, was
directed, after he had accomplished his main business, to proceed in making
further discoveries in the great Southern Seas. The complement of the Endeavor
consisted, besides the Commander, of eighty-four persons. She was victualled
for eighteen months, and ten carriage and twelve swivel guns were sent on board
of her, together with abundance of ammunition and all necessary stores.

The Endeavor being completely fitted for sea, Mr. Cook sailed from Deptford,
on the 30th of July 1768, and on the 13th of August anchored in Plymouth Sound,
from which, after a few days stay, he proceeded to sea, and reached Madeira on
the 13th of September. Having laid in a fresh stock of beef, water and wine at
this island, our navigator pursued his voyage; but on the 7th of November,
finding that several articles of the ship's provisions were likely to fall
short, he determined to touch at Rio de Janeiro, where he had no doubt of
meeting with a friendly reception. In this, however, he was disappointed; and
though he received a supply of water, and such other necessaries as in like
circumstances, the people of one civilized nation would scarcely refuse to
those of an other, he could not make the Viceroy, who appears to have been
jealous of the designs of the English, and who besides, was not celebrated for
his knowledge, comprehend the true intent of the expedition.

On the 7th of December, the Endeavor got under sail, and on the 14th of
January, 1769, Mr. Cook entered the Strait of Le Maire, and next day anchored
in the Bay of Good Success, where the following remarkable adventure happened
to Mr. Banks, Dr. Solander, and some others who accompanied them in a botanical
excursion. Having ascended a mountain in search of plants, they were exposed to
such an intense degree of cold, that Dr. Solander was seized with a torper,
which had nearly put a period to his existence. Two black servants who attended
our adventurers, actually died, and this event took place in the midst of
summer, in that part of the world, and at the close of a day, the beginning of
which was as mild and warm as the month of May usually is in England.

After doubling Cape Horn, and discovering several islands, most of which
appeared to be inhabited, and to be clothed with the most beautiful verdure,
Mr. Cook arrived in sight of Otaheite, on the 11th of April, and on the 13th
the Endeavor came to anchor in Port Royal Bay, which by the natives is called
Matavai. The first object which engaged our navigator's attention upon his
arrival here, does the highest honor to his good sense and humanity. As he was
sensible that his stay at the island was not likely to be long, and that much
depended upon the manner in which the English behaved toward the natives, he
drew up a set of regulations for the conduct of his people, and gave express
orders that they should be strictly observed. These orders were as follows:
First, "To endeavor by every fair means to cultivate a friendship with the
natives; and to treat them with all imaginable humanity. Secondly, a proper
person or persons will be appointed to trade with the natives for all manner of
provisions, fruit, and other productions of the earth, and no officer or
seaman, or other person belonging to the ship, except such as are so appointed,
shall trade, or offer to trade for any sort of provision fruit, or other
productions of the earth, unless they have leave to do so. Thirdly, every
person employed on shore, or on any duty whatsoever, is strictly to attend to
the same, and if by any neglect, he loses any of his arms or working tools, or
suffers them to be stolen, the full value thereof will be charged against his
pay, according to the custom of the navy in such cases, and he shall receive
such farther punishment as the nature of the offense may deserve. Fourthly, the
same penalty will be inflicted on every person who is found to embezzel, trade,
or offer to trade with any part of the ship's stores, of whatsoever nature they
may be. And lastly, no sort of iron, or any thing that is made of iron, or any
sort of cloth, or other useful or necessary articles, are to be given in
exchange for any thing but provision."

Having accomplished the grand object of his expedition, a particular account
of which may be seen in the sixty-first volume of the Philosophical
Transactions, our navigator began to think of pursuing his voyage, in obedience
to the orders which he had received from the Lords Commissioners of the
Admiralty. Having therefore, got every thing in readiness for his departure,
and having taken on board a native of the country, named Tupia, who brought
with him a boy of 13 years of age, and earnestly entreated that he might be
allowed to accompany the English, he weighed anchor on the 13th of July, after
a stay of three months. To give a particular account of all the places visited
by Mr. Cook, in the course of this voyage, would be tedious; let it therefore
be sufficient to say, that, after ascertaining New-Zealand to be two islands,
and after spending six months in exploring their coasts, he made for
New-Holland, where he anchored, in Botany Bay, on the 28th of April, 1770.
Great part of the coasts of this extensive country Mr. Cook examined also, and
finding on his arrival at Batavia, to which he had directed his course, that it
would be dangerous to proceed to Europe, without inspecting the Endeavour's
bottom, he requested leave from the Governor to heave her down, which was
readily complied with. Before the vessel was refitted, the dreadful effects of
that unhealthy climate were severely felt. Mr. Banks and Dr. Solander, were
attacked by fevers, and in a little time almost every person both on board and
on shore, was sick. This circumstance occasioned a great delay, and though
several of the gentlemen were considerably better by the time the ship was
ready for sea, yet the number of sick even then amounted to forty, and the rest
of the company were in a very feeble condition. What may appear rather singular
is, that the sailmaker, an old man, between seventy and eighty years of age,
and who got drunk every day during the time he resided at Batavia, was the only
person who continued in full health. Three seaman, and Mr. Green's servant
died, together with the surgeon, Tupia and his companion ^ayeto. The former did
not entirely fall a sacrifice to the unwholesomeness of the climate: having
been accustomed to seed principally upon vegetables, he soon contracted those
disorders which are incident to a sea life, and in all probability would have
sunk under them, even if the English had not been obliged to go to Batavia.

On the 27th of December Mr. Cook departed from Batavia, and having taken in a
fresh supply of wood and water, together with some refreshments, at Prince's
Island, he directed his course for the Cape of Good Hope; but before he reached
that place, the seeds of disease which had been received at Batavia appeared
with alarming symptoms, and reduced the ship's crew to the most melancholy
situation. Mr. Banks' life was almost despaired of, and so dreadful was the
ravage of the distemper, that scarcely a night passed but some dead body was
committed to the deep. In the course of six weeks, Mr. Sporing, one of Mr.
Banks' assistants, Mr. Parkinson, his natural history painter, Mr. Green, the
astronomer, the boatswain, the carpenter, and his mate, Mr. Monk-house, the
midshipman, another midshipman, the old sailmaker and his assistant, the ship's
cook, the corporal of the marines, two of the carpenter's crew, and nine of the
seamen, all shared the same fate. The loss in all amounted to twenty-three
persons, besides the seven who died at Batavia.

The evident proofs which Mr. Cook exhibited of his sagacity, resolution and
activity, during this perilous enterprise, in which he had encountered many
dangers and difficulties, gave him a just claim to the protection of
government, and to the favor of his sovereign. He was, therefore, soon after
his arrival, promoted to be a commander in his Majesty's navy, by commission
bearing date August 29th, 1771. On this occasion, he wished to have been
appointed a Post Captain; but Lord Sandwich, who was now at the head of the
Admiralty, though he had the greatest esteem for our navigator, would not
comply with his request, because it would have been inconsistent with the
established order of the naval service.

Though Captain Cook had fully accomplished the main object of his voyage, and
though he had afterward traversed great part of the Pacific Ocean, and
explored the coasts of New-Zealand and New Holland, he had not, however, been
able to determine the grand question, respecting a Terra Australis Incognita,
or southern continent, which had long amused Europe. The first person who seems
to have entertained any notion of this kind, was the famous Quiros, who was
sent out for the express purpose of discovering it; but he did not succeed, and
all those who made the same attempt afterward were equally unsuccessful. To
determine, therefore, this point, of so much importance to geography and
navigation, a second expedition was planned out, at the desire of his Majesty,
whose patronage of literature and science has been eminently conspicuous; and
no person appeared better qualified to undertake it than Captain Cook.

When this design was fully resolved upon, two vessels, which had been both
built at Whitby, by the same person who had built the Endeavor, were purchased
of Captain William Hammond, of Hull. The largest, which was about four hundred
and sixty-two tons burden, was called the Resolution, and the other, which was
considerably less, was named the Adventure. On the 28th of November, 1771,
Captain Cook was appointed to the command of the former, and about the same
time Mr. Tobias Furneaux to that of the latter. In the equipment of these
vessels, every possible attention was bestowed; they were supplied with the
best stores and provisions, and every article suited to the nature of the
expedition was put on board of them, besides abundance of antiscorbutics, such
as malt, sour krout, salted cabbage, portable broth, saloup, mustard, marmalade
of carrots, and inspissated juice of wort and beer.

The advancement of science was equally consulted. Mr. Wm. Hodges, an eminent
landscape painter, was engaged to make drawings of such objects as could not be
so well comprehended from descriptions; Mr. John Reinhold Foster, and his son,
were appointed to explore the natural history of the countries they might
visit, and Mr. Wm. Wales, and Mr. Wm. Bayley, were chosen on purpose to make
astronomical observations.

On the 9th of April 1772, Captain Cook sailed from Deptford, and on the 3d of
July, joined the Adventure in Plymouth Sound. From Plymouth, he departed on the
13th of the same month, and having touched at Madeira, to obtain a supply of
water, wine and other necessaries, proceeded on his voyage, but finding that
his water would not last to the Cape of Good Hope, without putting his men to
short allowance, he resolved to touch at St. Jago, one of the Cape de Verd
Islands, in order to get a fresh stock. On the 10th of August he arrived at
Port Praya, in that island, and having procured a sufficiency of water and
other refreshments, put to sea again, on the 14th, and on the 30th of October,
came to anchor in Table Bay, at the Cape of Good Hope, where he was received
with the greatest politeness by the Governor, and promised every assistance
that the place could afford. From the Cape our commander departed on the 22d of
November, in search of a southern continent, and having got clear of the land,
directed his course for Cape Circumcision; but a dreadful gale of wind coming
on about the 6th of December, which at times was so furious, that the ships
could carry no sail, they were driven so far to the eastward of their course,
that no hopes were left of reaching the intended spot.

On the 10th of December, our navigators began to meet with islands of ice, one
of which was so concealed by the haziness of the weather, that they were almost
close upon it before it was observed. Captain Cook judged, that it might be
about fifty feet high, and half a mile in circumference. It was flat on the
top, and its sides rose in a perpendicular direction, against which the sea
broke with amazing fury, and was dashed up to a great height. By the 17th of
January 1773, he had reached the latitude of 67 15, where he found the ice
entirely closed, and on the 17th of March, after two months longer navigation
amidst mountains and islands of ice, which seemed to threaten destruction on
every side, considering that it would be very improper to continue longer in
high southern latitudes, he resolved to quit them, and to proceed to
New-Zealand, with a view of looking for the Adventure, which had parted from
him on the 8th of February, and that he might have an opportunity of procuring
some refreshments for his people. He therefore, steered his course for that
island, and came to anchor in Dusky Bay, on the 26th of March, from which he
proceeded to Queen Charlotte's Sound, where he had the satisfaction of meeting
with the Adventure, after an absence of fourteen weeks.

Quitting New-Zealand, in company with the Adventure, Captain Cook paid a visit
to his old friends at Otaheite, the Society and Friendly Isles, and having
examined a space of more than forty degrees of longitude, between the tropicks,
returned to Queen Charlotte's Sound. Here he changed the rigging of his ship
for such as might be able to withstand storms and the severity of high southern
latitudes; and again set sail on the 27th of November, to explore the unknown
parts of the Pacific Ocean. In this perilous navigation, he was exposed to
dangers which none but a man possessed of the greatest resolution could have
encountered; yet such was his strength of mind, and so great was his skill in
navigation, that though often interrupted by islands of ice, among which he was
sometimes as it were enclosed, and though his vessel was almost every moment in
hazard of being dashed to pieces, by large masses, which floated around, he
advanced amidst all these obstacles till nature set bounds to his course. Many
of these ice-islands were two and three hundred feet in height, and between two
and three miles in circuit, with perpendicular sides or cliffs, that could not
be beheld without astonishment.

On the 26th of January, 1774, our navigators passed the Antarctic circle for
the third time in 109 degrees of west longitude, where they found the mildest
sunshine they had ever experienced in the frigid zone. This circumstance
induced them to hope, that they should be able to penetrate as far toward the
south as others had done toward the north; but the next day, they discovered a
solid field of ice before them, which extended from east to west farther than
the eye could reach. Within this (...) ninety-seven islands were counted,
besides those on the outside, many of which were large, and had the appearance
of a ridge of mountains, rising one above another, till they were lost in the
clouds. The outer, or northern edge of this immense field, was composed of
loose or broken ice, packed so closely together, that there was no possibility
of entering it; but Captain Cook was of opinion, that there must be land to the
south behind it. "If there is," says he, "it can afford no better retreat for
birds, or any other animals than the ice itself, with which it must be entirely
covered." He then adds, "I, who was ambitious not only of going farther than
any body had gone before, but as far as it was possible for man to go, was not
sorry at meeting with this interruption, as it in some measure relieved us, and
shortened the dangers and hardships inseparable from the navigation of the
southern polar regions. Since then, we could not proceed farther to the south,
no other reason need be assigned for my tacking and standing back to the north,
being at this time in the latitude of 70 10 south and longitude 106 54 west."

Our navigator next went in quest of land said to have been discovered by Juan
Fernandez, no vestiges of which he could find. He then proceeded to the
Marquesas, discovered in 1565, and visited for the second time during this
voyage the island of Otaheite, where having procured some refreshments, he
sailed for the New-Hebrides which though discovered as early as 1606, by
Quitos, had never been sufficiently explored. Besides ascertaining the extent
and situation of these islands, which had been barely seen by others, he
acquired a knowledge of several before unknown, which entitled him to give the
whole that appellation by which they are now distinguished.

Captain Cook continued surveying these islands during the month of August,
1774, and having set sail on the 1st of August, discovered a large track of
land, to which he gave the name of New-Caledonia. The coasts of this he
explored also, and found it to be the most considerable of all the tropical
islands in those parts, and except New-Holland and New-Zealand, the largest
that has been seen in the South Pacific Ocean. On leaving New-Caledonia, he
fell in with an uninhabited island, on the 10th of October, which he named
Norfolk Isle, in honor of the noble family of Howard, and finding that
provisions were now beginning to run short, he determined to sail again for
New-Zealand, where he came to anchor on the 18th of October. Here he continued
till the 10th of November, when he again set out, in pursuit of his great
object, the determination of the question concerning the existence of a
southern continent; but having sailed till the 27th, in different degrees of
latitude, extending from 43 to 55 48 south without success, he gave up all
hopes of finding it, and resolved to steer directly for the west entrance of
the straits of Maghalhaens, with a view of coasting the south side of Terra del
Fuego, round Cape Horn to the strait Le Maire.

During the rest of the voyage very little remarkable occured. After leaving
Terra del Fuego, our navigator proceeded round Cape Horn, passed through Strait
Le Mair, to Staten Island, and having explored part of the neighboring seas,
directed his course to the Cape of Good Hope, from which he sailed to England,
where he arrived on the 19th of July, 1775, having been absent from it three
years and eighteen days.

Though the question respecting the existence of a southern continent was now
fully determined, there remained still another important object to be
investigated, the practicability of a northern passage to the Pacific Ocean. It
had long been a favorite scheme with navigators, and particularly the English,
to discover a shorter and more commodious course ^o the East Indies, than that
by the Cape of Good Hope. Several attempts were made for this purpose, both by
our own countrymen, and the Dutch; but with so little success, that it ceased
for many years to be an object of pursuit. In the beginning of the present
century it was again revived by Mr. Dobbs, and Captain Middleton was sent out
by government in 1741, and Captain Smith and Captain Moore in 1746; but though
an act of parliament had been passed, which secured a reward of twenty thousand
pounds to the discoverer, the accomplishment of this favorite object continued
at as great a distance as ever.

To ascertain whether this matter, of so much importance to geography and
navigation, could be carried into execution, was reserved for the glory of the
present reign. The idea was very warmly espoused by the First Lord of the
Admiralty, and it was resolved that a voyage should be undertaken for that
purpose. For the conduct of this enterprise, it was evident that great skill
and ability were requisite, and though no one was so well qualified for it as
Captain Cook, yet none of his friends, not even Lord Sandwich, presumed to
solicit him on the subject. The service he had rendered to science and
navigation was so great, the labors he had sustained, and the dangers he had
encountered were so many, and so various, that it was deemed not reasonable to
ask him to engage in fresh perils. His advice, however, was requested,
respecting the properest person for undertaking the voyage, and in order to
determine this point, the Captain, Sir Hugh Palliser, and Mr. Stephens, were
invited to dinner at Lord Sandwich's house. In the course of the conversation,
while they were discoursing on the importance of the design, and the
consequences that were likely to result from it to science and navigation,
Cook's mind was so fired with the magnitude of the object, that he suddenly
started up and declared, that he himself would undertake the direction of it.
No proposal could be received with more pleasure. Lord Sandwich immediately
laid the affair before his Majesty, and Capt. Cook was appointed to the
expedition, on the 10th of February, 1776.

When the command of the enterprise was thus settled, much to the satisfaction
of those who had set it on foot, it was considered as a matter of great
importance to determine what might be the best course to be pursued in the
voyage. All former navigators round the globe had returned by the Cape of Good
Hope; but to Capt. Cook was assigned the arduous task of attempting the same
thing, by reaching the high northern latitudes, between Asia and America; and
it appears, that this plan was adopted in consequence of his own suggestions.
He was, therefore, ordered to proceed to the Pacific Ocean, through that chain
of islands which he had before visited, in the tropical regions of the south,
and thence, if practicable, to make his way into the Atlantic. To give every
possible encouragement to the prosecution of this great design, motives of
interest were added to the ob^igations of duty. In the act of parliament passed
in 1745, the reward of twenty thousand pounds was offered only to vessels
belonging to any of his Majesty's subjects: ships belonging to government being
thus excluded. Besides this, the reward was entirely confined to such as should
discover a passage through Hudson's Bay, but by a new act, which passed in
1776, it was declared, that if any ship belonging to any of his Majesty's
subjects or to his Majesty* should find and sail through any passage by sea,
between the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans, in any direction, or parallel of the
northern hemisphere, to the northward of the fifty-second degree of northern
latitude, the owners of such ships, if belonging to any of his Majesty's
subjects, or the commander, officers and seaman of such ship, if belonging to
his Majesty, should receive as a reward for such discovery the sum of twenty
thousand pounds.

The vessels fixed upon by government for this service, were the Resolution and
the Discovery. The command of the former was given to Captain Cook, and that of
the latter to Capt. Clerk, who had been our navigator's second lieutenant in
his second voyage. Nearly the same complement of men and officers was assigned
to each as before, and the utmost attention was employed by the Admiralty Board
to have them equipped in the compleatest manner. Every article that could tend
to preserve the health of the seamen was provided in abundance; and that the
inhabitants of Otaheite, and of the other islands in the South Seas where the
English had been treated with so much hospitality, might be benefited by the
expedition, his Majesty was graciously pleased to order an assortment of useful
animals to be put on board, and to be left in those countries. Besides these,
the Captain was furnished with a quantity of European garden-seeds, and the
Board of Admiralty added such articles of commerce as were most likely to
promote a friendly intercourse with the natives of the other hemisphere, and to
induce them to carry on a profitable traffic with the English. Additional
clothing, suited to the severities of a cold climate, was likewise ordered for
the crews of the two ships, and nothing was denied our navigators that could
contribute to l^ssen the hardships of the expedition, or to render their
situation comfortable.

As the ships were to touch at Otaheite and the Society Isles, it had been
determined to send back by this opportunity Omai, a native of that country,
whom Capt. Furneaux brought with him to England the former voyage. He therefore
left London on the 24th of June, 1776, in company with the Captain, and every
preparation being completed, they sailed for Plymouth, where they were joined
by the Discovery. From Plymouth our navigators directed their course to
Teneriff, to procure a fresh supply of corn and hay, for the subsistence of
their live stock. They then proceeded to the Cape, where they staid from the
18th of October till the 30th of November, and having touched at Kerguelen's
Island, and Van Diemen's Land, discovered by Tasman in 1642, arrived at Queen
Charlotte's Sound, in New-Zealand, on the 12th of February, 1777.

At New-Zealand they staid about two weeks, during which time they acquired
much additional knowledge respecting its productions, and the manners and
customs of its inhabitants. They then paid a visit to the Friendly Isles, where
they remained some time, and where Captain Cook neglected no opportunity of
making such observations as might be serviceable to navigation and astronomy.
From the information which he then received, it appears, that this Archipelago
is very extensive; above one hundred and fifty islands were reckoned up by the
natives, who made use of bits of leaves to ascertain their number; and Mr.
Anderson, with his usual diligence, procured all their names. Sixty-one of
these isles have their proper places and names marked out upon the chart of the
Friendly Isles, and the sketch of the harbor of Tongataboo, which are given in
the account published of this expedition.

On the 17th of July Capt. Cook took his final leave of the Friendly Isles,
and, resuming his voyage, reached Otaheite on the 12th of August. From Otaheite
he proceeded to some other of the Society Isles, and having disposed of Omai,
agreeable to his wishes, and distributed part of his live stock, in such a
manner as he thought would best answer the proposed end, he determined to
pursue his course to the northward. Setting sail, therefore, from Bolabola, on
the 8th of December, he crossed the line about the 24th, and on the 18th of
January, 1778, discovered an island, which he, however, could not reach. Soon
after another appeared, on which he went on shore, and in the course of a few
days, a whole group was seen which Capt. Cook, in honor of Lord Sandwich,
distinguished by the name of the Sandwich Islands. Those which he saw were
situated between the latitude of 20 30, and 22 15 north, and between the
longitude of 199 29, and 201 30 east.

On quitting these islands, Captain Cook proceeded to range along the western
side of America, and after giving names to several capes and headlands, which
appeared in sight, came to anchor in an inlet, where the country presented a
very different aspect from what he had seen before. The summits of the
mountains were clothed in sheets of snow, while the valleys between them and
the grounds on the sea coast, both high and low, were covered to a considerable
breadth, with tall straight trees, which formed a most beautiful prospect, as
of one immense forest. On his first arrival in this inlet, he had honored it
with the name of King George's Sound; but he afterward found that it was
called Nootka by the natives. Having staid nearly a month here, to complete the
necessary repairs of the ships, our navigators proceeded northward, and entered
another inlet, from which great things were expected, as they entertained the
strongest hopes, that it would be found to communicate either with the sea to
the north, or with Baffi^'s or Hudson's bay to the east. On this account,
therefore, it was traced as high as the latitude of 60 30, and the longitude of
210, being seventy leagues from its entrance, but without success; for after
several fruitless attempts to discover a passage through it, this idea was
abandoned, and Captain Cook named it River Turnagain. Lord Sandwich has since
distinguished it by the appellation of Cook's River.

Indefatigable in pursuit of his favorite object, Captain Cook continued his
researches, and arrived on the 27th of June, 1778, at the island of Oona^^s^a,
the inhabitants of which behaved with a degree of friendship and politeness
very uncommon to savage tribes. He then ^^eered toward the American coast, and
having advanced as far as the latitude of 70 44, found his progress stopped by
the ice, which was as compact as a wall, and at least ten or twelve feet in
height; still farther north it appeared to be much higher; its surface was
extremely rugged, and in different places it was covered with pools of water. A
prodigious number of sea-horses lay upon it, some of which were procured for
food, as at this time there was a great want of fresh provisions, and though
many of the sailors were disappointed, having at first concluded that these
animals were sea-cows, yet such was the general anxiety for a change of diet,
that our voyagers lived on them as long as they lasted.

From the 26th of April, the time that Capt. Cook left Nootka, to the 29th of
July, many important discoverie^ were made, which it is impossible to
particularize here. They form a valuable addition to those made in the course
of his two former voyages, and, in point of extent, surpass all that the
Russians had accomplished in a long series of years, though in parts belonging
or contiguous to their own empire. He had previous to the last mentioned
period, traversed the Icy Sea beyond Beering's Strait, in various directions,
and through numberless difficulties and obstructions; but he never abandoned
the pursuit of his favorite object till the ice increased so much, as to
preclude all hopes of attaining it, at least during that year. The season being
far advanced, and the time when the frost was expected to set in being fast
approaching, he thought it imprudent to make any farther attempts to find a
passage into the Atlantic, till the next summer. He, therefore, began now to
look out for a place where he might, besides procuring wood and water,
conveniently pass the winter, and as none seemed better adapted for that
purpose than some of the Sandwich Isles, he determined to direct his course
thither.

Hitherto this expedition, though attended with many dangers and difficulties,
had been marked with no peculiar disaster, and our illustrious commander was no
doubt flattering himself with the hopes of being more successful in his
researches the next summer; but little did he think that the Sandwich Isles,
which he considered as the most important discovery of all that had been made
by Europeans in the Pacific Ocean, would in the result prove fatal, and that he
should there fall by the murdering dagger of a barbarian. To relate an event of
this kind must ever be a painful task to a feeling mind; but it must be doubly
so, when it appears that the unhappy sufferer became a victim to his own
humanity.

In Captain Cook's former visit to this group of islands, he had observed five
of them situated between the latitude of 20 30, and 22 15 north, and between
the longitude of 199 30, and 201 30 east, the names of which were Woahoo,
Atooi, Oneeheow, Oreehoua and Tahoora; but on his return southward, with an
intent of passing the winter, he discovered on the 26th of November, when he
came to the latitude of 20 55, a sixth, named Mowee, and on the 30th, another,
which the natives distinguished by the appellation of Owhyhee. As this island
appeared to be of greater extent and importance that any of the rest, our
navigator spent nearly seven weeks in sailing round it, and in examining its
coasts. Whilst he was employed in this business, the inhabitants came off from
time to time in great numbers with their canoes, and readily engaged in
traffic. On this occasion their behavior was open and unreserved, and afforded
much less cause for suspicion than that of any other people among whom our
navigators had ever been. It was even remarked, that the people of Otaheite
itself with whom he had been so intimately connected, had never displayed such
unbounded confidence in the integrity and good treatment of the English.

On the 17th of January, 1779, our navigators came to anchor in the Bay of
Karakakooa, which is situated on the west side of ^he island of Owhyhee, and
extends about a mile in depth. It is bounded by two points of land, bearing
south-east and north-west from each other, at the distance of half a league: on
the northernmost of which is situated a village called Kowrowa. A more
considerable village stands in the bottom of the Bay, near a stately grove of
cocoa-nut trees, and a high rocky cliff, inaccessible from the sea shore, runs
between them. Near the coast on the south side, the land has a rugged
appearance, but farther inland the country gradually rises, and abounds with
cultivated enclosures and groves of cocoa trees.

While Capt. Cook remained here, the islanders behaved with the greatest
friendship, and seemed very much disposed to render him every assistance in
their power. Several of their chiefs paid him a visit, and when he himself went
on shore, he was received with very extraordinary ceremonies, which fell little
short of adoration. He had likewise an interview with Terreeoboo, the king of
the island, whom he carried on board the Resolution, where he was treated with
every mark of respect, and in return for a beautiful feathered cloak which he
had bestowed on our navigator, the Captain put a linen shirt on his Majesty,
and girt his own hanger round him. In short, during the intercourse which was
kept up between the natives and the English, the greatest harmony prevailed,
and the quiet, inoffensive behavior of the former banished every apprehension
of danger from the breasts of our voyagers. The islanders, however, began at
length to be very inquisitive about the time of their departure; but this is
not much to be wondered at, when it is considered, that during sixteen days,
which they had been in the harbor of Karakakooa, they had made an enormous
consumption both of hogs and vegetables. It afterward appeared, that these
enquiries were made with no other view than that they might provide a
sufficient quantity of provisions for them when they quitted the island; for it
was observed, that the King, on being informed that they were about to depart
in a few days, made a kind of proclamation throughout the villages, requiring
the people to bring in their hogs and vegetables, that his Majesty might
present them to the Orono Orono was a title of high honor bestowed on Captain
Cook.
, before he took his leave of the country. A circumstance which seems to prove
the affectionate regard which the people of Owhyhee had for our voyagers is,
that their prince strongly solicited Mr. King to remain among them, and waited
upon Capt. Cook whose son he supposed him to be, with a formal request that he
might be left.

On the 4th of February, Captain Cook quitted Karakakooa Bay, with an intention
of finishing the survey of Owhyhee, and of proceeding afterward to the rest of
the islands, in quest of some road which might afford better shelter to the
vessels; but a gale of wind arising, in the course of a few days the Resolution
had the misfortune to spring the head of her foremast, in such a dangerous
manner, that it was found necessary to return to Karakakooa, in order to have
it repaired. It does not sufficiently appear from the accounts given of Capt.
Cook's death, whether the natives were displeased or not with this second
visit. Captain King says, "That our voyagers, upon coming to anchor, were
surprised to find their reception very different from what it had been on their
first arrival; but Mr. Samwell, whose veracity seems unquestionable, asserts,
that he saw nothing which could induce him to believe, that there was any
change in the disposition or behavior of the inhabitants. However this may be,
it is certain, that some acts of theft committed by the islanders, and the
attempts of the English to punish them, and to recover their property, were the
preludes to that unhappy commotion, which deprived the British navy of one of
its brightest ornaments, and our illustrious navigator of his life.

These people it seems had a strong propensity to thieving, and one of them
having been detected in carrying of the amourer's tongs from the forge, was
punished with a pretty severe flogging, and sent out of the ship. This example,
however, did not deter another, who, having snatched the tongs and chissel from
the same place, jumped overboard with them, and swam for the shore. The master
and a midshipman were instantly dispatched after him in the small cutter, upon
which the Indian made for a canoe, where he was taken on board by one of his
countrymen, and though several muskets were fired at them, they soon got out of
gun shot, and escaped. Pareah, one of their chiefs, afterward brought back the
stolen articles, but on his return, being met by the Resolution's pinnace, with
five men in her, who insisted upon having the thief delivered up, or the canoe
which had taken him in, a scuffle ensued, and the natives began to pelt the
English with stones. This commotion was, however, quelled by the interference
of Pareah; but another circumstance of the same kind soon after occured, which
widened the breach between them. Some of the islanders found means in the night
time to take away the Discovery's large cutter, which lay swamped at the buoy
of one of her anchors, and she was not missed till the next morning, Sunday,
February the 14th. When Captain Clerk had informed Captain Cook of this event,
he returned on board, with orders for the launch and small cutter to go, under
the command of the second lieutenant, and to lie off the east side of the Bay,
in order to intercept all canoes that might attempt to get out; and if he found
it necessary, to fire upon them. At the same time, the third lieutenant of the
Resolution, with the launch and small cutter, was sent out on the same service,
to the opposite side of the Bay, and the master was dispatched in the large
cutter, in pursuit of a double canoe already under sail, and making the best of
her way out of the harbor.

As it had been Capt. Cook's usual custom in all the islands of the South Seas,
when any thing of consequence had been stolen, to secure the person of the
King, or of some of the principal Erees, and to detain them as hostages, until
the property was restored, he resolved to adopt this method on the present
occasion. He therefore left the ship about seven o'clock, attended by the
lieutenant of marines, a sergeant, a corporal, and seven private men, and the
pinnace's crew were also armed, under the command of Mr. Roberts. As they rowed
toward the shore, Captain Cook ordered the launch to leave her station at the
west point of the Bay, in order to assist his own boat, which clearly shows
that he was not unapprehensive of meeting with resistance, and that he was
desirous of making necessary preparations for the defense of himself and his
people. When he landed, the natives flocked round him in great crowds, showed
him the usual marks of respect, by prostrating themselves before him, and being
ignorant of his intention in coming ashore, frequently asked him if he wanted
^ogs or provisions. As soon as he had found the King, who came out of a house
without any h^sitation, where he had been asleep, the Captain took him by the
hand, and invited him in a friendly manner to go on board, to which he readily
consented. Thus far matters appeared in a favorable train, but in a little time
the islanders were observed to be busy in arming themselves with long spears,
clubs, and daggers, and in putting on thick mats, which they used as armor.
This hostile appearance increased, and became more alarming on the arrival of
two men in a canoe, from the opposite side of the Bay, with the news of a chief
having been killed by one of the Discovery's boats. The Captain, who by this
time, was surrounded by a great crowd, thinking his situation rather hazardous,
ordered the lieutenant of marines to march his small party to the water side,
where the boats lay, within a few yards of the shore, and the Indians readily
made a line for them to pass, without offering them the least molestation. The
distance they had to go might be about fifty or sixty yards, and Capt. Cook
followed, having hold of the King's hand, who was attended by his wife, two
sons, and several chiefs, and who accompanied him without reluctance. When they
had reached the pinnace, the younger son immediately stepped in, expecting his
father to follow; but just as he arrived at the water side, his wife threw her
arms round his neck, and with the assistance of two chiefs, forced him to sit
down by the side of a double canoe. Capt. Cook expostulated with them on this
behavior; but they would not suffer the King to proceed, telling him, that he
would be put to death if he went on board the ship.

One of the chiefs having been seen lurking near, with a dagger partly
concealed, and another of the natives having made an attempt to wrench a
musket from the sergeant of marines, Capt. Cook observed, that as the Indians
were becoming more daring and tumultuous, he could not take the King off by
force without sacrificing the lives of many of his people, he therefore
resolved to act only on the defensive, and to secure a safe embarkation for his
small party, who were now closely pressed by a body of several thousand people;
one man attempted to dart his spear at Capt. Cook, who was thereupon forced to
fire in his own defense; but he missed the person he aimed at, and happened to
kill another close to him, who was equally forward in the tumult. The sergeant
observing to him that he had missed the man he aimed at, received orders to
fire at him, which he immediately did, and killed him. The impetuosity of the
islanders was by this time somewhat repressed, they fell back seemingly in
confusion, but being pushed on by those behind, returned to the charge, and
poured a volley of stones among the marines, who, without waiting for orders,
returned it with a general discharge of musquetry, which was instantly followed
by a fire from the boats.

At this Captain Cook was heard to express his astonishment; he waved his hand
to the boats, called to them to cease firing, and bade them come nearer in to
receive the marines. -- What followed after this seems to have been a scene of
confusion. After the marines had fired, the Indians rushed among them, and
forced them into the water, where four of them were killed. Their lieutenant
was wounded, but fortunately escaped, and was taken up by the pinnace. "Captain
Cook, who was then the only one remaining on the rock, was observed making for
the pinnace, holding his left hand against the back of his head, to guard it
from the stones, and carrying his musket under the other arm. An Indian who
had followed him, but with caution and timidity, at last advanced upon him
unawares, and with a large club Some have said, that he received the first
injury from a dagger. The account here given, is that of Mr. Samwell, who
published a relation of this melancholy affair, which seems to be written with
great precision and accuracy.
or stake, gave him a blow on the back of the head, and then precipitately
retreated. By this stroke, Captain Cook seemed to be stunned, he staggered a
few paces, then fell on his hand and one knee, and dropped his musket. As he
was rising, and before he could recover his feet, another Indian stabbed him in
the back of the neck with an iron dagger. He then fell in a bite of water about
knee deep, where others crowded upon him, and endeavored to keep him under;
but struggling very strongly with them, he got his head up, and casting his
look toward the pinnace, seemed to solicit assistance. Though the boat was not
above five or six yards from him, yet from the crowded and confused state of
the crew, it seems it was not in their power to save him. -- The Indians got
him under again, but in deeper water; he was, however, able to get his head up
once more, and being almost spent in the struggle, he naturally turned to the
rock, and was endeavoring to support himself by it, when a savage gave him a
blow with a club, and he was seen alive no more. -- They hauled him lifeless
upon the rocks, where they seemed to take a savage pleasure in using every
barbarity to his dead body, snatching the daggers out of each others hands, to
have the horrid satisfaction of piercing the fallen victim of their barbarous
rage."

Thus perished, in the fifty-first year of his age, this truly eminent and
valuable man, equally distinguished for his skill as a navigator, and for the
heroic constancy and firmness of his mind. In whatever point of view we
consider his character, we shall find just subject for admiration. Cool and
deliberate in judging, sagacious in determining, active in executing, and
persevering in his enterprises, he supported labors, overcame difficulties, and
encountered dangers, which seldom fall to the lot of one man. Though rigid in
discipline, he was mild, just and humane; and his people, to whom he was a
father, were obedient to him, rather from motives of affection than fear. --
His constitution was strong, and his mode of living temperate. He was modest,
and rather reserved in company; but among those with whom he was acquainted, he
was found to be a lively, sensible and intelligent companion. His person was
about six feet high, and though a good looking man, he was plain both in
address and appearance. His head was small; his hair, which was dark brown, he
wore tied behind. His face was full of expression, his nose exceedingly well
shaped, his eyes, which were small, and of a brown cast, were quick and
piercing, and his eyebrows were prominent, which gave his countenance
altogether an air of austerity.

THE END.
SUBSCRIBERS NAMES.
A.
THOMAS Allen N. Y. James Allen Moses Archer George Andrews John Ames James A.
Allen Henry Aburn Mr. Apthorp Peter Anderson Alexander Anderson John Anderson
Dr. Charles Arding James Abiel Barnard Andarieus John Ashmore
B.
Ded. Con. Brower Labon Bronson Omar Bodin John P. Barney Thomas Bushfield John
Black John B. Brooks Peter Brotherson William Brisco Benidick Birgman John
Burger Mrs. Ann Banker Thomas Bloomfield Leopald Beck Mr. Blydindenburgh N.Y.
James L. Bogart John Brash Thomas Bruen Philip Buchannon George Buffirt James
Bughen Thomas Blackman Andrew Brown Alexander Brown Rev. Dr. Beach Mr.
Buckannen Stephen Bourdet Thomas Brown Matthew Balmer Silvin Bijotat John T.
Barrow John Buel Elias Byram William Binford Robert Buchannon Conrad Brower Dr.
Borrowe Peter Burtsell Peter Byran Dr. Barbron, Brooklyn
C.
Isaac Cross N. Y. John Coals Andrew Commerdinger Arnout Cannon Henry Carmer
Alexander Christie Ke^n Coldwell, N. Y. William Carver Clarkson Crolious George
Colles William Carpenter Samuel Clerk Stephen Cooper William Cobb George W.
Chapman Daniel Coutent Francis Choir, jun. Michael Commerdinger William Chivers
De W^t Clinton John Cuskadon Henry Cruger Jacob C. Coursa John Carnes Seabery
Champlain James Cassie Michael Collins William Cordoner
D.
James Doyle Benjamin Duyckinck Thomas Dunn Joel Davis Michael Dyckman P. I.
Dubon Peter Dunham Jacob M. De la Montagni^ Thomas Davis Isace Dean James
Douglas Thomas C. Davis Robert Dods G. Dickinson Andrew Durham Gerard Depeyster
Christopher Duyckinck David Dunham, N. Y. Charles Dobes Hugh Dougal James Davis
John Dean
E.
Simon Elstob Jacob Evans Wm. K. Edwards Philip Eekart Barnard Elliot Henry
Eieghell
F.
William Ford John Furman Peter Falconer Henry Fenshaw Gisbert Fannewkerk John
Forrester Nicholas Fursman Nicholas Farroux Duncan Ferguson Samuel Falkenhan
Henry Fellhousen John Fellows, 3 copies James Ferguson William Frasure,
Flatbush
G.
William Gibson, N. Y. Benjamin Galliher Isaac Griffin Charles Guiland William
Guy Mrs. Gender Nathaniel Gatty Thomas Gibson Mrs. T. Gordon, N. Y. Robert
Gentle Thomas Gughan Thomas Gore Thomas Goddard George Gosman John Gudie John
Gilmore Robert Gourlay John Gomes Cornell Gilliam William Grigg James Grant
William Goodman Thomas Garness Kirkpatrick Gay
H.
John Harmer John Hurton William Hartshorn Ashur H^^rt Jacob Hauptman John
Harvay John Hutson David Hossack Theodore Hitchcock Anthony Hunt I. R. Huffman,
jun. John Harrison, 7 copies Den^s Heahy Henry Harp Andrey Hamilton Martin Hill
James Hutton Miss Haloday William Husband Garhart H^pper Monson H^^t Mrs.
Harrison David Heckl^ Thomas Harrison, N. Y. John Hefield Henry Hays Stephen
Hillgar P. Hill William Hutsen George Henderson James Harrison John Hasburgh
Hen^y Hamman Wiliam Humphreys Thomas Hicks Ab^aham Hipwell ^eyste^d Hacker
Eldad Holms Joseph Hitchcock Thomas Hasam Christian Heyl Nathaniel Hopkins John
Harrington George Haws
I.
Naptali Judah Bernard S. Judah William Jinway Daniel Jenes Thomas Johnson John
Jsenbury Peter Jackson J. Jefferson
K.
I. Kitchon Patrick Kelley Jacob Kulph John Kyser John W. King Daniel Kemper
James Knox John Keyser N. Y. Samuel Kip, jun* Godfrey Kant William Knox Isaac
A. Kip William J. Knox
L.
Jourden Lutting David Loydig William Lamb Mrs. Lloyd Nicholas Luthzer Richard
Lent Richard Lloyd Robert Lambert John Linnington Evan Lewis John Larkin Philip
Leonard William Lewis Thomas Leach, 7 copies John Low, 4 copies John Learmont
M.
Samuel Miller Peter Mesier A. M'Kenzie Achibald M'Cullan Daniel M'Leoid Thomas
M'Ready Edward Meeks, jun. John Main Joseph Marshalk Je^^miah Marshall John
M'Crea Philip Myer Robert Mount Hugh M'Dearmont Frances Mayer Richard Moor
James Mott, N. Y. Mary Morrison John Moffit Hugh Maxfield J. Mildeberger John
Mills Charles Mayer Alexander M'Donald John Mildeberger John Milenbugh Isaac
Mynard William G. Miller John Mount John Miller (...) M'Ready (...) Meleck
(...) Mur^^ M^rphy Lot Merk^ Jo^^ua Mills Jacob M'Conne^ Nile M'Intire George
Manold Matthew Manold George Misavy James Morrison Nephen Miner Benjamin
Mertayer Robert M'Dowal William Mathews David March John Moor, Long Isla^d
N.
Sabastian Nordh, N. Y. Samuel Nichols Richard Newton Joseph Normon
O.
Howard Ogle Dr. John Ondrd^^^ Silas Osterline, N. Y. B. W. Osborn Bernard
O'Blaines
P.
Ephraim Parker John Pierson John E. Parker Epinetus Plat Robert Patterson
David Pierson William Patterson Rev. Christopher G. Peter's The Right Rev.
Samue^ Provost, Bishop of (...) Episcopal Church, i^ the City of New York
Edward Pember Joseph Prescot Thomas Pedly John Patri^^ Henry P^t Mary ^urdy
Joln Paxton Edward Parkins, Brooklyn
Q.
^ertulian Quin, N. Y.
R.
Wil^am Rollinson Hen^^ Rutger James Riker Tunas ^iker John Roose M. C. R^nsay
George R* George Roertson Henry Roo^ R. Rogers Henry Rosinkians, N. Y. Daniel
Roberts John R^^deker Peter Ri^son John R^ye Robert S. Ratoon Lawrence Ryan
John ^ankin Wils^n Rowlinson
S.
Fed Serial Henry Stagg William Staymet Cornelious B. Sebring James Smith
George Shimul Anthony Stienback Christian Schultz Henry C. Southwick Hugh
Stuart Thomas Smyth Richard Smith Robert Sands Manasseh Salter Garret S^^kles
J^hn Shredy William Spy Gerard Steadiford Thomas Stagg, jun. Mrs. Sands Thomas
S^ell Benjamin Seixals John S^ckles Joseph Smith Edward Sulivan Christiana
Sword^ John Sinclair John Smith Isaac Smith Walter Smith Stephen Stephens John
Stephenson* N. Y.
T.
James Thomson William Turner Henry Thomas William Trail Charles Tillinghurst
Francis Tobin John Thornton Ann Tibow George Tymer John Thom Abraham Tyson
Francis Tillow
V.
Philip Van Horn Henry Vervelen Peter Van Ness John Warner Van Wyck Peter Vonck
Richard Varick, Esquire. Jacob Van Wagner Abraham Van Gelder John Van Reed John Van
Reper
W.
Tylor Wilet, N. Y. Joseph Dudly Webb James Walsord Charles Wirsphal William
Wade John Wood John Wall Thomas Walton Mrs. Wilt Henry Waning William Wray
Benjamin Woolf Elisha Woodruf William Waloon (...) Wood Dav^^ Wills John W^ts
John Whilock David Walls Garret Walgro^^ Capt. Thomas Wi^ht Thomas Whitemore
David Waldron William Weeks
Y.
George Youngs Timothy Yowle
DIRECTIONS TO THE BINDER FOR PLACING THE PLATES.
VOL. I.
The Head of Cook to face the title Christmas Harbor PAGE 33 Man and Woman of
Van Diemens Island PAGE 57 A Man of Mangea, etc. PAGE 98 A view in Anamooka
PAGE 140 Reception of Captain Cook in Happaee PAGE 161 Boxing Match PAGE 162
Night dance of Women in Happaee PAGE 167 Night dance of Men in Happaee PAGE 168
Poulaho, King of the Friendly Isles PAGE 177 -- Drinking Kava PAGE 190 Fiatooka
or Morai in Tongataboo PAGE 223 The Natche a ceremony PAGE 240 Human sacrifice
in a Morai PAGE 349 Dance in Otaheite PAGE 356 The Body of Tee, a Chief PAGE
361 A young Woman of Otaheite bringing presents PAGE 363
VOL. II.
A view of Huahine PAGE 31 Inhabitants of Norton's Sound PAGE 73 A Morai in
Atooi PAGE 140 An inland view in Atooi PAGE 163 A Man of the Sandwich Islands
dancing PAGE 176 An offering before Captain Cook PAGE 177 A canoe of the
Sandwich Islands, the rowers masked PAGE 184 Sea Otter PAGE 235 A Man (...)
Woman of Nootka Sound PAGE 240 A view of the habitations in Nootka Sound PAGE
253 The inside of a house in Nootka Sound PAGE 255 A view of Snug Corner PAGE
299 A Man and Woman of Prince William's Sound PAGE 300 Canoes of Oonalashka
PAGE 357 A Man and Woman of Oonalashka PAGE 358 Inside of a house in Oonalashka
PAGE 359
VOL. III.
The Tschutschis and their Habitations PAGE 33 Sea Horses PAGE 41 Natives of
Oonaleshaka and their Habitations PAGE 108 View of Karakakooa PAGE 147 Chart of
different Islands PAGE 148 King of Owhyhee bringing presents PAGE 164 Death of
Captain Cook PAGE 199 Town and Harbor of St. Peter PAGE 355 A view at
Bolchertzkoi PAGE 387
VOL. IV.
White Bear PAGE 32 A Man of Kamtschatka traveling in winter PAGE 133 A Man
and Woman of Kamtschatka PAGE 145 Summer and Winter habitations in Kamtschatka
PAGE 159 The inside of a Winter habitation in Kamtschatka PAGE 160
A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN FOR MAKING DISCOVERIES IN THE NORTHERN
HEMISPHERE: PERFORMED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF Captains COOK, CLERK, and GORE,
In the Years 1776, 1777, 1778, 1779, 1780.

BY Captain JAMES COOK, F. R. S. AND Captain JAMES KING, LL. D. and F. R. S.
ILLUSTRATED WITH ELEGANT PLATES, AND A LARGE CHART.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. IV.

NEW YORK: Printed by TIEBOUT and O'BRIEN: FOR BENJAMIN and JACOB JOHNSON, No.
147, HIGH STREET, PHILADELPHIA. -- 1796.

CONTENTS.
BOOK VI. TRANSACTIONS IN A SECOND EXPEDITION TO THE NORTH, BY THE WAY OF
KAMTSCHATKA, AND IN RETURNING HOME, BY THE WAY OF CANTON, AND THE CAPE OF GOOD
HOPE.
CHAP. III. Transactions at Petropaulowska -- Abundant Supply of Fish -- Death
of the Carpenter's Mate -- The Russian Hospital put under the Care of our
Surgeons -- Supply of Rye Flour -- Celebration of his Majesty's Birthday --
Twenty Head of Cattle sent us -- Difficulties in sailing out of the Bay --
Ruins of large Villages -- Eruption of a Volcano -- Appearance of the Country
-- Cheepoonshoi Noss -- Kronotskoi Noss -- Kamtschatskoi Noss -- Account of the
Arctic Gull -- Olutorskoi Noss -- St. Thadeus's Noss -- Tschukotskoi Noss --
Isle of St. Laurence -- The East Cape of Asia described -- Sight of the two
Coasts of Asia and America at the same instant -- Obstructions from the Ice --
Some Sea-Horses killed -- Fruitless Attempts to discover a Passage on the
American Side -- Captain Clerke's future Designs. Page 1 CHAP. IV. Attempt to
pass the Ice to the North-West -- Critical Situation of the Discovery -- Sea
Horses killed -- Greatly obstructed by the Ice -- Damages sustained by the
Discovery -- Captain Clerk resolves to proceed to the Southward -- The Crews
rejoice greatly on that Occasion -- Pass Serdze Kamen -- Through Beering's
Straits -- Observations on the Extent of the North-East Coast of Asia --
Reasons for rejecting Muller's Map -- Impracticability of a North-East or
North-West Passage from the Atlantic into the Pacific Ocean -- The Progress
made in 1778, compared with that made in 1779 -- Observations on the Sea, Sea
Coasts, etc. North of Beering's Straits -- Resume the History of the Voyage --
The Island of St. Lawrence -- Island of Medoni -- Death of Captain Clerk --
Enumeration of his Services. CHAP. V. Return to St. Peter and St. Paul -- The
Sergeant brings a Present of Berries on Board for Captain Clerk -- Several
Officers promoted -- Funeral of Captain Clerk, and the Solemnities attending
it -- Repaired the Damages which the Discovery sustained by the Ice -- Various
Occupations of the Ships Crews -- Letter from the Commander of Bolcheretsk to
Captain Gore -- Supply of Flour, Pitch, Tar, etc. from a Russian Galliot, which
brought a Reinforcement of Russian Soldiers -- Account of a very remarkable
Exile -- Bear-hunting and fishing -- The Sergeant disgraced -- The King's
Coronation Day celebrated -- Visited by the Commander -- The Serjeant's
Restoration -- Promotion of a Russian Soldier at our Request -- Discipline of
the Russian Army -- Church at Paratounca described -- Manner of Bear-hunting --
Curious Particulars of the Bears and Kamtschadales -- Inscription to Captain
Clerke's Memory -- Supply of Cattle received -- Entertainments in Honor of the
Empress's Name-Day -- Present from the Commander -- A Marine attempts to desert
-- Awatska-Bay nautically and geographically described. CHAP. VI. Geographical
Description of Kamtschatka -- Account of the Rivers Bolchoireka, Kamtschatka,
Awatska, etc -- Soil -- Severity of the Climate -- Several Volcanoes --
Remarkable hot Spring at Natcheekin -- Productions -- Vegetables: particularly
the Sarana, and sweet Grass -- Animals in general -- Foxes -- Sables -- Bears
-- Wolves, etc. -- Birds -- Sea-Otters, and other amphibious Animals -- Fish
the staple Article of Food at Kamtschatka -- Whales -- Salmon Fishery -- Method
of catching Salmon -- Lakes abounding with Fish. CHAP. VII. Continuation of the
general Account of Kamtschatka -- Its Inhabitants consist of three Sorts --
Conjectures on their Origin and Descent -- Kamtschadales discovered by the
Russian^ -- Atlassoff makes the inhabitants tributary -- He is disgraced, and
afterward restored -- The Kamtschadales revolt -- Great Havo^k made among them
by the Smallpox -- The Russian Government established in this Country mild and
equitable -- No Offense punishable with death -- The Russian Commerce in
Kamtschatka -- Habitations -- Dress -- Account of the Kurile Islands, etc. Page
143 CHAP. VIII. Plan of further operations -- The ships, on quitting Awatska
Bay, sail along the Coast -- Achachinskoi Bay -- Cape Lopatka -- The Island of
Shoomska -- The Isle of Paramousir -- Observations relative to the Land of
Jeso, Staten Island, and the Company's Land -- Many Birds observed -- A violent
Storm -- Position of Zellany, Kunashir, and the Three Sisters -- De Gama's Land
-- Ineffectual Attempts to make the Land -- The Ships sail for Japan -- Various
Parts of the Japanese Coast described -- Cape Nambu -- Two Japanese Vessels
observed -- Description of one of them -- Boisterous Weather -- Cape de Kennis
-- Boomtje's Point -- Low Point -- White Point -- Sanddown Point -- Prosecution
of our Voyage to China -- Violent Currents -- Quantities of Pumice-Stone --
Three Islands discovered -- Sulphur Island described -- Steer for the Bashee
Isles -- Fruitless Search for them -- The Island of Prata -- The Prata Shoal --
Some Chinese Fishing-boats seen -- The Lema Islands -- Signal for a Chinese
Pilot -- The Grand Ladrone Island -- Journals and other Papers of the Officers
and Men, relating to the History of the Voyage, delivered up. Page 170 CHAP.
IX. Ignorance of the Chinese Pilot -- The ships approach Macao -- Account of
the Isle of Potoe -- A Chinese Comprador comes on board -- Captain King
dispatched to Macao to visit the Portuguese Governor -- Dependent State of the
Portuguese at Macao -- Effects of the Intelligence we received respecting
European Affairs -- Alarms occasioned at Canton -- Our ships anchor in the Typa
-- Captain King, his second Lieutenant, etc. proceed to Canton -- Bocca Tigris
-- Wompu -- A Sampane, or Chinese Boat, described -- Mr. King's Reception at
the English Factory at Canton -- An Instance of the suspicious Character of the
Chinese -- Their Method of trading exemplified -- Observations relative to the
City of Canton -- Its Population -- Number of Sampanes -- Military Force of the
province of Quantong -- Streets and Houses of Canton described -- Of the
English Supercargoes -- Captain King visits a Chinese of the first Distinction
at Canton -- His Return to Macao -- Great Demand for the Sea-Otter Skins --
Earnest Desire of our Seamen to return to Cook's River for Skins -- Plan of a
Voyage for opening a Fur Trade on the Western Coast of North America, and
making further Discoveries in the Neighborhood of China and Japan -- Nautical
Observations -- Price of Provisions at Canton. Page 220 CHAP. X. The ships
rendered more defensible -- Orders of the French Court relative to Captain Cook
-- Quit the Typa -- Strike Soundings on the Macclesfield Bank -- Pulo Sapata
described -- Steer for Pulo Condore -- Cast Anchor in a Harbor of that Island
-- The Captains Gore and King land there -- Captain King's Journey to the
principal Town -- Description of the Town -- Of the Habitation of the Chief --
Ineffectual search for the remains of an English Fort -- Copy of a French
Certificate -- A Mandarin, named Luco, visits the Ships -- Information received
from him -- The Launches dispatched to bring away some Buffaloes -- Singular
Gentleness of these Animals toward Children -- Supplies of Wood and Water --
Pulo Condore described -- Account of the Harhour -- Animal and Vegetable
Producc of the Island -- Persons and Disposition of the Inhabitants -- Presents
to the Mandarin and the Bishop of Adran -- Astronomical and Nautical
Observations. Page 253 CHAP XI. Departure of the Ships from Pulo Condore -- See
Pulo Timoan -- Pulo Puissang -- Pulo Aor -- Pulo Panjang -- Islands called
Domiuis -- Pulo Tya -- Enter the Straits of Banca -- Island of Lusepara --
Description of the Country that borders on the Straits of Banca -- The Sisters
described -- See the Island of Java -- Enter the Straits of Sunda -- Mr.
Williamson sent on board a Dutch Ship to procure Intelligence -- Anchor at
Cracatoa -- Description of that Island -- Proceed to the Prince's Island --
Supplies obtained there -- Situation of the Watering-Place there -- Unhealthy
Effects of the Climate of Java -- The Crew of the Resolution in a more sickly
State than that of the Discovery -- A sudden Storm -- Steer for the Cape of
Good Hope -- Anchor in Simon's Bay -- The two Captains visit the Governor of
the Cape -- Description of False Bay -- Of Simon's Bay -- Noah's Ark -- Seal
Island -- Fruitless Attempts to get into Port Galway in Ireland -- Steer to the
North of Lewis Island -- Anchor at Stromness -- Concluding Remarks. Page 278
A VOYAGE TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN. BOOK VI. TRANSACTIONS IN A SECOND EXPEDITION TO
THE NORTH, BY THE WAY OF KAMTSCHATKA, AND IN RETURNING HOME, BY THE WAY OF
CANTON, AND THE CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.
CHAP. III.
Transactions at Petropaulowska -- Abundant Supply of Fish -- Death of the
Carpenter's Mate -- The Russian Hospital put under the Care of our Surgeons --
Supply of Rye Flour -- Celebration of his Majesty's Birthday -- Twenty Head of
Cattle sent us -- Difficulties in sailing out of the Bay -- Ruins of large
Villages -- Eruption of a Volcano -- Appearance of the Country -- Chepoonskoi
Noss -- Kronotskoi Noss -- Kamtschatskoi Noss -- Account of the Arctic Gull --
Olutorskoi Noss -- St. Thadeu^'s Noss -- Tschukotskoi Noss -- Isle of St.
Laurence -- The East Cape of Asia described -- Sight of the two Coasts of Asia
and America at the same Instant -- Obstructions from the Ice -- Some Sea-Horses
killed -- Fruitless Attempts to discover a Passage on the American Side --
Captain Clerke's future Designs

THE preceding chapter having terminated with a narrative of the return of our
party from Bolchertsk, and of the departure of Major Behm, who had accompanied
them to our ships; we shall now recount the transactions which passed at
Petropaulowska during their absence.

On the 7th of May, not long after they had quitted the bay of Awatska, a great
piece of ice drove against the Resolution, and brought home the small bower
anchor; in consequence of which the other anchor was weighed, and the ship was
moored again. The carpenters, who were occupied in stopping the leak, were
under the necessity of taking off great part of the sheathing from the bows;
and many of the trunnels were found to be so loose and rotten, that they were
drawn out easily with the fingers. On Tuesday the 11th, heavy gales blew from
the north-east, which obliged both our vessels to strike their yards and
top-masts; but the weather becoming more moderate in the afternoon and the ice
having drifted away as far as the mouth of the harbor of Petropaulowska, we
warped close to the shore for the greater convenience of procuring wood and
water, and again moored, as before; the mouth of the bay shut in by the most
southerly point of Rakowina harbor, bearing south, and the town north half
west, at the distance of half a mile.

On the 12th, a party was detached on shore to cut wood, but made little
progress in that service, on account of the snow, which still covered the
ground. A convenient spot, abreast of the ships, was cleared, where there was a
good run of water; and a tent being pitched for the cooper, our empty casks
were landed, and the sail-makers sent ashore.

On Saturday the 15th, as the beach was then clear of ice, a party was sent to
haul the seine, and caught a plentiful supply of fine flat fish for the
companies of both ships. From this time, indeed, till we quitted the harbor,
we were even overpowered with the great quantities of fish which came in from
every quarter. The Toions, both of this town, and of Paratounca, a neighboring
village, had received orders from Major Bemh to employ, in our service, all the
Kamtschadales; so that it frequently happened, that we could not take into the
ships the presents which were sent us. They generally consisted of herrings,
trout, flat fish, and cod. The former, which were in their highest perfection,
and of a delicious flavor, were in extreme plenty in this bay. The people of
the Discovery, at one time surrounded such an amazing quantity in their seine,
that they were obliged to throw over a very considerable number, lest the net
should be broken to pieces; and the cargo they landed was still so abundant,
that, besides having a sufficient stock for immediate use, they filled as many
casks as they could conveniently spare for salting; and, after sending on board
the Resolution a tolerable quantity for the same purpose, they left behind
several bushels upon the beach.

The ice and snow now began rapidly to disappear, and plenty of nettle-tops,
celery, and wild garlic were gathered for the use of the crews; which being
boiled with portable soup and wheat, furnished them with an excellent and
salutary breakfast; and with this they were every morning supplied. The
birch-trees were also tapped, and the sweet juice, of which they produced great
quantities, was constantly mixed with the brandy allowed to the men.

On the 16th, a small bullock was killed, which the sergeant had procured for
the ship's companies. Its weight was two hundred and seventytwo pounds. It was
served out to both the crews for their Sunday's dinner, and was the first fresh
beef which they had tasted since the departure of our vessels from the Cape of
Good Hope in December 1776; a period of almost two years and a half.

John Macintosh, the carpenter's mate, expired this evening, after having been
afflicted with a dysentery ever since we had left the Sandwich Isles. He was a
peaceable and industrious man, and greatly regretted by his mess-mates. Though
he was the fourth person that we had lost by sickness during our voyage, he was
the first who, from his age and constitution, could be said to have had, on our
setting out, an equal chance of life with the rest of his companions. Watman
was supposed by us to be about sixty years old; and Roberts, and Mr. Anderson
from the decline which had manifestly commenced before our departure from
England, most probably could not, under any circumstances, have lived to a
later period than they did.

Captain Clerke's health continued daily to decline, notwithstanding the
salutary change of diet which Kamtschatka afforded him, the priest of
Paratounca, as soon as he was informed of the weak state he was in, supplied
him every day with milk, bread, fowls, and fresh butter, though his habitation
was sixteen miles from the harbor where our ships were stationed.

The Russian hospital, near the town of St. Peter and St. Paul, was, at our
first arrival, in a very deplorable state. All the soldiers were in a greater
or lesser degree, afflicted with the scurvy, many being in the last stage of
that disorder. The rest of the Russian inhabitants were likewise in a similar
condition; and we observed, that our friend the sergeant, by drinking too
freely of the spirits he had received from us, had brought on himself, in the
course of a few days, several of the most alarming symptoms of that disease.
Captain Clerk, desirous of relieving them from this lamentable state, put them
all under the care of our surgeons, and gave orders, that a supply of sour
krout, and malt, for wort, should be furnished for their use. A surprising
alteration soon took place in the figures of most of them; and their speedy
recovery was chiefly attributed to the effects of the sweet wort.

On Tuesday the first of June, two hundred and fifty poods or nine thousand
pounds weight of rye flour, were brought on board the Resolution; and the
Discovery received a proportional quantity. We were supplied with this flour
from the stores of Petropaulowska. The men were now put on their full allowance
of bread, which, from the time of our leaving the Cape of Good Hope, they had
not been indulged in. The same day, we completed our stock of water, sixty-five
tons having been conveyed on board.

We had fresh breezes, and heavy rains, on the 4th of June, so that we were
disappointed in our design of dressing the ships, and obliged to content
ourselves with firing one and twenty guns, in honor of his Majesty's
birthday, and celebrating it, in other respects, in the best manner we could.
Port, who on account of his skill in languages, was left with us, partook, as
well as the sergeants (in the capacity of commandant of the place) of the
entertainment of the day. The worthy priest of Paratounca, having been informed
that it was the anniversary of our sovereign's birthday, gave likewise a
sumptuous feast, at which several of our gentlemen were present, who were
highly pleased with their entertainment, of which dancing formed a part.

On Sunday the 6th, twenty head of cattle arrived, having been sent us, by the
directions of the commander, from the Verchni ostrog, which stands on the river
Kamtschatka, at the distance of almost a hundred miles from this place. These
cattle were of a moderate size; and though the Kamtschadales had been seventeen
days in driving them down to the harbor, were in good condition when they
arrived. The four succeeding days were employed in making preparations for
putting to sea; and on Friday the 11th, about two o'clock in the morning, we
began to unmoor. Before, however, we had got up one anchor, so violent a gale
sprung up from the north-east, that we thought proper to moor again, supposing,
from the position of the entrance of the bay, that the current of wind would,
in all probability, set up the channel. The pinnace was dispatched to examine
the passage, and returned with intelligence, that the wind blew violently from
the south-east, with a great swell, setting into the bay; so that any attempt
to get out to sea would have been attended with considerable risque.

Port now took his leave of us, carrying with him the box containing the
journals of our voyage, which Major Behm was to take charge of, and the packet
that was to be forwarded by express. On the 12th, the gale having abated, we
began unmooring again; but, after having broken the messenger, and reeved a
running purchase with a six inch hawser, which likewise broke three times, we
were, at last, under the necessity of heaving a strain at low water, and
waiting for the flowing of the tide to raise the anchor. This measure
succeeded, though not without damaging the cable. About three o'clock in the
afternoon, the best bower was weighed, and we set sail; but, at eight, the tide
making against us, and the wind being inconsiderable, we anchored again in ten
fathoms water, off the mouth of Rakowina harbor: the ostrog being at the
distance of between two and three miles, bearing north by east half east; the
elevated rock, on the western side of the passage, bearing south; and the
needle rocks, on the eastern side of the passage, south-south-east half east.

The next morning, at four o'clock, we got under way with the tide of ebb; and,
as there was a perfect calm, the boats were dispatched ahead for the purpose
of towing the ships. About ten, a south-easterly wind springing up, and the
tide having turned, we were obliged to let go our anchors again, in seven
fathoms; the ostrog bearing north half east, at the distance of a mile from the
land that was nearest to us; and the three needle rocks being in the direction
of south half east.

Captain Gore and Lieutenant King landed in the afternoon on the east side of
the passage. where they observed, in two different places, the remains of
spacious villages; and, on the side of a hill, they saw an old ruined parapet,
with four or five embrasures. It had guns mounted on it in Beering's time, as
that navigator himself informs us; and commanded the passage up the mouth of
the bay. Not far from this spot, were the ruins of some subterraneous caverns,
which our two gentlemen conjectured to have been magazines.

We weighed anchor, with the ebb tide, about six o'clock in the afternoon, and
turned to windward; but, two hours after, a thick fog coming on, we were under
the necessity of bringing to, our soundings not affording us a sufficient
direction for steering between several sunken ^ocks, situated on each side of
the passage we were to make. The next morning (Monday the 14th) the fog in some
degree dispersing, we weighed as soon as the tide began to ebb; and, there
being little wind, the boats were sent ahead to tow; but, about ten o'clock,
both the wind and tide set in so strong from the sea, that we were once more
obliged to cast anchor, in thirteen fathoms water, the high rock being at the
distance of six furlongs, in the direction of west one quarter south. We
continued, during the remainder of the day, in this situation, the wind blowing
fresh into the mouth of the bay. Toward the evening, the weather was extremely
dark and cloudy with an unsettled wind.

We were surprised, before daylight, on the 15th, with a rumbling noise, that
resembled distant thunder; and, when the day appeared, we found that the sides
and decks of our ships were covered, near an inch thick, with a fine dust like
emery. The air was at the same time loaded and obscured with this substance;
and, toward the volcano mountain, which stands to the northward of the
harbor, it was exceeding thick and black, insomuch that we were unable to
distinguish the body of the hill. About twelve o'clock, and during the
afternoon, the loudness of the explosions increased; and they were succeeded by
showers of cinders, which in general were of the size of peace, though many of
those that were picked up from the deck were larger than a hazel nut. Several
small stones, which had undergone no alteration from the action of the fire,
fell with the cinders. In the evening we had dreadful claps of thunder and
vivid flashes of lightning, which, with the darkness of the sky, and the
sulphurous smell of the air, produced a very awful and tremendous effect. Our
distance from the foot of the mountain was, at this time, about eight leagues.

At daybreak on the 16th, we got up our anchors, and stood out of the bay; but
the wind falling, and the tide of ebb setting across the passage on the eastern
shore, we were driven very near the three needle rocks, situated on that side
of the entrance, and were under the necessity of hoisting out the boats, for
the purpose of towing the ships clear of them. At twelve o'clock, we were at
the distance of six miles from the land; and our depth of water was forty three
fathoms, over a bottom of small stones, of the same kind with those which had
fallen upon our decks, after the late eruption of the volcano.

The country had now a very different appearance from what it had on our first
arrival. The snow, except what remained on the summits of some very lofty
mountains, had vanished; and the sides of the hills, which abounded with wood
in many parts, were covered with a beautiful verdure.

It being the intention of Captain Clerk to keep in sight of the coast of
Kamtschatka, as much as the weather would allow, in order to ascertain its
position, we continued to steer toward the north-north-east, with variable
light winds, till the 18th. The volcano was still observed to throw up immense
volumes of smoke; and we did not strike ground with one hundred and fifty
fathoms of line, at the distance of twelve miles from the shore.

The wind blew fresh from the south on the 18th and the weather became so thick
and hazy, that it was imprudent to make any further attempts at present to keep
in sight of the land. However, that we might be ready, whenever the fog should
clear up, to assume our survey, we ran on in the direction of the coast, (as
represented in the Russian charts) and fired signal guns for the Discovery to
proceed on the same course. At eleven o'clock, just before we lost sight of
land, Cheepoonskoi Noss, so denominated by the Russians, was at the distance of
seven or eight leagues, bearing north-north-east.

At three o'clock in the morning of the 20th, the weather becoming clearer, we
stood in toward the land, and, in the space of an hour afterward, saw it
ahead, extending from north-west to north-north-east, at the distance of about
five leagues. The northern part we conjectured to be Kronotskoi Noss; its
position in the Russian charts, nearly agreeing with our reckoning in respect
to its latitude, which was 54 42 north; though, in point of longitude, we
differed considerably from them; for they place it 1 48 east of Awatska;
whereas our computation makes it 3 34 east of that place, or 162 17 east of
Greenwich. The land about this cape is very elevated, and the inland mountains
were at this time covered with snow. There is no appearance of inlets or bays
in the coast; and the shore breaks off in steep cliffs.

We had not long been gratified with this view of the land, when the wind
freshened from the south-west, bringing on a thick fog, which obliged us to
stand off in the direction of north-east by east.

The fog dispersing about noon, we again steered for the land, expecting to
fall in with Kamschatskoi Noss, and gained a sight of it at daybreak on the
21st. The south-west wind being soon after succeeded by a light breeze that
blew off the land, we were prevented from approaching the coast sufficiently
near to determine its direction, or describe its aspect. At twelve o'clock, our
longitude was 163 50, and our latitude 55 52; the extremes of the land bore
north-west by west* west, and north by west west; and the nearest part was at
the distance of about twenty-four miles.

At nine in the evening, when we had approached about six miles nearer the
coast, it appeared to form a projecting peninsula, and to extend eleven or
twelve leagues in the direction nearly of north and south. It is level, and of
a moderate elevation; the southern extreme terminates in a low sloping point;
that to the northward forms a steep bluff head; and between them, ten or twelve
miles to the south of the northern cape, there is a considerable break in the
land. On both sides of this break, the land is low. A remarkable hill,
resembling a saddle, rises beyond the opening; and a chain of lofty mountains
capped with snow, extends along the back of the whole peninsula.

The coast running in an even direction, we were uncertain with respect to the
position of Kamtschatskoi Noss, which, according to Mr. Muller, forms a
projecting point toward the middle of the peninsula; but we afterward found,
that, in a late Russian map, that appellation is given to the southern cape.
The latitude of this from several accurate observations, was 56 3; and its
longitude, 163 20. To the south of this peninsula, the greater river
Kamtschatska runs into the sea.

The season being too far advanced for us to make an accurate survey of the
coast of Kamtschatka, it was the design of Captain Clerk, in our course to
Beering's Straights, to ascertain chiefly the respective situations of the
projecting points of the coast. We therefore steered across a spacious bay,
laid down between Kamtschatskoi Noss and Olutorskoi Noss, with a view of making
the latter; which is represented by the Russian geographers, as terminating the
peninsula of Kamtschatka, and as being the southern limit of the country of the
Koriacs.

On Tuesday the 22d, we passed a dead whale, which emitted a most horrible
smell, perceivable at the distance of three or four miles. It was covered with
a very considerable number of gulls, petrels, and other oceanic birds, which
were regaling themselves upon it. On the 24th, the wind, which had shifted
about during the three preceding days, settled at south-west, bringing on clear
weather, with which we proceeded toward the north-east by north, across the
bay, having no land in sight. In the course of this day we observed a great
number of gulls, and were disgusted with the indelicate manner of feeding of
the arctic gull, which has procured it the appellation of the parasite. This
bird, which is rather larger than the common gull, pursues the latter species
whenever it meets them; the gull after flying about for some time, with loud
screams and manifest indications of extreme terror, drops its excrement, which
its pursuer instantly darts at, and catches in its beak before it falls into
the sea.

At one o'clock in the afternoon of the 25th, when we were in the latitude of
59 12, and in the longitude of 168 35, a very thick fog came on, about the time
we expected to obtain a view of Olutorskoi Noss, which (if Muller's position of
it, in the latitude 59 30, and in the longitude of 167 36, is right) could then
have been only a dozen leagues from us; at which distance we might easily have
discerned land of a moderate height. Our depth of water, at present, was so
great, that we had no ground with a hundred and sixty fathoms of line.

The fog still continuing, prevented us from making a nearer approach to the
land, and we steered east by north at five o'clock, which is a little more
easterly than the Russian charts represent the trending of the coast from
Olutorskoi Noss. The next day, a fresh gale blew from the south-west, which
lasted till noon on the 27th, when the weather clearing up, we steered to the
north, with an intention of making the land. Our latitude, at this time, was 59
49, and our longitude 175 43. Though we saw some shags in the morning, which
are imagined never to fly far from land, yet there was no appearance of it
during the whole day. However, the next morning, about six o'clock, we had
sight of it toward the north-west. The coast appeared in hills of moderate
elevation; but, inland, others were observed considerably higher. The snow
lying in patches, and no wood being perceived, the land had a very barren
aspect.

At nine o'clock, we were ten or eleven miles from the shore, the southern
extreme bearing west by south, about six leagues distant, beyond which the
coast seemed to incline to the west. This point being in the longitude of 174
48, and in the latitude 61 48, is situated, according to the Russian charts,
near the mouth of the river Opuka. The northern extremity, at the same time
bore north by west; between which, and a hill bearing north-west by west west,
the coast appeared to bend toward the west, and form a deep bay.

At the distance of about eight miles from the land, we observed a strong
rippling; and being under apprehensions of meeting with foul ground, we made
sail to the north-east, along the coast. On heaving the lead, we found the
depth of water to be twenty-four fathoms, over a bottom of gravel. We therefore
concluded, that the appearance abovementioned, was occasioned by a tide, then
running to the southward. At noon, the extremes of the land bearing
west-south-west and north-north-east, we were abreast of the low land, which,
we now observed, joined the two points, where we had before expected to
discover a deep bay. The coast bends a little toward the west, and has a small
inlet, which is, perhaps, the mouth of some inconsiderable river. Our longitude
was now 175 43, and our latitude 61 36.

During the afternoon, we continued our course along the coast, at the distance
of four or five leagues, with a breeze from the west, having regular soundings
from twenty-eight to thirty-six fathoms. The coast exhibited an appearance of
sterility, and the hills rose to a considerable elevation inland, but the
clouds on their tops prevented us from determining their height. About eight
o'clock in the evening, some of our people thought they saw land to the east by
north; upon which we stood to the southward of east; but it proved to be
nothing more than a fog bank. At midnight, the extreme point bearing north-east
east, we conjectured that it was St. Thadeus's Noss; to the south of which the
land inclines toward the west, forming a deep bight, wherein the river
Katirka, according to the charts published by the Russians, is situate.

The weather, on the 29th, was unsettled, with the wind at the north-east
point. The next day, at twelve o'clock, our longitude was 180, and our latitude
61 48. At this time, St. Thadeus's Noss bore north-north-west, at the distance
of twenty-three leagues; and beyond it we perceived the coast extending almost
directly north. The easternmost point of the Noss is in the latitude 62 50, and
in the longitude of 179. The land about it, from its being discerned at so
great a distance, may justly be supposed to be of a considerable height. During
this and the preceding day, we saw numbers of sea-horses, whales, and seals;
also albatrosses, gulls, sea-parrots, guillemots, etc. Taking the advantage of
a little calm weather, several of our people employed themselves in fishing,
and caught plenty of excellent cod. Our soundings were from sixty-five to
seventy-five fathoms.

At noon, on Thursday the first of July, Mr. Bligh, Master of the Resolution,
having moored a small keg with the deep sea lead, in seventy-five fathoms
water, found that the ship made a course to the north by east, about half a
mile in an hour: this was attributed by him to the effect of a southerly swell,
rather than to that of any current. The wind, toward the evening, freshening
from the south-east, we steered to north-east by east, for the point that
Beering calls Tschukotskoi Noss, which we had observed on the 4th of September
the preceding year, at the same time that we perceived, toward the south-east,
the Isle of St. Lawrence. This cape, and St. Thadeus's Noss, from the
north-eastern and south-western extremes of the extensive Gulf of Anadir, into
the bottom of which the river of that name discharges itself, separating, as it
passes, the country of the Tschutski from that of the Koriacs.

On the 3d of July, at twelve o'clock, our latitude was 63 33, and our
longitude 186 45. Between twelve and one, we descried the Tschukotskoi Noss,
bearing north half west, at the distance of thirteen or fourteen leagues. At
five in the afternoon, we saw the island of St. Lawrence, in the direction of
east three-quarters north; and also another island, which we imagined was
between St. Lawrence and Anderson's Island, about eighteen miles
east-south-east of the former. As we had no certain knowledge of this island,
Captain Clerk was inclined to have a nearer view of it, and immediately hauled
the wind toward it: but it unfortunately happened, that we were unable to
weather the Isle of St. Lawrence, and were therefore obliged to bear up again,
and pass them all to the leeward.

The latitude of the Island of St. Lawrence, according to the most accurate
observations, is 63 47; and its longitude is 188 15. This island, if its
boundaries were at present within our view, is about three leagues in
circumference. The northern part of it may be discerned at the distance of ten
or a dozen leagues. As it has some low land to the south-east, the extent of
which we could not perceive, some of us supposed, that it might perhaps be
joined to the land to the eastward of it: we were, however, prevented by the
haziness of the weather, from ascertaining this circumstance. These islands, as
well as the land adjoining to the Tschukotskoi Noss, were covered with snow,
and presented a most dismal aspect. About midnight, the Isle of St. Lawrence
was five or six miles distant, bearing south-south-east; and our soundings were
eighteen fathoms. We were accompanied with sea fowl of various sorts, and
observed some guillemots and small crested hawks.

As the weather continued to thicken, we lost sight of land till Monday the
5th, when we had a view of it both to the north-east and north-west. Our
longitude, at this time, was 189 14, and our latitude 65 24. As the islands of
St. Diomede, which are situated in Beering's Straight, between the two
continents of Asia and America, were determined by us the preceding year to be
in the latitude of 95 48, we were at a loss how to reconcile the land toward
the north-east, with the position of those islands. We therefore stood for the
land till three o'clock in the afternoon, when we were within the distance of
four miles from it, and discovering it to be two islands, were pretty well
convinced of their being the same; but the haziness of the weather still
continuing, we, in order to be certain, with respect to our situation, stood
over to the Asiatic coast, till about seven o'clock in the evening; at which
time we had approached within two or three leagues of the eastern cape of that
continent.

This cape is an elevated round head of land, and extends about five miles from
north to south. It forms a peninsula, which is connected with the continent by
a narrow isthmus of low land. It has a bold shore; and three lofty, detached,
spiral rocks, are seen off its north part. It was at present covered with snow,
and the beach encompassed with ice. We were now convinced of our having been
under the influence of a strong current setting to the northward, which had
occasioned an error of twenty miles in our computation of the latitude at noon.
At the time of our passing this Straight the last year, we had experienced a
similar effect.

Being now certain with regard to our position, we steered north by east. At
ten o'clock in the evening, the weather clearing up, we saw, at the same
instant, the remarkable peaked hill near Cape Prince of Wales, on the North
American coast, and the East Cape of Asia, with the two islands of St. Diomede
between them.

In the course of this day, we saw several large white gulls, and great numbers
of very small birds of the hawk kind. The beak of the latter was compressed,
and large in proportion to the body of the bird; the color was dark brown, or
rather black, the breast whitish, and toward the abdomen a reddish brown hue
was visible.

On the 6th, at twelve o'clock, our latitude was 67, and our longitude 191 6.
Having already passed many large masses of ice, and observed that it adhered,
in several places, to the shore of the Asiatic continent, we were not greatly
surprised when we fell in, about three o'clock, with an extensive body of it,
stretching toward the west. This appearance considerably discouraged our hopes
of proceeding much further to the north this year, than we had done the
preceding. There being little wind in the afternoon, the boats were hoisted out
in pursuit of the sea-horses, great numbers of which were seen on the detached
pieces of ice; but they returned without success: these animals being extremely
shy, and, before our people could come within gunshot of them, always
retreated into the water.

Having hoisted in the boats at seven o'clock in the evening, we stood on to
the north-east-ward, with a fresh southerly breeze, intending to explore the
American continent, between the latitudes of 68 and 69, which, on account of
the foggy weather, we had not an opportunity of examining the last year. In
this attempt we were partly disappointed again: for, on the 7th, about six
o'clock in the morning, we were stopped by a large body of ice, stretching from
north-west to south-east; but, not long afterward, the horrizon becoming
clear, we had a view of the American coast, at the distance of about ten
leagues, extending from north-east by east to east, and lying between 68 and 68
20 of northern latitude. The ice not being high, we were enabled by the
clearness of the weather to see over a great extent of it. The whole exhibited
a compact solid surface, not in the least thawed; and seemed also to adhere to
the land.

The weather becoming hazy soon after, we lost sight of the land; and it being
impossible to approach nearer to it, we steered to the north-north-west,
keeping the ice close on board; and having, by noon, got round its western
extremity, we found that it trended nearly north. Our longitude, at this time,
was 192 34, and our latitude 68 22. We proceeded along the edge of the ice, to
the north-north-east, during the remainder of the day, passing through many
loose pieces which had been separated from the main body, and against which our
vessels were driven with great violence, notwithstanding our utmost caution.
About eight in the evening, we passed some drift-wood: at midnight the wind
veered to the north-west; and there were continued showers of snow and sleet.
The thermometer had now fallen from 38 to 31.

The next morning, at five o'clock, the wind shifting more to the northward, we
could continue no longer on the same tack, by reason of the ice, but were under
the necessity of standing toward the west. Our depth of water, at this time
was nineteen fathoms; from which, upon comparing it with our remarks on the
soundings in the preceding year, we inferred, that our present distance from
the coast of America did not exceed six or seven leagues; but our view was
circumscribed within a much narrower compass, by a heavy fall of snow. Our
latitude, at twelve o'clock, was 69 21, and our longitude 192 42.

At two in the afternoon, the weather became clearer, and we sound ourselves
close to an expanse of ice, which from the mast-head, was discovered to consist
of very large compact bodies, united toward the exterior edge, but, in the
interior parts, some pieces were observed floating in vacant spaces of the
water: it extended from west-south-west to north-east by north. We bore away
toward the south, along the edge of it, endeavoring to get into clearer
water; for the strong northerly winds had drifted down such numbers of loose
pieces, that we had been encompassed with them for some time, and were unable
to prevent the ships from striking against several of them.

On Friday the 9th, a fresh gale blew from the north-north-west, accompanied
with violent showers of snow and sleet. The thermometer, at noon, was at 30. We
steered west-south-west, and kept as near the main body of ice as we could; but
had the misfortune to damage the cut-water against the drift pieces, and rub
off some of the sheathing from the bows. The shocks, indeed, which our ships
received, were frequently very severe, and were attended with considerable
hazard. Our latitude, at noon, was 69 12, and our longitude 188 5.

Having now sailed almost forty leagues to the west, along the edge of the ice,
without perceiving any opening, or a clear sea. beyond it toward the north, we
had no prospect of making further progress to the northward at present. Captain
Clerk, therefore, determined to bear away to the south by east, the only
quarter which was clear, and to wait till the season was somewhat more
advanced, before he made any further attempts, to penetrate through the ice. He
proposed to employ the intermediate time in surveying the bay of St. Lawrence,
and the coast situate to the south of it, as it would be a great satisfaction
to have a harbor so near, in case of future damage from the quantity of ice,
in these parts. We were also desirous of paying another visit to the Tschutski;
and more particular since the acconuts we had heard of them from Major Behm.

In consequence of this determination, we made sail to the southward, till the
10th at noon, when we passed considerable quantities of drift ice, and a
perfect calm ensued. The latitude, at this time, was 68 1, and the longitude,
188 30. This morning we saw several whales, and in the afternoon, there being
great numbers of sea-horses on the pieces of ice that surrounded us, we hoisted
out the boats, and dispatched them in pursuit of those animals. Our people had
more success on this occasion, than they had on the 6th; for they returned with
three large ones, and a young one, besides having killed or wounded some
others. They were witnesses of several striking instances of parental affection
in these animals. All of them, on the approach of the boats toward the ice,
took their young ones under their fins, and attempted to escape with them into
the sea. Some, whose cubs were killed or wounded, and left floating upon the
surface of the water, rose again, and carried them down, sometimes just as our
men were on the point of taking them into the boat; and could be traced bearing
them to a considerable distance through the water, which was stained with their
blood. They were afterward observed bringing them, at intervals, above the
surface, as if for air, and again plunging under it, with a horrid bellowing.
The female, in particular, whose young one had been, killed, and taken into the
boat, became so furious, that she even struck her two tusks through the bottom
of the cutter.

About eight o'clock in the evening, an easterly breeze sprung up, with which
we continued to steer to the southward; and, at midnight, fell in with many
extensive bodies of ice. We attempted to push through them under an easy sail,
that the ships might sustain no damage; and when we had proceeded a little
further toward the south, nothing was visible but a very large and compact
mass of ice, extending to the north-east, south-west, and south-east, as far as
the eye could reach. This formidable obstacle prevented our visiting the
Tschutski; for no space remained open, except back again to the northward. We
therefore tacked, at three o'clock in the morning of the 11th, and stood to
that quarter. The latitude, at noon, was 67 49, and the longitude 188 47.

On Monday the 12th, we had light winds and hazy weather. On examining the
current, we found it set toward the north-west, at the rate of half a mile an
hour. We continued our northerly course, with a breeze from the south, and fair
weather, till ten o'clock in the morning of the 13th, when we again found
ourselves close in with a solid mass of ice, to which we could perceive no
limits from the mast-head. This was an effectual discouragement to all our
hopes of penetrating further; which had been greatly raised, by our having now
advanced almost ten leagues, through a space, which, on the 9th, had been found
to be occupied by impenetrable ice. Our situation, at this time, was nearly in
the middle of the channel, betwixt the two continents; our latitude was 69 37;
and the main body of the ice extended from west-south-west to east-north-east.

As, in that part of the sea where we now were, there was no probability of
getting further to the north, Captain Clerk determined to make a final attempt
on the coast of America, for Baffin's Bay, since we had found it practicable to
advance the furtherest on this side, in the preceding year. We accordingly,
during the remainder of the day, worked to the windward, with a fresh breeze
from the east. We observed several fulmars and arctic gulls, and passed two
trees, both of which seemed to have lain a loner time in the water. The larger
one was, in length, ten or eleven feet, and in circumference, about three,
without either the bark or branches.

We proceeded to the eastward on the 14th, with thick foggy weather. The next
day, the wind blowing fresh from the west, and having, in some measure,
dispersed the fog, we immediately steered to the north, in order to have a
nearer view of the ice; and we were soon close in with it. It extended from
north-north-west to north-east, and was solid and compact; the exterior parts
were ragged, and of various heights; the inner surface was even: and, as we
supposed, from eight to ten feet above the level of the sea. The weather
becoming moderate during the rest of the day, we shaped our course according to
the trending of the ice, which, in several places, formed deep bays.

The wind freshened in the morning of the 16th, and was accompanied with
frequent and thick showers of snow. At eight o'clock in the forenoon, we had a
strong gale from the west-south-west, which brought us under double-reefed
topsails; when, the weather in some degree clearing up, we found ourselves, as
it were, embayed; the ice having suddenly taken a turn to the south-eastward,
and encompassing us, in one compact body, on all sides but the south. In
consequence of this, we hauled our wind to the southward, being, at that time,
in twenty-six fathoms water, and in the latitude of 70 8 north; and, as we
imagined, at the distance of about five-and-twenty leagues from the American
coast.

At four in the afternoon, the gale increasing, we got the top-gallant-yards
down upon the deck, surled the mizen top-sail, and close-reefed the fore and
main-top-sails. About eight o'clock, finding that our soundings had decreased
to twenty-two fathoms, which we considered as an indication of our near
approach to the coast of America, we tacked and steered to the northward. In
the night we had boisterous weather, attended with snow: but, the next morning,
it was clear and moderate; and, at eight o'clock, we got the top-gallant-yards
across, and bore away, with the wind still at west-south-west. Our latitude, at
noon, was 69 55, and our longitude, 194 30. The wind slackened in the evening,
and, about midnight, we had a calm.

A light breeze arising from the east-north-east, at five in the morning of the
18th, we continued our progress toward the north, with a view of regaining the
ice as soon as possible. We saw numbers of sea-parrots, and small ice-birds,
and also many whales; and passed several logs of drift-wood. The latitude, at
twelve o'clock, was 70 26, and the longitude 194 54. Our soundings, at the same
time, were three-and-twenty fathoms; and the ice extended from north to
east-north-east, being about one league distant.

At one o'clock in the afternoon, observing, that we were close in with a firm
united mass of ice, stretching from east to west-north-west, we tacked, and,
the wind veering to the westward, stood to the east, along the edge of ^t, till
eleven in the evening. A very thick fog then coming on, and the depth of water
decreasing to nineteen fathoms, we hauled our wind to the southward.

Though we perceived no sea-horses on the body of ice, yet, on the detached
fragments of it, they were seen in herds, and in greater numbers than we had
ever before observed. About nine o'clock in the evening, a white bear swam
close by the Discovery; it afterward went toward the ice, on which were
likewise two others.

The weather clearing up at one in the morning of the 19th, we bore away to the
north-east till two o'clock, when we were again so completely embayed by the
ice, that no opening remained, except to the southward; to which quarter we
therefore directed our course, and returned through a very smooth water, with
favorable weather, by the same way we had come in. We were unable to penetrate
further toward the north than at this time, when our latitude was 70 33, which
was about five leagues short of the point to which we had advanced the
preceding summer. We stood to the south-south-west, with light winds from the
north-west, near the edge of the main body of ice, which was situated on our
left hand, extending between us and the American coast. At noon, our latitude
was 70 11, and our longitude 196 15; and our soundings were sixteen fathoms. We
supposed, from this circumstance, that the Icy Cape was at the distance of only
seven or eight leagues from us: but, though the weather was, in general, pretty
clear, there was, at the same time, a hasiness in the horizon so that we could
not expect to have an opportunity of seeing the cape.

Two white bears appearing in the water during the afternoon, some of our
people immediately pursued them in the jolly boat, and were so fortunate as to
kill them both. The larger one, which was, in all probability, the dam of the
younger, being shot first, the other would not leave it, though it might have
escaped with ease on the ice, while the men were re-loading their muskets; but
continued swimming about, till, after having been several times fired upon, it
was shot dead. The length of the larger one, from the snout to the end of the
tail, was seven feet two inches; its circumference, near the forelegs, was
four feet ten inches; the height of the shoulder was four feet three inches;
and the breadth of the sore-paw was ten inches. The weight of its four quarters
was four hundred and thirty six pounds. The four quarters of the smallest
weighed two hundred and fifty-six pounds.

These animals furnished us with some good meals of fresh meat. Their flesh,
indeed, had a strong fishy taste, but was infinitely superior to that of the
seahorse; which, however, our people were again persuaded, with no great
difficulty, to prefer to their salted provisions.

On Tuesday the 20th, at six in the morning, a thick fog arising, we lost sight
of the ice for the space of two hours; but, when the weather became clearer, we
again had a view of the main body to the south-south-east; and immediately
hauled our wind, which was easterly, toward it, expecting to make the American
coast to the south-east, which we effected between ten and eleven o'clock. The
latitude, at noon, was 69 33, and the longitude 194 53. Our depth of water, at
the same time, was nineteen fathoms. The land was at the distance of eight or
ten leagues, extending from south by east to south-south-west, half west, being
the same we had seen the preceding year; but it was at present, much more
covered with snow than at that time; and the ice seemed to adhere to the shore.

We continued to sail in the afternoon, through a sea of loose ice, and to
steer toward the land, as near as the wind, which blew from east-south-east,
would permit. A thick fog came on at eight o'clock in the evening, and the wind
abated. Observing a rippling in the water, we tried the current, and found it
set to the east-north-east, at the rate of a mile in an hour: we therefore
resolved to steer before the wind, during the night, in order to stem it, and
oppose the large pieces of loose ice, which were setting us on toward the
(...). Our soundings, at midnight, were twenty f^thoms.

The next morning, at eight o'clock, the wind freshening, and the fog
dispersing, we again had sight of the coast of America to the south-eastward,
at the distance of nine or ten leagues, and hauled in for it; but the ice in a
short time effectually stopped our further progress on that side, and we were
obliged to bear away toward the west, along the edge of it. Our latitude, at
twelve, was 69 34; our longitude was 193, and our soundings were twenty-four
fathoms.

A connected solid field of ice, thus baffling all our efforts to make a nearer
approach to the land and (as we had some reason to imagine) adhering to it, we
relinquished all hopes of a north-east passage to Great Britain.

Captain Clerk now finding it impossible to advance further to the northward
of the American coast, and deeming it equally improbable, that such a
prodigious quantity of ice should be dissolved by the few remaining weeks that
would terminate the summer, considered it as the best step that could be taken,
to trace the sea over to the coast of Asia and endeavor to find some opening
that would admit him further north, or see what more could be done upon that
coast, where we hoped to meet with better success.

CHAP. IV.
Attempt to pass the Ice to the North-West -- Critical Situation of the
Discovery -- Sea Horses killed -- Greatly obstructed by the Ice -- Damages
sustained by the Discovery -- Captain Clerk resolves to proceed to the
Southward -- The Crews rejoice greatly on that Occasion -- Pass Serdze Kamen --
Through Beering's Straits -- Observations on the Extent of the North-East Coast
of Asia -- Reasons for rejecting Muller's Map -- Impracticability of a
North-East or North-West Passage from the Atlantic into the Pacific Ocean --
The Progress made in 1778, compared with that made in 1779 -- Observations on
the Sea, Sea Coasts, etc. North of Beering's Straits -- Resume the History of
the Voyage -- The Island of St. Lawrence -- Island of Medoni -- Death of
Captain Clerk -- Enumeration of his Services.

IN consequence of Captain Clerke's determination to relinquish all attempts on
the American coast, and to make his final efforts, in search of a passage, on
the coast of the Asiatic continent, we steered west-north-west* during the
afternoon of the 21st of July, through a great quantity of loose ice. About ten
o'clock in the evening, discovering the main body of ice through the fog, right
ahead, and very near us, and being unwilling to stand to the southward, so
long as we could possibly avoid it; we hauled our wind, which was easterly, and
made sail to the north; but in the space of an hour afterward, finding that
the weather became clearer, and that we were surrounded by a compact field of
ice on all sides, except to the south-south-west, we tacked, and steered in
that direction, for the purpose of getting clear of it. On the 22d at noon, our
latitude was 69 30, and our longitude 187 30. In the afternoon, we again came
up with the ice, which extending to the north-west, and south-west, obliged us
to proceed to the southward, in order to weather it.

It may not be improper to remark, that, since the 8th of July, we had twice
traversed this sea, in lines almost parallel with the run we had just now made;
that we were unable in the first of those traverses, to penetrate so far north,
by eight or ten leagues, as in the second; and that in the last we had again
met with a connected mass of ice, generally about five leagues to the southward
of its position in the preceding run. This makes it evident, that the large
compact fields of ice, observed by us, were moveable, or diminishing* but, at
the same time, it does not authorize any expectation of advancing much farther,
even in the most favorable seasons.

About seven o'clock in the evening, the weather being hazy, and no ice
visible, we made sail to the westward; but, between eight and nine, the haze
dispersing, we found ourselves in the midst of loose ice, and very near the
main body, we therefore stood upon a wind, which was still easterly, and
continued to beat to windward during the night, hoping to weather the loose
pieces, which the wind drove down upon us in such quantities, that we were in
great danger of being blocked up by them.

The next morning, the clear water, in which we steered to and fro, did not
exceed a mile and a half, and was lessening every moment. At length, after
exerting our most strenuous endeavors to clear the loose ice, we were under
the necessity of forcing a passage to the south, which we accomplished between
seven and eight, though not without subjecting the ship to some very severe
shocks. The Discovery was not so successful, for, about eleven o'clock, when
she had almost got clear out, she became so entangled by several large pieces,
that her progress was stopped, and she immediately dropped to leeward, and fell
broadside foremost, on the edge of a considerably body of ice; and there being
an open sea to windward, the surf occasioned her to strike with violence upon
it. This mass, at length, either so far broke, or moved, as to give the crew an
opportunity of making another effort to escape; but it unfortunately happened,
that, before the ship gathered way enough to be under command, she fell to
leeward a second time, on another fragment, and the swell rendering it unsafe
to lie to windward, and finding no prospect of getting clear, they pushed into
a small opening, furled their sails, and made the vessel fast with ice hooks.

We saw them in this dangerous situation at noon, at the distance of about
three miles from us, in a north-west direction; a fresh gale from the
south-east driving more ice toward the north-west, and augmenting the body
that lay between us. Our latitude at this time was 69 8; our longitude 187; and
our soundings were twenty-eight fathoms. To add to the apprehensions which
began to force themselves on our minds, between four and five in the afternoon,
the weather becoming thick and hazy, we lost sight of the Discovery. However,
that we might be in a situation to afford her every possible assistance, we
stood on close by the edge of the ice. About six o'clock the wind shifting to
the north, gave us some hopes, that the ice might drift away, and release her
from her danger; and in that case, as it was uncertain in what condition she
might come out, we continued, every half hour, to fire a gun, with a view of
preventing a separation. Our fears for her safety did not cease till nine, when
we heard her guns fired in answer to ours; and not long afterward, being
hailed by her, we were informed, that, upon the change of wind, the ice began
to separate; and that her people, setting all the sails, forced a passage
through it. We also learned, that while they were surrounded by it, they found
the ship drift with the main body toward the north-east, at the rate of half a
mile an hour. We found, that she had rubbed off much of the sheathing from her
bows, and was become very leaky, from the violent blows she had received when
she fell upon the edge of the ice.

On Saturday the 24th, we had fresh breezes from the south-west, with hazy
weather, and steered to the south-east till eleven o'clock in the forenoon,
when our course was again obstructed by a large body of loose ice, which
extended from north-north-east to south-south-east; and to which we could
discover no end. We therefore kept working to windward, and at twelve o'clock
our latitude was 68 53, and longitude 188. About four in the afternoon, it
became calm, and the boats were hoisted out in pursuit of the sea-horses, which
appeared in prodigious he^^^ on each side of us. Ten of them were killed by our
people, which were as many as could be made use of by us for eating, or for
converting into lamp oil. We kept it on with a south westerly wind, along the
edge of the ice, which extended in a direction nearly east and west, till four
in the morning of the 25th, when perceiving a clear sea beyond it, to the south
eastward, we steered that way, with an intention of forcing through it. We ^^d
cleared it by six, and continued, during the remaining part of the day, to run
toward the south-east, with no ice in sight.

At noon, our latitude was 68 38, our longitude 189 9, and our soundings thirty
fathoms. We tacked at midnight, and stood to the west, with a fresh southerly
gale; and the next morning, at ten, the ice again made its appearance,
extending from north-west to south. It was loose, and drifted by the force of
the wind toward the north. At twelve, our latitude was 68, longitude 88 10,
and our depth of water was twenty-eight fathoms. For the remainder of the day,
and till noon on the 27th, we stood backwards and forwards, to clear ourselves
of different pieces of ice. The latitude at noon was 67 47, and the longitude
181.

At two in the afternoon, we had sight of the continent to the south by east;
and at four, having run, since noon, to the south-west, we were encompassed by
loose masses of ice, with the main body of it in view, stretching in the
direction of north by west, and south by east, as far as the eye could reach,
beyond which we descried the Asiatic coast, bearing south, and south by east.

It being now necessary to come to some determination respecting the course we
were next to steer, Captain Clerk dispatched a boat, with the carpenters, on
board the Discovery, to make inquiry into the particulars of the damage she had
lately received. They returned, in the evening, with the report of Captain
Gore, and of the carpenters of both vessels, that the damages sustained were
such as would require three weeks to repair; and that it would be requisite,
for that purpose, to make the best of their way to some port.

Thus, finding our farther progress to the north, as well as our nearer
approach to either continent, obstructed by immence bodies of ice, we
considered it as not only injurious to the service, by endangering the safety
of the ships, but likewise fruitless with respect to the design of our voyage
to make any farther attempts for the discovery of a passage. This, therefore,
added to Captain Gore's representations, determined Captain Clerk to lose no
more time in what he concluded to be an unattainable object, but to proceed ^o
the bay of Awatska, to repair our damages there, and, before the winter should
set in, to take a survey of the coast of Japan.

Great was the joy that appeared on the countenance of every individual, as
soon as Captain Clerke's resolutions were made known. We were all completely
weary of a navigation full of danger, and in which the greatest perseverance
had not been rewarded with the smallest prospect of success. We therefore
turned our faces toward home, after an absence of three years, with extreme
delight and satisfaction, notwithstanding the very long voyage we had still to
make.

We worked to windward on the 28th, with a fresh breeze from the south-east,
being still in sight of the coast of Asia. At four in the morning, Cape Serdze
Kamen bore south-south-west, at the distance of six or seven leagues. We
observed, in different places, upon the summits of the hills, which rise inland
on each side of this Cape, protuberances of a considerable height, which had
the appearance of pillows of stone, or great rocks.

The next day, the wind being still unfavourable, we made but slow progress to
the southward. About midnight, we had foggy weather, attended with a breeze
from the north-north-west, with which we steered to the south-south-east,
through the straits, and had no land in our view till seven in the evening of
the 30th, when the fog dispersing, we saw Cape Prince of Wales, bearing south
by east, at the distance of about six leagues; and the island of St. Diornede
south-west by west. We now stood to the west, and at eight made the East Cape,
which at midnight, was four leagues distant, bearing west by north.

During the night we steered to the south-south-west, with a fresh breeze from
the west north-west, and on the 31st, at four in the morning, the East Cape
bore north-north-east and the north-east part of the Bay of St. Lawrence,
(where our ships anchored the preceding year) west by south, its distance being
twelve miles. As we could not have worked up to windward, without a greater
consumption of time, than the object seemed to deserve, we ran across the bay
regretting the loss of this opportunity of paying another visit to the
Tuschutski. At twelve o'clock our latitude was 65 6, and longitude 189. The
south point of the bay of St. Lawrence was seven or eight leagues distant,
bearing north by west one quarter west.

Having now passed Beering's Straits, and finally quitted the north-east coast
of Asia, it may not, perhaps, be improper, on this occasion, to state our
reasons for adopting two general conclusions relative to its extent, in
opposition to the sentiments of Mr. Muller. The first is, that the promontory
called East Cape is actually the most easterly point of that quarter of the
globe; or, in other words, that no part of that continent extends in longitude
beyond 190 22 east. The second is, that the latitude of the north easternmost
extreme is somewhat to the southward of 70 north. With regard to the former, if
such land really exists, it must certainly be to the north of the 69th degree
of latitude, where the discoveries made in our present voyage terminate. We
shall therefore, in the first place, endeavor to investigate the probable
direction of the coast beyond this point.

Russia being the only nation, that has hitherto navigated this part of the
ocean, all our information respecting the position of the coast to the
northward of Cape North, is derived from the journals and charts of the persons
who have been engaged, at different times, in determining the bounds of that
extensive empire; and these are, in general, so confined, contradictory, and
imperfect, that we cannot easily form a distinct idea of their pretended, much
less collect the particulars of their real discoveries. On this account, the
extent and figure of the peninsula, inhabited by the Tschutski, still remains a
point, on which the Russian geographers are greatly divided in their opinions.
Mr. Muller, in the map which he published in 1754 supposes that this country
extends toward the north-east, as far as the latitude of 75, and the longitude
of 190 east of Greenwich; and that it ends, in a round cape, which he
denominates Tschukotskoi Noss. To the south of this cape, the coast, as he
imagines, forms a bay to the west, bounded in the latitude of 67 18 by Serdze
Kamen, the most northerly point observed by Beering in his expedition in 1728.
The map published in 1776 by the academy of St. Petersburg, gives a new form to
the whole peninsula, placing its north-easternmost extreme in the latitude 73,
longitude 178 30, and the most easterly point in latitude 65 30, longitude 189
30. All the other maps we have seen, both manuscript and printed, vary between
these two, apparently more according to the fancy and conjectures of the
compiler, than on any grounds of more accurate intelligence. The only
particular in which there is a general coincidence, with very little variation,
is the position of the East Cape in the latitude of 66. The form of the coast,
both to the north and south or the East Cape, in the map of the academy is
extremely erroneous, and may be entirely disregarded. In Mr. Muller's map, the
coast toward the north has some degree of resemblance to our survey, as far as
the latter extends, except that he does not make it trend sufficiently to the
west, but makes it recede only about 5 of longitude, between the latitude of 66
and 69; whereas it actually recedes near ten. Between the latitude of 69 and
74, the coast, according to him, bends round to the north and north-east, and
forms a large promontory. On what authority he has thus represented the coast,
is next to be examined.

The ingenious Mr. Coxe, whose accurate researches in this subject, give great
weight to his sentiments, is of opinion, that the extremity of the Noss in
question, was never passed except by Deshneff and his party, who sailed in the
year 1648, from the river Kovyma, and are imagined to have got round it into
the Anadyr. As the narrative of this expedition, the substance of which has
been given by Mr. Coxe, in his account of Russian discoveries, comprehends no
geographical delineations of the coast along which they sailed, our conjectures
respecting its position must be derived from incidental circumstances; and from
these it evidently appears, that the Tschukotskoi Noss of Deshneff, is, in
reality, the promontory named by Captain Cook, the East Cape. Speaking of the
Noss, he says, that a person may sail from the isthmus to the Anadyr, with a
favorable wind, in three days, and three nights. This perfectly agrees with
the situation of the East Cape, which is about one hundred and twenty leagues
from the mouth of the river Anadyr; and there being no other isthmus to the
north between that and the latitude of 69, it seems evident, that, by this
description he certainly means either the Cape in question, or some other
situated to the south of it. He says, in another place, that, opposite to the
isthmus, there are two islands in the sea, upon which were observed some of the
Tschutski nation, in whose lips pieces of the teeth of the sea-horses were
fixed. This exactly coincides with the two islands that lie to the south-east
of the East Cape. We observed, indeed, no inhabitants upon them; but it is by
no means improbable, that a party of Americans from the opposite continent,
whom this description suits, might have accidentally been there at that time,
and he might easily mi^take them for a tribe of the Tschutski.

These two circumstances seem to us to be conclusive on the point of the
Tschukotskoi Noss, though there are others of a more dubious nature from the
same authority, and which now remain to be investigated. Deshneff, in another
account, says, that in going from the Kovyma to the Anadyr, a great promontory
which projects very far into the sea, must be doubled; and that this promontory
extends between north and north-east. It was, perhaps, from these expressions,
that Muller was induced to represent the country of the Tschutski, in the form
we find in his map; but, if he had been acquainted with the position of the
East Cape, as determined by Captain Cook, and the striking agreement between
that and the promontory or isthmus (for it must be remarked, that Deshneff
still appears to be speaking of the same thing), in the circumstances
abovementioned, we are confident that he would not have thought those
expressions of sufficient weight to authorize his extending the north-eastern
extreme of Asia, either so far to the north or to the east. For these words of
Deshneff may be reconciled with the opinion we have adopted, if we suppose that
navigator to have taken these bearings from the small bight lying to the west
of the cape.

The next authority, on which Muller has proceeded, seems to have been the
deposition of the Cossac Popoff, taken at the Anadirskoi ostrog, in 1711. This
Cossac was sent by land, in company with several others, to demand tribute from
the independent Tschutski tribes, who inhabited the parts about the Noss. The
first circumstance, in the narative of this journey, that can tend to lead to
the situation of Tschukotskoi Noss, is its distance from Anadirsk; and this is
represented as a journey of ten weeks, with loaded reindeer; for which reason,
it is added, their day's journey was very inconsiderable. We cannot, indeed,
conclude much from so vague an account, but as the distance between the East
Cape and the ostrog exceeds two hundred leagues in a direct line, and
consequently may be supposed to allow twelve or fourteen miles a day, its
situation is not incompatible with Popoff's calculation.

Another circumstance stated in this deposition is, that their rout lay at the
foot of a rock named Matkol, situate at the bottom of a spacious gulf. This
gulf Muller conjectures to be the bay he had said down between the latitudes of
66 and 72 and he accordingly places the rock Matkol in the center of it; but it
appears to be more probable, that it might be a part of the Gulf of Anadyr,
which they would doubtless touch upon in their journey from the ostrog to the
East Cap.

What seems, however, to put this point beyond all dispute, and to prove that
the Cape which Popoff visited cannot be the northward of the latitude of 69, is
that part of his deposition, which relates to an island lying off the Noss,
from whence the opposite continent might be discerned. For, as the two
continents, in the latitude of 69, diverge so far as to be upwards of one
hundred leagues distant, it is certainly very improbable, that the coast of
Asia should again trend in such a manner to the east, as to come almost within
sight of the American coast.

Should these arguments be thought conclusive against the form and extent of
the peninsula of the Tschutski, as represented by Mr. Muller, it will follow,
that the East Cape is the Tschukotskoi Noss of the earlier Russian navigators
We mention the earlier Russian navigators, because Beering, and, after him, the
late Russian geographers, have affixed this appellation to the south-east cape
of the peninsula of the Tschutski, which was formerly distinguished by the name
of the Anadirskoi Noss.
; and, consequently, that the undescribed coast, extending from the latitude of
69 to the mouth of the Kovyma, must consequently trend more or less toward the
west. As an additional proof of this, we may observe, that Tschukotskoi Noss is
constantly laid down as dividing the sea of Kovyma from that of Anadyr, which
(we are of opinion) could not possibly be, if any large cape had projected to
the north-east in the more advanced latitudes.

Another question arising on this point, is, to what degree of northern
latitude this coast extends, before it inclines more immediately to the west.
If the position of the mouth of the Kovyma, both with regard to its latitude
and longitude, were accurately ascertained, it might perhaps be easy to form a
plausible conjecture upon this head. Captain Cook was always strongly induced
to believe, that the northern coast of Asia, from the Indigirka eastward, has
hitherto been usually laid down above two degrees to the northward of its true
situation; and he has therefore, on the authority of a map that was in his
possession, and on the intelligence which he received at Oonalashka, placed the
mouth of the Kovyma, in his chart of the north-east coast of Asia, and the
north-west coast of America, in the latitude of 68. Should the Captain be right
in this conjecture, it is probable, for the ^easons which we have already
stated, that the coast of Asia does not, in any part, exceed 70 before it
trends toward the west, and consequently, that we were within one degree of
its north-eastern extremity. For if the continent be imagined to extend any
where to the north of Shelatskoi Noss it can scarcely be supposed that such an
interesting circumstance would have been omitted by the Russian Navigators, who
mention no remarkable promontory between the Anadyr and the Kovyma except the
East Cape. Another particular, which Deshneff relates, may, perhaps, be deemed
a farther confirmation of this opinion, namely, that he met with no obstruction
from ice in sailing round the north-eastern extremity of Asia; though he adds
that this sea is not at all times so free from it; as indeed evidently appears
from his not succeeding in his first expedition, and, since that, from the
failure of Shalauroff, as well as from the interruptions and impediments we met
with, in two successive years, in our present voyage.

That part of the continent, which is between Cape North, and the mouth of the
Kovyma, is one hundred and twenty-five leagues in longitudinal extent. About a
third of this distance from the Kovyma eastward, was explored in 1723, by Fedot
Amossoff, a Sinbojarskoi of Jakutz, who informed Mr. Muller, that its direction
was easterly. It has since that time been surveyed, with some degree of
accuracy, by Shalauroff, whose chart makes it trend to the north-east by east,
as far as Shelatskoi Noss, which he places at the distance of about forty-three
leagues to the east of the Kovyma. The space, therefore, between the Noss and
Cape North, upwards of eighty leagues, is the only part of the Russian
dominions now remaining unascertained.

If the Kovyma, however, be erroneously laid down, in point of longitude as
well as latitude, (a supposition by no means improbable) the extent of the
unexplored coast will diminish in proportion. The reasons which incline us to
imagine, that in the Russian charts, the mouth of the river is placed
considerably too far to the west, are the following: first, because the
accounts that have been given of the navigation of the Frozen Ocean, from that
river, round the North-Eastern extreme of Asia, to the gulf of Anadyr, do not
agree with the supposed distance between those places; secondly, because the
distance from the Anadyr to the Kovyma, over land, is represented by former
Russian travelers as a journey of no very great length, and easily performed:
thirdly, because the coast from the Shelatskoi Noss of Shalauroff appears to
trend directly south-east toward the East Cape. If this be really the case, it
may be inferred, that as we were, in all probability, not more than one degree
to the southward of Shelatskoi Noss, only sixty miles of the coast of Asia are
unascertained.

It is highly probable, that a north^west passage from the Atlantic into the
Pacific Ocean does not exist to the southward of the fifty-sixth degree of
latitude. If, therefore, a passage really exists, it must certainly be either
through Baffin's-bay, or by the north of Greenland, in the western hemisphere;
or in the eastern, through the Frozen Sea, to the north of Siberia; and on
whichever side it is situated, the navigator must pass through the straits
distinguished by the name of Beering's Straits. The impracticability of
penetrating into the Atlantic Ocean on either side, through these straits, is
therefore all that now remains to be offered to the reader's consideration.

The sea to the northward of Beering's Straits, was found by us to be more free
from ice in August than in July, and perhaps in some part of September it may
be still more clear of it. But, after the autumnal equinox, the length of the
days diminishes so fast, that no farther thaw can be expected; and we cannot
reasonably attribute so great an effect to the warm weather in the last
fortnight in the month of September, as to imagine it capable of dispersing the
ice, from the most northern parts of the coast of America. Admitting this,
however, to be possible, it must at least be allowed, that it would be highly
absurd to attempt to avoid the Icy Cape by running to the known parts of
Baffin's Bay, (a distance of about twelve hundred and sixty miles) in so short
a space of time as that passage can be supposed to remain open.

There appears, on the side of Asia, still less probability of success, not
only from what came to our own knowledge, relative to the state of the sea to
the southward of Cape North, but likewise from what we have gathered from the
experience of the Lieutenants under the direction of Beering, and the journal
of Shalauroff, respecting that on the north of Siberia.

The possibility of sailing round the north-eastern extremity of Asia, is
undoubtedly proved by the voyage of Deshneff, if its truth be admitted; but
when we reflect, that, since the time of that navigator, near a century and a
half has elapsed, during which, in an age of curiosity and enterprise, no
person has yet been able to follow him, we can entertain no very sanguine
expectations of the public benefits which can be derived from it. But even on
the supposition, that, in some remarkably favorable season, a vessel might
find a clear passage round the coast of Siberia, and arrive in safety at the
mouth of the Lena, still there remains the Cape of Taimura, extending to the
seventy-eighth degree of latitude, which no navigator has hitherto had the good
fortune to double.

Some, however, contend, that there are strong reasons for believing, that the
nearer approach we make to the Pole, the sea is more clear of ice; and that all
the ice we observed in the lower latitudes, had originally been formed in the
great rivers of Siberia and America, from the breaking up of which the
intermediate sea had been filled. But even if that supposition be true, it is
no less certain that there can be no access to those open seas, unless this
prodigious mass of ice is so far dissolved in the summer, as to admit of a
ship's making its way through it. If this be the real fact, we made choice of
an improper time of the year for attempting to discover this passage, which
should have been explored in the months of April and May, before the rivers
were broken up. But several reasons may be alleged against such a supposition.
Our experience at Petropaulowska, gave us an opportunity of judging what might
be expected farther northward; and upon that ground, we had some reason to
entertain a doubt, whether the two continents might not, during the winter, be
even joined by the ice: and this coincided with the accounts we heard in
Kamtschatska, that, on the coast of Siberia, the inhabitants, in the winter, go
out from the shore, upon the ice, to distances that exceed the breath of the
sea, in some parts, from one continent to the other.

The following remarkable particular is mentioned in the deposition above
referred to. Speaking of the land seen from the Tschutski Noss, it is said,
that, during the summer, they sail in one day to the land in baidares, a kind
of vessel formed of whale-bone, and covered with the skins of seals; and, in
the winter, as they go swift with reindeer, the journey may also be performed
in a day. A satisfactory proof, that the two countries were generally connected
by the ice.

Muller's account of one of the expeditions undertaken for the purpose of
discovering a supposed island in the Frozen Ocean, is still more remarkable.
His narrative is to the following purport. In 1714, a new expedition was
prepared from Jakntzk, under the conduct of Alexei Markoff, who was to set sail
from the mouth of the Jana; and if the Schitiki were not well adapted for sea
voyages, he was to build, at a convenient place, proper vessels for prosecuting
the discoveries without any great risque. Upon his arrival at Ust-janskoe
Simovie, the port where he was to embark, he dispatched an account, dated the
2d of February, 1515, to the Chancery of Jakutzka, intimating that it was
impracticable to navigate the sea, as it was constantly frozen both in winter
and summer; and that, consequently, the expedition could only be prosecuted
with sledges drawn by dogs. He accordingly set out in this manner, accompanied
with nine persons, the 10th of March, in the same year, and returned to
Ust-janskoe Simovie on the 3d of the succeeding month. The account of his
journey is as follows; that, for the space of seven days, he traveled with as
much expedition as his dogs could draw, (which, in good tracks, and favorable
weather, is from eighty to a hundred wersts in a day) directly to the
northward, upon the ice, without observing any island: that he was prevented
from proceeding farther, by the ice, which rose like mountains in that part of
the sea: that he had ascended some of the hills of ice, whence he could see to
a great distance around him, but could discern no land: and that, at length,
provisions for his dogs being deficient, many of them died, which reduced him
to the necessity of returning.

Besides the abovementioned arguments, which proceed upon an admission of the
hypothesis, that the ice in this ocean comes from the rivers, others may be
adduced, which afford good reason for suspecting the truth of the hypothesis
itself. Captain Cook, whose opinion, with regard to the formation of ice, had
originally coincided with that of the theorists we are now endeavoring to
confute, found sufficient grounds, in the present voyage, for changing his
sentiments. We observed, that the coasts of both continents were low, that the
depth of water gradually decreased toward them, and that a striking
resemblance prevailed between the two; from which circumstances, as well as
from the description given by Mr. Hearne of the copper-mine river, we have room
for conjecturing, that, whatever rivers may discharge themselves into the
Frozen Ocean, from the continent of America are of a similar nature with those
on the Asiatic side; which are said to be so shallow at their entrance, as to
admit only vessels of inconsiderable magnitude; whereas, the ice seen by us,
rises above the level of the sea, to a height that equals the depth of those
rivers; so that its entire altitude must be, at least, ten times greater.

Another circumstance will naturally offer itself, in this place, to our
consideration, which seems to be very incompatible with the opinion of those
who suppose that land is necessary for the formation of ice; we mean, the
different state of the sea about Spitsbergen, and of that which is to the
northward of Beering's Straits. It is incumbent on those philosophers to
explain how it happens, that in the former quarter, and in the neighborhood of
much known land, navigators annually penetrate to near eighty degrees of
northern latitude; whereas, on the other side, no voyager has been able, with
his utmost efforts, to proceed beyond the seventy-first degree; where,
moreover, the continents diverge nearly in the direction of east and west, and
where there is no land yet known to exist in the vicinity of the pole. For the
farther satisfaction of our readers on this subject, we refer them to Dr.
Forster's " Observations round the World," where they will find the question,
of the formation of the ice, discussed in a full and satisfactory manner, and
the probability of open polar seas, disproved by many forcible arguments.

To these remarks, we shall subjoin a comparative view of the progress made by
us to the northward, at the two different seasons in which we were occupied in
that pursuit; together with some general observations respecting the sea, and
the coasts of the two continents, which lie to the north of Beering's Straits.

In the year 1778, we did not discover the ice, till we advanced to the
latitude of 70, on the 17th of August; and we then found it in compact bodies,
which extend as far as the eye could discern, and of which the whole, or a part
was moveable; since, by its drifting down upon our ships, we were almost hemmed
in between that and the land. After we had experienced, both how fruitless and
dangerous it would be, to attempt to penetrate farther to the northward,
between the land and the ice, we stood over toward the side of Asia, between
the latitudes of 69 and 70; after encountering in this tract very large fields
of ice, and through the fogs, and thickness of the weather, prevented us from
entirely tracing a connected line of it across, yet we were certain of meeting
with it before it reached the latitude of 70, whenever we made any attempts to
stand to the north.

On the 26th of August, in the latitude of 69 and the longitude of 184, we were
obstructed by it in such quantities, that we could not pass either to the north
or west; and were under the necessity of running along the edge of it to the
south-south-west, till we perceived land which proved to be the Asiatic coast.
With the season thus far advanced, the weather setting in with snow and sleet,
and other indications of the approach of winter, we relinquished our enterprise
for that time.

In our second attempt, we did little more than confirm the remarks made by us
in the first; for we never had an opportunity of approaching the continent of
Asia higher than 67 of latitude, nor that of America in any parts, except a few
leagues between the latitude of 68 and 68 20, that we had not seen in the
preceding year. We now met with obstruction from ice 3 over; and our efforts to
make farther progress to the northward, were chiefly confined to the middle
space between the two coasts. We penetrated near 3 farther on the side of
America, than that of Asia, coming up with the ice both years sooner, and in
more considerable quantities, on the latter coast. As we advanced in our
northerly course, we found the ice more solid and compact; however, as in our
different traverses from one side to the other, we passed over spaces which had
before been covered with it, we imagined, that the greatest part of what we saw
was moveable. Its height, on a medium, we estimated at eight or ten feet, and
that of the highest at sixteen or eighteen. We again examined the currents
twice, and found that they were unequal, though they never exceeded one mile an
hour. We likewise found the currents to set different ways, but more from the
south-west than any other quarter; yet, whatever their direction might be,
their effect was so inconsiderable, that on conclusions, with respect to the
existence of any passage toward the north, could possibly be drawn from them.

We found July infinitely colder than August. The thermometer, in the first of
these months, was once at 28, and very frequently at 30; whereas, during the
last year, it was very uncommon in August, to have it so low as the freezing
point. In both seasons, we experienced some high winds, all of which blew from
the south-west. Whenever the wind was moderate from any quarter, we were
subject to fogs; but they were observed to attend southerly winds more
constantly than others.

The straits, between the American and Asiatic continents, at their nearest
approach, in the latitude of 66, were ascertained by us to be thirteen leagues,
beyond which they diverge to north-east by east, and west-north-west; and in
the latitude of 69, their distance from each other is about three hundred
miles. In the aspect of the two countries to the north of the straits, a great
resemblance is observable. Both of them are destitute of wood. The shores are
low, with mountains further inland, rising to a great height. The soundings, in
the midway between them, were twenty-nine and thirty fathoms, gradually
decreasing as we approached either continent; with this difference, however,
that the water was somewhat shallower on the coast of America than on that of
Asia, at an equal distance from land. The bottom, toward the middle, was a
soft slimy mud; and near either shore, it was a brownish sand, intermixed with
a few shells, and small fragments of bones. We found but little tide or
current, and that little came from the west.

We will now resume the narrative of our voyage, which was continued till the
31st of July; on which day we had proceeded, at noon, eighteen leagues to the
southward of the east cape. We had light airs from the south-west till the
first of August, at noon, when our latitude was 64 23, and our longitude 189
15; the Asiatic coast extending from north-west by west, to west half south, at
the distance of about twelve leagues, and the land to the eastward of St.
Lawrence bearing south half west.

On Monday the second, the weather being clear, we perceived the same land at
noon, extending from west-south-west half west to south-east, and forming many
elevated hummocks, which bore the appearance of separate islands. The latitude,
at this time, was 64 3, the longitude 189 28, and our soundings were seventeen
fathoms. We were not near enough to this land to ascertain whether it was a
group of islands, or only a single one. We had passed its most westerly point
in the evening of the third of July, which we then supposed to be the isle of
St. Lawrence; the easternmost we sailed close by in September the preceding
year, and this we denominated Clerke's Island; and found it composed of a
number of lofty cliffs, connected by very low land. Though these cliffs, the
last year, were mistaken by us for separate islands, till we made a very near
approach to the shore, we are still inclined to conjecture, that the isle of
St. Lawrence is distinct from Clerke's Island, as there appeared betwixt them a
considerable space, where we did not observe the least appearance of rising
ground. In the afternoon, we likewise saw what had the appearance of a small
island, to the north-east of the land that we had seen at noon, and which, from
the thickness of the weather, we only had sight of once. We supposed its
distance to be nineteen leagues from the island of St. Lawrence, in the
direction of north-east by east half east.

We had light variable winds on the 3d, and steered round the north-west point
of the isle of St. Lawrence. The next day, at noon, our latitude was 64 8,
longitude 188; the island of St. Lawrence bearing south one quarter east, at
the distance of seven leagues.

In the afternoon, a fresh breeze arising from the east, we steered to the
south-south-west, and quickly lost sight of St. Lawrence. On Saturday the
seventh, at twelve o'clock, the latitude was 59 38 and the longitude 183. We
had a calm in the afternoon, and caught a great number of cod, in seventy-eight
fathoms of water. From this period to the 17th, we were making the best of our
way toward the south, without any remarkable occurence, except that the wind
blowing from the west, forced us more to the eastward than we wished, it being
our intention to make Beering's Island.

On Thursday the 17th, between four and five in the morning, we descried land
to the north-west, which we could not approach, as the wind blew from that
quarter. Ac midday, the latitude was 53 49, and the longitude 168 5. The land
in view bore north by west, at the distance of twelve or fourteen leagues. This
land we imagine to be the island Mednoi, which is placed in the Russian charts
to the south-east of Beering's Island. It is elevated land, and was at this
time apparently free from snow. We reckon it to be in the latitude of 54 28,
and the longitude of 167 52. We did not strike ground with one hundred and
fifty fathoms of line.

Captain Clerk being now no longer able to get out of his bed, signified his
desire, that the officers would receive their orders from Mr. King; and
directed that we should repair, with all convenient speed, to the bay of
Awatska. The wind continuing westerly, we steered a southerly course, till
early in the morning of the 19th; when, after rain of a few hours continuance,
it blew from the east, and increased to a strong gale. We made the most of it
while it lasted, by standing toward the west, with all the sail we could bear.
The next day, the wind varying to the south-west, we steered a west-north-west
course. The latitude, at noon, was 53 7, and the longitude 162 49. On the 21st,
between five and six in the morning, we perceived a very lofty peaked mountain
on the coast of Kamtschatka, known by the name of Chepoonskoi Mountain, bearing
north-west-by-north, at the distance of between twenty-five and thirty leagues.
At noon the coast was observed to extend from north-by-east to west, with a
very great haziness upon it; and it was about twelve leagues distant. We had
light airs during the remainder of this, as well as the following day, and
found no ground within one hundred and forty fathoms of line.

At nine o'clock in the morning, on Sunday the 22d of August, Capt. Charles
Clerk expired, in the thirty-eighth year of his age. His death was occasioned
by a consumption, which had manifestly commenced before his departure from
England, and of which he had lingered, during the whole continuance of the
voyage. His very gradual decay, had for a long time rendered him a melancholy
object to his friends; but the firmness and equanimity with which he bore it,
the constant flow of good spirits, which he retained even to the last hour, and
a cheerful resignation to his fate, furnished them with some consolation. It
was impossible, not to feel an uncommon degree of compassion for a gentleman,
who had experienced a series of those difficulties and hardships, which must be
the inevitable lot of every seamen, and under which he at last sunk. He was
bred to the navy from his youth, and had been in many engagements during the
war which began in the year 1756. In the action between the Bellona and
Courageux, he was stationed in the mizentop, and was carried overboard with the
mast; but was afterward taken up, without having received the least injury. He
was midshipman on board the Dolphin, commanded by Commodore Byron, when she
first sailed round the world; and was afterward on the American station. In
the year 1768, he engaged in a second voyage round the world, in the situation
of master's mate of the Endeavor; and, during the expedition, succeeded to a
lieutenancy. In the Resolution he made a third voyage round the world, in the
capacity of second lieutenant: and in a short time after his return, in 1775,
he was appointed master and commander. In the present expedition, he was
appointed captain of the Discovery, and to accompany Captain Cook. By the
calamitous death of the other, he naturally succeeded, as has been already
related, to the chief command.

It would savor of injustice and ingratitude to his memory, not to mention,
that, during the short time he commanded the expedition, he was most remarkably
zealous for its success. When the principal command devolved upon him, his
health began rapidly to decline; and he was unequal in every respect, to
encounter the severity of a high northern climate. The vigor of his mind,
however, was not, in the least, impaired by the decay of his body: and though
he was perfectly sensible, that his delaying to return to a warmer climate, was
depriving himself of the only chance of recovery; yet, so attentive was he to
his duty, that he was determined not to suffer his own situation to bias his
judgment to the prejudice of the service* he therefore persevered in the search
of a passage, till every officer in the expedition, declared they were of
opinion it was impracticable, and that any farther attempts would be equally
hazardous and ineffectual.

CHAP. V.
Return to St. Peter and St. Paul -- The Sergeant brings a Present of Berries
on Board for Captain Clerk -- Several Officers promoted -- Funeral of Captain
Clerk, and the Solemnities attending it -- Repaired the Damages which the
Discovery sustained by the Ice -- Various Occupations of the Ships Crews --
Letter from the Commander of Bolcheretsk to Captain Gore -- Supply of Flour,
Pitch, Tar, etc. from a Russian Galliot, which brought a Reinforcement of
Russian Soldiers -- Account of a very remarkable Exile -- Bear-hunting and
fishing -- The Sergeant disgraced -- The King's Coronation Day celebrated --
Visited by the Commander -- The Serjeant's Restoration -- Promotion of a
Russian Soldier at our Request -- Discipline of the Russian Army -- Church at
Paratounca described -- Manner of Bear-hunting -- Curious Particulars of the
Bears and Kamtschadales -- Inscription to Captain Clerke's Memory -- Supply of
Cattle received -- Entertainments in Honor of the Empress's Name-Day --
Present from the Commander -- A Marine attempts to desert -- Awatska-Bay
nautically and geographically described.

CAPTAIN King sent a messenger to Captain Gore, to acquaint him with the death
of Captain Clerk, who brought a letter from Captain Gore, containing an order
for Captain King to exert his utmost endeavors to keep in company with the
Discovery, and, if a separation should happen, to repair, as soon as possible
to St. Peter and St. Paul. Our latitude, at noon, was 53 8 north, and our
longitude 160 40 east; Cheepoonskoi Noss then bearing west. In the afternoon,
we had light airs, which continued till noon on the 23d; when, a fresh breeze
springing up from the east, we steered for the entrance of Awatska-bay; which
we saw about six in the evening, bearing west-north-west, distant about five
leagues. At eight, the light-house, which now furnished a good light, was about
three miles distant, and bore north-west-by-west. It was now a perfect calm;
but, as the tide was favorable, the boats were sent ahead, and towed beyond
the narrow parts of the entrance. On the 24th, at one in the morning, we
dropped anchor, the ebb tide then setting against us.

We weighed about nine o'clock, and went up the bay with light airs, which
being afterward succeeded by a light breeze, we anchored before three in the
harbor of St. Peter and St. Paul; having up our ensign half staff, as the body
of our late Captain was in the vessel; and the Discovery followed us in a very
short time.

Soon after we had anchored, we were visited by our old friend, the Sergeant,
(still the commanding officer of the place) who brought with him a present of
berries, intended for Captain Clerk. He was much affected at hearing of his
death, and seeing the coffin wherein his body was deposited. As the deceased
Captain had particularly requested to be buried on shore, and gave the
preference to the church at Paratounca, we embraced this opportunity of
consulting with the Sergeant, about the necessary steps to be pursued upon the
occasion.

After much conversation on this subject, which was very imperfectly carried
on, for want of an interpreter, we gathered intelligence that de L'Isle, and
some other Russian gentlemen, who had died here, were buried near the barracks,
at the ostrog of St. Peter and St. Paul; and that this place would certainly be
more eligible than Paratounca, as the church was shortly to be removed thither.
We, therefore, determined to wait the arrival of the Priest of Paratounca, who
was immediately to be sent for, as being the person best qualified to give us
any information we required upon the subject. The Sergeant, at the same time,
expressed his intentions of sending an express to the commander of Bolcheretsk,
with intelligence of our arrival; when Captain Gore begged to avail himself of
that opportunity of conveying a letter to him, wherein he requested that
sixteen head of black cattle might be sent with all possible dispatch. And, as
the commander was unacquainted with any language except his own, the
particulars of our request were communicated to the Sergeant, who not only
undertook to send the letter, but also an explanation of its contents.

It was a general remark among us that, though the face of the country had
improved in its appearance since we had left it, the Russians looked even worse
than they did then. They made the very same observation with respect to us;
and, as neither party seemed pleased with the discovery, we mutually consoled
ourselves by casting the blame upon the country, whose verdant and lively
complexion, had occasioned an appearance of sallowness on our own.

Though the eruption of the volcano was so extremely violent when we quitted
the bay, we were informed that no damage had been received from it here.
Several stones, however, that were as large as a goose's egg, had fallen at the
ostrog. This was the principal news we had to enquire after, and all the
intelligence they had to communicate to us, excepting that of Soposnicoff's
arrival from Oonalashka, who took charge of the packet sent by Captain Cook to
the Admiralty, and which, we had the pleasure to find, had been forwarded.

On the 25th of August, in the morning, Captain Gore, in consequence of the
death of Captain Clerk, made out the new commissions. He appointed himself to
the command of the Resolution, and Mr. King to that of the Discovery* Mr.
Lanyan, who was master's mate of the Resolution, and who had been in that
capacity in the former voyage, on board the Adventure, was appointed to the
vacant lieutenancy. The following arrangements were the consequence of these
promotions. Lieutenants Burney and Rickman (from the Discovery) were appointed
first and second Lieutenants of the Resolution; and Lieutenant Williamson,
first Lieutenant of the Discovery. Captain King, by the permission of Captain
Gore, took in four midshipmen, who had rendered themselves useful to him in
astronomical calculations; and whose assistance was become the more necessary,
as we had not an ephemeris for the present year. And, that astronomical
observations might not be neglected to be made in either ship, Mr. Bailey took
Captain King's place in the Resolution.

On the same day, we were attended by the worthy Priest of Paratounca. His
expressions of sorrow, at the death of Captain Clerk, did honor to his
feelings. He confirmed what the Sergeant had related with regard to the
intended removal of the Church, and assured us the timber was actually
preparing; but submitted the choice of either place entirely to Captain Gore.

As the Discovery had suffered great injury from the ice, especially on the 23d
of July, and had continued exceedingly leaky ever since, it was apprehended
that some of her timbers might have started; the carpenters of the Resolution
were therefore sent to assist those of the Discovery in repairing her; and they
accordingly began to rip the damaged sheathing from the larboard bow. It was
discovered, by this operation, that three feet of third struck were staved, and
the timbers started. To accommodate those who were to be employed on shore, a
tent was erected, and a party was sent into the country, north of the harbor,
to fell timber. The observatories were placed at the west end of the village,
near which was erected a tent, as an abode for the Captains Gore and King.

As we proceeded to remove the sheathing, the decayed state of the ship's hull
became more and more apparent. Eight feet of a plank in the wale were so
exceedingly rotton, that we were obliged to shift it the next morning. We were
now totally at a stand, as nothing could be found to replace it in either ship,
without cutting up a topmast; which ought to be the last expedient to have
recourse to. In the afternoon, the carpenters were dispatched in search of a
tree of a proper size for the purpose. Fortunately they discovered a birch,
which was probably the only one of sufficient magnitude in the whole
neighborhood of the bay, and which we had sawed down when we were last here;
consequently it had the advantage of being a little seasoned. This was prepared
on the spot, and taken on board the Discovery the next morning.

The season being now far advanced, Captain King was unwilling that any
hindrance or delay should happen through him, to Captain Gore's farther views
of discovery, and therefore ordered the carpenters to rip off no more of the
sheathing than should be found absolutely necessary for repairing the damages
occasioned by the ice. He was apprehensive of their meeting with more decayed
planks, which he thought had better remain in that state, than have their
places supplied with green birch, even supposing it could be procured.

All hands were now fully employed in their separate departments, that we might
be perfectly ready for sea, by the time the carpenters had completed their
busineis. Four men were set apart to haul the seine for salmon, which were
caught in immense quantities, and were of a most excellent quality. After the
wants of both ships were sufficiently supplied, we daily salted down almost a
hogshead. We had four invalids, who were employed in gathering greens, and
cooking for those who were on shore. We also landed our powder in order to have
it dried; and the blubber of the sea-horses, with which both ships had
completely furnished themselves in our passage to the north, was now boiled
down for oil, and was become a very necessary article, having long since
expended all our candles. The cooper was also employed in his department.

Both ships companies were thus fully engaged till Saturday afternoon, which
was given up to every man (except the carpenters) to enable them to wash their
linen, and get their clothes in tolerable order, that they might appear
decently on the Sunday.

On Sunday the 29th, in the afternoon, we performed the last sad offices to
Captain Clerk. The officers and crew of the two vessels attended him in
procession to the grave; the ships, at the same time, firing minute guns; and,
at the conclusion of the service, three vollies were fired by the marines. The
body was interred under a tree, which stands on a little eminence in the valley
north of the harbor, where the storehouses and hospital are situated; this
being, as Captain Gore supposed, such a situation as was most consonant to the
wishes of the deceased. The Priest of Paratounca also recommended this spot,
imagining it would be very near the center of the new church. This worthy
pastor joined in the procession, walking with the gentleman who read the
service. All the Russians in the garrison assembled on the occasion, and
respectfully assisted in the solemnity.

On Monday the 30th, the several parties reassumed their respective
employments, as particularly mentioned in the course of the preceding week; and
on the 2d of September, the carpenters proceeded to rip off such of the
sheathing as had been injured by the ice, from the starboard-side; having first
shifted the damaged planks, and repaired and caulked the sheathing of the
larboard bow. Four feet of a plank were discovered in the third struck under
the wale, so much shaken as to require to be replaced; which was accordingly
done; and on the 3d, the sheathing was repaired.

In the afternoon of the 3d, we got some ballast on board; after which we
unhung the rudder, and caused it to be conveyed on shore, the lead of the
pintles being much worn, and a considerable part of the sheathing rubbed off.
The carpenters of the Resolution not being immediately wanted, this was put in
proper order the next day; but finding the rudder immoderately heavy, (heavier
indeed than that of the Resolution) we let it remain on shore to dry, and
consequently to become lighter.

An ensign arrived this day from Bolcheretsk, with a letter from the commander
of that place to Captain Gore; which we requested the Sergeant to peruse, and,
by his assistance, we at length understood, that proper orders had been given
respecting the cattle; and that in a few days we might expect to see them; and
that Captain Shmaleff, who succeeded Major Behm in his command, would pay us a
visit immediately on the arrival of a sloop which he expected from Okotsk. The
bearer of the letter was the son of Captain Lieutenant Synd, who, about eleven
years ago, was appointed to the command of an expedition of discovery between
Asia and America, and now resided at Okotsk. He told us he was appointed to
receive our directions, and to supply us with every thing that our service
might require. That he should remain with us, till it was convenient for the
commander to leave Bolcheretsk; and then he was to return, or the garrison
would be without an officer.

The Russians, in Kamtschatka, could not furnish us with a better account of
Synd than Mr. Coxe has given us; though they seemed entirely disposed to
communicate what they really knew. Major Behm could only give us this general
information, that the expedition had miscarried, and that the commander had
been much censured. It was evident that he had been on the coast of Africa,
south of Cape Prince of Wales; and, as he was too far north to meet with
sea-otters, which the Russians seem to have in view in all their attempts at
discoveries, it is probable, that his return without having made any, from
whence commercial advantages might be reaped, was the cause of his disgrace,
and on that account his voyage is spoken of with contempt by all the Russians.

But, to proceed; on the 5th of September, all the parties that were on shore
returned to the ship, and were employed in scrubbing her bottom, and getting in
some shingle ballast. Two of our guns, which had been stowed in the fore-hold,
we now got up, and mounted them on the deck, as we were shortly to visit those
nations, where our reception would probably be regulated by the respectability
of our appearance. On the 8th, the Resolution hauled on shore, in order to
repair some damages she had received from the ice in her cut-water; and our
carpenters, in their turn, were ordered to assist her.

We began, about this time, to make a strong decoction from a species of dwarf
pine, which is very plentiful in this country, judging it would hereafter be
useful in making beer, and that we might perhaps be able to procure sugar, or a
substitute for it, to ferment with it, at Canton. We knew, however, it would be
an admirable medicine for the scurvy, and therefore were particularly desirous
of procuring a considerable supply; as most of the preventatives with which we
had furnished ourselves, were either consumed, or had lost their efficacy
through long keeping. When we had prepared about a hogshead of it, the ship's
copper was found to be remarkably thin, and that in many places, it was even
cracked. This obliged us to desist, and orders were given that, for the future,
it should be used as sparingly as possible.

Those who may hereafter be engaged in long voyages, would act judiciously if
they provided themselves with a spare copper; or, at least, they should be
fully convinced that the copper, usually furnished, should be remarkably strong
and durable. These necessary utensils are employed in so many extra-services,
particularly in that important one of brewing antiscorbutic decoctions, that
some such provision seems absolutely necessary; and the former appears the more
eligible, because a much greater quantity of fuel would be consumed in heating
coppers that were very thick.

On Friday the 10th, the boats from both the ships were ordered to tow a
Russian galliot into the harbor, which had just arrived from Okotsk. She had
been no less than thirty-five days on her passage, and, from the light-house,
had been observed a fortnight before, beating up toward the mouth of the bay.
The crew had, at that time, dispatched their only boat on shore, in order to
procure water, which they were much in need of; but, the wind increasing, the
boat was lost; the galliot was again driven to sea, and those on board suffered
inconceivable hardships.

On board this galliot there were fifty soldiers, their wives and children,
they had also several passengers, and their crew consisted of twenty-five;
making, in the whole, upwards of an hundred persons; which, for a vessel of
eighty tons, was a great number, especially as she was heavily laden with
stores and provisions. This galliot, and the sloop which we saw here in May,
are built in the manner of the Dutch doggers.

Soon after the vessel had come to anchor, we were visited by a Pul-parouchich,
or Sub-lieutenant, who arrived in her, and who was sent to take the command of
this place. Some of the soldiers, we were informed, were intended to reinforce
the garrison; and two pieces of cannon were brought on shore, to serve as an
additional defense of the town. From these circumstances, it is pretty apparent
that the Russian commanders in Siberia, had, from our visiting this place, been
induced to attend to the defenseless situation of it; and the honest Sergeant
shrewdly observed, that, as we had found the way thither, others might do the
same, who might not be so welcome as ourselves.

Having repaired the damages which the Resolution had suffered by the ice, she
hauled off from the shore the next morning; and, in the course of the day, we
got some pitch, tar, cordage, and twine from the galliot. Their scanty store
rendered them unable to supply us with canvass, and they could not comply with
our application for that article. She furnished us, however, with an hundred
and forty skins of flour, amounting to 13, 782 English pounds. Till this day,
we had a continual course of dry weather, but now a heavy rain succeeded,
attended with strong squalls of wind, which occasioned us to strike our yards
and top-masts.

Sunday the 12th, was a day of rest: but, as the weather continued foul, our
men could not employ themselves in gathering the berries which grew in such
vast quantities about the coast, or amuse themselves by any other pastime on
shore. Ensign Synd left us this day to return to Bolcheretsk, with the
remainder of the soldiers who had arrived in the galliot. While he remained
here, he had been our constant guest; and, on his father's account, we thought
him in some degree belonging to us; and, as one of the family of discoverers,
entitled to a share of our esteem.

The Sergeant, as being commander of the place, had hitherto been admitted to
our tables; and his company was additionally welcome to us, because he was
sensible and quick in his conceptions; and comprehended, better than any other
person, the few Russian words that we had acquired. Whilst Ensign Synd
remained, among us, he very politely suffered him to enjoy the same privileges;
but, when the new commander arrived from Okotsk, the Sergeant, for what cause
we did not understand, fell into disgrace, and was no longer permitted to sit
in the company of his own officers. Our endeavors to obtain indulgence for
him, we perceived would have been ineffectual; for, though it would have been
highly agreeable to us, it was, perhaps, incompatible with their discipline.

On the 14th we had completed the stowage of the holds, got our wood and water
on board, and were ready for sea at a day's notice. But, it should be observed,
that, though every thing on board was in this degree of readiness, we could not
think of taking our departure, because the cattle were not yet arrived from
Verchnei; and fresh provisions were now become the most important article of
our wants, and essentially necessary for preserving the health of our people.
As there was a prospect of fine weather, this was considered as a favorable
opportunity of engaging in some amusement on shore, and acquiring some little
knowledge of the country. A party of bear hunting was therefore proposed by
Captain Gore, and the proposal was readily acceded to.

On Friday the 17th, we set out on this expedetion; which was deferred till
that day, in order to give a little rest to the Hospodin Ivaskin, a new
acquaintance who had arrived here on Wednesday, and who was to be of our party.
Major Behm had desired this gentleman, who usually resides at Verchnei, to
attend us on our return to the harbor, and assist us as an interpreter; and,
from what we had heard of him before his arrival, our curiosity to see him was
much excited.

He is allied to a considerable family in Russia, and his father was a general
in the service of the empress. He received his education partly in Germany, and
partly in France; he had been page to the empress Elizabeth, and bore an
ensign's commission in her guards. At sixteen years of age he was knowted, had
his nose slit, and was banished to Siberia. He was afterward transported to
Kamtschatka, and had then resided there thirty-one years. His person was tall
and thin, and his visage furrowed with deep wrinkles. Old age was strongly
depicted in his whole figure, though he had hardly entered his fifty-fourth
year.

Great was our disappointment when we discovered, that he had so totally
forgotten the French and German languages as not to be able to speak a single
sentence, nor readily to comprehend any thing that was said to him in either of
those languages. Thus were we unfortunately deprived of what we expected would
have furnished a favorable opportunity of acquiring further information
respecting this country. We also promised ourselves much satisfaction in
hearing the history of this extraordinary man, which he might, perhaps, be
induced to relate to strangers who could probably be serviceable to him, but
who could not be supposed to take advantage from what he might say, to his
prejudice.

The cause of his banishment remained a secret to every one in this country,
but it was generally supposed he had been guilty of some atrocious offense;
especially as several of the commanders of Kamtschatka have exerted their
interest to get him recalled, in the reign of the present empress; but, so far
from getting him recalled, they were not able to obtain a change of his place
of banishment. He assured us that, for twenty years, he had not tasted a morsel
of bread, nor had been allowed any kind of subsistence; but had lived, all that
time with the Kamtschadales, on what he had procured from the chase by his own
activity and toil. Afterward a small pension was allowed him, and his
situation has been rendered much less intolerable, since Major Behm was
appointed to the command. Being taken notice of by so respectable a character,
who often invited him to become his guest, others were induced to follow his
example. The Major had also occasioned his pension to be increased to a hundred
roubles a year, which is an ensign's pay in every other part of the empress's
dominions, but, in this province, all the officers have double pay. Major Behm
informed us that he had obtained permission for him to go to Okotsk, where he
was to reside in future; but that, at present, he should leave him behind, as
he might probably be useful to us as an interpreter, on our return to

Orders having been given to the first lieutenants of both ships, that the
rigging should be repaired as far as the late supply of stores would permit, we
proceeded on our hunting party, conducted by the corporal of the Kamtschadales;
but, previous to our looking out for game, we proceeded to the head of Behm's
Harbor, which is an inlet on the west side of the bay. This having been a
favorite place of Major Behm's, we had named it after that officer, though by
the natives it is called Tareinska.

As we advanced toward this harbor, we saw the Toion of St. Peter and St.
Paul, in a canoe having with him his wife and two children, and another
inhabitant of Kamtschatka. He had just killed two seals on an island in the
entrance of the harbor, and was returning home with them, as well as with a
large quantity of berries which he had gathered. The wind having veered to the
south-west, in pursuance of his advice we now changed our route, and, instead
of proceeding up the harbor, took a northerly course toward a pool of water,
at a small distance from the mouth of the river Paratounca, which was much
frequented by the bears.

As soon as we had landed, the wind unfortunately veered to the eastward, and
once more destroyed our hopes of meeting with any game; the Kamtschadales
having often assured us, that there was no probability of finding any bears, as
we were to the windward; those animals being possessed of extraordinary
acuteness in scenting their pursuers, which, under such circumstances, enabled
them to avoid danger. We therefore returned to the boat, and, having provided a
tent for that purpose, passed the night upon the beach. The next day, being
governed by the opinion of our guides, we crossed the bay, and proceeded to the
head of Rokoweena Harbor; where we secured our boats, and afterward went on
foot with all our baggage.

Having walked about five or six miles, we arrived at the seaside, three miles
north of the light-house head. From hence, a continued narrow border of level
ground adjoining to the sea, extended itself toward Chepoonskoi Noss as far as
we could see. It is entirely covered with heath, and produces berries in great
abundance, especially those which are called crow and partridge berries.

We were told, that there was almost a certainty of finding a number of bears,
feeding upon these berries; but, as the weather was showery, it was
unfavourable to us. Accordingly, however, we pursued our course along the
plain; and, though several bears were seen at a distance, we could not by any
means, get within shot of them. This diversion was therefore changed to that of
spearing salmon, which we saw in throngs, driving through the surf into a small
river. Here we could not help remarking the inferiority of the Kamtschadales,
at this kind of fishing, to the natives of Oonalashka; neither were their
instruments, though pointed with iron, near so well adapted to the purpose, nor
fabricated with that neatness, which those of the Americans were, though only
pointed with bone. On asking the cause of this inferiority, we were informed by
the corporal, who had long resided among the Americans, that formerly the
natives of Kamtschatka used such darts and spears as those of the Americans,
and, like theirs, headed and barbed with bone, and were as dexterous as the
latter in the management of them. We could not sufficiently understand each
other to discover the real cause of this change, but suppose it may be the
effect of an imperfect state of improvement. Fortunately, however, the water
afforded us a little provision; for ill success had not only attended us in the
chase by land, but we had failed in our expectations of shooting wild-fowl,
after having almost depended upon a supply of them for our subsistence; and, on
its failure, began to think it almost time to return to our headquarters.

The Kamtschadales who attended us, at length discovered, that our not meeting
with game was occasioned by our going in too large a party, and by the
unavoidable noise that was the natural consequence of it. This judicious remark
induced us to separate; Captain King, Ivaskin, and the corporal, forming one
party; the other consisting of Captain Gore, and the rest of the company. We
passed the night under our tent, and, on the morning of the 19th, set out by
different routs, in order to make a kind of circuit round the country, and meet
at St. Peter and St. Paul.

Captain King, and his party, took the course of the river, at whose mouth he
had fished for the salmon; and, after being completely soaked with heavy rains
the whole morning, they took sheller, about three in the afternoon, in some old
balagans, which were the remains of a Kamtschadale village, without having seen
a single bear in their long and tedious journey.

At first we seemed inclined to continue here all night, that we might resume
the chase early in the morning; but, as the weather began to clear, and a fresh
breeze sprung up from a quarter hostile to our designs, the Hospodin, whom
former severities had rendered unable to endure fatigue, and who was now more
particularly distressed from having his snuff box exhausted of its contents,
grew very importunate with us to return home. The old corporal was extremely
unwilling to consent, alleging, that we were at a considerable distance from
the harbor, and that the badness of the way would probably hinder us from
completing our journey, before night had overtaken us. Ivaskin's entreaties,
however, at length prevailed, and the corporal conducted us by the side of
several small lakes, which are pretty numerous in the flat part of this
country. They are from half a mile to two miles long, and generally about half
a mile in breadth. The water in them is very clear and fresh, and they abound
with red-coloured fish, not unlike a small salmon, both in shape and size. The
margins of these lakes were usually covered with half-eaten fish, being
fragments left by the bears, which occasioned a most intolerable stench. We
frequently arrived at places which had just been quitted by the bears, but were
never able to come within reach of them.

At night we reached the ships, after having been full twelve hours upon our
legs. Poor Ivaskin seemed perfectly overcome with fatigue, and was probably the
more sensibly affected by it, for want of a supply of snuff; for, almost at
every ^^ep, his hand sunk mechanically into his pocket, and instantly rose
again with his huge empty box. Just as we arrived at the tent, the weather
became exceedingly rough and wet, and we congratulated ourselves on our not
having staid another day from our general rendezvous. The Hospodin's box was
immediately replenished, and, regaling upon a good supper, we forgot the
fatigues and disappointments of our journey.

The next day (Monday the 20th) we received the disagreeable intelligence, that
our friend, the sergeant, had suffered corporal punishment, which had been
inflicted on him by command of the old Put-parouchick. None of us could learn
the cause of his displeasure; but it was supposed to have arisen from some
little jealousy, which had been excited by our civility to the former.
Imagining, however, that the offense, whatever it might be, could not merit a
chastisement so disgraceful, we were both sorry and angry at what had happened.
The friendly and familiar terms on which we had lived with him, and the esteem
we were known to entertain for him, made the affront appear personal to
ourselves. For we had consulted the worthy Major Behm, who was likewise the
serjeant's friend, how we could render him some service, for the excellent
order he had preserved in the ostrog during our stay, and for his extreme
readiness to oblige us, upon every occasion that presented itself. The Major
said, a letter of recommendation to the Governor General, would probably have a
good effect; Captain Clerk accordingly had given him one, which, together with
his own representations, he fully expected would get the sergeant advanced in
his profession.

We were unwilling to remonstrate on this subject, till Captain Shmaleff should
arrive. Indeed, our very imperfect knowledge of the language, would not permit
us to enter into any discussion upon this business. But, when we were next
visited by the Put-parouchick, the coolness of our reception must fully have
testified our chagrin.

On Wednesday, the 22d of September, being the anniversary of the coronation of
George the Third, we fired twenty-one guns; and, in honor of the day, prepared
as elegant a feast as our situation would allow of. The arrival of Captain
Shmaleff was announced the very moment we were sitting down to dinner. We were
equally pleased and surprised at this intelligence. First, because he came so
opportunely to take a share in the festivity of the day; and, in the next
place, having lately been informed that the effects of a severe illness had
rendered him unequal to the journey. We had the satisfaction to hear that this
had been merely an excuse; that, knowing we were distressed for tea, sugar,
etc. he was hurt at the idea of coming empty-handed, and therefore had deferred
his setting out, impatiently waiting for the arrival of a sloop from Okotsk;
but hearing no intelligence of her, and fearing we should sail before he had
visited us, he was resolved to prosecute the journey, though he had nothing to
present to us but apologies for the poverty of Bolcheretsk.

He told us, at the same time, that the reason of our not having received the
black cattle, which we had requested to be sent down, was, that the heavy rains
at Verchnei, had absolutely prevented their setting out. So much politeness and
generosity demanded the best answer we were capable of making; and he was, the
next day, saluted with eleven guns, on coming on board the Resolution: samples
and specimens of our curiosities were then presented to him; to which Captain
Gore added a gold watch, and a fowling-piece. He was entertained on board the
Discovery the next day, and on the 25th, he returned to Bolcheretsk.

No entreaties could prevail on him to extend his visit, having, as he assured
us, some expectations that the sub-governor-general would arrive in the sloop
which he expected from Okotsk, as he was then on a tour through all the
provinces of the governor-general of Jakutsk. Without any application from us,
he re-instated the sergeant in his command, before his departure, having
resolved to take the Put-parouchick with him. We also understood, that he was
much offended with him for punishing the sergeant, as there did not appear to
be the slightest grounds for inflicting such chastisement.

Encouraged by the Captain's great readiness to oblige us, we ventured to
request a small favor for another inhabitant of Kamtschatka. It was to requite
an honest old soldier, who kept a kind of open house for the inferior officers,
and who had done a thousand good offices, both for them and the whole crew. The
Captain obligingly complied with our wishes, and dubbed him instantly a
corporal; telling him, at the same time, to thank the English officers for his
very great promotion.

It may not here be unnecessary to remark, that the lower class of officers in
the Russian army, have a greater pre-eminence above the private men than those
in the British service can possibly conceive. It was, indeed, a matter of
astonishment to us, to see a sergeant assume all the state, and exact as much
homage from those beneath him, as though he had been a field officer. Besides,
there are several gradations of rank amongst them, of which other countries are
wholly ignorant; there being no less than four intermediate steps between a
sergeant and a private soldier; and many considerable advantages may probably
arise from this system. Subordinate ranks in the sea service, are known to
produce the most salutary effects, by creating emulation; and the officers of
superior rank are thereby enabled to bestow an adequate reward on almost every
possible degree of merit.

The discipline of the Russian army, though so extremely remote from the seat
of government, is remarkable for its strictness and severity; not exempting
even the commissioned officers. Imprisonment, and bread and water diet, is the
punishment of the latter for inconsiderable offenses. A good friend of ours,
who was as an ensign in this place, informed us, that the punishment he
received for having been concerned in a drunken frolic, was three months
imprisonment in the black hole, with bread and water only for his subsistence;
which so affected his whole nervous system, that he has never since enjoyed a
sufficient flow of spirits to qualify him for a convivial meeting.

Captain King attended Captain Shmaleff as far as the entrance of Awatska
river, and having taken leave of him, embraced that opportunity of visiting the
priest of Paratounca. He attended him to church on Sunday the 26th, when his
whole congregation consisted of his own family, three men, and the same number
of boys, who assisted in the singing; and the whole of the service was
performed with great solemnity and devotion.

Though the church is built of wood, it is much superior to any building either
in this town, or in that of St. Peter and St. Paul. Among the several paintings
with which it is ornamented, are two pictures of St. Peter and St. Paul, which
were presented by Beering; and which might vie with the first European
performances in the intrinsic riches of its drapery; the principal parts of it
being composed of thick plates of real solid silver, so fashioned as to imitate
the foldings of the robes which decorate the figures, and fixed upon the
canvass.

Another hunting party was set on foot the next day, when Captain King
submitted himself to the direction of the parish clerk, who had acquired great
reputation as a bear-hunter. About sunset they arrived at one of the larger
lakes, where it was deemed necessary to conceal themselves as much as possible:
this was easily effected among some long grass and brush-wood, of which there
was great plenty near the water's edge. We had not been long in this situation,
before our ears were agreeably saluted with the growling of bears, in almost
every quarter round about us; and we soon had the pleasure of beholding one of
them in the water, swimming in a direct course to where we lay concealed. At
this time the moon shone so as to afford a considerable light; and, as the
animal advanced toward us, three of us fired at it almost at the same instant.
Immediately the beast turned short upon one side, and set up a most horrible
noise; which was neither yelling, growling, nor roaring, but a very
extraordinary mixture of the whole three.

We could easily perceive that the animal was severely wounded, and that it
reached the bank with difficulty; whence it retreated to some thick bushes not
far distant, still continuing to make that dreadful noise. The Kamtschadales
supposed it to be mortally wounded, and that it could proceed no farther; but
judged it an act of imprudence to attempt to rouse it again immediately. It was
then after nine o'clock; and, as the night became over-cast (...) a change of
weather was to be apprehended, we thought it advisable to return home, and
wait till morning for the gratification of our curiosity; when we accordingly
repaired to the spot, and found the bear dead from the wounds it had received.
It was a female and larger than the ordinary size. But, as this account of our
hunting party may convey a wrong idea of the method usually pursued in this
sport, a few words may be necessary to be added on this subject.

The natives generally contrive to reach the ground, frequented by the bears;
about sunset. Their first business when they arrive there, is to look out for
their tracks, and to attend particularly to the freshest of them; always paying
a regard to the situation with respect to concealment, and taking aim at the
animal as it passes by, or as it advances or goes from them. These tracks are
numerous between the woods and the lakes, and are often found among the long
sedgy grass and brakes on the margin of the water. Having determined upon a
convenient spot for concealment, the hunters fix their crutches in the ground,
on which they rest their firelocks, pointing them in a proper direction. They
afterward kneel or lie down, as the circumstances of their situations may
require; and, having their bear-spears in readiness by their side, wait the
arrival of their game.

These precautions are extremely necessary, on many accounts, that the hunters
may make sure of their mark: for the price of ammunition is so high at
Kamtschatka, that the value of a bear will not purchase more of it than will
load a musket four or five times. It is much more material on another
consideration; for, if the first shot should not render the animal incapable of
pursuit, fatal consequences too frequently ensue. The enraged beast makes
immedi^^^ly toward the place from whence the sound and smoke issue, and
furiously attacks his adversaries. They have not sufficient time to re-load
their pieces, as the bear is seldom sired at till he comes within the distance
of fifteen yards; therefore, if he should not happen to fall, they immediately
prepare to receive him upon their spears; their safety depending, in a great
measure, on their giving him a mortal stab as he advances toward them. Should
he parry the thrust, (which these animals are sometimes enabled to do, by the
strength and agility of their paws) and break in upon his opponents, the
conflict becomes dreadful, and it is seldom that the loss of a single life will
satisfy the beast's revenge.

The business or diversion of bear-hunting, is particularly dangerous at two
seasons of the year: in the spring, when they first issue from their caves,
after having subsisted the whole winter (as it is here positively asserted)
solely on sucking their paws; and especially if the frost should continue to be
severe, and the ice in the lakes is not broken up; as they cannot then have
recourse to their customary and expected food. Thus becoming exceedingly
famished, they grow fierce and savage in proportion; pursuing the inhabitants
by the cent; and, prowling about at a distance from their usual tracks, dart
upon them unawares. Under these circumstances, as the natives have no idea of
shooting flying, or even running, or in any manner without resting their piece,
they often fall a sacrifice to their rapacity. The time of their copulation, is
the other dangerous season to meet with them; and that is usually about this
time of the year.

We have already mentioned a remarkable instance of natural affection in these
animals. Many of a similar nature, and equally affecting, are frequently
related by the Kamtschadales; who, from this circumstance, derive considerable
advantage in hunting. They never presume to sire at a young bear, if the dam is
upon the spot; for, if the cub should happen to be killed, she becomes enraged
to an immoderate degree; and, if she can only obtain a sight of the offender,
she is sure to be revenged of him, or die in the attempt. On the other hand, if
the mother should be shot, the cubs continue by her side after she has been a
long time dead; exhibiting, by the most affecting gestures and motions, the
most poignant affliction. The hunters, instead of commiserating their
distresses, embrace these opportunities of destroying them. If the veracity of
the Kamtschadales is to be depended on, the sagacity of the bears is as
extraordinary as their natural affection.

Innumerable are the stories which they relate to this effect. One remarkable
instance, however, we cannot avoid mentioning, as it is admitted among the
natives as a well-attested fact. It is the stratagem they put in practice to
catch the bareins, which run too swift for them to expect success in pursuing
them. These animals herd together in great numbers, and their usual haunts are
low grounds, at the feet of rocks and precipices, where they delight in
browsing. The bear pursues them by the scent, till he obtains a view of them;
and then advances warily, keeping in a situation above them; at the same time
concealing himself among the rocks as he approaches, till he is almost
immedietely over them, and near enough to carry his purpose into execution.
Then, with his paws, he pushes down large pieces of the rock amongst the herd
below. If he perceives that he has succeeded in maiming any of the flock, he
immediately pursues them, and according to the injury the poor bareins have
received, he either proves successful in overtaking them, or they escape by the
rapidity of their ^light.

The Kamtschadales acknowledge infinite obligations to the bears, for all the
little progress they have hitherto made, as well in the science as the polite
arts. They confess themselves indebted wholly to those animals for all their
knowledge in physic and surgery; that, by observing what herbs they have
applied to the wounds they have received, and what methods they have pursued
when they were languid and out of order, they have acquired a knowledge of most
of those simples which they have now recourse to, either as external or
internal applications. But, the most singular circumstance of all is, that they
admit the bears to be their dancing-masters; though the evidence of our own
senses places this matter beyond all dispute; for, in the bear-dance of the
Kamtschadales, every gesture and attitude peculiar to that animal, was
faithfully exhibited. All their other dances are similar to this in many
particulars, and those attitudes are thought to come the nearest to perfection,
which most resemble the motions of the bear.

On the 28th of September, Captain King returned to the ships, not a little
pleased with his excursion, as it gave him an opportunity of seeing a part of
the country, and of observing the actions of the Kamtschadales when they were
under no restraint, which evidently was not the case when they were in the
company of the Russians.

Nothing worth mentioning occurred till the 30th, when Captain Gore went to
Paratounca, in order to have an escutcheon put up in the church, which had been
prepaired by Mr. Webber. It had an inscription on it, mentioning Captain
Clerke's age and rank, and the nature of the expedition which he commanded at
the time of his decease. To the tree, under which he was interred, a board was
affixed with a similar inscription on it.

Captain Gore, before his departure, ordered Captain King to get the ships out
of the harbor, that they might be in readiness to sail. This, however, was
prevented, by a violent gale of wind on the 1st of October, which continued the
whole day; but, on the 2d, both the vessels warped out of the harbor, and
anchored in seven fathoms water, about a quarter of a mile from the ostrog. The
day before we quitted the harbor the cattle from Verchnei arrived; and, that
the men might have the full enjoyment of this seasonable supply, by eating it
whilst it was fresh, Captain Gore determined to stay in the same station five
or six days longer.

This time was far from being misapplied, for the pumps, sails, and rigging of
each ship received an additional repair. Captain King, having obtained
permission to use the copper belonging to the Resolution, and being supplied
with molasses by Captain Gore, was enabled to brew a sufficient quantity of
beer to last the crew a fortnight, and to make ten additional puncheons of
strong spruce essence. This supply was the more acceptable, as our last cask of
spirits was now serving out, except a small quantity reserved for cases of
emergency.

As the 3d of October was the name-day of the Empress of Russia, we were
perfectly inclined to show it every possible respect. The priest of Paratounca,
Ivaskin, and the sergeant, were invited to dine with us; and an entertainment
was prepared for the two Toions of Paratounca, and St. Peter and St. Paul; as
well as for the inferior officers of the garrison, and the most respectable of
the Kamtschadale inhabitants. All the other natives were invited to partake in
common with the ships companies; a pound of excellent beef being served out to
every man, and the remainder of our spirits was made into grog, and distributed
amongst them. Twenty-one guns were fired upon the occasion; and, considering we
were in a very remote part of the Empress's dominions, the whole was conducted
in a manner not unworthy so illustrious a character.

On the 5th of October, we received a fresh supply of tea, sugar, and tobacco,
from Bolcheretsk. Captain Shmaleff having met this present on his return, he
sent a letter with it, informing us that the sloop from Okotsk had arrived in
his absence, and that Madame Shmaleff had instantly dispatched a courier with
these few presents, requesting our acceptance of them.

On the 6th and 7th of October, the appearance of foul weather prevented our
unmooring; but on the 8th, we sailed toward the mouth of the bay, and all the
boats were hoisted in; but our progress was stopped by the wind veering to the
south, which obliged us to drop anchor, the ostrog bearing north, at the
distance of half a league. The wind blowing from the same quarter, and the
weather being foggy all the forenoon on the 9th, we continued in our station.

At four in the afternoon of the same day, we again unmoored; but, whilst we
were raising our last anchor, we were informed that the drummer of marines had
fled from the boat, which had just left the village, and that he had been
lately seen with a Kamtschadale woman, to whom he was known to have been much
attached, and who had frequently importuned him to stay behind. This man was
entirely useless to us, having been rendered lame by a swelling in his knee;
and, on that very account, Captain King was the more unwilling to leave him
behind, lest he should become a miserable burden to himself, as well as to the
Russians. He therefore applied to the sergeant to send parties of his men in
pursuit of him; and, in the mean time, the sailors visited a well-known haunt
of his in the neighborhood, where the drummer and his woman were found
together. On the return of our deserter, we weighed anchor, and immediately
followed the Resolution.

As we have now taken our leave of St. Peter and St. Paul, a particular account
of Awatska bay, and the adjoining coast, may not be unacceptable to the reader;
as it is perhaps the safest, and most extensive harbor that has ever been
discovered; and the only one, in this part of the world, that can admit vessels
of considerable burden. The term bay, properly speaking, is rather
inapplicable to a place so completely sheltered as Awatska; but when it is
considered how loose and vague some navigators have been, in their
denominations of certain situations of sea and land, as harbors, bays, roads,
sounds, etc. we are not sufficiently warranted to exchange a popular name, for
one that may perhaps seem more consistent with propriety.

The entrance into Awatska bay is in the latitude of 52 51 north, and the
longitude of 158 48 east. It lies in the bight of another exterior bay, formed
by Cape Gavareea to the south, and Cheepooskoi Noss to the north. The latter of
these head-lands bears from the former, north-east by north, and is thirty-two
leagues distant. From Cape Gavareea to the entrance of Awatska Bay, the coast
takes a northerly direction, and extends about eleven leagues. It consists of a
chain of ragged cliffs and rocks, and, in many parts, presents an appearance of
bays or inlets; but on a nearer view, low ground was seen that connected the
head-lands.

From the entrance of Awatska bay, Cheepoonskoi Noss bears east-north-east,
distant seventeen leagues. The shore, on this side, is flat and low, with hills
behind, gradually rising to a considerable height. The latitude of Cape
Gavareea is 52 21.

This remarkable difference of the land on the sides of Awatska Bay, together
with their different bearings, are very proper guides to steer for it, in
coming from the southward; and when it is approached from the northward,
Cheepoonskoi Noss becomes very conspicuous; it being a high projecting
head-land, and is united to the continent, by a large extent of level ground,
lower than the Noss. Whether viewed from the north or south, it presents the
same appearance.

We have been rather particular in describing this coast, having experienced
the want of such a description; for, if we had possessed a tolerably good
account of the form of the coast on both sides of Awatska Bay, we should, when
we first visited it, have arrived there two days sooner then we did, and
consequently have avoided part of the tempestuous weather, which we experienced
in plying off the mouth of the harbor. Besides as the fogs are so prevalent in
these seas, it often happens that an observation for ascertaining the latitude
cannot be taken. It should also be considered, that land makes a very deceptive
appearance when covered with snow, or when viewed through an hazy atmosphere;
both which circumstances prevail here for a considerable part of the year, and
render it necessary for every mariner to be acquainted with as many
discriminating objects as possible.

If the weather should happen to be sufficiently clear to admit a view of the
mountains, both on the coast and its neighborhood, the situation of Awatska
bay may be precisely known, by the two high mountains to the south of it. That
nearest the bay is in the form of a sugar loaf; the other, which is more
inland, is flat at the top, and not quite so high. There are three very
conspicuous mountains the north of the bay: that farthest to the west, appears
to be highest; the next, which is a volcano mountain, may readily be known by
the smoke issuing from its top. The third is the most northerly, and might,
with some propriety, be called a cluster of mountains, as it presents several
flat tops to our view.

When we got within the capes, and into the eastward bay, a light-house on a
perpendicular head-land, will point out the entrance of the bay of Awatska to
the north. Many sunken rocks lie to the eastward of this head-land, stretching
two or three miles into the sea; and which, with a moderate sea or swell, will
always show themselves. A small round island lies four miles to the south of
the entrance, principally composed of high pointed rocks, one of which is
strikingly remarkable, as being larger and more perpendicular than the rest.

The entrance into the bay is, at first, about three miles wide, and one mile
and an half in the narrowest part; the length is four miles, in a
north-north-west direction. A noble basin, of about twenty-five miles in
circumference, lies within the mouth; in which are the harbors of Rakoweena to
the east, Tarcinska to the west, and St. Peter and St. Paul to the north.

The breadth of Tarcinska harbor is three miles, and the length about twelve.
A narrow neck of land separates it from the sea at the bottom, and it stretches
to the east-south-east. As far as we surveyed, we never found less that seven
fathoms water; but the ice hindered us from getting to the bottom of the
harbor.

The entrance of the harbor of Rakoweena is impeded by a shoal in the middle
of the channel, which, in general, makes it necessary to warp in unless there
should happen to be a leading wind. Were it not for this circumstance, this
harbor would be preferable to the other two. Its breadth is from one mile to
half a mile, and its length three miles, running in a south-east and easterly
direction. It is from thirteen to three fathoms in depth.

One of the most convenient little harbors we have seen, is St. Peter and St.
Paul. Half a dozen ships may be commodiously moored in it, head and stern; and
it is, in every respect, convenient for giving them any kind of repairs. The
south side of this harbor is formed by a low, narrow, sandy neck, on which the
ostrog is built. The mid-channel is only two hundred and seventy feet across,
in which there is six fathoms and an half water; the deepest water within is
seven fathoms; and all over a muddy bottom. Some inconvenience was, however,
occasioned by the toughness of the ground, which often broke the messenger, and
made it troublesome to get the anchors up. At the head of this harbor there is
a watering place.

There is a shoal lying off the eastern harbor, and a spit within the
entrance, stretching from the south-west shore, having only three fathoms water
over it. To steer clear of the latter, a small island, or rather a large
detached rock, on the west shore of the entrance, must be shut in with the
land to the south of it. In order to steer clear of the former, the three
needle-rocks, near the light-house head, on the east shore of the entrance,
must be kept open with the head-lands to the northward of the first small
bending on the east side of the entrance. In entering the harbor of St. Peter
and St. Paul, and approaching the village, it is very necessary to keep near
the eastern shore, to avoid a spit which stretches from the head-land, to the
south-west of the ostrog.

The time-keeper on board the Resolution, which was exactly copied from Mr.
Harrison's, by Mr. Kendal, stopped on the 27th of April, a few days before our
first arrived in Awatska Bay. During the voyage, it had always been carefully
attended to, not having been trusted, even for a moment, into any other hands
than those of Captain Cook and Captain King. No accident, therefore, could
possibly have happened to it, to which its stopping could be attributed; nor
could it proceed from the operation of intense cold, the thermometer being but
very little below the freezing point.

When the failure of the time-piece was first discovered, the Captains Clerk
and King, consulted what measures they should pursue; whether they should
suffer it to remain in a useless state, for the satisfaction of the curious at
home, where it would certainly be examined by proper judges; or submit it to
the inspection of a seaman on board, who had been regularly bred a watch-maker,
in London, and who had given many satisfactory proofs of his skill in that
profession, in repairing several watches upon the voyage.

Having experienced the accuracy of this time-piece, we were extremely
unwilling to be deprived of its advantages during the remaining part of the
voyage; and that object appeared to us of more importance, than the small
degree of probability of deriving any material knowledge with regard to its
mechanism, by deferring the inspection of it till our return. Besides, it
should be considered, that the watch had already been sufficiently tried to
ascertain its utility, as well in the former voyage, as during the three years
we had now had it on board the Resolution. Therefore, on the first clear day
after we arrived in Awatska bay, the time-piece was opened, in the presence of
Captain Clerk and Captain King. No part of the watch appeared to be broken;
but, as the watch-maker was not able to make it go, he took off the cock and
balance, and cleaned the pivot-holes, which were extremely foul. The other
parts of the work were also dirty. He then took off the dial-plate, and found a
piece of dirt between two teeth of the wheel which carries the second hand, and
attributed its stopping principally to this cause. After putting the work
together, and oiling it very sparingly, the watch seemed to go with freedom and
regularity.

Captain King having orders to go the next day to Bolcheretsk, the time-keeper
was left with Mr. Baily, in order to get its rate by comparing it with his
watch and clock; who informed him, on his return, that it had gone very
regularly for some days, never losing more than seventeen seconds a day, and
afterward stopped again. Upon its being a second time opened, its stopping
seemed to be occasioned by its having been badly put together on the first
opening of it. When it was again abjusted, it gained above a minute a day and
the watch-maker broke the balance-spring in attempting to alter that and the
regulator. He then made a new spring, but the watch went so irregularly
afterward, that we could make no farther use of it. The honest man was as much
ch^grined as we were at our ill success, which we were convinced was not so
much owing to his want of skill, as to the miserable tools he had to work with,
and the stiffness his hands had contracted from his occupation as a seaman.

At the full and change of the moon, it was high water at thirty-six minutes
after four; and five feet eight inches was the greatest rise. The tides were
regular every twelve hours.

CHAP. VI.
Geographical Description of Kam^schatka -- Account of the Rivers Bolchoireka,
Kamtschatka, Awatska, etc -- Soil -- Severity of the Climate -- Several
Volcanoes -- Remarkable hot Spring at Natcheekin -- Productions -- Vegetables:
particularly the Sarana, and sweet Grass -- Animals in general -- Foxes --
Sables -- Bears -- Wolves, etc. -- Birds -- Sea-Otters, and other amphibious
Animals -- Fish the staple Article of Food at Kamtschatka -- Whales -- Salmon
Fishery -- Method of catching Salmon -- Lakes abounding with Fish.

THE peninsula of Kamtschatka, is situated on the eastern coast of Asia, and
extends from 52 to 61 north latitude; the longitude of its extremity to the
south being 156 45 east. The isthmus, joining it to the continent on the north,
lies between the gulphs of Olutorsk and Penshinsk. Its extremity to the south,
is Cape Lopatka; so called from its resembling the blade-bone of a man, which
is the signification of that word. The whole peninsula is somewhat in the form
of a shoe; and its greatest breadth is two hundred and thirty-six computed
miles, being from the mouth of a river Tigil to that of the river Kamtschatka;
and, toward each extremity, it gradually becomes narrower.

On the north, it is bounded by the country of the Koriacks; by the north
Pacific Ocean to the south and east; and by the sea of Okotsk to the west. A
chain of high mountains, from north to south, extend the whole length of the
peninsula, and almost equally divide it; whence several rivers take their rise,
and make their course into the Pacific Ocean, and the sea of Okotsk.

The three principal rivers, are the Bolchoireka, or great river; the river
Kamtschatka; and the river Awatska. The first discharges itself into the sea of
Okotsk, and is navigable for the Russian galliots, five leagues from its mouth,
or within three leagues of Bolcheretsk, which is situated at the conflux of the
two rivers, Goltsoffka and the Bistraia, which are here lost in the
Bolchoireka. The source of the Bistraia, which is no inconsiderable river, is
derived from the same mountain as the river Kamtschatka, but takes quite a
contrary course; by which means, the Kamtschadales are enabled to transport
their goods by water, almost across the peninsula. -- The river Kamtschatka
continues about three hundred miles, in the direction of south to north; and,
after winding round to the eastward, is received by the ocean, a little to the
southward of Kamtschatkoi Noss. To the north-west of the mouth of the
Kamtschatka, lies the great lake Nerpitsch; from nerpi, a seal; that lake
abounding with those animals. A fort, called Nishnei Kamtschatka ostrog, is
situated about twenty miles up the river, where an hospital and barracks have
been built by the Russians; and this place, we understood, is now become the
principal mart in the country.

The source of the Awatska river, is from the mountains between the Bolchoireka
and the Bistraia. After running two hundred miles, from north-west to the
south-east, it falls into Awatska bay. The Tigil is likewise a considerable
river; it rises amidst some high mountains, parallel with Kamtschatkoi Noss,
and empties itself into the sea of Okotsk. The other rivers of this peninsula,
which are very numerous, are too inconsiderable to be particularly mentioned.

If we may judge of its soil form its vegetable productions, it appears to be
barren in the extreme. Neither about the bay, nor in our journey to
Bolcheretsk, nor in any of our hunting exhibitions, did we ever perceive the
smallest spot of ground, that had the appearance of a good green turf, or that
seemed capable of improvement by cultivation. Stunted trees were thinly
scattered over the whole face of the country, whose bottoms were moffy, with a
mixture of low heath, the whole resembling Newfoundland in a most striking
degree.

It must be admitted, however, that we saw at Paratounca, three or four stacks
of most excellent hay; and Major Behm assured us, that the banks of the
Kamtschatka, and the Bistraia, as well as many other parts of the peninsula,
produce a quantity of grass of great strength and height, which is mowed twice
in every summer; and that the hay is particularly adapted to the fattening of
cattle, being of a very succulent quality. It appeared, indeed, from the size
and fatness of the thirty-six which we received from the Verchnei ostrog, that
they must have had the advantage of good grass and hay; for when we were
supplied with the first twenty, it was just the close of the winter, the snow
still remaining on the ground; and probably they had fed only on hay for the
seven preceding months. This agrees with Krascheninicoff's account, who
relates, that the country which borders on the river Kamtschatka, is much
superior, in point of fertility, to that of either the north or south. Repeated
experiments, he says, have been made, in different quarters near this river, in
the culture of barley, rye, and oats, which seldom failed of success; and he
supposes, that wheat would grow in many parts, especially near the source of
the Bistraia and Kamtschatka, as well as in most countries situated in the same
latitude. The fertility of this part of the country may, perhaps, be occasioned
by its lying in the widest part of the peninsula, and, consequently, at the
farthest distance from the sea on each side: as chilling fogs and drizzling
weather generally prevail along the coast, and cannot fail to render the parts
adjacent incapable of improvement by agriculture.

The severity of the climate, it may naturally be supposed, must be in
proportion to the sterility of the soil, of which it is perhaps the cause. We
first saw this country in the beginning of May, 1779, when it was covered with
snow, from six to eight feet in depth. On the 6th of May we had snow, with the
wind from north-east. At noon, on the 8th, the thermometer stood at 32; and
some of our men were on that day ordered on shore, to endeavor to cut wood;
but their attempts were fruitless, the snow still lying so deep upon the
ground. Nor could they proceed in this necessary business, though tne party
consisted of stout and able fellows, till the 12th; when the thaw gradually
advanced. In some places, the sides of the hills were now free from snow; and
it was principally melted on the low land by the beginning of June. On the 15th
of that month, we sailed out of the harbor: during our stay, the winds
generally blew from the eastward, and the south-east was the most prevalent.

On this 24th of August, when we returned, the foliage of the trees, and
vegatation in general, appeared to be in the height of profection. The weather,
during the remainder of that month, and the whole of September, was very
changeable, but not severe. At the beginning of the month, the winds were, in
general, easterly; but afterward got round to the west. The thermometer's
greatest height was 65, the lowest 40. The greatest height of the barometer 30,
the lowest 29 3. So that all the month of September, a moderate degree of
temperature prevailed. But when October began, the new fallen snow again
covered the tops of the hills, and the wind continued westerly.

In computing the seasons here, spring should certainly be omitted. Summer may
be said to extend from t^^ middle of June, till the middle of September;
October may be considered as autumn; from which period to the middle of June,
it is all dreary winter.

The climate, in the country adjacent to the river Kamtschatka, is said to be
as serene and temperate, as in many parts of Siberia under the same latitude.
This, probably, originates from the same causes, to which the fertility of the
soil in that part of the country, has been already attributed. The sterility of
the ground, however, is not the only consequence of the unfavourable
temperature of the climate. The inhabitants are sometimes prevented, by the
uncertainty of the summer season, from providing a sufficient stock of dried
fish, for their food in the winter; and the moisture of the air occasions worms
to breed in them, which frequently destroy, or spoil, the greatest part.

We had neither thunder nor lightning during our stay at Kamtschatka, excepting
on the night of the eruption of the volcano; and we were told by the
inhabitants, that they were not often troubled with either, and never but in a
slight degree. The severity of winter, and the dreadful hurricanes of wind and
snow which attend it, oblige the natives to retire to their subteraneous
habitations, both for their security and warmth. We were informed by Major
Behm, that the inclemency of the winter of 1779, was so great, that all
intercourse was stopped ^^tween the inhabitants for several weeks, no one
daring to stir from one habitation to another, so fearful were they of being
frost-bitten. The extreme rigor of climate, in so low a latitude, may be
attributed to its being situated to the east of an immense uncultivated
country, and to the prevalence of the westerly winds over so extensive and cold
a continent. The impetuosity of the winds, may be attributed to the
subteraneous fires, and sulphurous exhalations.

Volcanos are numerous in this peninsula; only three of which have lately been
subject to eruptions. That in the neighborhood or Awatska we have already
mentioned; and there are others equally remarkable, according to
Krascheninicoff.

The volcano of Tolbatchick is situated between the river Kamtschatka and
Tolbatchick, on a neck of land. The eruptions proceed from the summit of a high
mountain, which terminates in pointed rocks. A whirlwind of flames issued from
it in the beginning of 1739, which reduced the forests of the neighboring
mountains to ashes. A cloud of smoke succeeded this, which spread darkness over
the whole country, but was dissipated by a shower of cinders, which covered the
earth to the extent of thirty miles. Mr. Krascheni^icoff, who was then
traveling from Bolchoireka to the Kamtschatka ostrog, and not far from the
mountain, says, the eruption was preceded by an alarming sound in the woods,
which, he thought, portended some dreadful storm or hurricane; till three
successive shocks of an earthquake, with only a minute's interval between each,
fully convinced him of its real cause; but that he was hindered, by the falling
of the cinders, from approaching nearer the mountain, or from proceeding on his
journey.

On the top of the mountain, of Kamtschatka, supposed to be by far the highest
in the peninsula, is the third volcano. A thick smoke incessantly ascends from
its summit, and it often has eruptions of the most dreadful kind; some of which
were fresh in the memories of the natives, and were frequently spoken of.

Springs of hot water are said to abound in this country. We have seen only
that at Natcheekin ostrog, which has already been described. Several others are
mentioned by Krascheninicoff, who also taken notice of two pits or wells, at
the bottom of which, the water boils with great impetuosity; a dreadful noise
issuing from them at the same time, and so thick a vapor, that objects cannot
be discerned through it.

Among the principal trees which fell under our notice, are the birch, the
poplar, the alder, several small pieces of the willow, and two sorts of
dwarfish cedars. One of these sorts grows upon the coast, seldom exceeding two
feet in height, and creeping upon the ground. Of this our essence for beer was
made, and proved to be very proper for the purpose: the other, which grows much
higher, is found on the mountains, and bears a kind of nut or apple. The old
Toion at St. Peter and St. Paul informed us, that when Beering lay in that
harbor, he taught them the use of the decoction of these cedars; which proved
an admirable remedy for the scurvy; but, either from the scarcity of sugar, or
some other cause it is no longer used amongst them.

Of the birch, which appears to be the most common tree, we remarked three
sorts. Two of them were large, and fit for timber, and differed from each other
only in the color and texture of the bark. The third is of a dwarfish kind.
The natives apply this tree to a variety of uses. When tapped, it yields a
liquor in great abundance, which they drink without mixture, or any kind of
preparation, as we frequently observed in our journey to Bolcheretsk. We drank
some of it ourselves, and found it pleasant and refreshing, though somewhat
purgative. They convert the bark into vessels for their domestic purposes; and,
and from the wood of this tree, are made their sledges and canoes. Not only the
birch, but every other kind of tree in the neighborhood of the bay, were
stunted and very small; the natives are therefore obliged to go to a
considerable distance up the country, to get wood of a proper size for their
canoes, their balagans, and many other purposes.

Krascheninicoff also mentions the larch, a tree which grows only on the banks
of the river Kamtschatka; and those which it receives. He also says, there are
firs near the river Berezowa. Likewise the service-tree, and two species of the
white thorn.

This peninsula produces great abundance of the shrub kind, as mountain ash,
junipers, rasberry bushes, and wild rose-trees. Also a variety of berries, as
partridge-berries, blew-berries. These are gathered at proper seasons, and
preserved by mashing them into a thick jam. They constitute a considerable part
of their winter provisions, serving as a general sauce to their dried fish.
They also eat them in puddings, and in various other modes; and make decoctions
of them for their common beverage.

We found great quantities of wholesome vegetables in a wild state, such as
chervil, garlic, onions, angelica, and wild celery. We also met with some
excellent turnips, and turnip-radishes, upon a few spots of ground in the
valleys. This was the utmost extent of their garden cultivation; but, it is
probable, that many of the hardy sorts of vegetables will thrive here
(particularly those whose roots descend as carrots, parsnips, etc. Major Behm
told us, that many other sorts of kitchen vegetables had been tried, but
without effect; that those of the cabbage or lettuce kind would not head; and
that, though beans and peace would grow vigorously, and flower and pod, yet the
pods would never fill. He also told us, that in experiments he made in
different sorts of farinaceous grain, a strong high blade sprung up, and even
produced ears; but the latter never yielded flour.

This account of vegetables only relates to such parts of the country, as fell
within our observation; near the river Kamtschatka, where, as we have already
observed, both the soil and climate is the best in the peninsula, garden
culture is attended to, and perhaps with success; for, with the second drove of
cattle which we received from Verchnei, we also received a present of
cucumbers, celery, some very large turnips, and other garden vegetables.

Two plants are produced in this peninsula, which deserve particular attention.
The first is called sarana, by the natives, and Li^ium Kamtskatiense store atro
rubende, by botanists. The stem grows to the height of about five inches, and
is not larger than that of a tulip; toward the bottom, it is of a purple
color, and green higher up. Two tier of leaves issue from it, of an oval
figure; the lower consisting of three leaves, and the uppermost of four. A
single flower, of a dark red color, which resembles that of the narcissus in
shape, grows from the top of the stalk. It has a bulbous root, like that of
garlic, and, like that, has several cloves hanging together. The plant grows
wild, and in great quantities: about the beginning of August, many women are
employed in collecting the roots; which, after being dried in the sun, are
preserved for use. When we arrived the second time, it was at the conclusion of
this harvest, which we understood had fallen short of its usual produce. It is
a maxim with the Kamtschadales, that providence never deserts them, for the
seasons that are prejudicial to the sarana, are always favorable for fishing;
and, on the contrary, an unsuccessful fishing month is always amply compensated
by an exuberant sarana harvest. This article is variously employed in cookery.
When roasted in embers, it is a better substitute for bread than any thing the
country produces. When baked in an oven, and pounded, it supplies the place of
flour and meal, and is mixed in all their soups, and many of their other
dishes. It is extremely nourishing, has a pleasant bitter flavor, and may be
eaten daily without cloying. We partook of these roots, boiled in the manner of
potatoes, and found them very wholesome and agreeable. This plant is also
produced at Oonalashka, where the roots of it, in like manner, constitute a
considerable part of their food.

Sweet grass is the name of the other plant alluded to; the botanical
description of which is, Heracleum Sibericum foliis pinnatis, foliolis quinis,
intermediis senssilibus, corollulis uniformibus. HORT. UPSAL. 65. It was in the
month of May that we took particular notice of it, when it was about eighteen
inches in height, strongly resembled sedge, and was covered with a kind of
white down not unlike the hoar-frost hanging upon it, and which might easily be
rubbed off. The taste of it is as sweet as that of sugar, though very hot and
pungent. It has a hollow stalk, which consists of three or four joints, with
large leaves, issuing from each. When this plant attains its full growth, it is
about six feet in height. This plant was formerly a principal ingredient in
cookery, amongst the Kamtschadales; but, since the country has been in the
possession of the Russians, it has been chiefly appropriated to the purpose of
distilation. It is gathered, prepared, and distilled, in the following manner.
Having cut the stalk which have leaves growing on them, and scraped the downy
substance from their surface, they are placed in small heaps till they begin to
heat and smell. When dry, they are put into sacks of matting, where they remain
a few days, and are then gradually covered with a sweet saccharine powder,
which exfudes from the hollow of the stalk. Only a quarter of a pound of powder
is obtained from thirty-six pounds of the plant, in this state. The women who
conduct this business, find it necessary to defend their hands, with gloves,
whilst they are scraping the stalks, the rind being of so acrid a quality, as
even to ulcerate the part it touches.

In this state, the spirit is drawn from the plant, by the following process.
Bundles of it are steeped in hot water, and its fermentation promoted in a
small vessel, with berries of the gimolost, or of the golubitsa; care being
taken to close the mouth of the vessel, and to keep it in a warm place whilst
it continues to ferment; which is often to so violent a degree, as to agitate
the vessel which contains it, and occasion a considerable noise. When this
first liquor is drawn off, more hot water is poured on, and a second made in
the same manner. Both liquor and herbs are then put into a copper still, and
the spirit is drawn off in the usual method. The liquor, thus prepared, is
called by the natives raka, and has the strength of brandy. Seventy-two pounds
of the plant, generally produce twenty-five pints of raka. According to
Steller, the spirit distilled from this plant unscraped, is very pernicious to
health, and produces sudden nervous disorders.

Krascheninicoff mentions several other plants, from which decoctions are
prepared; and which, when properly intermingled with their fish, make palatable
dishes. Such is the kipri, with which a pleasant beverage is brewed; and, when
this plant and the sweet-herb are boiled together, in the proportion of one to
five of the latter, and properly fermented, a strong and excellent vinegar is
obtained. The leaves are substituted for tea; and the pith, when dried, is
introduced in many of their dishes. He also mentions the morkovai, which is not
unlike angelica; the kotkorica, the root of which is eaten green or dried; the
ikoum, the utchichlei, and several others.

Before the Kamtschadales were acquainted with fire arms, it is said, they
poisoned their spears and arrows with a juice extracted from the root of the
zgate; and that death was inevitable to every animal who had received a wound
from them. The Tschutski are now reported to use the same drug, and for the
very same purpose.

The materials of all the manufactures of Kamtschatka, according to
Krascheninicoff, are furnished by three plants. One of them is the triticum,
radice perenni spiculis binis lanuginosis, which is exceedingly plentiful along
the coast. A strong kind of matting is fabricated from the straw of this grass;
which is used to cover their floors, as well as for bed-clothes, curtains,
sacks, and many other domestic purposes. Little bags and baskets are also made
of the same materials, and are applied to various uses.

The bolotnaia grows in the marshes, and resembles cyperoides. It is gathered
in the autumn, and is carded in the same manner as wool, with an instrument
made of the bones of the sea-swallow. With this manufacture their newborn
infants are swathed, and it is used for a covering next the skin, after they
cease to be infants. A kind of wadding is also formed of it, which is used to
give additional warmth to different parts of their clothing.

A vulgar well-known plant remains to be taken notice of, as being more
essential to their subsistence than all which have been mentioned. It is the
nettle; which, as neither hemp nor flax are produced in Kamtschatka, supplies
materials for their fishing nets; and on which their existence principally
depends. For this purpose, nettles are usually cut down in August, and, after
being hung in bundles under their balagans the remainder of the summer, they
are manufactured like hemp. It is then spun into thread with their fingers, and
twisted round a spindle; after which several threads may be twined together, if
the purposes for which it is designed requires it.

Many parts of this peninsula would probably admit of such cultivation, as
might contribute to the comfort and convenience of the inhabitants; yet, the
number of wild animals it produces, must always be considered as its real
riches; and no labor can be so productive of advantage, as what is employed
upon their furrieries. And next to these, the animals that supply them are to
be considered. These are the fox, the zibeline, or sable; the stoat, or ermine;
the isatis, or arctic fox; the earless marmot; the varying hare; the weasel;
the glutton or wolverene; the wild sheep; reindeer; bears; wolves; dogs.

The most general object of the chase are foxes, with which this country
abounds, and among which are a variety of colors. The most common species is
the same as the European, but their colors are more vivid and shining. Some
are of a dark, chestnut, others have dark-colored stripes; the bellies of some
are black, when the other part of the body is of a light chestnut. Some are a
black; others of a dark brown; others of a stone-colour; and some few are
entirely white; the last, however, are very scarce. The quality of their fur is
much superior to that of the same animals in Siberia or America. Many artifices
are put in practice by the hunters to destroy them. Traps of various kinds are
prepared; some to fall upon them, others to secure them by the feet, and others
to catch them by the head. These are the most common methods of taking them;
but they have many ingenious contrivances for catching them in nets. Poisoned
baits are also used, the nux vomica being generally employed for that purpose.
Still, however, the animal preserves his character for craftiness and cunning,
in all climates, and upon all occasions.

Before the Kamtschadales had any knowledge of the Russians, who instructed
them in the use of firearms, they carried bows and arrows to the chase; but,
since that period, almost every man amongst them is provided with a
rifle-barrel gun; and, though he cannot use it with any extraordinary
dexterity, he readily acknowledges its superiority to the former instruments.

The Kamtschatka sables are much larger than those of Siberia, and their fur is
thicker and brighter; but those in the neighborhood of the rivers Olekma and
Vitime, are of a finer black. The sables of the Tigil and Ouka, are said to be
the best in Kamtschatka, a pair of these being frequently sold for five pounds
sterling. The worst are found in the southern extremity.

A rifle-barrel gun, of a very small bore, a net and a few bricks, are the
whole apparatus of the sable hunters. With the first, they sometimes shoot
them, when they are seen on the trees; the net is used in surrounding the
hollow trees; in which they usually take refuge when pursued; and the bricks
are put hot into the cavaties, in order to drive them out with the smoke.

For an account of the isatis, or arctic fox, we must refer the reader to Mr.
Pennant's Arctic Zoology; the skin of this animal is of little value. The
varying hare is neglected on that account. They are very numerous, and always
become perfectly white during the winter. In the beginning of May, we observed
several of this color, but they were so extremely shy, as not to suffer us to
come within gunshot.

The earless marmot, or mountain rat, is a beautiful creature, much smaller
than a squirrel; and, like that animal, feeds upon roots and berries; sitting
upon its hind legs whilst it eats, and holding the food to its mouth with the
paws. (...) skin is in high estimation among the Kamtschadales; being warm,
light, and of a bright shining hue. Like the plumage of some birds, when it is
viewed in different lights, it appears to be of various colors.

The ermine, or stoat, is little regarded here, and consequently not much
attended to by the hunters, its fur being of a very ordinary kind. We observed
several of these little creatures running about, and we purchased some of their
skins which were of a dirty yellow toward the belly, and the other parts were
of a cloudy white. The weasel is also neglected, and on the same account.

The skin of the wolverene, or glutton, on the contrary, is in the highest
repute; a Kamtschadale looking upon himself as most splendidly attired, when a
small quantity of this fur appears upon his garment. The women embellish their
hair with its white pats, which is considered as the most superlative piece of
finery. In short, a superstitious opinion obtains amongst them, that the angels
are clad with the skins of those animals. This creature, it is said, may be
easily tamed, and instructed in a variety of entertaining tricks.

All the bears which we had an opportunity of seeing, were of a dun brown
color; they generally appear in a company of four or five together, and are
frequently seen in the season when the fish quit the sea, and push, in great
quantities, up the rivers. Fish is indeed their principal food. In the winter
months they are seldom visible. Of the skins of bears, warm mattresses and
coverings for beds are made; together with comfortable bonnets, and gloves, and
harness for the sledges. The flesh, especially the fat, is held in great
estimation.

The wolves appear only in the winter, when they are said to prowl about in
large companies, in pursuit of prey

Reindeer, both wild and tame, are found in many parts of the peninsula, but
none in the neighborhood of Awatska. It is remarkable, that the reindeer have
not been used, in this nation, for the purposes of carriage, as they are by
their neighbors to the north and east. The demands of the natives, in their
present state, are indeed sufficiently supplied by their dogs; and the breed of
Russian horses will probably supply any future necessaries of the country. But
as the use of dogs, in a great degree, precludes them from the advantage of
rearing other domestic animals, it appears very extraordinary that they should
not have preferred an animal so much more powerful and gentle.

The wild mountain sheep, or argali, is in great plenty here; an animal unknown
in Europe, except in Corsica and Sardinia. Its skin resembles that of the
deer's, but it nearer approaches the goat, in its gait and general appearance.
Its head is adorned with two large twisted horns, which, when the animal is at
full growth, sometimes weigh from twenty-five to thirty pounds; and are rested
on the creature's back when it is running. These animals are remarkably swift
and active, frequent only the most craggy and mountainous parts, and traverse
the steepest rocks with an astonishing agility. Of their horns, spoons, cups,
and platters, are fabricated by the natives, who often have one of the latter
hanging to a bent, serving them to drink out of, when on their hunting
expeditions. This is a gregarious ^nimal. It is extremely beautiful, and its
flesh is sweet and delicately flavoured.

The dogs of this country, as already observed, resemble the Pomeranian in mien
and figure; but they are larger, and the hair is considerably coarser. Their
colors are various but that which most prevails is a light dun, or a pale
dirty yellow. The poor animals are all turned loose, about the latter end of
May and are obliged to shift for themselves till the ensuing winter; but never
fail to return to their respective homes, when the snow begins to make its
appearance. In the winter, their food consists wholly of the head, back-bones,
and entrails of salmon; which are preserved and dried for that purpose; and,
even with this food, they are very scantily supplied. The dogs must certainly
be very numerous, no less than five being yoked to a single sledge, and only
one person carried in each sledge. In our journey to Bolcheretsk, we had
occasion for one hundred and thirty-nine, at the two stages of Karatchin and
Natcheekin. It is observable too, that bitches are never employed in this
business, nor dogs that have been castrated. The whelps are trained to the
draft, by being fastened to stakes with leathern thongs, which are elastic, and
having their food placed beyond their reach; and thus, by continually pulling
and laboring to obtain a repast, they acquire strength, and a habit of
drawing, both of which are essentially necessary for their destined occupation.

Almost every kind of northern sea-fowl, frequent the coast and bays of
Kamtschatka: and, among others, the sea-eagles, but not in great plenty, as at
Oonalashka. The inland rivers are plentifully stored with various species of
wild ducks; one of which, called by the natives aangitche, has a most beautiful
plumage. Its cry is equally singular and agreeable.

Another species is called the mountain-duck, which according to Steller, is
peculiar to Kamtschatka. The plumage of the drake is singularly beautiful. A
variety of other water fowl were seen, which, from their magnitude, appeared to
be of the wild goose kind.

We observed, in passing through the woods, some eagles of a prodigious size,
but of what species we could not possibly determine. There are said to be three
different kinds. The first is the black eagle, with a white head, tail, and
legs; the eaglets of which are perfectly white. The second is improperly called
the white eagle, though in reality, it is of a light gray. The third is the
stone-coloured eagle, which is a very common sort. There are great numbers of
the hawk, falcon, and bustard kind, in this peninsula.

Woodcocks, snipes, and grouse, are also found here. Swans are very numerous,
and generally make a part of the repast at all public entertainments. The vast
abundence of wild fowl, in this country, was sufficiently manifest from the
many presents we received, consisting frequently of twenty brace at a time.

We saw no amphibious animals on the coast, except seals, which were in extreme
plenty about the bay of Awatska. The others were, at that time, pursuing the
salmon, that were ascending the rivers in large shoals. Some of them, it is
said, follow the fish into fresh water, and frequent all the lakes which have a
communication with the sea.

The sea-otters found here and those which we met with at Nootka Sound, are
exactly the same, and have already been particularly described. They were
formerly in great abundance here; but since the Russians have opened a trade
with the Chinese for their skins, where they bear a price superior to any other
kind of fur, the hunters have been induced to be so indefatigable in the
pursuit of them, that very few remain in the country. They are still found
amongst the Kurile Islands, though the number is inconsiderable; but they are
superior in quality to those of Kamtschaka or Nootka Sound. It is said, that
hardly a sea otter is now to be found on Mednoi and Beering's Island; though
Muller informs us that they were exceedingly plentiful in his time.

A great variety of amphibious sea-animals, are mentioned by the Russian
voyages as frequenters of these coasts; but as we saw no other kinds, this was
probably the season of their migration.

Fish is certainly the staple article of food among the inhabitants of this
peninsula; who cannot possibly derive any considerable part of their sustenance
either from agriculture or cattle. The soil, indeed, affords some wholesome
roots, and every part of the country produces great quantities of berries; but
these alone could not possibly support the inhabitants; though they are
extremely salutary, as being proper correctives of the putrescent quality of
their principal diet, dried fish. In short, fish may here be called the staff
of life, with more propriety than bread in any other country; for neither the
inhabitants, nor their domestic animals of the canine species, could possibly
exist without it.

Whales are frequently seen in this country, and, when taken, serve for a
variety of uses. Of the skins, the inhabitants make the soles of their shoes,
and belts and straps for many other purposes. The flesh is eaten, and the fat
is preserved for culinary uses, and feeding their lamps. The whiskers are
highly serviceable for sewing the seams of their canoes; nets are also made of
them for the larger kind of fish, and they shoe their sledges with the under
jaw-bones. Knives are formed from many of their bones; and the chains, which
fasten the dogs together, were formerly made of the same materials, though iron
ones are now generally used. After cleaning their intestines, drying them, and
blowing them like bladders, they deposit their oil and grease in them; and they
make excellent snares of their nerves and veins; in short, there is no part of
the whale that is not used in this peninsula.

We caught abundance of fine flat fish, trout, and herrings, from about the
middle of May, till the 24th of June, the time of our departure. At one hawl,
on the 15th of May, we dragged out upwards of three hundred flat fish, besides
a considerable quantity of sea-trout. The former are firm and well-flavoured,
studded with prickly knobs upon the back, like turbot, with dark brown streaks,
extending from the head toward the tail. The first herring season commences
about the latter end of May. They visit the coast in large shoals, but continue
there no considerable time. They quitted the bay before we sailed out of it the
first time, but were returning in October. It has already been remarked, that
the herrings here were excellent, and that many of our empty casks were filled
with them. Large quantities of extremely fine cod were taken, some of which
were also salted: and we caught, at different times, considerable quantities of
small fish, which had the appearance of smelts.

But notwithstanding this abundance of fish abovementioned, it is on the
salmon fishery alone that the inhabitants depend for their winter sustenance.
On this coast, all the species of these that are known to exist, are said to be
found; and which were formerly characterized by the different times of their
ascending the rivers. It is also reported that, though shoals of different
sorts are seen floating up the rivers at the same time, they avoid mixing with
each other; that they never fail to return to the river in which they were
bred, but not till the third summer; that they never live to regain the sea;
that particular species frequent certain rivers, and are not to be found in
others, though the sea receives them nearly at the same place.

About the middle of May, the first shoals of salmon enter the mouth of the
Awatska. This kind is called tchavitsi, by the Kamtschadales, and is the
largest and most esteemed. Three feet and a half is their usual length; and
they are more than proportionally deep; their average weight being from thirty
to forty pounds. The back is of a dark blue color, with black spots, and the
tail is perfectly straight. In all other respects, they resemble our common
salmon. They swim with such velocity along the river, that the water is greatly
agitated by their motion; and the natives, who are ever on the watch for them
at their accustomed time, are convinced of their approach by this circumstance,
and drop their nets immediately before them. One of the first that was taken
was presented to us, but not without acquainting us that it was the highest
compliment they could possibly confer upon us. We are informed, by
Krascheninicoff, that it was formerly the custom, among the Kamtschadales, to
eat the first fish they caught, in the midst of great rejoicings, accompanied
with many superstitious ceremonies; and that, after they became subjects of
Russia, it was long a matter of contention between them who should be entitled
to the first. Their fishing season, for this species, begins about the middle
of May, and continues till the end of ^une.

There is a smaller sort of salmon, weighing from about eight to fifteen
pounds, known by the name of the red fish, which assemble in the bays, and at
the mouths of the rivers, early in the month of June. From this time till
toward the end of September, vast quantities of them are taken upon the
eastern and western coasts, where the sea receives any fresh water; and also up
the rivers, almost to their very source. Their method of catching them in the
bay of Awatska, is as follows: One end of the net is fastened to a large stone
at the side of the water, after which they push off about twenty yards in a
canoe, dropping their net as they proceed; then they turn, and extend the other
part of the net in a line parallel on the shore. Thus prepared, they carefully
conceal themselves in the boat, looking earnestly for the fish, which usually
hover ab^^t the shore, and whose approach is known by a rippling in the water,
till they have proceeded beyond the boat. At that instant, they shoot the canoe
to shore, and are almost certain of enclosing their prey. One of these nets is
generally hawled by two men, with as much facility as our seines are managed by
a dozen, though our's are much smaller. We had very indifferent success with
our own method of hawling; but after receiving some friendly instructions from
the Kamtschadales, we were as successful as they were. Their mode of fishing in
the rivers, is to shoot one net across and haul another to it down the current.

All the lakes which communicate with the sea, abound with fish which have much
the appearance of salmon, and usually weigh about five or six pounds. The
natives, we understand, did not think it worth their labor to catch them.
These lakes being generally shallow, the fish become an easy prey to the bears
and dogs, in the summer season; and, from the quantities of bones appearing
upon the banks, vast numbers of them seem to have been devoured.

The natives dry the principal part of their salmon, and salt but very little
of it. They cut a fish into three pieces; they take off the belly-piece first,
and then a slice along each side of the backbone. The belly-piece, which is
esteemed the best, is dried and smoked; the other slices are dried in the air,
and either eaten whole as a substitute for bread, or pulverized for paste and
cakes. The head, tail, and bones, are dried and preserved for their dogs.

ANIMALS FOUND IN KAMTSCHATKA.
Argal^, ibex, rein, wolf, dog, Arctic fox, European fox, polar bear, in the
frozen sea only, bear, wolverene, common weasel, stoat, sable, common otter,
sea otter, varying hare, alpine hare, earless marmot, bobak marmot, water rat,
common mouse, oeconomic mouse, red mouse, ichelag mouse, foetid shrew, walrus,
common seal, great seal, leporine seal, harp seal, rubbon seal, ursine seal,
leonine seal, whale tailed manati. Kamtschatka had no domestic animals till the
Russians introduced them.

BIRDS FOUND IN KAMTSCHATKA.
Land Birds. Sea eagle, cinereous eagle, white-headed eagle, crying eagle,
osprey, peregrine falcon, goshawk, eagle owl, snowy owl, raven, magpie,
nutcracker, cuckoo, wrynech, nuthatch, white grous, wood grous, water ouzel,
fieldfare, redwing thrush, Kamtschatkan, green-finch, golden bunting, lesser
red-headed linnet, dun fly-catcher, sky-lark, wood-lark, white wagtail, yellow
wagtail, Tschutski wagtail, yellow wren, redstart long-billed stayzina,
Awatska, marsh titmouse, chimney-swallow, martin, sand-martin, European
goat-sucker. Water Fowl. Cloven-footed Water Fowl. Great tern, Kamtschatkan,
black-headed gull, kittiwake gull, ivory gull, arctic gull, tarrock,
red-legged, fulmar petrel, stormy petrel, kurile petrel, blue petrel, goosander
merganser, smew whistling swan, great goose, Chinese goose, snow goose, brent
goose, eider duck, black duck, velvet duck, shoveler, golden eye, harlequin,
mallard, pintail, long-tailed, mouillon, shield-rake, tufted, falcated,
garganey, teal, corvorant, red-faced corvoran^, crane, curlew, whimbrel, common
sand-piper, gambet, golden plover, pied oyster-catcher. Fowls with pinnated
Feet. Plain phalarope. Fowl with webbed Feet. Wandering albatross, razor-bill
auk, puffin, ancient, pigmy, tufted parroquet crested dusky, foolish guillemot,
black guillemot, imber diver, speckled diver, red-throated diver.

CHAP. VII.
Continuation of the general Account of Kamtschatka -- Its Inhabitants consist
of three Sorts -- Conjectures on their Origin and Descent -- Kamtschadales
discovered by the Russians -- Atlassoff makes the inhabitants tributary -- He
is disgraced, and afterward restored -- The Kamtschadales revolt -- Great
Havoc made among them by the Smallpox -- The Russian Government established
in this Country mild and equitable -- No Offense punishable with death -- The
Russian Commerce in Kamtschatka -- Habitations -- Dress -- Account of the
Kurile Islands, etc.

THE inhabitants of Kamtschatka may be said to consist of three sorts. The
Kamtschadales; the Russians, and Cossacks; and a mixture produced by their
intermarriages. We are informed by Mr. Steller, who was long resident in this
country, and who was indefatigable in endeavoring to acquire knowledge on this
subject, that the Kamtschadales are people of remote antiquity, and have
inhabited this peninsula for many ages; and that they doubtless descended from
the Mungalians: though some have imagined they sprang from the Tongusian
Tartars, and others from the Japanese.

He endeavors to support these opinions by the following arguments: That they
have no tradition among them of their having migrated from any other country;
that they believe they were created on this particular spot, by their great god
Koutkou, who prefers them to all his other creatures: that they are the
happiest of beings; and that their country far surpasses any other; affording
means of gratification which cannot be obtained in other regions. Further to
support his opinions, he says that they are perfectly acquainted with all the
plants which the peninsula produces, their qualities and their several uses; a
species of knowledge of too extensive a nature to be acquired in a short time:
that their instruments and utensils are totally different from those of any
other nation; and are made so inimitably neat and dexterous, as to be a
satisfactory demonstration that they were invented by themselves, and must have
been long in arriving at such a pitch of perfection: that before the Russians
and Cossacks came amongst them they had not the most distant knowledge of any
people, except the Koreki: that till very lately, they had not the smallest
intercourse with the Kuriles, and still later that they had any knowledge of
the Japanese; that being acquired by means of a vessel which was shipwrecked on
their coast: and he further adds, that when the Russians first got a footing in
the country, they found it extremely populous.

He supposes them to be descended from the Mungalians, from the words in their
language having similar terminations to those of the Mungalian Chinese; and
that, in both languages, the same principle of derivation is preserved: that
they are generally short, their complexions swarthy, the face broad, the nose
short and flat, the eyes small and sunk, the legs small, and they have many
other peculiarities which are to be observed among the Munlgalians. He
therefore concludes, that they fled to this peninsula for safety from the
rapacity of the eastern conquerors, as the Laplanders and others retreated to
the extremities of the north, from the advances of the Europeans.

The Russians, having made themselves masters of that vast extent of coast of
the frozen sea, established posts and colonies, and appointed commissaries to
explore and subject the countries still farther to the east. They soon
discovered that the wandering Koriacs inhabited part of the coast of the sea of
Okotsk, and they found no difficulty in making them tributary. These being at
no great distance from the Kamtschadales, with whom they had frequent
intercourse, a knowledge of Kamtschatka must naturally follow.

To Feodot Alexeieff, a merchant, the honor of the first discovery is
attributed, about the year 1648. That, being separated from seven other vessels
by a storm, he was driven upon the coast of Kamtschatka, where he and his
companions remained a whole winter, but they were afterward cut off by the
Koriacs. This was corroborated, in some degree, by Simeon Deshneff, who was
commander of one of the seven vessels, and was driven on shore near the mouth
of the Anidir. But, as these discoverers (if they really were so) did not live
to relate what they had discovered, a cossac, named Volodimir Atlassoff, is the
first acknowledged discoverer of Kamtschatka.

He was sent, in 1697, in the capacity of commissary, from fort Jakutsk to the
Anadirsk, with directions to call in the Koriacs to his assistance, in order to
discover, and make tributary, the countries beyond theirs. With sixty Russian
soldiers, and as many cossacks, he penetrated, in the year 1699, into the heart
of the peninsula, and gained the Tigil. In his progress he levied a tribute
upon furs, and proceeded to the river Kamtschatka on which he built an ostrog,
now called Verchnei; and, leaving a garrison of sixteen cossacks, returned, in
the year 1700, to Jakutsk with vast quantities of valuable tributary furs.
These he very judiciously accompanied to Moscow, and was rewarded for his
services by the appointment of commander of the fort of Jakutsk; at the same
time, received orders to return to Kamtschatka, with a reinforcement of a
hundred cossacks, ammunition, and whatever might conduce to the completion and
settlement of his new discoveries. Proceeding with his force toward the
Anadirsk, he perceived a bark on the river Tunguska, which proved to be laden
with Chinese merchandise. He immediately pillaged the vessel, in consequence of
which the owners remonstrated to the Russian court; he was seized on at
Jakutsk, and conducted to a prison.

All this time Potop Serioukoff, whom Atlassoff had left, enjoyed the quiet
possession of the garrison of Verchnei; and, though his corpse was too
inconsiderable to enforce the payment of a tribute from the inhabitants, yet he
had the address and management to traffic with them as a merchant, on very
advantageous terms. His conciliating disposition so far gained him the esteem
of the natives of Kamtschatka, that they lamented his departure, when he set
off to return to the Anadirsk. He and his party were, however, attacked by the
Koriacs, and unfortunately cut off in the year 1703. Several other commissaries
were successively sent in to Kamtschatka, during the disgrace and trial of
Atlassoff.

Atlassoff was restored to his command in 1706, and entrusted with the
management of a second expedition into Kamtschatka, after having received
instructions to ingratiate himself into the favor of the natives by all
peaceable and amicable means; but, on no consideration, to have recourse to
compulsive measures; but, so far from paying any attention to these
instructions, he rendered the natives extremely hostile to their new governors,
by repeated acts of cruelty and injustice; and even alienated the affections of
his, own people, insomuch that it created a mutiny of the cossacks, who
demanded a new commander.

The cossacks, having succeeded in displacing Atlassoff, took possession of his
effects; and having tasted the sweets of plunder, and living without discipline
or control, his successors were unable to reduce them to order and subjection.
No less than three successive commanders were assassinated. From that period,
to the grand revolt of the Kamtschadales in 1731, the history of this country
presents an unvaried detail of revolts, massacres, and murders, in every part
of the peninsula.

This revolt was principally occasioned by the discovery of a passage from
Okotsk, to the river Bo^choireka, made by Cosmo So^oloff. The Russians, before
this period, could enter this country only on the side of the Anadirsk; which
afforded frequent opportunities to the natives of plundering the tribute, as it
was conveyed out of the peninsula by so long a journey. But, when this
communication was discovered, the tribute could be exported with speed and
safety; and troops and military stores might now be imported into the very
heart of the country. The natives were convinced that this circumstance would
give the Russians so great an advantage over them, as must very shortly confirm
their dominion; and therefore they immediately resolved to make one grand
effort for their liberty.

Beering had, at this time, a small squadron on the coast, and had dispatched
what troops could be spared from the country, to join Powlo^tski, in an
expedition against the Tschutski. The time determined on, therefore, for
carrying their plan into execution, was when Beering should have set sail. This
was certainly a well-chosen opportunity; and it is matter of astonishment,
that, notwithstaning this conspiracy was so general that every native is said
to have had his share in it, the whole was conducted with such secrecy, that
the Russians had no suspicion that any hostile measures were meditating against
them.

They were equally judicious in planning their other operations. A strong body
was in readiness to prevent any communication with the fort Anadirsk, and
detached parties were scattered on the eastein coast, in order to seize any
Russians that might accidentally arrive from Okotsk. Things were thus situated,
when Cheekhaerdin, (who was then commissary) was escorted by the troops of the
fort, with his tribute, from Verchnei to the mouth of the river Kamtscha^ka,
where a vessel was to remove it, and convey it to the Anadir.

It was further resoved on, that the revolt should not commence, till this
vessel should be out at sea; and such resolution was communicated to the
different chiefs. In consequence of which the moment she disappeared, a most
dreadful massacre began. Every Russian and Cossack that could be found, was
immediately put to death, and their habitations were reduced to ashes. A large
party of them ascended the river Kamtschatka, took possession of the fort and
ostrog, which had just been quitted by the commissary, and slew all that were
in it; and all the buildings were consumed by fire, the fort and church only
excepted. Here they received information that the Russian vessel which had got
the commissary on board, was still remaining on the coast, and therefore
resolved to defend themselves in the fort.

Fortunately the vessel was drived back to the harbor; for, had she prosecuted
her voyage, the utter extirpation of the Russians must have ensued. The
Cossacks, on their landing, finding that their wives and children had been
murdered, and their habitations consumed by fire, were enraged almost to
madness. They proceeded immediately to the fort, and attacked it most
furiously; the natives defending it with equal resolution. The powder magazins
at length took fire, the fort was blown up, and, with it, almost every man that
was in it. Various rencounters and assassinations succeeded this event; till,
at length, two of the leaders being slain, and another (first dispatching his
wife and children) having put a period to his own existence, peace was again
established. From that period, no particular disturbances happened till 1740,
when a few Russians were slain in a tumult, but no farther consequences ensued;
and every thing has since gone on very peaceably, excepting the insurrection at
Bolceretsk, which has been already mentioned.

Though a great many of the inhabitants were lost, in quelling the rebellion of
1731, the country had afterward recovered itself, and was become as populous
as ever in 1767; when the smallpox was, for the first time, introduced among
them, by a soldier from Okotsk. It broke out with much fury, and was as
dreadful in its progress as the plague; seeming almost to threaten their entire
extirpation. Twenty thousand were supposed to have died by this filthy disorder
in Kamtschatka, the Kurile islands, and the Koreki country. The inhabitants of
whole villages were sometimes swept away; of which sufficient proof rem^ins.
There are eight ostrogs about the bay of Awatska, which we were told had been
completely inhabited, but now they are all become desolate, except St. Peter
and St. Paul; and only seven Kamtschadales, who are tributary, reside in that.
At the ostrog of Paratounca, no more than thirty-six native inhabitants remain,
including men, women, and children; though it contained three hundred and sixty
before it was visited by the smallpox. We passed no less than four extensive
ostrogs, in our journey to Bolcheretsk, which had not a single inhabitant in
either of them. The number of the natives is now so much diminished, and so
many Russians and Cossacks are continually pouring in upon them, and
intermixing with them by marriage, that, it is probable, very few of them will
be left in less than half a century. We were informed by Major Behm, that those
who at this time pay tribute, do not exceed three thousand, including the
Kurile islanders.

The number of military in the five forts of Nichnei, Verchnei, Tigil,
Bolcheretsk, and St. Peter and St. Paul, are about four hundred, including
Russians and Cossacks. Nearly the same number are said to be at Ingiga; which,
though in the north of the peninsula, is under the commander of Kamtschatka.
The Russian traders and emigrants are not very considerable.

The government established over this country by the Russians, considered as a
military one, is remarkably mild and equitable. The natives are suffered to
elect their own magistrates in their own mode, who exercise the same powers
they have ever been accustomed to. One of these, called a Toion, presides over
each ostrog, to whom all differences are referred; and who awards fines and
punishments for all offenses and misdemeanors; referring to the governor of
Kamtschatka, those who are the most intricate and enormous, not choosing to
decide upon them himself. The Toion also appoints a civil officer under him,
called a corporal, who assists him in his duty, and officiates for him in his
absence.

An edict has been issued by the empress of Russia, that no offense shall be
punishable with death. But we were told, that, in cases of murder (which rarely
happens here) the knout is inflicted with such severity, that the offender
seldom survives the punishment.

In some districts, the only tribute that is exacted, is a fox's skin; in
others, a sable's; and, in the Kurile isles, a sea otter's; but, as the latter
is considerably more valuable, the tribute of several persons is paid with a
single skin. The tribute is collected by the Toions, in the different
districts, and is so inconsiderable, as hardly to be considered in any other
light, than as an acknowledgment of the Russian dominion over them.

The Russians are not only to be commended for the mildness of their
government, but are also entitled to applause for their successful endeavor in
converting the natives to Christianity; there being now but very few idolaters
remaining among them. If we form a judgment of the other missionaries, from the
benevolent pastor of Paratounca, more suitable persons could not possibly be
engaged in this business. It may be necessary to observe, that the religion
inculcated here, is that of the Greek Church. In many of the ostrogs,
free-schools are established, for the instruction of the natives and Cossacks
in the Russian language.

The articles exported from this country, consist entirely of furs, and this
business is principally conducted by a company of merchants, appointed by the
empress. Twelve was the number of them originally, but three have since been
added to them. Besides certain privileges allowed them, they are distinguished
by wearing a gold medal, expressive of the empress's protection of the fur
trade. There are other inferior traders, chiefly Cossacks, in different parts
of the country. Whilst the principal merchants remain here, they reside either
at Bolcheretsk, or the Nishnei ostrog; the trade centering entirely in those
two places. This business was formerly carried on wholly in the way of barter,
but every article is at present purchased with ready money, no inconsiderable
quantity of specie being circulated in that wretched country. The furs produce
a high price; and the natives, from their mode of life, require few articles in
return. Our sailors brought a quantity of furs from the coast of America, and
were both pleased and astonished on receiving such a quantity of silver for
them from the merchants; but as they could not purchase gin or tobacco with it,
or any thing else that would afford them any degree of entertainment, the
roubles were soon considered as troublesome companions, and they were
frequently employed in kicking them about the deck. Our men received thirty
roubles of a merchant, for a sea-otter's skin, and in the same proportion for
others; but, understanding they had great quantities to dispose of, and
perceiving that they were unacquainted with traffic, he afterward procured
them at a much cheaper rate.

European articles are the principal that are imported, but they are not solely
confined to Russian manufactures. They come from England, Holland, Siberia,
Bucharia, the Calmucks, and China. They chiefly consist of coarse woollen and
linen cloths, stockings, bonnets, and gloves; thin Persian silks, pieces of
nankeen, cottons, hankerchiefs, both of silk and cotton; iron stoves, brass and
copper pans, files, guns, powder and shot; hatchets, knives, looking-glasses,
sugar, flour, boots, etc. We saw many of these articles in the possession of
one of the merchants, who came from Okotsk in the empress's galliot. These
commodities, we observed, sold for three times the sum- they might have been
purchased for in England. And, notwithstanding the merchants have so
extravagant a profit upon these imported goods, they receive still a greater
advantage from the sale of the furs at Kiachta, a considerable market for them
on the frontiers of China. In Kamtschatka, the best sea-otter skins usually
produce about thirty roubles a-piece; at Kiachta, the Chinese merchant gives
more than double that price, and disposes of them again at Pekin, for a much
greater sum; after which, an aditional profit is made of many of them at Japan.
If, then, the original value of a skin at Kamtschatka is thirty roubles, and it
is afterward trasported to Okotsk, thence by land thirteen hundred and
sixty-four miles to Kiachta, thence seven hundred and sixty miles to Pekin, and
after that to be transported to Japan, what a lucrative trade might be
established between Kamtschatka and Japan, which is not above three weeks sail
from it, at the utmost?

Furs of all kinds, exported from Kamtschatka across the sea of Okotsk, pay ten
per cent. duty, and sables twelve. And merchandise of all denominations,
imported from Okotsk, pay a duty of half a rouble for every pood, which is
thirty-six Fnglish pounds.

The export and import duties are paid at Okotsk; but the tribute which is
collected at Bolcheretsk, amounts to the annual sum of ten thousand roubles, as
we were informed by Major Behm.

Six vessels, of the burden of forty or fifty to^s, are employed by the
empress of Russia, between Okotsk and Bolcheretsk; five of them are occupied in
transporting stores, etc. from Okotsk to Bolcheretsk, except that some of them
go to Awatska and the Kamtschatka river, once in the space of two or three
years; the sixth answers the purpose of a packet-boat, and is always equipped
and in readiness to convey dispatches. About fourteen vessels are also employed
by the merchants in the fur trade, among the islands to the east. In the
harbor of St. Peter and St. Paul, we saw one of these froxen up, which was to
sail to Oonalashka when the season would permit.

It may be necessary to observe, that the principal and most valuable part the
fur trade, lies among the islands between Kamschatka and America. Beering first
discovered these in 1741, and as they were found to abound with sea-otters, the
Russian merchants sought anxiously for the other islands seen by that
navigator, south-east of Kamtschatka, named in Muller's map, the islands of St.
Abraham, Seduction, etc. They fell in with no less than three groups of
islands, in these expeditions. The first, about fifteen degrees east of
Kamtschatka; another, twelve degrees east of the former; and a third,
Oonalashka, and the neighboring islands.

These mercantile adventurers also proceeded as far as Shumagin's Islands, of
which Kodiak is the largest. But here they met with so warm a reception, for
attempting to compel the payment of a tribute, that they never ventured so far
again. The three groups beforementioned, however, were made tributary. The
whole sea between Kamtschatka and America is, according to the Russian charts,
covered with islands; for, as those who were engaged in these expeditions,
frequently fell in with land, which they supposed did not tally with the
situation laid down by preceding adventurers, they immediately supposed it to
be a new discovery, and reported it accordingly on their return; and, as these
vessels were usually out three or four years, and sometimes longer, such
mistakes could not immediately be rectified. It is pretty certain, however,
that only those islands which have been enumerated, have been discovered in
that sea, by the Russians, south of 6 latitude.

The sea-otter skins which are certainly the most valuable article in the fur
trade, are principally drawn from these islands; which being now under the
Russian dominion, the merchants have factors residing in settlements there, for
the sole purpose of bartering with the natives. To extend this trade, an
expedition was fitted out by the admiralty of Okotsk, to make discoveries to
the north and north-east of the above mentioned islands, and the command of it
given to Lieutenant Synd. But as this gentleman directed his course too far
SUMMER and WINTER HABITATIONS in KAMTSCHATKA.
north he did not succeed in the object of his voyage; for, as we never found a
sea-otter north of Bristol bay, they perhaps, avoid tho^^ latitudes were large
amphibious sea-animals are numerous. The Russians have not since undertaken any
expedition for making discoveries to the eastward; but they will, probably,
make an advantageous use of our discovery of Cook's river. Notwithstanding the
general intercourse between the natives, the Russians, and Cossacks, the former
are as much distinguished from the latter by their habits and disposition, as
by their features and general figure.

The persons of the natives having already been described, we shall only add,
that, in their stature, they are below the common height, which Major Behm
attributes to their marrying so very early; both sexes usually engage in the
conjugal state, at thirteen or fourteen years of age. They are exceedingly
industrious, and may he properly contrasted with the Russians and Cossacks, who
frequently intermarry with them, apparently for no other reason, but that they
may be supported in laziness and sloth. To this inactivity, may be attributed
those scorbutic complaints, which most of them are dreadfully afflicted with;
whilst the natives, who exercise in the open air, entirely escape them.

Their habitations consist of three distinct sorts; their jourts, balagons, and
log-houses, which are here called isbas; they inhabit the first in the winter,
and the second in the summer; the third are introduced by the Russians, wherein
only the wealthier people reside. The jourts are thus constructed. A kind of
oblong square is dug about six feet deep in the earth; the dimensions must be
proportioned to the numbers who are to inhabit it, for it is usual for several
to live together in the same jourt. Strong wooden posts, or pillars, are
fastened in the ground, at equal distances from each other, on which the beams
intended to support the roof, are extended; which is formed by joists, one end
of which rest upon the ground, and the other on the beams. Between the joists,
the inte^stices are filled up with wicker work, and turf is spread over the
whole. The external appearance of a jourt, resembles a round squat hillock. A
hole, serving for a chimney, window, and door, is left in the center, and the
inhabitants go in and out by the assistance of a long pole, having notches deep
enough to afford a little security for the toe. On the side, and even with the
ground, there is another entrance, appropriated to the use of the women; but if
a man passes in or out of this door, he becomes as much an object of ridicule,
as a sailor who descends through lubber's hole.

A jourt consists of one apartment, forming an oblong square. Broad platforms,
made of boards are extended along the sides, at the height of about six inches
from the ground; which serve them for sitting on, and on which they reposed;
first taking care to cover them with mats and skins. The fireplace is on one
side, and, on the other, their provisions and culinary utensils ar^ stowed.
When they make entertainments, the compliment is considered in proportion to
the heat of the jourts; the hotter they are made, the more gracious is the
reception of the guests considered. We always found them so extremely hot as to
be intolerable. They generally retire to their jourts about the middle of
October, and continue in them till the month of May is more than half expired.

To erect a balagan, nine posts are fixed into the earth, in three regular
rows, at equal distances from each other, to the height of about twelve or
thirteen feet from the surface. About ten feet from the ground, rafters are
laid from post to post, and securely fastened by strong ropes. The joists are
laid upon these rafters, and a turf covering completes the platform or floor of
the balagan. A roof of a conical figure is raised upon this, by means of long
poles, which are fastened to the rafters at one end, and meet together in a
point at the top. The whole is covered, or rather thatched, with a coarse kind
of grass. These summer habitations have two doors, placed directly opposite to
each other, to which they ascend by the same kind of ladders that are used in
the jourts. In the lower parts, which is left entirely open, they dry their
fish, vegetables, and other articles intended for the consumption of the
winter. Though six families usually live together in one jourt, a balagan is
seldom occupied by more than one at a time.

The isbas, or log-houses, are thus erected: Long timbers are piled
horizontally, with the ends let into each other, and the seams are filled up or
caulked with moss. Like those of our common cottages, the roof is slooping, and
thatched either with grass or rushes. Each log-house has three apartments in
the inside. One end may be said to be a kind of entry, which extends the whole
width and height of the house, and seems to be a kind of receptacle for their
bulky articles, as sledges, harness, etc. This has a communication with their
best apartment, which is in the middle, and is furnished with broad benches,
calculated both for eating and sleeping upon. A door leads from this into the
kitchen, almost half of which is taken up with an oven, or fireplace; which is
let into the wall that separates the middle apartment and the kitchen, and is
so constructed as to communicate the heat to both rooms at the same time. There
are two lofts over the kitchen and middle apartment, to which the inhabitants
ascend by a ladder placed in the entry for that purpose. Each apartment has two
small windows made of talc, and, among the inferior people, of fish-skin. The
boards and beams of their habitations, are smoothed only with a hatchet, for
they are strangers to the plane; and the smoke has rendered them of a deep
shining black.

A town is called an ostrong in Kamtschatka, and consists of several houses or
habitations of the various kinds abovementioned. Balagans are considerably the
most numerous; and it is remarkable that we never saw a house of any kind that
was detached from an ostrong. There are, in St. Peter and St. Paul, seven log
houses, nineteen balagans, and three jourts; Paratounca is nearly of the same
size, Karatchin and Natcheedin have not so many log-houses as the former, but
rather more balagans and jourts; whence may be concluded that such is the most
general size of an ostrong.

The dress of the Kamtschadale women having already been described, we shall
proceed to that of the men. The upper garment resembles that of a waggoner's
frock. If for summer wear, it is made of nankeen; if intended for winter, it is
made of a skin, (generally that of a deer or dog) having one side tanned, and
the hair preserved on the other, which is worn innermost. A close jacket of
nankeen, or some other cotton stuff, is the next under this; and beneath that,
a shirt made of a thin Persian silk, of a red, blue, or yellow color. They
wear also a pair of long breeches, or tight trowsers, of leather, reaching
below the calf of the leg. They have likewise a pair of boots, made of dog or
deer skin, with the hair innermost. They have a fur cap, having two flaps that
are usually tied up close to the head, but are permitted to fall round the
shoulders in bad weather.

The fur dress, which was presented by Major Behm's son to Captain King, is one
of those worn on ceremonious occasions by the Toions. It is shaped like the
exterior garment we have just described, and consists of small triangular
pieces of fur, chequered brown and white, and so ingeniously joined as to
appear to be of the same skin. A border, of the breadth of six inches,
curiously wrought with different colored threads of lerther, surrounds the
bottom, and produces a rich effect. A broad edging of the sea otter's skin is
suspended to this. The sleeves are ornamented with the same materials. An
edging of it also encircles the neck, and surrounds the opening at the breast.
It is lined with a beautiful white skin. And the present was accompanied with a
pair of gloves, a cap, and a pair of boots, executed with the utmost neatness,
and composed of the same materials. The Russians who reside in Kamtschatka,
wear the European dress; and the uniform worn by the troops here, is of a dark
green turned up with red. The people, situated to the north and south of this
country, being but imperfectly known, we shall give such information as we have
been able to acquire, respecting the Kurile islands, and the Koreki and
Tschutski.

The Kuriles are a chain of islands, extending from latitude 51 to 45, running
from the southern promontory of Kamtschatka to Japan, in a south-west
direction. The inhabitants of the neighborhood of Lopatka, who were themselves
called Kuriles, gave these islands the same name, as soon as they became
acquainted with them. Spanberg says they are twenty-two in number, exclusive of
the very small ones. The northernmost island, which is called Shoomska, is
about three leagues distant from the promontory Lopatka, its inhabitants
consisting of a mixture of natives and Kamtschadales. The next which is named
Paramousir, is considerably larger than Shoomska, and is inhabited by the real
natives; whose ancestors, they say, came from an island, called Onecutan, a
little farther to the south. The Russians paid their first visit to these two
islands in 1713, and added it to the dominions of the Empress. The others, as
far as Ooshesheer inclusive, are now made tributary, if we may rely upon the
information of the worthy pastor of Paratounca, their missionary; who pays them
a visit once in three years, and mentions the islanders in the most respectable
terms, extolling them for their generosity, hospitality, and humanity; and that
they excel their Kamtschadale neighbors as much in the gracefulness of their
persons, as in their docility and understanding.

Though the island of Ooshesheer is the farthest to the south, of any under the
dominion of Russia, yet they are said to trade to Ooroop, which is the
eighteenth in order; and is the only one that has a good harbor for vessels of
burden. Nadeegsda lies to the south of this, and is said to be inhabited by a
race of men who are remarkably hairy, and who live in a state of perfect
independence, like those of Ooroop Spanberg, speaking of these people, says,
their bodies are covered all over with hair, that they wear a loose striped
silk gown, and many of them have silver rings pendant from the ears. Their
being hairy all over the body, is also mentioned in the journal of the ship
C^stricom.
.

Nearly in the same direction, lie a group of islands, called J^so, by the
Japanese; a name also given by them to the chain of islands between Kamtschatka
and Japan. That called Matmai, which is the furthest to the south, belongs to
the Japanese, and has a garrison and fortifications on the side toward the
continent. The islanders of Kunachir, and Zellany, to the north-east of Matmai,
and three others, called the Three Sisters, still farther to the north-east,
are entirely independent. The inhabitants of Matmai barter with those of the
islands last mentioned, as well as with those of the Kuriles to the northward.

Many of the inhabitants of those islands that are under the dominion of Russia
are now converted to christianity. And perhaps the time is not far distant,
when all advantageous commerce will be carried on between Kamtschatka and this
extensive chain of islands, which may afterward produce a communication with
Japan itself. This intercourse may probably be facilitated by a circumstance
which Major Behm related, that several Russians, having been taught the
Japanese language, by two natives of that country, who had been shipwrecked on
the coast of Kamptschatka, had been sent among those islands. The advantages
that must infallibly accrue to the Russians, by establishing a commerce, with
the Japanese have been already adverted to, and are sufficiently obvious.

The Koreki country consists of two distinct nations, which are called the
wandering and fixed Koriacs. Part of the isthmus of Kamtschtka is inhabited by
the former, as well as all the coast of the Eastern Ocean, from thence to the
Anadir. The nation of the wandering Koriacs extends westwards toward the river
Kovyma, and along the north-east of the sea of Okotsk, as far as the river
Penskina.

The resemblance between the fixed Koriacs and the Kamtschadales, is very
striking; both countries too depend alike on fishing for subsistence. Their
clothing and habitations are equally similar. The fixed Koriacs are under the
district of the Ingiga, and are tributary to Russia.

The wandering Koriacs are wholly employed in breeding and pasturing deer, and
are said to have immense numbers in their possession; it being common for a
single chief to have a herd of four or five thousand. Deer is the food they
subsist upon, and have an aversion to every kind of fish. They erect no
balagans; their only habitations being somewhat like the Kamtschadale jourts,
except that, in winter, they are covered with raw deer-skins; and, in summer,
with such as have been tanned. Their sledges are drawn only by deer, and those
which are used in drawing them feed in the same pasture with the others. If
they are wanted, the herdsman makes use of a certain cry which is familiar to
them, which they obey quitting the herd immediately. The two nations of the
Koriacs, (as we were informed by the priest of Paratounca) and the Tschutski,
make use of different dialects of the same language; but it has not the
smallest affinity to that of the Kamtschadale.

The country inhabited by the Tschutski, is bounded by the Anadir on the south,
and extends to the Tschutskoi Noss. Their attention, like that of the wandering
Koriacs, confined chiefly to their deer, with which their country abounds. They
are a courageous, well-made, warlike race of people; and are formidable
neighbors to the Koriacs of both nations who often experience their
depredations. The Russians have long endeavored to bring them under their
dominion; and though they have lost a great number of men in their different
expeditions to; accomplish this purpose, they have never yet been able to
effect it.

CHAP. VIII.
Plan of further operations -- The ships, on quitting Awatska Bay, sail along
the Coast -- Achachinskoi Bay -- Cape Lopatka -- The Island of Shoomska -- The
Isle of Paramousir -- Observations relative to the Land of Jeso, Staten Island,
and the Company's Land -- Many Birds observed -- A violent Storm -- Position of
Zellany, Kunashir, and the Three Sisters -- De Gama's Land -- Ineffectual
Attempts to make the Land -- The Ships sail for Japan -- Various Parts of the
Japanese Coast described -- Cape Nambu -- Two Japanese Vessels observed --
Description of one of them -- Boisterous Weather -- Cape de Kennis -- Boomtje's
Point -- Low Point -- White Point -- Sanddown Point -- Prosecution of our
Voyage to China -- Violent Currents -- Quantities of Pumice-Stone -- Three
Islands discovered -- Sulphur Island described -- Steer for the Bashee Isles --
Fruitless Search for them -- The Island of Prata -- The Prata Shoal -- Some
Chinese Fishing-boats seen -- The Lema Islands -- Signal for a Chinese Pilot --
The Grand Ladrone Island -- Journals and other Papers of the Officers and Men,
relating to the History of the Voyage, delivered up.

AS the Lords of the Admiralty, in the instructions which they had given for
the regulation of the present voyage, had entrusted the commanding officer of
the expedition with a discretionary power, in case of not succeeding in the
discovery of a passage from the Pacific Ocean into the Atlantic, to make
choice, in his return to England, of whatever route he should judge best
adapted for the improvement of geography; Captain Gore desired, that the
principal officers would deliver their sentiments, in writing, relative to the
mode in which these instructions might most effectually be carried into
execution. The result of their opinions, which, to his great satisfaction, he
found unanimous, and perfectly agreeing with his own, was, that the condition
of our vessels, of the sails, cordage, etc. rendered it hazardous and unsafe to
make any attempt, as the winter was now approaching, to navigate the sea
between Asia and Japan, which would otherwise have opened to us the most
copious field for discovery: that it was therefore most prudent to steer to the
eastward of that island; and, in our way thither, to sail along Kuriles, and
examine, in a most particular manner, those islands that are situated nearest
to the northern coast of Japan, which are said to be of considerable extent,
and not subject to the Russians or Japanese. Should we have the good fortune to
meet with some secure and commodious harbors in any of these islands, we
supposed they might prove of considerable importance, as convenient places of
shelter for subsequent navigators, who might be employed in exploring the seas,
or as the means of producing a commercial intercourse among the adjacent
dominions of the two abovementioned empires. Our next object was to take a
survey of the coasts of the Japanese isles; after which we designed to make the
coast of China as far to the north as was in our power, and proceed along it to
Macao.

This plan of operations being adopted, Captain King was ordered by Captain
Gore, in case the two ships should separate, to repair without delay to Macao;
and on the 9th of October, about six o'clock in the afternoon, having cleared
the entrance of the bay of Awatska, we made sail to the south-eastward, the
wind blowing from the north-west and by west. A perfect calm ensued at
midnight, and continued till the noon of the following day; at which time the
light-house was at the distance of fourteen or fifteen miles, bearing north
half west; and Cape Gavareea bore south by west half west. Our present depth of
water being sixty and seventy fathoms, our people were very profitably engaged
in catching cod, which were extremely fine, and in great abundance. A breeze
springing up from the west about three o'clock in the afternoon, we steered to
the south along the coast.

A head-land now opened with Cape Gavareea, in the direction of south by west,
situated about twenty-one miles beyond it. Betwixt them are two narrow, though
deep inlets, which may perhaps unite behind what has the appearance of an
elevated island. The coasts of these inlets are rather steep and cliffy. The
hills, which break with abruptness, form chasms and valleys, that are
plentifully furnished with wood.

Between Awatska Bay, and Cape Gavareea, which lies in the longitude of 158 38,
and in the latitude of 52 21, there appear to be several inlets, which may, at
first sight, flatter the navigator with hopes of procuring shelter and good
anchorage: but we were assured by the Russian pilots, that there are none that
will admit vessels even of the smallest size, as the spaces which seem vacant,
between the lofty projecting head-lands, are filled up with low land.

We again, had a calm toward the evening: but, about midnight, a light breeze
sprung up from the north, which gradually augmented to a strong gale. On monday
the 11th, at noon, we were in the latitude of 52 4, and in the longitude of 158
31; Cape Gavareea bearing north by west a quarter west, and the southern
extremity south-west half west. We were now at the distance of nine or ten
miles from the nearest part of the coast* and perceived the whole inland
country covered with snow. A point of land toward the south, which we judged
to be in the latitude of 51 54, constituted the northern side of a deep bay,
distinguished by the name of Achachinskoi, in whose distant bottom we imagined
that a large river discharged itself, as the land behind appeared remarkably
low. To the southward of Achachinskoi Bay, the land did not exhibit such a
rugged and barren aspect, as was observable in that part of the country which
we had before passed.

We had variable winds during the night, accompanied with rain; but, the next
morning, at four o'clock, the wind began to blow with such violence from the
north-east quarter, that we were obliged to double-reef the topsails, and
thought proper to stand to a greater distance from the shore. About six
o'clock, the weather became more moderate and fair; in consequence of which we
again stood in for the land. Our latitude, at twelve, was 51, and our longitude
157 25. The most northerly land in view, being the point which we have already
mentioned as first opening with Cape Gavareea, was in the direction of
north-north-east. A head-land, having a flat summit, which is situated in the
latitude of 51 27, and forms the southern point of an inlet, named Girowara,
bore north a quarter east, and the most southerly land in sight was about
eightteen miles distant, bearing west three quarters north. We could, at this
time, faintly perceive low land extending from the southern extremity; but as
the wind shifted to the north-west, we were unable to obtain a nearer view of
it.

At six o'clock in the afternoon, we discerned, from the mast-head, Cape
Lopatka, which is the most southern extreme of Kamtschatka. This cape, which is
very low and flat, and gradually slopes from the elevated level land that we
had sight of at noon, bore west half north, at the distance of fifteen or
sixteen miles; and the high land, at the same time, bore north-west by west
half west. This point of land forming so distinguished an object in the
geography of the eastern coast of Asia, we were glad of an opportunity of
ascertaining, by accurate observations, its exact position, which is in the
longitude of 156 45, and in the latitude of 51. We perceived, to the north-west
of it, a very lofty mountain, whose summit was lost in the clouds. At the same
instant, the first of the Kurile islands, named Shoomska, ^^de its appearance,
in the direction of west half south.

The passage between Shoomska and Cape Lopatka, is represented by the Russians
as being one league in breadth, and extremely dangerous, as well on account of
the rapidity of the tides, as of the sunken rocks which lie off the Cape. The
coast, from Cape Gavareea to Lopatka, trends to the south-eastward. The land,
to the south of Achachinskoi, is not so elevated and broken as betwixt that bay
and the entrance of the bay of Awatska, being only of a moderate height toward
the sea, with hills rising gradually further inland. The coast is of
considerable steepness, and abounds with white chalky patches.

Having a calm at noon, we had an opportunity of catching some excellent cod.
Our depth of water, at this time, was forty fathoms; and our distance from Cape
Lopatka was between five and six leagues. During the night we stood to the
south-south-west under an easy sail, with a westerly wind. We sounded at
midnight, and found ourselves in sixty fathoms water.

On the 13th, at break of day, we descried the second of the Kurile Islands,
named Paramousir by the Russians, extending from west half south to north-west
by west. This land was exceedingly high, and almost wholly covered with snow.
At twelve o'clock, its extremes bore from west-north-west half west, to
north-north-west half west; and a lofty peaked mountain, from which some of our
people imagined they beheld smoke issuing, was at the distance of twelve or
thirteen leagues bearing north-west by west half west. Our latitude, at this
time, was 49 49 and our longitude 157. We observed in the course of the day,
several whales, and a considerable number of albatrosses and gulls.

The island of Paramousir is the largest of the Kuriles that are subject to the
dominion of the Russians; and is worthy of a more accurate survey, than we
were, on this occasion, enabled to take. For, in the afternoon, the westerly
wind increasing to a brisk gale, it was not in our power to make a nearer
approach to it than we had made at noon; we were, therefore, obliged to content
ourselves with endeavoring to determine its position at that distance. The
southern extreme of the island stands, according to our computation, in the
latitude of 49 58; the northern extremity we place in the latitude of 50 46,
and in the longitude of 10 west of Cape Lopatka; and as this situation does not
metarially differ from that which the Russians have assigned, it is in all
probability, very near the truth.

While we were abreast of Paramousir, we had a very violent swell from the
north-east-ward, though the wind had continued, for some time, in the western
quarter; a circumstance which more than once occurred to our observation during
the course of the voyage. In the night we sounded, but did not reach the bottom
with fifty fathoms of line. The two following days, the wind blowing fresh from
the west, obliged us to steer to the southward, and consequently prevented us
from seeing any more of the Kuriles.

On Saturday the 16th, at noon, our latitude was 45 27; our longitude, deduced
from many lunar observations taken during the three preceding days, was 155 30
and the variation was 4 30 east. In this situation, we were almost encompassed
by the real or pretended discoveries of prior navigators, and could not readily
determine to which we should direct our course. Toward the south and the
south-west, a group consisting of five islands, named Kunashir, Zellany, and
the Three Sisters, were placed in the French charts. According to the same
charts, we were now about ten leagues to the west of De Gama's Land, which, in
April last, we had passed to the eastward, at a distance somewhat less than the
present, without observing the least appearance of it; from which circumstance
it may reasonably be inferred, that, if such land has any existence, it must be
an island of very small extent. If, on the other hand, we adopt the original
position of this land, as fixed by Texeira, it was situated to the west by
south; and the Company's Land The Dutchman who sailed in the Castricom and
Breskes, had sight of this land, which they supposed was a part of the American
(...); but there now remains very little doubt of its being the islands of
Nadeegsda and Ooroop.
. Staten Island This land, which was also discovered by the Castricorn, seems,
from the situation assigned to it in the journal of that vessel, to be the
islands called the Three Sisters.
, and the land of Jeso, were likewise imagined to lie nearly in the same
direction.

With respect to the famous land of Jeso, which has, for so long a time, proved
a stumbling block to modern geographers, it may be observed, that it was first
brought to the knowledge of Europeans by the Castricom and Breskes. The name,
from the earliest accounts, appears to have been well known to the
Kamtschadales and Japanese, and indiscriminately used by them for all the
islands that are situate between Japan and Kamtschatka. It has been since
affixed to an extensive imaginary island, or continent, pretended to have been
discovered by the two Dutch ships abovementioned; and, therefore, it may not
perhaps, be deemed improper to take the grounds of this error into our
consideration. The expedition, in which those vessels were engaged, was
undertaken with a view of exploring the eastern coast of Tartary; but, a storm
separating the two ships, off the south-east point of Japan, they sailed along
the e^stern side of that island in different tracks; and, passing its northern
extreme, proceeding singly on their voyage. De Vries, commander of the
Castricom, steering a northerly course, fell in with land on the third day, in
the 42d degree of latitude. He sailed (according to the journal of the
expedition) along the south-eastern coast, in a continual fog, for the space of
about sixty leagues; and having brought his ship to anchor in several places,
had a friendly communication with the natives. Now, as the islands of Zellany,
Kunashir, and Matimai, appear, from the discoveries of Captain Spanberg, to
stand exactly in this situation, it is more than probable that they are the
same land; and the error of De Vries, in supposing them to be one continent
seems to be sufficiently accounted for from this circumstance of the fog,
without our adopting the supposition of an earthquake, by which Mr. Muller,
desirous of reconciling the general opinion with the later discoveries of the
Russians, imagines the several parts to have been separated. The journal
afterward mentions the discovery of Staten Island and the company's Land
respecting which we have already declared our sentiments. When they had passed
through the Straits of De Vries, (continues the journal) they entered an
extensive, wild, and tempestuous sea, in which they proceeded, with dark misty
weather, to the 48th degree of northern latitude; after which being driven to
the south by adverse winds, they again fell in with land, toward the west, in
the latitude of 45, which they still supposed was a part of the continent of
Jeso; whereas, if any person will examine Jansen's map of their discoveries,
which appears to be very accurate, he will not, we think, entertain a doubt of
their being, at this time, on the coast of Tartary. After they had traced this
land four degrees to the northward, they returned toward the south through the
same starits they had before passed.

But, to return to the narrative of our voyage; the having veered, in the
afternoon of the 16th, to the northward, we hauled round to the west. In the
course of this day we observed several albitrosses, fulmars, and numerous
flocks of birds, we also saw a number of fish, which were called grampuses by
our sailors; but we were rather inclined to judge, from the appearance of those
which passed close by our vessels, that they were the kasatka, or sword-fish,
mentioned by Krascheninicoff, who has given a curious account of their mode of
attacking the whales. In the evening, being visited by a small land bird, about
the size of a gold-finch, and not unlike that bird in plumage and shape, we
thought proper to keep a careful look out for land. However, upon our trying
for soundings at midnight, we did not strike ground with forty-five fathoms of
line.

The next day, at noon, our longitude was 154, and our latitude 45 7. The wind
again becoming westerly, we were under the necessity of steering a more
southerly course; and, about midnight, we had a fresh gale from the same
quarter, attended with heavy rain. In the course of the morning, we saw another
land-bird, and several flocks of petrels and gulls directing their course to
the south-westward.

The heavy north-east swell, which had constantly been observed by us since we
had passed Lopatka, now ceased, and suddenly changed to the south east. On the
18th, in the forenoon, we saw considerable quantities of rock-weed, from which,
as well as from the flights of birds already mentioned, we imagined that the
southernmost of the Kurile Islands was at no great distance from us; and, about
the same time, the wind shifting to the southward, we were enabled to steer for
it. At two o'clock, we set studding-sails, and stood to the westward; but, the
wind augmenting to a gale, we were quickly obliged to double-reef the
topsails; and, at midnight, we deemed it necessary to examine our depth of
water. We accordingly sounded; but, meeting with no ground at the depth of
seventy-five fathoms, we again bore away to the west, with the wind in the
south-east point.

This course we continued till two in the morning of the 19th, when the weather
becoming thick and gloomy, we hauled our wind, and stood to the south-westward
till five o'clock, at which time a violent storm reduced us to our coursers.
Though, from the unfavourable state of the weather, there was but little
probability of our making the land, our attention was still anxiously directed
to this object; and, on the appearance of daylight, we ventured to steer west
by south. We proceeded on the same course till ten o'clock in the forenoon,
when the wind suddenly veered round to the south-west, and was accompanied with
clear weather. Scarce had we availed ours^lves of this, by letting out the
reefs, and setting the topsails, when it began to blow with such vehemence,
that we were under the necessity of close-reefing again; and, about noon, the
wind shifting more to the west, we were prevented from continuing any longer on
this tack: we therefore put about, and stood toward the south.

Our latitude, at this time, was 44 12, and our longitude 150 40; so that,
after all our exertions, we had the mortification of finding ourselves,
according to the Russian charts, upon the same meridian with Nadeegsda, which
they represent as the most southerly of all the Kurile Islands, and about sixty
miles to the southward.

Though the violent and adverse winds that we had met with for the last six
days, had deprived us of an opportunity of getting in with these islands, yet
the course on which we had been obliged to proceed, did not prove altogether
destitute of geographical advantages. For the groupe of islands, comprehending
Zellany, Kunashir, and the Three Sisters, which, in the maps of Monsieur
D'Anville, are laid down in the track we had just crossed, are, by this means,
demonstrably removed from that position; and thus an additional proof is
obtained of their being situated to the west, where Captain Spanberg has placed
them, between the longitudes of 142 and 147. But this space being occupied, in
the French charts, by Staten Island, and part of the land of Jeso, the opinion
of Muller becomes highly probable, that they are all the same lands; and, as we
have no reason to call in question the accuracy of Spanberg, we have, in our
general map, re-instated Kunashir Zellany, and the Three Sisters, in their
proper situation, and have totally omitted the rest.

When we reflect on the manner in which the Russians have multiplied the
Islands of the Northern Archipelago, not only from the want of accuracy in
ascertaining their real position, but likewise from the desire natural to
mankind of propagating new discoveries, we shall not be surprised that the same
causes should produce similar effects. It is thus that the lands of Jeso, which
appear, as well from the earliest traditions among the Russians, as from the
accounts of the Japanese, to be no other than the southern Kurile Islands, have
been imagined to be distinct from the latter. De Gama's land is next on record;
and this was originally represented as being nearly in the same situation with
those we have just mentioned; but it was afterward removed, in order to make
room for Staten Island and the Company's Land; and, as Jeso, and the most
southerly of the Kuriles, and likewise possession of this space, that nothing
might be lost, the former had a place provided for it to the westward, and the
letter toward the east.

As according to the Russian charts, the isles of Kunashir and Zellany, were
still to the south, we entertained some hopes of being able to make them, and,
with this view, kept our head toward the west as much as the wind would
permit. At twelve o'clock, on the 20th, our latitude was 43 47, and our
longitude 150 30; and we were then standing to the west by south, with a gentle
breeze from the south-east, and, soon after, were, in all probability, not more
than four and twenty leagues to the east of Zellany; but this good fortune was
not of long duration: for, about three in the afternoon, the wind shifting to
the north-west point, began to blow with such violence, that we were brought
under our mizen stay-sail and fore-sail.

For the next twenty-four hours, we had heavy rain and vehement squalls; after
which, the weather becoming moderate, and the horizon being in some measure
clear we were enabled to set our topsails; but as the wind continued to blow
from the north west, all out attempts to make the land were rendered abortive,
and we were at length obliged to relinquish all further thoughts of discovery
to the northward of Japan. To this disappointment we submitted with the greater
reluctance, as our curiosity had been considerably excited by the accounts that
are given of the natives of these islands.

An accident befell the Resolution in the afternoon of the 21st; for the
leach-rope of her fore-top-sail gave way, and split the sail. As this had
frequently happened during the life of Captain Cook, he had, on such occasions,
ordered the foot and leach-ropes of the topsails to be taken out, and larger
ones to be fixed in their room; and these likewise proving incapable of
supporting the strain that was on them, it manifestly appears, that the just
proportion of strength between the sail and those ropes is extremely
miscalculated in our service.

This day a land-bird, somewhat larger than a sparrow, but greatly resembling
one in other respects, perched on our rigging, and was caught. The gale now
gradually abated; so that, on Friday the 22d, in the morning, we let out the
reefs of our topsails, and carried more sail. Our latitude, at twelve o'clock,
was 40 58. and our longitude 148 17; the variation 3 east.

During the afternoon, another land-bird pitched on one of our ships, and was
so exhausted with fatigue, that it suffered itself to be taken instantaneously,
and expired a few hours afterward. Its size did not exceed that of a wren; it
had on its head a tuft of yellow feathers, and the rest of its plumage was
similar to that of a linnet. The bird that we mentioned before as bearing a
great resemblance to a sparrow, lived a long time after it was taken.

These birds afforded clear indications, that we were not at any very
considerable distance from the land, and the wind, after varying for a little
time, settling at the north point in the evening, our hopes of falling in with
the land again revived, and we steered to the west-north-west; in which
direction were situated, at the distance of about fifty leagues, the
southernmost islands, seen by Captain Spanberg, and said to be inhabited by
hairy men. The wind, however, did not keep pace with our wishes, but blew in
such light airs, that we made little progress, till about eight o'clock the
following morning, when a fresh breeze sprung up from the south-south-west,
with which we continterd our course to the west-north-west till the evening.
The latitude, at noon, was 40 35; and the longitude deduced from several lunar
observations, was 146 45. The variation of the needle was 17 east.

In the evening, we had violent squally gales, accompanied with rain; and, as
we had, in the course of this day, passed some patches of green grass, and
observed a number of small land birds, a shag, and many flocks of gulls, we did
not think it consistent with prudence, having all these signs of the vicinity
of land, to stand on for the whole night. We, therefore, about midnight,
tacked, and for the space of a few hours, steered to the south-eastward.

On the 24th, at four in the morning, we again bore away to the
west-north-west, and carried a press of sail till about seven o'clock in the
evening, when the wind veered round from south-south-west to the north, and
blew a fresh gale. Our longitude, at this time, was 145 20, and our latitude 40
57.

This second disappointment in our attempts; to get to the north-westward, the
tempestuous weather with which we had been harassed, and the small probability,
at this season of the year, of its becoming more favorable to our designs,
were the motives that now induced Captain Gore finally to abandon all further
search for the islands situate to the northward (...), and to direct his course
to the west-south-west, for the northern part of that island.

The wind, during the night, shifted to the north-east, and blew a brisk gale;
and, at the same time, we had heavy rain, and hazy weather. On the 25th, at
noon, we were in the latitude of 49 18, and in the longitude of 144. Flights,
of wild ducks were this day observed by us; a pigeon lighted upon our rigging;
and many birds, resembling linnets, flew about the ships, with a degree of
vigor, that gave us reason to imagine they had not been long on the wing. We
also passed a piece either of bamboo or sugarcane, and several patches of long
grass. These indications of our being at no great distance from land,
determined us to try for soundings; but we could not reach the bottom with,
ninety fathoms of line. On the approach of evening, the wind gradually veered
round to the south, with which we continued our course to the west-south-west.

On Tuesday the 26th at break of day, we had the satisfaction of perceiving
high land toward the west, which proved to be Japan. At eight o'clock, it was
at the distance of ten or twelve miles, and extended from south by west to
north-west. A low flat cape, which apparently constituted the southern part of
the entrance of a bay, bore north-west three quarters west. Near the south
extremity, a hill of a conic figure appeared, bearing south by west three
quarters west. To the north of this hill, there seemed to be an inlet of very
considerable depth, the northern side of whose entrance is formed by a low
point of land; and, as well as we were enabled to judge by the assistance of
our glasses, has a small island near it toward the south.

Having stood on till nine o'clock, we had by that time approached within five
or six miles of the land, which bore west three quarters south. Our depth of
water was fifty-eight fathoms, with a bottom composed of very fine sand. We now
tacked, and stood off; but, as the wind failed us, we had proceeded, at noon,
to no greater distance from the shore than three leagues. This part of the
coast extended from north-west by north to south half east, and was principally
bold and cliffy. The low cape abovementioned was about six leagues distant,
bearing north-west by west; and the northern point of the inlet was in the
direction of south three quarters west. Our latitude, by observation, was 40 5,
and our longitude 142 28. The most northerly land in view, was supposed by us
to be the northern extreme of Japan The most accurate survey of the eastern
coast of Japan, appears to be that which was published by Jansen in his Atlas,
and compiled with a great degree of exactness from the Journals and Charts of
the Castricom and Breskes. We have, therefore, thought proper to adopt wherever
we could nearly ascertain the identity of the situations, the names affixed in
Jansen's map, to the corresponding head-lands and points, observed by us along
the coast.
. It is somewhat lower than the other parts; and, from the range of the
elevated lands, that were discerned over it from the mast-head, the coast
manifestly appeared to trend to the westward. The northern point of the inlet,
was imagined by us to be Cape Nambu; and we conjectured, that the town Jansen
calls the town Nabo.
stood in a break or the high land, toward which the inlet apparently directed
itself. The neighboring country is of a moderate elevation, and has a double
range of mountains. It is well furnished with wood, and exhibits a pleasing
variety of hills and dales. We perceived the smoke arising from several
villages or towns, and saw many houses in delightful and cultivated situations,
at a small distance from the shore.

While the calm continued, that we might lose no time, we put our fishing-lines
overboard, in ten fathoms water, but met with no success. This being the only
diversion which our present circumstances permitted us to enjoy, we very
sensibly felt the disappointment; and looked back with regret to the cod-banks
of the dismal regions we had lately quitted, which had furnished us with so
many salutary meals, and, by the amusement they afforded, had given a variety
to the tedious recurrence of the same nautical and astronomical observations,
and the wearisome succession of calms and gales.

At two o'clock in the afternoon, the wind blow fresh from the south, and, by
four, had reduced us to close reefed topsails, and obliged us to stand off to
the south-eastward; in consequence of which course, and the gloominess of the
weather, we soon lost sight of land. We kept on during the whole night, and
till eight o'clock the following morning, when the wind shifting to the north,
and becoming moderate, we made, sail, and steered a west-south-west course,
toward the land, which, however, we did not make before three in the
afternoon; at which time it was seen to extend from north-west half west to
west. The most northerly extremity was a continuation of the elevated land,
which was the southernmost we had observed the preceding day. The land to the
westward, we conjectured to be the Hose Tafel Berg (or High Table Hill) of
Jansen. The coast, betwixt the two extremes, was low, and could scarcely be
perceived, except from the mast-head.

We proceeded toward the coast till eight in the evening, when our distance
from it was about five leagues; and having shortened sail for the night, we
steered in a southerly direction, sounding every four hours; but our depth of
water was so great, that we did not find ground with a hundred and sixty
fathoms of line.

We again saw land on the 28th, about six o'clock in the morning. It lay twelve
leagues to the southward of that which we had seen the day before, and extended
from west by north to west-south-west. Steering south-west obliquely with the
shore, we saw, at ten o'clock, more land in that direction. To the west of this
land, which is low and level, were two islands, as we supposed, though some
doubts were entertained, whether they were not united with the neighboring low
ground. The haziness of the weather, as well as our distance, rendered it
likewise impossible for us to ascertain, whether there were not some inlets or
harbors between the projecting points, which here seemed to promise tolerable
shelter.

At noon, the northern extremity of the land in view bore north-west by north,
and a lofty peaked hill, over a steep head-land, was fifteen or sixteen miles
distance, bearing west by north. Our present latitude, by observation, was 30
16 and our longitude 142 9. The mean of the variation was found to be 1 20 east.

The land disappeared from our view between three and four o'clock in the
afternoon, and, from its breaking off so suddenly, we imagined, that what we
had this day seen was an island, or, perhaps, a group of island, situated off
the main land of Japan; but, as the islands called by D'Anville Matsima, and by
Jansen the Schildpads, though represented as being nearly in the same
situation, are unequal in extent to the land seen by us, we must leave this
point undetermined.

We continued our course to the south-west during the remainder of the day,
and, at midnight, found our depth of water to be seventy fathoms, over a bottom
of fine brown sand. We therefore hauled up toward the east, till the next
morning, when we again had sight of land, about eleven leagues to the south of
that which we had seen the preceding day. At eight o'clock, we were within the
distance of about two leagues from the shore, having had regular soundings from
sixty-five to twenty fathoms over gravel and coarse sand.

It unfortunately happened, that there was a haze over the land, which
prevented us from distinguishing small objects on it. The coast was straight
and unbroken, running nearly in the direction of north and south. The ground
was low toward the sea, but gradually swelled into hills of a moderate
elevation, whose summits were pretty even, and covered with wood.

About nine o'clock, the sky being in some degree overcast, and the wind
veering to the south, we tacked, and stood off to the eastward. Not long after,
we observed a vessel, close in with the land, standing to the north along the
shore; and we also saw another in the offing, coming down on us before the
wind. The reader will easily conceive, that objects of any kind, belonging to a
country so celebrated, and yet so imperfectly known, must have excited a
general eagerness of curiosity; in consequence of which, every person on board
came instantaneously upon deck, to gaze at them. As the vessel to windward
approached us, she hauled off to a greater distance from the shore; upon which,
being apprehensive of alarming those who were on board of her by the appearance
of a pursuit, we brought our ships too, and she sailed ahead of us, at the
distance of four or five furlongs. We might have spoken to them with great
facility; but Captain Gore, perceiving, by their maneuvers, that they were
highly terrified, was unwilling to increase their apprehensions; and, imagining
that we should have many better opportunities of communication with the
Japanese, suffered them to retire without interruption.

We were not sufficiently near this vessel, to remark any particulars
respecting the men on board of her, who seemed to be six or seven in number,
especially as the use of our glasses was precluded by the thickness of the
weather. According to the most probable conjectures we were enabled to form,
the vessel was of the burden of about forty tons. She had only one mast, on
which was hoisted a quadrangular sail, extended aloft by a yard, the braces of
which worked forwards. Three pieces of black cloth came halfway down the sail,
at an equal distance from each other. The vessel was lower in the middle than
at each end; and from her figure and appearance, we supposed, that she could
not sail otherwise than large.

The wind blew fresh at noon, and was accompanied with much rain. By three in
the afternoon, it had increased in so great a degree, that we were reduced to
our courses. The sea, at the same time, ran as high as any of our people ever
remembered to have seen it.

If the vessels of the Japanese are, as Koempfer has described them, open in
the stern, it would have been impossible for those which we saw, to have
endured the violence of this storm; but, as the appearance of the weather,
during all the former part of the day, had prognosticated its approach, and one
of the sloops had, nevertheless, stood a considerable way out to sea, it may
safely be inferred, that they are very capable of sustaining the fury of a gale
of wind. Spanberg has, indeed, mentioned two sorts of Japanese vessels; one
corresponding with Koempfer's description, while the other, which he
denominates busses, and in which, he says, the natives make voyages to the
adjacent islands, perfectly agrees with those that were seen by us.

About eight o'clock in the evening, the gale, without the smallest diminution
of its violence, shifted to the west, and, by producing a sudden swell, in a
direction contrary to that which had before prevailed, caused our ships to
strain and labor extremely. During the continuance of the storm, the
Resolution had several of her sails split. They had, indeed, been bent for such
a considerable time, and were worn so thin, that this accident had lately
happened in both our vessels almost daily; particularly when the sails were
stiff and heavy with rain, in which case they became less capable of bearing
the shocks of the boisterous and variable winds we occasionally experienced.

The gale at length abating, and settling in the western quarter, we steered a
southward course; and on Saturday the 30th, at nine o'clock in the morning, we
saw the land, extending from west by north to north-west a quarter west, at the
distance of fifteen or sixteen leagues. It showed itself in detached parts; but
we were not near enough to ascertain, whether they were small islands, or parts
of Japan.

At noon, the land extended from west to north-west; and the nearest part of it
was twelve or thirteen leagues distant, beyond which, the coast appeared to run
in a western direction. Our present latitude, by observation, was 36 41, and
our longitude 142 6. The point to the north, which we imagined was near the
southernmost land seen the preceding day, was supposed by us to be Cape de
Kennis; and the break to the south of this point, was thought to be the mouth
of the river, on which the town named Gissima is said to stand. The next cape
is, in all probability, that which is called Boomtje's Point in the Dutch
charts; and the most southerly one, off which we were abreast at noon, we
conjectured to be near Low Point (termed by Jansen Lage Hoeck, and placed by
him in the latitude of 36 40), and that our distance was too great to admit of
our seeing the low land, in which it probably terminates, toward the east.

The wind, in the afternoon, shifting to the north-east, we stood to the south,
at the distance of seventeen or eighteen leagues from the coast. As we passed
along, we tried for soundings, but did not find any ground with a hundred and
fifty fathoms of line.

On the 31st, at two o'clock in the morning, the wind veered round to the west,
and blew in violent squalls, accompanied with lightning and rain. In the course
of this day, several little birds of a brown plumage, resembling linnets, which
had been driven off the land by the strong westerly gales, flew about our
ships. On the approach of evening, the wind coming to the north-west point, we
directed our course, with the birds, to the west south-west, with a view of
regaining the coast.

The next morning, which was the 1st of November, the wind shifted to the
south-east, and was attended with fair weather; in consequence of which, we
obtained, with four different quadrants, forty-two sets of distances of the
moon from the sun and stars, each set comprehending six observations. These
nearly coinciding with each other, fix, with great accuracy, our situation, at
twelve o'clock this day, in the longitude of 141 32; the latitude, by
observation, being 35 17. In our reckonings of the 31st of October, we found an
error, with respect to latitude, of eight miles, and of seventeen in this day's
computations; from which circumstance, as well as from our being much more to
the east than we expected, we inferred, that there had been a violent current
from the south westward.

We again made the land toward the west, at two o'clock in the afternoon, at
the distance of twelve or thirteen leagues. The most southerly land in view,
which we imagined was White Point (or Wit Hoeck, placed by Jansen in the
latitude of 35 42), bore west-south-west half west. A hummock to the northward,
which had an insular appearance, bore north-north-west half west; and within
this we discerned from the m^st-head some low land, which we supposed to be
Sanddown Point, called Sanduynege Hoeck by Jansen, who has placed it in the
latitude of 35 55

We steered for the land till between five and six, when we hauled our wind to
the south. We observed, at this time, many Japanese vessels, close in with the
land, some standing along the shore, and others apparently occupied in fishing.
We now descried to the westward a mountain of extraordinary height, with a
round summit, rising far inland. There is no high ground in the neighborhood
of it, the coast being of a moderate elevation, and, as far as the haziness of
the horizon permitted us to judge, much broken and indented by small inlets.
But, to the south of the hummock island abovementioned, there appeared, at a
considerable distance up the, country, a ridge of hills, which extended toward
the mountain, and might perhaps join with it.

This being the most remarkable hill seen by us near the coast, we were
desirous of ascertaining its precise situation; but as we had only gained this
single view of it, we were obliged to content ourselves with such accuracy as
our circumstances would admit of. Its latitude we judged to be 35 20, and is
longitude 140 26* the latter being estimated by its distance from our ships, at
this time fifteen leagues.

As the coast of Japan, is represented, in the Dutch charts, as extending nine
or ten leagues to the south-west of White Point, we tacked at eight o'clock in
the evening, and stood off to the eastward, with a view of weathering that
point. We again tacked, at midnight, to the south-westward, under the
expectation of falling in with the coast to the south, but were surprised, at
eight the next morning, to see the hummock at no greater distance than three
leagues, in the direction of west-north-west. We were, at first, almost
inclined to doubt the evidence of our senses, and afterward began to suspect
some deception from a resemblance of land; but, at noon, we found, by
observation, that we were actually in the latitude of 35 43, at a time when,
according to our reckonings, it was 34 48. It therefore appeared, that during
the eight hours in which we imagined we had proceeded nine leagues to the
south-westward, we had really been carried eight leagues from the situation we
left, in a totally opposite direction; which occasioned, upon the whole, a
difference of seventeen leagues in our computation, in that inconsiderable
space of time. From this error, we estimated, that the current had set, at the
rate of at least five knots an hour, to the north-east by north. Our present
longitude was 141 16

As the weather had now a very threatening appearance, and the wind was at
sou^h-south-east, we thought it advisable to quit the neighborhood of the
shore, and stand off toward the east, that the ships might not be entangled
with the land. We were not deceived in our prognostications; for, not long
afterward, a heavy gale began to blow which continued till the succeeding day,
and was attended with rainy and hazy weather.

On Wednesday the 3d, in the morning, we found ourselves, by our reckoning, at
the distance of upwards of fifty leagues from the coast; which circumstance,
united to the consideratian of the very uncommon effect of currents we had
already experienced, the advanced period of the year, the variable and
uncertain state of the weather, and the small prospect we had of any alteration
for the better, induced Captain Gore to form the resolution of leaving Japan,
and prosecuting our voyage to China; particularly as he entertained (...),
that, since the track he intended to pursue had not yet been, explored, he
might perhaps find an opportunity of making amends, by some new and important
discovery, for the disappointments we had sustained upon this coast.

If any of our readers should be inclined to suppose that we relinguished this
object too hastily, it may be observed, in addition to the facts before stated,
that the coast of Japan, according to Koempfer's description of it, is the most
dangerous in all the known world Koempfer's History of Japan, vol. i. p. 92,
93, 94, and 102.
; that it would have been exceedingly hazardous, in case of distress, to have
run into any of the harbors of that country; where, if we may credit the most
authentic writers, the aversion of the natives to a communication with
strangers, has prompted them to the commission of the most flagrant acts of
barbarity; that our vessels were in a leaky condition; that the rigging was so
rotten as to require continual repairs; and that the sails were almost entirely
worn out, and incapable of withstanding the vehemence of a gale of wind.

As the violent currents, which set along the eastern shore of Japan, may
perhaps be attended with dangerous consequences to those navigators, who are
not acquainted with their extreme rapidity, we will here subjoin a summary
account of their direction and force, as remarked by us from the 1st day of
November to the 8th of the same month. On the 1st, at a time when we were about
eighteen leagues to the east of White Point, the current set, at the rate of
three miles in an hour, to the north-east and by north. On the 2d, as we made a
nearer approach to the shore, we observed that it continued in a similar
direction, but was augmented in its rapidity to five miles an hour. As we
receded from the coast, it again became more moderate, and inclined toward the
east. On the 3d, at the distance of sixty leagues from the shore, it set, at
the rate of three miles an hour, to the east-north-east. On the two following
days, it turned to the southward, and, at a hundred and twenty leagues from the
coast, its direction was south-east, and its rate did not exceed one mile and a
half in an hour. It again, on the 6th and 7th, shifted to the north-east, and
its force diminished gradually till the 8th, at which time we could no longer
perceive any current.

We proceeded to the south-eastward during the 4th and 5th of November, with
very unsettled weather, and much lightning and rain. On each of those days we
passed considerable quantities of pumice-stone, some pieces of which were taken
up by our people, and found to weigh from an ounce to three pounds. We imagined
that these stones had been thrown into the water, by eruptions at different
periods, as many of them were entirely bare, and others covered with barnaeles.
At the same time, we had a number of porpoises playing round our ships; and saw
several small land-birds, and two wild ducks.

At break of day, on Saturday the 6th, we changed our course to the
south-south-west; but, about eight o'clock in the evening, we were taken back,
and obliged to stand toward the south-east. The next day, at noon, we saw a
small land-bird. At this time our latitude, by observation, was 33 52, and our
longitude 140 42.

On the 9th, we had a great swell from the east-south-east; and our longitude
was 146 20, and latitude 31 46. In the course of this day, we observed another
little land-bird, a tropic bird, some flying-fish and porpoises. The wind
blowing from the northward, we continued to steer a south-west course, without
any memorable occurrence, till Friday the 12th, when, from the same quarter, a
most violent gale arose, which reduced us to the mizen stay-sail and fore-sail.
The weather being, at the same time, so hazy, that we could, not see a cable's
length before us, and a number of shoals and small islands being represented,
in our charts, as lying in this part of the ocean, we brought to, with our
heads turned to the south-west. This day, at noon our latitude, by account, was
27 36, and our longitude I44 25.

On the 13th, in the morning, the wind veered, to the north-west point, and was
accompanied with fair weather; but though we were at present, nearly in the
situation attributed to the island of St. Juan, we perceived no appearance of
land. We now bore away toward the south-west, and set our top-sail^, the gale
still blowing with considerable violence. At twelve o'clock, our latitude, by
observation, was 26, our longitude 143 40, and the variation 3 50 east. In the
afternoon we saw some albatrosses and tropic birds; also several dolphins and
fly-fish.

We continued to pass much pumice-stone; the amazing quantities of which
substance, floating in the sea betwixt Japan and the Bashee Isles, give reason
to suppose, that in this, quarter of the Pacific Ocean, some great volcanic
convulsion must have happened; and, consequently, afford some degree of
probability to the opinion of Mr. Muller, (which we have mentioned in a former
part of this chapter) relative to the separation of the continent of Jeso, and
the disappearance of Staten Island, and the Company's Land.

About six o'clock in the afternoon, we steered to the west-south-west, Captain
Gore deeming it useless to stand any longer toward the south-south-west, as we
were nearly in the same meridian with the Ladrones, or Marianne Islands, and at
no very considerable distance from the track of the Manilla galleons.

In the morning of Saturday the 14th, we had fine weather, and the wind, which
blew moderately, shifted by degrees to the north-east point, and proved to be
the trade-wind. At ten o'clock Mr. Trevenen, one of the young gentlemen who
accompanied Captain King in the Discovery, after the death of Captain Clerk,
saw land in the direction of south-west, which had the appearance of a peaked
mountain. At noon, the longitude was 142 2, and the latitude 24 37.

The land in view, which we now discovered to be an island, was nine or ten
leagues distant, bearing south-west half west; and, at two o'clock in the
afternoon, we descried another to the west-north-westward. This second island,
when viewed at a distance, appears like two; the southern point consisting of a
lofty hill of a conic figure, united by a narrow neck to the northern land,
which is of a moderate elevation. This island being manifestly of greater
extent than that to the southward, we directed our course toward it. At four
o'clock, it bore north-west by west; but, as we had not sufficient daylight to
examine its coast, we stood, during the night, upon our tacks.

The next morning, at six, we made sail for the southern point of the larger
island; and, about this time, discovered another high island, in the direction
of north three quarters west; the island to the southward being on the same
rhomb line, and the south extreme of the island ahead bearing west by north.
At nine o'clock, we were abreast of the middle island, and within the distance
of a mile from it; but Captain Gore, finding that a boat could not land without
running some risque from the heavy surf that broke against the shore, continued
his course to the westward. The latitude at noon, by observation, was 24 50,
and the longitude 140 56

The length of this island, in the direction of south-south-west and
north-north-east, is about five miles. Its south point is an elevated barren
hill* rather slat at the summit, and when seen from the west-south-west,
exhibits an evident volcanic crater. The sand, ea^^^ or rock, (for it was
difficult to distinguish of which of these substances its surface was composed)
displayed various colors; and we imagined that considerable part was sulphur,
not only from its appearance to the eye, but from the strong sulphurous smell
perceived by us in our approach to the point. The Resolution having passed
nearer the land, several of the officers of that ship thought they discerned
steams proceeding from the top of the hill. These circumstances induced Captain
Gore to bestow on this discovery the appellation of Sulphur Island.

A low and narrow neck of land unites the hill we have just described, with the
south end of the island, which extends itself into a circumference of between
three and four leagues. The part bordering on the isthmus has some bushes upon
it, and presents an aspect of verdure; but those parts that are situate to the
north-east are extremely barren, and abound with large detached rocks, many of
which are of great whiteness. Some very dangerous breakers extend about two
miles and a half to the eastward, and two miles to the westward, off the middle
part of the island, against which the sea breaks with a great degree of
violence.

The north and south islands had the appearance of single mountains, of a
considerable elevation; the former was peaked, and of a (...) form; the latter
more square and flat at the summit.

Sulphur Island we judge to be in the latitude of 24 48, and the longitude of
141 12. The north island we place in the latitude of 25 14, and in the
longitude of 141 10; and the south island in the latitude of 24 22, and the
longitude of 141 20.

Captain Gore now thought proper to direct his course to the west-south-west,
for the Bashee Isles, with the hopes of procuring, at them, such a supply of
refreshments as might render it less necessary to continue long at Macao, These
islands received a visit from Captain Dampier, who has given a very favorable
account, as well of the civility of the natives, as of the abundance of hogs
and vegetables, with which the country is furnished. They were afterward seen
by Commodore Byron and Captain Wallis, who passed them without landing.

For the purpose of extending our view in the daytime, our ships sailed at the
distance of between two and three leagues from each other; and, during the
night, we proceeded under an easy sail; so that it was scarcely possible to
avoid observing any land that lay in the vicinity of our course. In this manner
we continued our progress, without any interesting occurrence, having a fresh
breeze from the north east, till Monday the 22d, when it augmented to a strong
gale, with vehement squalls of wind and rain, which reduced us to close-reefed
topsails.

The following day, at twelve o'clock, our latitude, by account, was 21 5, and
our longitude 123 20. About six in the afternoon, being at the distance of only
one and twenty leagues from the Bashee Islands, according to their position in
Mr. Dalrymple's map, and the weather being squally, with a thick haze, we
handed the fore-top-sail, and hauled our wind toward the north-north-west.

On the 24th, we had constant rain during the whole day, and the weather was
still very tempestuous; a heavy sea rolled down upon us from the northward,
and, in the course of the afternoon, we had vivid flashes of lightning from the
same quarter. We continued to stand to the north-north-west till nine, when we
tacked, and steered to the south-south-eastward, till four o'clock in the
morning of Thursday the 25th, at which time we wore. In the night there was an
eclipse of the moon; but we were prevented by the rain from making any
observation. It unfortunately happened, that one of the Discovery's people,
being occupied, at the time of the greatest darkness, in stowing the main
topmast stay-sail, fell overboar, but immediately catching hold of a rope,
which was providentally hanging out of the fore-chains into the sea, and the
ship being brought into the wind without delay, he was got on board with no
other hurt than a trifling bruise on one of his shoulders.

The weather becoming clear at eight o'clock we bore away, but the wind still
blew with such violence, that we did not carry any other sail than the
fore-sail, and the main-top-sail close reefed. We observed, about this time, a
sugar-cane, and a land-bird that resembled a thrush. At noon, our longitude was
121 35, and our latitude 21 35.

Our present situation, with respect to longitude, being to the west of the
Bashee Isles, according to Mr. Dalrymple's charts, we perceived that Captain
Gore was influenced, in the course he was now steering, by the sentiments of
Commodore Byron and Captain Wallis, with whom he had sailed when they passed
these islands, which are placed by the former near four degrees to the
westward, or in the longitude of 118 14. In consequence of this opinion, we
stood toward the south at two o'clock in the afternoon, with an intention of
getting into the same parallel of latitude with the Bashees, before we should
r^n down our longitude. We had nearly arrived in that situation by six o'clock,
and ought, in consequence, to have been within sight of the land, according to
the account of Captain Wallis, who places these islands near three degrees more
to the east than Commodore Byron.

The fury of the gale had not, at this time, received the least diminution; and
Captain Gore, being still of opinion that the Bashees were situated to the
westward, brought the ships too, with their heads turned toward the
north-west, under the fore-sail and balanced mizen.

On the 26th, about six in the morning, the wind having, in a great measure,
abated, we set our topsails, let out the reefs, and bore away to the westward.
At twelve o'clock, our latitude, by observation, was 21 12, and our longitude
120 25. In the course of this day, we saw many tropic birds, and a flock of
ducks; also porpoises and dolphins; and continued to pass several
pumice-stones. We spent the night on our tacks; and the following morning, at
six o'clock, we again made sail to the west, in search of the Bashee Isles.

Captain King began now to entertain apprehensions, lest, in the prosecution of
our search for those islands, we should get so far to the south as to be under
the necessity of passing to leeward of the Pratas; in which case, it might have
proved extremely difficult for such bad-sailing vessels as ours to fetch Macao,
especially if the wind should continue to blow (as it now did) from the
north-north-east and north. The Captain having some doubts whether Mr.
Dalrymple's maps were on board the Resolution, made sail and hailed her; and
having informed Captain Gore of the situation of these shoals, and his
apprehensions of being driven too much to the southward, the latter gave him to
understand, that he should continue his course during that day, being still not
without hopes of finding Mr. Byron's longitude right; and therefore ordered
Captain King to spread a few miles to the south.

The weather, at twelve o'clock, became hazy: the latitude, at that time, was
21 2, and the longitude 118 30. At six in the afternoon, having got to the west
of the Bashee Islands, according to Admiral Byron's account, Captain Gore
hauled his wind to the north-westward, under an easy sail, the wind blowing
with great vehemence, and there being every prospect of a tempestuous night.

On the 28th, at four o'clock in the morning, the Resolution, which was then a
half a mile ahead of the Discovery, wore, and the crew of the latter ship at
the same time, perceived breakers close under their lee. On the approach of
daylight, we had sight of the island of Prata; and, between the hours of six
and seven, we stood toward the shoal, but finding ourselves unable to weather
it, we bore away, and ran to leeward. As we passed along the south side, within
the distance of a mile from the reef, we saw two remarkable patches on the edge
of the breakers, that had the appearance of wrecks.

At noon, the latitude discovered by double altitudes, was 20 39; and the
longitude was 116 45. The island of Prata was now three or four leagues
distant, bearing north three quarters east. Near the southern extremity of the
island, and on the south-western side of the reef, we imagined that we saw,
from the mast-head, several openings in the reef, which seemed to promise
secure anchorage.

The extent of the Prata shoal is considerable; for it is about six leagues
from north to south, and extends three or four leagues to the east of the
island; its limits to the westward we had not an opportunity of ascertaining.
We judge its north-eastern extremity to be in the latitude of 20 58, and the
longitude of 117; and its south-west end we place in the latitude of 20 45, and
the longitude of 116 44.

We carried a press of sail during the remainder of the day, and kept the wind,
which now blew from the north-east by north, in order to secure our passage to
Macao. It was a fortunate circumstance, that the wind favored us toward the
evening, by veering two points more to the eastward; for, if the wind and
weather had continued the same as they had been in the preceding week, we think
we should scarcely have been able to have fetched that port, in which case we
must have repaired to Batavia; a place we had good reason to dread, from the
terrible havoc which the unhealthiness of the climate had occasioned among the
crews of the former vessels that had been employed in voyages of discovery, and
had touched there.

In the morning of Monday the 29th, we passed some Chinese fishing-boats, the
crews of which eyed us with marks of great indifference. In fishing, they make
use of a large dredge-net, resembling a hollow cone in shape, with a stat iron
rim fixed to the lower part of its mouth. The net is fastened with cords to the
head and stern of the boat, which being left to follow the impulse of the wind,
draws the net after it, with the iron rim dragging along the bottom. We found
the sea, to to our great regret, covered with the wrecks of boats which had
been lost, as we supposed, in the late stormy weather.

Our latitude at twelve o'clock, by observation, was 22 1; and, since the
preceding noon, we had run a hundred and ten miles upon a north-west course. As
we were now nearly in the latitude of the Lema Islands, we made sail to the
west by north, and, after we had proceeded two and twenty miles, descried one
of them nine or ten leagues to the west.

At six in the afternoon, the extremes of the islands in view were in the
direction of north-north-west, half west, and west-north-west half west; and we
were four or five leagues distant from the nearest; our soundings being
twenty-two fathoms, over a muddy bottom. We now slackened sail, and kept upon
our tacks for the night. The Grand Lema, according to Mr. Bayly's time-keeper,
bore, from the island of Prata, north 60 west, a hundred and fifty-three miles;
and, by our run, north 57 west, a hundred and forty-six miles.

The next morning, we ran along the Lema Isles, which, like the other islands
situated on this coast, are destitute of wood, and, as far as we had an
opportunity of observing, devoid of cultivation. About nine o'clock, a Chinese
boat, which had before been with the Resolution, came along-side the Discovery,
with offers of a pilot, which, however, Captain King declined, as it was
incumbent upon him to follow his consort. Not long afterward, we passed the
westernmost of the Lema rocks; but, instead of hauling up to the north of the
Grand Ladrone Island, as was done by Lord Anson in the Centurion, we sailed to
leeward.

We scarcely think it necessary to caution the navigator against taken this
course, as the danger is sufficiently manifest; for, if the wind should blow
violently, and the current set with it, it will be highly difficult to fetch
Macao. We might, indeed, by the direction of Mr. Dalrymple's chart, have safely
gone either between the Lema Islands, or entirely to the northward of them, and
have had the wind savourable for our reaching Macao. From our apprehensions of
missing that port, and being obliged to repair to Batavia, added to the strong
and ardent desires of hearing intelligence from Europe, we were the more
inclined to rejoice on observing the Resolution soon after fire a gun, and
display her colors as a signal, for a pilot. On the repetition of the signal,
there was an excellent race between four Chinese boats; and Captain Gore
engaged with the person who arrived first, to conduct the ship to the Typa, for
the sum of thirty dollars, sending word, at the same time, to Captain King,
that, as he could easily follow him with the Discovery, that expense might be
saved to him.

In a short time afterward, a second pilot getting on board the Resolution,
insisted on guiding the ship; and immediately laying hold of the wheel, began
to order the sails to be trimmed. This gave rise to a violent altercation,
which was at length compromised, by their agreeing to divide the money between
them.

At twelve o'clock, our latitude, by observation, was 21 57 north, and our
longitude 114 2 east. The Grand Ladrone island was, at this time, four miles
distant, extending from north-west half north to north half west. The land,
whose bearings we have here mentioned, was supposed by us to be one island; but
we afterward found that the western part was an island laid down in Mr.
Dalrymple's chart of part of the Chinese coast, etc. which we had not at
present on board.

In pursuance of the instructions which had been given to Captain Cook by the
Lords of the Admiralty, it now became necessary to desire the officers and men
to deliver up their journals, and all other papers they might have in their
possession, relative to the history of the voyage. Some degree of delicacy, as
well as firmness, seemed to be requisite in the execution of these orders. Our
commanders could not be ignorant, that most of the officers, and several of the
seamen, had amused themselves, in their leisure hours, with writing accounts of
our proceedings, for the purpose of gratifying their friends, or for their own
private satisfaction; which they might not wish to have submitted, in their
present form, to the inspection of strangers. On the other hand, the Captains
could not, consistently with the instructions they had received, leave papers
in their custody, which, either by accident or design, might fall into the
hands of printers and thus give rise to such spurious and imperfect narratives
of our voyage, as might tend to the disparagement of our labors, and perhaps,
to the prejudice of officers, who might, though injustly, incur the suspicion
of having been the authors of such publications.

Captain King, therefore, assembled the Discovery's people on deck, and
informed them of the orders that had been received, and the reasons which, in
his opinion, ought to induce them to yield a perfect obedience. He, at the same
time, gave them to understand, that whatever papers they wished not to have
sent to the Lords of the Admiralty, should be sealed up in their own presence
and preserved in his custody, till the intentions of their Lordships,
respecting the publication of the history of the voyage, were accomplished;
after which, he said, they should be faithfully restored to them.

Captain King had the satisfaction to find, that his proposals met with the
approbation, and the ready compliance, not only of the officers, but also of
the rest of the ship's company; and every scrap of paper, that contained an
account of any transactions relating to the present voyage, was immediately
given up. The Captain observes upon this occasion, that it is but doing justice
to the seamen of this ship to declare, that they were the best disposed, and
the most obedient men he ever knew, though the greatest part of them were very
young, and had never served before in a ship of war.

Captain Gore made the same proposals to the people of the Resolution, who
instantly complied with them, and delivered up all their papers which had any
reference to the voyage.

CHAP. IX.
Ignorance of the Chinese Pilot -- The ships approach Macao -- Account of the
Isle of Potoe -- A Chinese Comprador comes on board -- Captain King dispatched
to Macao to visit the Portuguese Governor -- Dependent State of the Portuguese
at Macao -- Effects of the Intelligence we received respecting European Affairs
-- Alarms occasioned at Canton -- Our ships anchor in the Typa -- Captain King,
his second Lieutenant, etc. proceed to Canton -- Bocca Tigris -- Wompi^ -- A
Sampane, or Chinese Boat, described -- Mr. King's Reception at the English
Factory at Canton -- An Instance of the suspicious Character of the Chinese --
Their Method of trading exemplified -- Observations relative to the City of
Canton -- Its Population -- Number of Sampanes -- Military Force of the
province of Quantong -- Streets and Houses of Canton described -- Of the
English Supercargoes -- Captain King visits a Chinese of the first Distinction
at Canton -- His Return to Macao -- Great Demand for the Sea-Otter Skins --
Earnest Desire of our Seamen to return to Cook's River for Skins -- Plan of a
Voyage for opening a Fur Trade on the Western Coast of North America, and
making further Discoveries in the Neighborhood of China and Japan -- Nautical
Observations -- Price of Provisions at Canton.

WE continued working to windward till about six o'clock in the afternoon, when
we let go our anchors, by the direction of the Chinese pilot on board the
Resolution, who was of opinion, that the tide was now se^ting against us. In
this particular, however, he was greatly deceived; for, upon our making the
experiment, we discovered, that it set toward the north till ten o'clock. The
next morning* (Wednesday the 1^t of December) he fell into an error of a
similar kind; for, at five, on the appearance of slack water, he directed that
we should get under way; but the ignorance he had before manifested had put us
upon our guard. We were therefore willing to be convinced, by our own
observations, before we weighed anchor; and, on examining the tide, we found a
strong under-tow, in consequence of which we were obliged to keep fast till
eleven o'clock. It appears from these circumstances, that the tide had run down
for the space of twelve hours.

We stood on our tacks, during the afternoon, between the Grand Ladrone and the
island of Potoe, having passed to the east of the latter. The tide beginning to
ebb at nine o'clock, we again cast anchor in six fathoms water; the town of
Macao being at the distance of nine or ten miles, in a north-west direction;
and the isle of Potoe bearing south half west, six or seven miles distant.

Potoe is situated about two leagues to the north-north-west of that island,
which, as we have already mentioned, we at first considered as a part of the
Grand Ladrone. It is rocky, and of small extent; and off its western extremity
there is said to be foul ground, though, when we passed near it, we did not
perceive any.

On the 2d of December, in the morning, one of the Chinese contractors, who are
known by the appellation of Compradors, came on board the Resolution, and sold
to Captain Gore as much beef as weighed two hundred pounds, together with a
considerable quantity of eggs, oranges, and greens. The Discovery received a
proportional share of these articles; and an agreement was made with the
comprador to provide us a daily supply, for which, however, he insisted on our
paying him beforehand.

As our pilot now pretended that he could conduct the ships no further, Captain
Gore was under the necessity of discharging him; and we were left to our own
guidance and direction. At two o'clock in the afternoon, the tide flowing, we
took up our anchors, and worked to windward; and, at seven, anchored again in
three fathoms and a half of water; at which time Macao bore west, at the
distance of one league. This was, indeed, a very ineligible situation; for it
was exposed to the north-east, and had shoal water, not exceeding two fathoms
and a half in depth, to leeward; but as, in the narrative of Lord Anson's
voyage, no nautical description is given of the harbor wherein the Centurian
anchored, and Mr. Dalrymple's general map was on too small a scale to be of
much service in directing us, our ships were obliged to continue there during
the whole night.

Captain Gore, in the evening, dispatched Captain King to Macao, to pay a visit
to the Portuguese Governor, and to request the favor of his assistance in
supplying our people with provisions, which he imagined might be done on more
moderate terms than the Comprador would undertake to furnish them. Captain
King, at the same time, took an account of the naval stores, of which both our
ships were in great want, with an intention of repairing immediately to Canton,
and making application to the servants of our East India company, who resided
there at that time.

Upon Mr. King's arrival at the citadel, he was informed by the fort-major,
that the governor was indisposed, and was therefore unwilling to receive
visitors, but that we might depend on meeting with every assistance in their
power. This, however, Mr. King understood would be very inconsiderable, since
they were perfectly dependent on the Chinese even for their deily support.
Indeed, the answer that was returned to Mr. King's first request, furnished a
sufficient proof of the reduced state of the Portuguese power; for, on his
signifying to the Major his desire of proceeding to Canton as soon as possible,
the latter acquainted him, that they could not presume to provide a boat for
him, till permission had been obtained from the Hoppo, or officer of the
customs; and that it was necessary to apply, for this purpose, to the Chinese
government at Canton.

Captain King's mortification at so unexpected a delay, could be equalled only
by the eager impatience with which we had so long waited for an opportunity of
gaining information with regard to European affairs. It not unfrequently
happens, that amidst the ardent pursuit of an object, we neglect the most
obvious means of attaining it. This was, indeed, Mr. King's case at present;
for he was returning to the ship in a state of great dejection, when the
Portuguese officer, who accompanied him, asked him whether he did not intend to
visit the English gentlemen at Macao. It is unnecessary to add with what
transport Mr. King received the intelligence conveyed to him by this question;
as well as with what anxious hopes and fears, what a conflict between curiosity
and apprehension, his mind was agitated, as he and his companions walked
toward the house of one of their countrymen. The reception they met with was
by no means deficient in civility or kindness, though, from the state of
agitation they were in, it appeared to them rather cold and formal. In their
inquiries as far as regarded objects of private concern, they obtained, as was
indeed to be expected, little or no satisfaction; but the occurrences of a
public nature, which had happened since the period of our departure from
England, and which now, for the first time, burst all at once upon them,
overwhelmed all other feelings, and almost deprived them, for some time, of the
power of reflection.

The information now received by Mr. King and his attendants, being
communicated to those who remained on board, we continued, for several days, to
question each other with respect to the truth of it, as if desirous of seeking,
in doubt and suspense, for that consolation, which the reality of our
misfortunes seemed entirely to exclude. To these sensations the most poignant
regret succeeded, on finding ourselves cut off, at so great a a distance, from
the scene, where, we supposed, the fate of contending fleets and armies was
continually deciding.

The intelligence we had gained concerning the state of affairs in Europe,
rendered us the more anxious to accelerate our departure as much as we possibly
could. Captain King, therefore, renewed his endeavors to procure a passage to
Canton, but did not meet with success at present. He was now informed, that the
difficulty arising from the settled policy of the country, would, in all
probability, be greatly augmented by an incident which had occurred a few weeks
before our arrival. Captain Panton had been sent from Madras, in a ship of war
of twenty-five guns, called the Seahorse, for the purpose of urging the
payment of a debt which the Chinese merchants of Canton owed to private British
subjects in Europe and India, and which amounted, as we understood, to almost a
million sterling, including the principal and compound interest. With this
view, he was directed to make a peremptory demand of an audience of the viceroy
of Canton, which after some delay, and not before recourse had been had to
menaces, was at length granted. The answer he received, with regard to the
subject of his mission, was fair and satisfactory: but he had no sooner
departed, than an edict was stuck up in the public places of the city, and on
the houses of the Europeans, prohibiting all foreigners from lending money, on
any pretense whatever, to the subjects of the emperor of China.

This procedure had given occasion for very serious alarms at Canton. The
Chinese merchants, who had contracted the debt, in opposition to the commercial
laws of their country, and partly denied the justice of the demand, were
apprehensive lest some intelligence of this should be conveyed to Pekin; in
which case the emperor, who is represented as a just and rigid prince, might
perhaps punish them with the confiscation of their property, if not with the
loss of their lives. On the other hand, the Select Committee at the English
factory, to whom the Presidency of Madras had recommended, in strong terms, the
cause of the claimants, entertained violent apprehensions of embroiling
themselves with the Chinese government at Canton, and of occasioning, by that
means, great and perhaps irreparable detriment to the East India Company's
affairs in China. For the Mandarines, as Captain King was further informed,
were constantly prepared to take occasion, even on the most trivial grounds, to
obstruct their commerce; and it was frequently a very difficult matter, and
always attended with expense, to get such restraints taken off. These
impositions were continually augmenting; and, indeed, Mr. King found it the
general opinion, in all the European factories, that they should, probably, in
a short time, be reduced to the mortifying alternative, either of quitting
their commercial intercourse with China, or enduring the same indignities to
which the Dutch are subjected in the Japanese dominions.

The arrival of our two ships, at such a time, could not fail of giving rise to
fresh alarms. Captain King, therefore, finding there was no prospect of his
proceeding to Canton, dispatched a letter to the Committee of the English
Supercargoes, to inform them of the reason of our putting into the Tygris, and
to request their assistance in procuring him a passport, as well as in
forwarding the stores we had occasion for (of which Mr. King sent them a list)
with all possible expedition.

The following morning, Captain King was accompanied on board by our
countrymen; who acquainting us with the situation of the Typa, we weighed
anchor between six and seven o'clock, and steered toward it; but the wind
sailing, we again came too, at eight, in three fathoms and a half; the Grand
Ladrone bearing south-east by south, and Macao west-north-west, at the distance
of three miles.

The Portuguese sort was here saluted by the Resolution with eleven guns, and
the compliment was returned by an equal number. Early in the morning of the
4th, we weighed again, and stood into the Typa, where we moored with the stream
anchor and cable to the west.

As the Comprador, with whom we at first engaged, had taken the liberty of
going off with a small sum of money, which he had received from us beforehand
for the purchase of provisions, we entered into an agreement with another, who
supplied both our vessels during the whole time of our continuance here. This
was done with secrecy, and in the night, on pretense of its being contrary to
the established regulations of the port; but we were inclined to suspect, that
all this caution was practiced either with a view of enhancing the price of the
articles provided by him, or of securing to himself the emoluments of his
contract, without being under the necessity of sharing them with the Mandarines.

On Thursday the 9th, Captain Gore received an answer from the English
Supercargoes at Canton, in which they promised to exert their most strenuous
endeavors in procuring the supplies of which we were in want, with all
possible dispatch, and assured him, that a passport should be sent for one of
our officers; expressing their hopes, at the same time, that we were
sufficiently acquainted with the character of the Chinese administration, to
impute any delays, that might unavoidably occur, to their true cause.

The next day, an English merchant, from one of our East-Indian settlements,
made application to Captain Gore for the assistance of a few of his people, to
navigate as far as Canton a vessel which he had purchased at Macao. Captain
Gore, considering this as a good opportunity for Mr. King to repair to that
city, gave orders, that he should take with him his second lieutenant, the
lieutenant of marines, and ten sailors.

Though this was not the exact mode in which Captain King could have wished to
visit Canton, yet as it was highly uncertain when the passport would arrive,
and his presence might be of great service in expediting the requisite
supplies; he did not scruple to go on board the vessel, having left orders with
Mr. Williamson to prepare the Discovery for sea with all convenient spee^ and
make such additions and improvements in her upper works, as might contribute to
render her more defensible. That the series of our astronomical observations
might not be interrupted by his absence, he entrusted Mr. Trevenen with the
care of continuing them; as he reposed a perfect confidence in the abilities
and assiduity of that gentleman.

Mr. King and his attendants quitted the harbor of Macao on Saturday the 11th;
and sailing round the south-eastern extreme of the island, steering a northerly
course, leaving on their right hand, as they passed along, Lantao Lintin, and
several isles of smaller extent. All these islands, as well as that of Macao,
which is situated to the left, are totally destitute of wood: the land is high
and unfertile, and is not inhabited, except occasionally by fishermen.

As they approached the Bocca Tygris, which is near forty miles distant from
Macao, the coast of China appeared to the eastward in steep white cliffs. The
two forts, that command the mouth of the river, were, at this time, exactly in
the same state they were in when Lord Anson was here. That which stands to the
left is a fine old castle, environed by a grove of trees, and has a pleasing
and romantic aspect.

The vessel was here visited by an officer of the customs; upon which occasion,
the person to whom it belonged, being apprehensive that, if our party should be
discovered on board, it would produce some alarm, and might perhaps be attended
with disagreeable consequences, requested them to retire into the cabin below.

Above these forts, the breadth of the river is variable, the banks being flat
and low, and subject to great inundations from the tide. The land on both
sides, is level, and laid out in fields of rice; but, as our party advanced, it
was observed to rise gradually into hills of considerable declivity, whose
sides were cut into terraces, and planted with sugarcanes, yams, sweet
potatoes, the cotton tree, and plantains. They also perceived many lofty
pagodas, dispersed about the country, and several towns at a distance, some of
which seemed to be of great magnitude.

Their progress being retarded by contrary winds, and the lightness of the
vessel, they did not arrive at Wampu, which is no more than nine leagues from
the Bocca Tygris, till the 18th. Wampu is a small town, off which the ships of
the various nations, who trade with the Chinese are stationed, in order to
receive their respective ladings. It is asserted by Monsieur Sonnerat, that the
river, higher up, is not sufficiently deep for the admission of vessels that
are heavily laden, even if the policy of the Chinese had permitted Europeans to
navigate them up to Canton. With respect to this circumstance, however, we
cannot pretend to decide, as no stranger, we believe, has been allowed to
inform himself with certainty of the truth. The little islands, that are
situated opposite the town, are appropriated to the several factories, who have
erected werehouses for the reception of the various articles of merchandise
which are brought down from Canton.

At Wampu, Captain King embarked in a sampane, or Chinese boat, and immediately
proceeded to Canton, which is eight or nine miles higher up the river. These
sampanes are the neatest and most commodious boats for passengers that Mr. King
ever saw. They are of different sizes, of great breadth upon the beam, nearly
flat at the bottom, and narrow at the head and stern, which are elevated, and
embellished with ornaments. The middle part, where Mr. King sat, was arched
over with a roof made of bamboo, which may, at pleasure, be raised or lowered;
in the sides were small windows which had shutters to them; and the apartment
was furnished with tables, chairs, and handsome mats. A small waxen idol was
placed in the stern, in a case of gilt leather. Before this image stood a pot,
that contained lighted tapers made of matches, or dry chips, and gum. The fare
of this boat amounted to a Spanish dollar.

Captain King reached Canton in the evening, and disembarked at the English
factory, where though his arrival was wholly unexpected, he was received with
every mark of civility and respect. Messrs. Fitzhugh, Bevan, and Rapier,
composed, at this time, the Select Committee; and the former of these gentlemen
acted as President. They immediately gave Mr. King an inventory of those stores
with which the East India ships were able to supply us; and though he did not
entertain the smallest doubt, that the commanders were willing to assist us
with whatever they could spare, consistently with a regard to the interest of
their employers, as well as their own safety, yet it was a great disappointment
to him to observe in their list scarcely any canvass or cordage, of both which
articles we were chiefly in want. It afforded him, however, some consolation to
find that the stores were ready to be shipped, and that the provisions we had
occasion for might be had at a day's notice.

Mr. King being desirous of making his stay here as short as possible,
requested that the gentlemen would endeavor to procure junks or boats for him
the next day, as it was his intention to quit Canton the following one; but
they gave him to understand, that a business of that nature was not to be
transacted with such quickness in the Chinese dominions; that leave must
previously be obtained from the Viceroy; that application must be made to the
Hoppo, or principal officer of the customs, for chops, or permits; and that it
was not customary to grant such favors without mature deliberation: in short,
that patience was a virtue essentially necessary in China; and that they hoped
they should have the pleasure of rendering the factory agreeable to him, for a
few days longer than he seemed inclined to favor them with his company.

Though Captain King was not much disposed to be pleased with this compliment,
he could not avoid being diverted with an incident which occurred very
seasonably to convince him of the truth of their representations, and of the
suspicious character that distinguishes the Chinese. Our readers will doubtless
recollect, that it was now upwards of a fortnight since Captain Gore had
written to the gentlemen of the factory, to solicit, their assistance in
gaining permission for one of his officers to repair to Canton. In consequence
of this application they had mention^^ the affair to one of the principal
Chinese merchants of that city, who had promised to interest himself in our
behalf, and to petition the Viceroy to grant our request. This person came to
visit Mr. Fitzhugh, the President, while he and his colleagues were conversing
with Captain King on the subject, and informed him, with great complacency and
satisfaction in his countenance, that he had at length met with success in his
solicitations, and that a passport would be issued in a few days for one of the
officers of the Ladrone ship, or pirate. Mr. Fitzhugh immediately desired him
not to give himself any further trouble in this business, as the officer
(pointing to Captain King) was already arrived. The consternation, with which
the old Chinese merchant was seized on hearing this intelligence, is almost
inconceivable. His head sunk instantaneosly upon his breast, and the sofa, on
which he sat, shook, from the violence of his emotion. Whether the Ladrone ship
(as he called it) was the object of his apprehensions, or his own government,
Captain King could not determine; but, after he had continued a few minutes in
this state of agitation, Mr. Bevan begged him not to despair, and acquainted
him with the manner in which the Captain had passed from Macao, the motives of
his journey to Canton, and his wishes to quit that city as soon as possible. As
this last circumstance seemed to be particularly agreeable to the old man, Mr.
King flattered himself that he should find him disposed to accelerate his
departure; but he had no sooner recovered from his consternation, than he began
to recount the unavoidable delays that would occur in our business, the
difficulty of obtaining an audience of the Viceroy, the jealousies and
suspicions entertained by the Mandarines with regard to our real designs,
which, he affirmed, had risen to an uncommon height, from the strange account
that we had given of ourselves.

After Captain King had waited several days, with great impatience, for the
issue of his negotiation, without finding that the affair was in the least
advanced toward a conclusion, he made application to the commander of an
English country ship, who intended to sail on the 25th, and who offered to take
on board the men and stores, and to lie too, unless the weather should prevent
him, off Macao, till we could dispatch boats to receive them out of his vessel.
He at the same time apprised Captain King of the danger he might perhaps incur
of being driven with them out to sea.

While Mr. King was considering what steps he should take, the commander of
another country ship, presented him with a letter from Captain Gore, importing
that he had engaged this commander to bring our party from Canton, and to
deliver our supplies, at his own hazard, in the Typa. All difficulties being
thus removed, Mr. King had leisure to bestow some attention on the purchase of
our stores and provisions, which he completed on the 26th; and on the
succeeding day, the whole stock was conveyed on board.

Captain Gore being of opinion, that Canton would be the most advantageous
market for furs, had desired Mr. King to take with him about twenty skins of
sea-otters; most of which had been the property of our deceased Commanders, and
to dispose of them at the best price he could obtain; a commission which
furnished him with an opportunity of becoming acquainted, in some degree, with
the genius of the Chinese for trade. Mr. King having informed some of the
English supercargoes of these circumstances, requested that they would
recommend him to some reputable Chinese merchant, who would at once offer him a
reasonable price for the skins. They accordingly directed him to a member of
the Hong, (an appellation given to a society of the principal merchants of the
city) who being fully apprised of the nature of the business, seemed to be
sensible of the delicacy of Mr. King's situation, and assured him that he might
rely on his integrity, and that, in an affair of this kind, he should consider
himself as a mere agent, without seeking to acquire any profit for himself.

The skins being laid before this merchant, he examined them over and over
again with particular attention, and at last informed Captain King, that he
could not think of offering more than three hundred dollars for them. As the
Captain was convinced, from the price at which our skins had been sold in
Kamtschatka, that he had not offered one half of their value, he found himself
obliged to drive a bargain. He therefore in his turn, demanded a thousand
dollars; the Chinese merchant then advanced to five hundred; after which he
offered Mr. King a private present of porcelain and tea, which amounted to a
hundred more; then he proposed to give the same sum in money; and at length
rose to seven hundred dollars, upon which the Captain lowered his demands to
nine hundred. Here, each of them declaring that he would not recede, they
parted; but the Chinese speedily returned with a list of East-Indian
commodities, which he now desired that Mr. King would taken in exchange, and
which (as the Captain was afterward informed) would have amounted in value, if
faithfully delivered, to double the sum the merchant had before offered.
Finding the Captain unwilling to deal in this mode, he finally proposed, that
they should divide the difference, which Mr. King, weary of the contest, agreed
to, and received the eight hundred dollars.

Captain King, from the ill health under which he at present labored, had but
little reason to lament the very narrow bounds, within which every European at
Canton is obliged, by the suspicious policy of the Chinese, to confine his
curiosity. He would otherwise, doubtless, have felt himself extremely
tantalized with living under the walls of a city of such magnitude, and so
replete with objects of novelty, without being permitted to enter it.

The accounts of Canton, as well as of the other parts of China, by Le Comte
and Du Halde, most of our readers have, in all probability, perused. These
authors have lately been charged by Monsieur Sonnerat with having been guilty
of great exaggeration; for which reason the subsequent remarks collected by
Captain King from the intelligence which he received from several English
gentlemen, who had resided a long time at Canton, may not improperly be
introduced.

The circumference of Canton, including the old and new town, and also the
suburbs, is about ten miles. With regard to its population, Mr. King, judging
of the whole from what he saw in the suburbs, is of opinion, that it falls
considerably short of an European town of equal magnitude. Le Comte has
estimated the number of its inhabitants at one million five hundred thousand;
Du Halde at a million; and M. Sonnerat affirms he has ascertained that their
number does not exceed seventy-five thousand "J'ai verify moi-meme, avec
plusieurs Chinois, la population de Canton," etc. Voyage aux Indes Grientales
et a la Ck us, M. Sonnerat, vol ii* p. 14.
: but, as this gentleman has not thought proper to communicate to us the
grounds on which he founded his calculation, and, besides, seems to be as much
inclined to depreciate whatever relates to the Chinese nation, as the Jesuits
may be to magnify, his opinion does not lay claim to an implicit assent. The
following particulars may perhaps enable our readers to form a judgment on this
point with some degree of accuracy.

It is certain, that a Chinese house, in general, occupies more space than is
commonly taken up by houses in Europe; but the proportion of four or five to
one, suggested by M. Sonnerat, must be acknowledged to go far beyond the truth.
To this we may add, that a considerable number of houses, in the suburbs of
Canton, are kept only for the purposes of commerce, by merchants and opulent
tradesmen, whose families reside entirely within the walls. On the other hand,
a Chinese family, upon an average is more numerous than an European. A
Mandarine, in proportion to his rank and property, has from five to twenty
wives. A merchant has from three to five. A person of the latter class at
Canton, had, indeed, five and twenty wives, and six and thirty children; but
this was mentioned to Captain King as a very uncommon circumstance. A wealthy
tradesman has generally two wives; and people of an inferior station very
rarely have more than one. They have, at least double the number of servants
employed by Europeans of the same rank. If, therefore, we suppose a Chinese
family to be larger by one third, and an European house less by two-thirds,
than each other, a city of China will comprehend only half the number of people
contained in a town of the same extent in Europe. According to these postulata,
the city and suburbs of Canton may contain, in all probability, about a hundred
and fifty thousand inhabitants.

Captain King found various opinions entertained respecting the number of
inhabited sampanes: but none computed them to be under forty thousand. They are
moored in rows, close to each other, a narrow passage being left, at intervals
for the boats to pass and repass on the river. The Tygris, at Canton, being of
greater width than the Thames at London, and the whole river, for the space at
least of a mile, being covered in this manner, it does not appear that this
estimate of their number is at all exaggerated; and if it be allowed, the
inhabitants in the sampanes alone, each of which contains one family, must
amount to almost thrice the number affirmed by M. Sonnerat to be in the whole
city.

Fifty thousand men constitute the military force of the province of Quangtong;
of which Canton is the capital. It is asserted, that twenty thousand are
stationed in the city and its environs; and Captain King was assured, that, on
occasion of some commotion which had happened at Canton, thirty thousand troops
had been drawn together in the course of a few hours.

The streets of this city are long, and most of them are narrow and destitute
of uniformity. They are well paved with large stones, and, in general, kept
extremely clean. The houses are built of brick, and are only one story high.
They have, for the most part, two or three courts backwards, in which are
erected the warehouses for the reception of merchandise, and, in the houses
within the city, the apartments for the females. Some of the meaner sort of
people, though very few have their habitations composed of wood.

The houses of the European factors are built on a fine quay, having a regular
facade of two stories toward the river. They are constructed, with respect to
the inside, partly after the Chinese, and partly after the European mode.
Adjoining to these are a considerable number of houses which belong to the
Chinese, and are let out by them to the commanders of vessels, and to
merchants, who make only an occasional stay.

As no European is permitted to take his wife with him to Canton, the English
supercargoes live together, at a common table, which is maintained by the
company; and each of them has also an apartment appropriated to himself,
consisting of three or four rooms. The period of their residence rarely exceeds
eight months in a year; and as, during that time, they are almost constantly
occupied in the service of the company, they may submit, with the less
uneasiness and regret, to the restrictions under which they live. They very
seldom make any visits within the walls of Canton, except on public occasions.
Indeed nothing contributed more to give Captain King an unfavourable opinion of
the character of the Chinese, than his finding, that, among so many persons of
ingenuous and liberal minds, as well as of amiable manners, several of whom had
been resident in that country for near fifteen successive years, they had never
formed any social connection or friendship.

As soon as the last ship departs from Wampu, they are all under the necessity
of retiring to Macao; but they leave behind them all the money they possess in
specie, which Mr. King was informed, sometimes amounts to a hundred thousand
pounds sterling, and for which they have no other security than the seals of
the Viceroy, the Mandarines, and the merchants of the Hong: a striking proof of
the excellent police maintained in China.

Captain King, during his continuance at Canton, accompanied one of the English
gentlemen on a visit to a person of the first distinction in the place. They
were received in a long room or gallery, at the further end of which a table
was placed, with a large chair behind it, and a row of chairs extending from
it, on both sides, down the room. The captain having been previously
instructed, that the point of politeness consisted in remaining unseated as
long as possible, readily submitting to this piece of etiquette; after which he
and his friend were treated with tea, and some fresh and preserved fruits.
Their entertainer was very corpulent, had a dull heavy countenance, and
displayed great gravity in his deportment. He had learned to speak a little
broken English and Portugueze. After his two guests had taken their
refreshment, he conducted them about his house and garden; and when he had
shown them all the improvements he was making, they took their leave.

Captain King being desirous of avoiding the trouble and delay that might
attend an application for passports, as well as of saving the unnecessary
expense of hiring a sampane, which he was informed amounted at least to twelve
pounds sterling, had hitherto designed to go along with the supplies to Macoa,
in the country merchant's ship we mentioned before: but receiving an invitation
from two English gentlemen, who had found means to procure passports for four,
he accepted, together with Mr. Philips, their offer of places in a Chinese
boat, and entrusted Mr. Lannyon with the superintendance of the men and stores,
which were to sail the following day.

On Sunday the 26th, in the evening, Captain King took his leave of the
supercargoes, after having returned them thanks for their many favors; among
which must be mentioned a present of a considerable quantity of tea, for the
use of the companies of both ships, and a copious collection of English
periodical publications. The latter proved a valuable acquisition to us, as
they not only served to beguile our impatience, in the prosecution of our
tedious voyage homewards, but also enabled us to return not wholly unacquainted
with what had been transacting in our native country during our absence.

At one o'clock in the morning of the 27th, Messrs. King and Phillips, and the
two English gentlemen, quitted Canton, and, about the same hour of the
succeeding day, arrived at Macao, having passed down a channel situated to the
west of that by which Mr. King had come up.

During the absence of our party from Macao, a brisk traffic had been carrying
on with the Chinese for four sea-otter skins, the value of which had augmented
every day. One of our sailors disposed of his stock, alone, for eight hundred
dollars; and a few of the best skins, which were clean, and had been carefully
preserved, produced a hundred and twenty dollars each. The total amount of the
value, in goods and cash, that was obtained for the furs of both our vessels,
we are confident was not less than two thousand pounds sterling; and it was the
general opinion, that at least two-thirds of the quantity we had originally
procured from the Americans, were by this time spoiled and worn out, or had
been bestowed as presents, and otherwise disposed of, in Kamtschatka. If, in
addition to these facts, we consider, that we at first collected the furs
without having just ideas of their real value; that most of them had been worn
by the savages from whom we purchased them; that little regard was afterward
shown to their preservation; that they were frequently made use of as
bed-clothes, and likewise for other purposes, during our cruize to the
northward; and that, in all probability, we never received the full value for
them in China; the benefits that might accrue from a voyage to that part of the
American coast where we obtained them, undertaken with commercial views, will
certainly appear of sufficient importance to claim the public attention.

So great was the rage with which our seamen were possessed to return to Cook's
River, and there procure another cargo of skins, by which they might be enabled
to make their fortunes, that, at one time, they were almost on the point of
proceeding to a mutiny. And Captain King acknowledges, that he could not
refrain from indulging himself in a project, which was first suggested to him
by the disappointment we had met with in being compelled to leave the Japanese
Archipelago, as well as the northern coast of China, unexplored; and he is of
opinion, that this object may still be happily attained, by means of our
East India Company, not only with trifling expense, but even with the prospect
of very beneficial consequences. The state of affairs at home, or perhaps
greater difficulties in the accomplishment of his plan that he had foreseen,
have hitherto prevented its being carried into execution; but, as the scheme
seems to be well contrived, we hope the reader will not be displeased with
inserting it here.

In the first place, Captain King proposes, that the East India Company's China
ships should, each, carry an additional number of men, making one hundred in
the whole. Two vessels, one of two hundred tons, and the other of a hundred and
fifty, might, with proper notice, (as Mr. King was informed) be purchased at
Canton; and, as victualling is as cheap there as in Europe, he has calculated
that they might be completely equipped for sea, with one year's provisions and
pay, for the sum of six thousand pounds, including the purchase. The expense of
the requisite articles for barter is very inconsiderable.

Mr. King particularly recommends that each of the ships should have a forge,
five tons of unwrought iron, and a skilful smith, with an apprentice and
journeyman, who might occasionally make such tools, as the Indians should
appear to have the greatest inclination for possessing. For, though half a
dozen of the finest skins, obtained by us, were purchased with twelve large
green glass beads, yet it is very certain, that the fancy of these people, for
ornamental articles, is extremely capricious and variable; and that the only
sure commodity for their market is iron. To this might be added several bales
of coarse woollen cloth, two or three barrels of glass and copper trinkets, and
a few gross of large pointed case-knives.

The Captain proposes two vessels, not only for the greater security of the
voyage, but because single ships ought never, in his opinion, to be sent out
for the purpose of discovery. For where risques are frequently to be run, and
uncertain and dangerous experiments tried, it can by no means be expected that
single ships should venture so far, as where some security is provided against
an unfortunate accident.

When the ships are prepared for sea, they will sail with the first south-west
monsoon, which usually sets in about the commencement of the month of April.
They will steer a northward course, with this wind, along the Chinese coast,
beginning to make a more accurate survey from the mouth of the Nankin river, or
the river Kyana, in the 30th degree of latitude, which is supposed to be the
remotest limit of this coast hitherto visited by European vessels.

The extent of the great gulf called Whang Hay, or the yellow Sea, being at
present unknown, it may be left to the Commander's discretion, to proceed up it
as far as he may think proper: he must be cautious, however, not to entangle
himself in it too far, lest he should not have sufficient time left for the
prosecution of the remainder of his voyage. The same discretion may be used,
when he has reached the straits of Tessoi, with regard to the islands of Jeso,
which, if the wind and weather should be favorable, he must not neglect to
explore.

Having arrived in the latitude of 51 40, where he will make the most southerly
point of the isle of Sagaleen, beyond which we have a considerable knowledge of
the sea of Okotsk he will steer toward the south, probably about the beginning
of June, and exert his endeavors to fall in with the most southern of the
Kurile islands. If the accounts of the Russians may be depended on, Ooroop, or
Nadeschda, will furnish the ships with a commodious harbor, where they may
recruit their wood and water, and provide themselves with such refreshments as
the place may afford.

About the end of June the commander will direct his course to the Shummagins,
whence he will proceed to Cook's River, purchasing, in his progress, as many
skins as possible, without losing too much time, since he ought to sail again
to the southward, and trace the coast with the utmost accuracy between the 56th
and 50th degrees of latitude, the space where contrary winds drove us out of
sight of land.

It must be here observed, that Captain King considers the purchase of skins,
in this expedition, as a secondary concern, for defraying the expense; and from
our experience in the present voyage, there is no reason to doubt that two
hundred and fifty skins, each worth a hundred dollars, may be obtained without
low of time; particularly as they will, in all probability, be met with along
the coast to the south of Cook's River.

The Commander, after having continued about three months on the American
coast, will set out on his return to China in the former part of October,
taking care, in his route, to avoid as much as possible, the tracks of
preceding navigators. All that remains to be added on this subject, is, that if
the fur trade should become an established object of Indian commerce, many
opportunities will occur of completing whatever may have been left unfinished,
in the voyage of which the outlines are here delineated.

A very ludicrous alteration took place in the dress of all our crew, in
consequence of the barter which the Chinese had carried on with us for our
sea-otter skins. On our arrival in the Typa, not only the sailors, but likewise
the young officers, were extremely ragged in their apparel; for, as the voyage
had now exceeded, almost by a year, the time it was ^ot first supposed we
should continue at sea, the far greater part of our original stock of European
clothes had been long ago worn out, or repaired and patched up with skins, and
the different manufactures we meet with in the course of the expedition. These
were now mixed and eked out with the gayest silks, and cottons that China could
produce.

Mr. Lannyon arrived on the 30th, with the stores and provisions, which,
without delay, were stowed in due proportion on board of our two vessels. The
following day, in compliance with an agreement made by Captain Gore, Mr. King
sent the Discovery's sheet anchor to the country ship, and, in return, received
the guns by which she before rode.

While we remained in the Typa, Captain King was shown in the garden of an
English gentlemen at Macao, the rock, under which, according to the traditional
accounts, Camoens, the celebrated Portuguese poet, was accustomed to sit and
compose his Lusiad. It is an arch of considerable height, consisting of one
solid stone, and forming the entrance of a grotto dug out of the elevated
ground behind it. Large spreading trees overshadow the rock, which commands a
beautiful and extensive prospect of the sea, and the islands dispersed about it.

On Tuesday the 11th of January, 1780, two sailors belonging to the Resolution
went off with a six-oared cutter; and though the most diligent search was made,
both that and the succeeding day, we never could gain any intelligence of her.
It was imagined, that these seamen had been seduced by hopes of acquiring a
fortune, if they should return to the fur islands.

As, during our continuance in the Typa, we heard nothing with respect to the
measurement of the ships, we may reasonably conclude, that the point so
strongly contested, in Commodore Anson's times by the Chinese, has, in
consequence of his courage and firmness, never since been insisted on.

According to the observations that were made while our vessels lay here, the
harbor of Macao is situated in the latitude of 22 12 north, and the longitude
of 113 47 east; our anchoring-place in the Typa, in the latitude of 22 9 20
north, and the longitude of 113 48 34 east; and the variation of the compass
was 19 west. It was high water in the Typa, on the full and change days, at a
quarter after five o'clock, and, in the harbor of Macao, at fifty minutes
after five: the greatest rise was six feet one inch. The flood seemed to come
from the south-east; but, on account of the numerous islands lying off the
mouth of the river of Canton, we could not properly ascertain that point.

CHAP. X.
The ships rendered more defensible -- Orders of the French Court relative to
Captain Cook -- Quit the Typa -- Strike Soundings on the Macclesfield Bank --
Pulo Sapata described --. Steer for Pulo Condore -- Cast Anchor in a Harbor of
that Island -- The Captains Gore and King land there -- Captain King's Journey
to the principal Town -- Description of the Town -- Of the habitation of the
Chief -- Ineffectual search for the Remains of an English Fort -- Copy of a
French Certificate -- A Mandarin, named Luco, visits the ships -- Information
received from him -- The Launches dispatched to bring away some Buffaloes --
Singular Gentleness of these Animals toward children -- Supplies of Wood and
Water -- Pulo Condore described -- Account of the Harbor -- Animal and
Vegetable Produce of the Island -- Persons and Disposition of the Inhabitants
-- Presents to the Mandarin and the Bishop of Adran -- Astronomical and
Nautical Observations.

WE unmoored on the 12th of January, at twelve o'clock, and scaled the guns,
which, on board the Discovery, amounted at this time to ten; so that her
people, by means of four additional ports, could fight seven on a side. In the
Resolution likewise, the number of guns had been augmented from twelve to
sixteen; and, in each of our vessels, a strong barricade had been carried round
the upper works, and all other precautions taken to give our inconsiderable
force a respectable appearance.

We considered it as our duty to furnish ourselves with these means of defense,
though there was some reason to believe, that they had, in a great measure,
been rendered superfluous by the generosity of our enemies. Captain King had
been informed at Canton, that, in the public prints, which had last arrived
from Great Britain, mention was made of instructions having been found on board
all the French ships of war, that had been taken in Europe, importing, that
their commanders, if they should happen to fall in with the ships which had
sailed from England under the command of Captain Cook, should suffer them to
proceed unmolested on their voyage. It was also reported, that the American
Congress had given similar orders to the vessels employed in their service.
This intelligence being further confirmed by the private letters of some of the
supercargoes, Captain Gore deemed it incumbent on him, in return for the
liberal exceptions which our enemies had made in our favor, to refrain from
embracing any opportunities of capture, which these might afford, and to
maintain the strictest neutrality during the whole of his voyage.

Having got under sail, about two o'clock in the afternoon, the Resolution
saluted the fort of Macao with eleven guns, and the salutation was returned
with an equal number. The wind failing at five, the ship missed stays, and
drove into shallow water; but an anchor being quickly carried out, she was
hauled off without sustaining any damage.

The calm continuing, we were under the necessity of warping out into the
entrance of the Typa, which we gained by eight in the evening, and remained
there till nine o'clock the following morning; when, being assisted by a fresh
easterly breeze, we stood to the south between Wungboo and Potoe. At twelve a
Swedish vessel saluted us as she passed us on her way to Europe. At four in the
afternoon, the Ladrone was about two leagues distant in an eastern direction.

We now steered south half east, having a fresh breeze from the east-north-east
point, without any remarkable occurrence, till the 15th at noon; at which time,
our latitude being 18 57, and our longitude 114 13 and the wind shifting to the
north, we directed our course rather more to the eastward, with a view of
striking soundings over the Macclesfield bank. This we accomplished on the
16th, at eight o'clock in the evening, and found that the depth of water was
fifty fathoms, over a bottom consisting of white sand and shells. We judge this
part of the Macclesfield shoals to be in the latitude of 25 51, and the
longitude of 114 20; which computation exactly coincides with the position
assigned in Mr. Dalrymple's map, whose general accuracy was confirmed, in this
instance, by many lunar observations. The variation was found, in the forenoon,
to be 39 west.

We had strong gales from the east by north, on the 17th, with a rough
turbulent sea, and gloomy weather. On the succeeding day, the sea continuing to
run high, and the wind to blow with violence, we changed our course to
south-west by south; and, at twelve o'clock, being in the longitude 112, and
the latitude of 12 34, we began to steer mo^e to the westward for Pulo Sapata,
of which we had sight on the 19th, about four in the afternoon. It was, at that
time, twelve or fourteen miles distant, bearing north-west by west.

This island, which is denominated Sapata, from its resembling a shoe in
figure, is small, elevated, and unfertile. According to our observations, it is
situated in the latitude of 10 4 north, and the longitude of 109 10 east.

The fury of the gale was now so much augmented, and the sea ran so high, that
we were obliged to close-reef the topsails. Our ships during the three last
days, had outrun their reckoning at the rate of twenty miles in a day; and, as
this could not be wholly attributed to the effects of a following sea, we
partly ascribed it to a current, which, according to Captain King's
calculation, had set, between the noon of the 19th, and the noon of the 20th,
forty-two miles to the south south-westward; and is taken into the account in
fixing the position of Sapata.

Having passed this island, we stood to the westward, and, at midnight,
sounded, and found a bottom of fine sand at the (...) fathoms. The violence of
the wind abating in the morning of the 20th, we let out the reefs, and directed
our course to the west by south for Pulo Condore. Our latitude at noon was 8 46
north, and our longitude 106 45 east; and, between twelve and one, we had a
view of that island, in a western direction.

At four o'clock in the afternoon, the extremes of Pulo Condore and the islands
that are situated off it, bore south-east and south-west by west; and our
distance from the nearest islands was about two miles. We sailed to the
northward of the islands, and stood toward a harbor at the south-west end of
Condore, which, having its entrance from the north-west, affords the best
shelter during the north-east monsoon. At six o'clock we anchored in six
fathoms water, with the best bower; and the Discovery was kept steady with a
stream anchor and cable toward the south-east. When moored, the extremities of
the entrance of the harbor bore west-north-west a quarter west, and north by
west; the opening at the upper end bore south-east by east three quarters east;
and we were about two furlong distant from the nearest part of the shore.

We had no sooner let go our anchors, than Captain Gore fired a gun, with a
view of giving the inhabitants notice of our arrival, and drawing them toward
the shore; but it had no effect. Early the next morning parties were dispatched
to cut wood, as Captain Gore's principal motive for touching at this island was
to supply the ships with that article. During the afternoon a sudden gust of
wind broke the stream-cable, by which the Discovery rode, and obliged her
people to moor with the bower anchors.

As none of the islanders had yet made their appearance, notwithstanding the
firing of a second gun, Captain Gore thought it advisable to go ashore in
search of them, that we might lose no time in opening a traffic for such
provisions as the place could furnish us with. For this purpose, he desired
Captain King to accompany him in the morning of the 22d: and, as the wind, at
that time blew violently from the eastward, they did not think it consistent
with prudence to coast in their boats to the town, which stands on the eastern
side of the island, but rowed round the northern point of the harbor.

They had proceeded along the shore for the space of about two miles, when
perceiving a road that led into a wood, they l^nded. Here Captain King left
Captain Gore, and, attended by a midshipman, and four armed sailors, pursued
the path, which appeared to point directly across the island. They passed
through a thick wood, up a hill of considerable steepness, to the distance of a
mile, when, after they had descended through a wood of equal extent, on the
other side, they arrived in an open, level, sandy country, interspersed with
groves of cabbage-palm and cocoa-nut trees, and cultivated spots of tobacco and
rice.

Here they descried two huts, situate on the extremity of the wood, to which
they directed their march. Before they came up to these habitations, they were
observed by two men, who instantaneously ran away from them, notwithstanding
all the peaceable and supplicating gestures our party could devise. On reaching
the huts, Captain King, apprehending that the fight of so many armed men might
terrify the natives, commanded his attendants to remain without, while he
entered and reconnoitred alone. In one of the huts he found an elderly man, who
was in a great consternation, and was preparing to retire with the most
valuable of his effects that he was able to carry. Mr. King, however, found
means, in a very short time, so entirely to dissipate his terrors, that he came
out, and called to the two islanders, who were running away, to return.

Captain King and the old man now quickly came to a perfect understanding. A
few signs, particularly that significant one of showing a handful of dollars,
and then pointing to a herd of buffa^oes, as well as to the fowls that were
running in considerable numbers about the huts, left him under no doubts with
respect to the real objects of the Captain's visit. He immediately pointed to
the spot where the town was situated and made Mr. King comprehend, that, by
repairing thither, all his necessities would be supplied.

By this time the two fugitives had returned, and one of them was ordered by
the old man to conduct our party to the town, as soon as an obstacle, of which
they were not aware, should be removed. On their first leaving the wood, a herd
of buffaloes, consisting of at least twenty, ^an toward them, tossing up their
heads, snuffing the air, and making a hideous roaring. They had followed our
people to the huts, and now remained at a small distance drawn up in a body;
and the old man signified to Captain King, that it would be extremely dangerous
for our party to move, till the buffaloes had been driven into the woods: but
these animals had become so enraged at the sight of them, that this was not
accomplished without some difficulty. The men, indeed, were unable to effect
it; but, to the surprise of Captain King and his companions, they called some
little boys to their assistance, who speedily drove the animals out of sight.
It afterward appeared, that, in driving the buffaloes, and securing them,
which is done by putting a rope through a hole made in their nostrils, it was
customary to employ little boys, who, at times when the men would not venture
to approach them, could stroke and handle them with impunity.

After the buffaloes had been driven off, our party were conducted to the town,
which was about a mile distant; the road to it lying through a deep whitish
sand. It stands near the seaside, at the bottom of a retired bay, which
affords good shelter during the prevalence of the south-west monsoon.

This town is composed of between twenty and thirty houses, which are built
contiguous to each other. Besides these, there are six or seven others
dispersed about the beach. The roof, the two ends, and the side that fronts the
country, are constructed of reeds in a neat manner. The opposite side which
faces the sea, is perfectly open; but the inhabitants, by means of a kind of
screens made of bamboo, can exclude or admit as much of the air and sun as they
think proper. There are likewise other large screens, or partitions, which
serve to divide, as occasion may require, the single room, of which the
habitation, properly speaking, consists into separate apartments.

The islander who acted as a guide to our party, conducted them to the largest
house in the town, belonging to the chief, or (as the natives styled him) the
Captain. At each extremity of this house was a room, separated by a partition
of reeds from the middle space, which was unenclosed on either side, and was
furnished with partition screens like the others. There was also a penthouse,
which projected to the distance of four or five feet from the roof, and ran the
whole length on each side. Some Chinese paintings, representing persons of both
sexes in ludicrous attitudes, were hung at each end of the middle room. In this
apartment our people were requested to seat themselves on mats, and betel was
presented to them.

Captain King, by producing money, and pointing at different objects that were
in sight, met with no difficulty in making one of the company, who seemed to be
the principal person among them, comprehend the chief design of his visit; and
as readily understood from him, that the Chief, or Captain, was, at this time,
absent, but would quickly return; and that no purchase of any kind could be
made without his concurrence and approbation.

Our party took advantage of the opportunity afforded them by this
circumstance, to walk about the town: and did not omit searching, though
ineffectually, for the remains of a fort, which some of our countrymen had
built in the year 1702, near the spot they were now upon The English settled on
this island in 1702, and brought with them a party of Macasser soldiers, who
were hired to contribute their assistance in erecting a fort; but the president
of the factory not fulfilling his engagement with them, they were determined
upon revenge, and one night, took an opportunity of murdering all the English
in the fort. Those who were without the fort, hearing a noise, were greatly
alarmed, and running to their boats, narrowly escaped with their lives to the
Johore dominions, where they met with very humane treatment. Some of these
afterward repaired to Benjar-Massean, in the island of B^rneo, for the purpose
of forming a settlement.
. On their return to the house of the Captain, they were sorry to find, that he
had not yet arrived, particularly as the time which had been fixed by Captain
Gore, for their return to the boat, was nearly expired. The inhabitants desired
them to protract their stay, and even proposed their passing the night there,
offering to accommodate them in the best manner they were able.

Mr. King had observed, when he was in the house before, (and now remarked it
the more) that the person abovementioned frequently retired into one of the
end rooms, where he continued a short time, before he answered the
interrogatories that were put to him. This induced Mr. King to suspect, that
the Captain had been there the whole time, though for reasons with which he
himself was best acquainted, he did not think proper to make his appearance. He
was confirmed in his opinion, by being stopped as he attempted to enter the
room. At length, it evidently appeared, that Mr. King's suspicions were well
founded; for, on his preparing to depart, the person who had passed in and out
so many times, came from the room with a paper in his hand, and gave it to him
for his perusal; and he was not a little surprised at finding it to be a kind
of certificate, written in the French language, of which the following is a
translation.

Peter Joseph George, Bishop of Adran, Apostolic Vicar of Cochin China, etc.
The little Mandarin, who is the bearer hereof, is the real Envoy of the court
to Pulo Condore, to attend there for the reception of all European vessels
whose destination is to approach this place, etc.

A Sai-Gon, 10 August, 1776.
Captain King returned the paper, with many protestations of our people being
the Mandarin's good friends, and requested he might be informed that they hoped
he would do them the favor to pay them a visit on board the ships, that they
might convince him of it. They now took their leave, being, upon the whole,
well satisfied with what had happened, but full of conjectures with regard to
this extraordinary French paper. Three of the inhabitants proposing to attend
them back, they readily accepted the offer, and returned by the way they had
come.

Captain Gore was extremely pleased at seeing them again, for, as they had
exceeded their appointed time by almost an hour, he began to entertain
apprehensions for their safety, and was preparing to march after them. He and
his party had, during Mr. King's absence, been usefully occupied, in loading
the boat with the cabbage-palm, which is very beautiful in this bay. The three
guides were each presented with a dollar, as a compensation for their trouble;
and a bottle of rum for the mandarin was entrusted to their care. One of them
thought proper to accompany our people on board.

The Captains Gore and King rejoined the ships at two o'clock in the afternoon;
and several of our shooting parties returned from the woods about the same
time, having met with no great success, though they had seen a considerable
variety of birds and other animals, some of which will be noticed in the course
of the present chapter.

Six men, in a proa, rowed up to the ships at five o'clock, from the upper end
of the harbor; and one of them, who was a person of a decent appearance,
introduced himself to Captain Gore with an ease and politeness, which indicated
that he had been accustomed to pass his time in other company than what Condore
afforded. He brought with him the French certificate above transcribed, and
gave us to understand, that he was the Mandarin mentioned in it. He could speak
a few Portuguese words; but, as none of us had learned that language, we were
under the necessity of having recourse to a black man on board, who was
acquainted with the Malayan tongue, which is the general language of these
islanders, and was understood by the Mandarin.

After some previous conversation, he informed us, that he professed the
Christian faith, and had been baptized by the appellation of Luco; that he had
been sent to this island in the preceding August, from Sai-gon, the capital of
Cochin-China, and had waited, since that time, in expectation of some French
vessels, which he was to conduct to a safe harbor, on the coast of
Cochin-China, not above one day's sail from Condore. We told him that we were
not of the French nation, but of the English; and asked him, whether he had not
heard, that those two kingdoms were now at war with each other. He replied in
the affirmative; but intimated to us at the same time, that it was a matter of
indifference to him to what nation the ships he was directed to wait for
appertained, provided their object was to enter into traffic with the people of
Cochin-China.

He now produced another paper, which he requested us to peruse. This was a
letter sealed up, and addressed "To the Captains of any European ships that may
touch at Condore:" Though we supposed, that this letter was particularly
intended for French vessels, yet, as the direction comprehended all European
Captains, and at Luco was desirous of our reading it, we broke the seal, and
perceived that it was written by the same bishop who wrote the certificate.

Its contents were to the following purport* "That he had reason to expect, by
some intelligence lately received from Europe, that a ship would, in a short
time, come to Cochin-China; in consequence of which news, he had prevailed on
the court to dispatch a Mandarin (the bearer) to Pulo Condore, to wait its
arrival: that if the vessel should touch there, the Captain might either send
to him, by the bearer of this letter, an account of his having arrived or trust
himself to the direction of the Mandarin, who would pilot the ship into a
commodious port in Cochin-China, not exceeding a day's sail from Pulo Condore:
that if he should he inclined to continue at this island till the return of the
messenger, proper interpreters should be sent back, and any other assistance,
which might be pointed out in a letter, should be furnished; that there was no
occasion for being more particular, of which the commander himself must be
sensible." This epistle had the same date with the certificate, and was
returned to Luco, without our taking any copy of it.

From the whole of the Mandarin's conversation, as well as from this letter, we
had little doubt that the vessel he expected was a French one. We found, at the
same time, that he was desirous of not losing his errand, and was not unwilling
to become our pilot. We could not discover from him the precise business which
the ship he was waiting for designed to prosecute in Cochin-China. The black,
indeed, who acted as our interpreter on this occasion, was exceedingly dull and
stupid: we should, therefore, be sorry, having such imperfect means of
information, to run the hazard of misleading our readers by any of our own
conjectures, relative to the object of the Mandarin's visit to Pulo Condore. We
shall only add, that he acquainted us, that the French vessels might perhaps
have touched at Tirnon, and from thence sail to Cochin-China; and, as no
intelligence of them had reached him, he imagined that this was most likely to
have been the case.

Captain Gore afterward inquired, what supplies could be procured from this
island. Luco replied, that there, were two buffaloes belonging to him, which
were at our service; and that there were considerable numbers of those animals
on the island, which might be purchased for four or five dollars each; but
Captain Gore thinking that sum very moderate, and appearing inclined to give a
much greater for them, the price was speedily augmented to seven or eight
dollars.

On the 23d, early in the morning, the launches of both our ships were
dispatched to the town, to bring away the buffaloes which we had given orders
for the purchase of; but they were under the necessity of waiting till it was
high water, not being able, at any other time to make their way through the
opening at the head of the harbor. Upon their arrival at the town, the surf
broke against the beach with such fury, that it was not without the greatest
difficulty that each of the launches brought a buffaloe on board in the
evening, and the officers employed in this service declared it as their
opinion, that, not only from the violence of the surf, but also from the
ferosity of the buffaloes, it would be highly imprudent to attempt to bring off
any more this way.

We had procured eight of these animals, and were now at a loss, in what manner
we should get them on board. We could not conveniently kill more than just
served for one day's consumption, as, in the climate in which we now were, meat
would not keep till the next day. After consulting with the Mandarin on this
point, it was determined that the remainder of the buffaloes should be driven
through the wood, and over the hill down to the bay, where out two Captains had
landed the preceding day; which being sheltered from the wind, was consequently
more free from surf.

This plan was accordingly executed; but the intractableness and amazing
strength of the animals rendered it a slow and difficult operation. The mode of
conducting them was, by putting ropes through their nostrils, and round their
horns; but when they were once enraged at the sight of our people, they became
so furious, that they sometimes tore asunder the cartilage of the nostril,
through which the ropes passed, and set themselves at liberty; at other times,
they broke the trees, to which it was frequently found necessary to fasten
them. On such occasions, all the endeavors of our men, for the recovery of
them, would have been unsuccessful without the aid of some little boys, whom
the buffaloes would suffer to approach them, and by whose puerile managements
their rage was quickly appeased: and when, at length, they had been brought up
to the beach, it was by their assistance, in twisting ropes about their legs,
in the manner they were directed, that our people were ^^^bled to throw them
down, and, by that means, to get them into the boats.

A circumstance relative to these animals, which we considered as no less
singular than their gentleness toward children, and seeming affection for
them, was, that they had not been a whole day on board, before they were as
tame as possible. Captain King kept two of them, one of each sex, for a
considerable time, which became great favorites with the seamen. Thinking that
a breed of animals of such magnitude and strength, some of which weighed, when
dressed, seven hundred pounds, would be an acquisition of some value, he
intended to have brought them with him to England; but that design was
frustrated by an incurable hurt which one of them received at sea.

The buffaloes were not all brought on board before the 28th. We had no reason,
however, to regret the time occupied in this service, since in that interval,
two wells of excellent water had been found, in consequence of which discovery,
part of the companies of both ships had been employed in providing a competent
supply of it. We likewise procured a quantity of wood: so that a shorter stay
would be requisite, in the Straits of Sunda, for recruiting our stock of the
necessary articles. A party had also been engaged in drawing the seine, at the
head of the harbor, where they caught a great number of good fish; and another
party had been busied in cutting down the cabbage-palm, which was boiled and
served out with the meat. Besides, as we obtained but an inconsiderable supply
of cordage at Macao, the repairs of our rigging had become an object of
constant attention, and demanded all the time we could conveniently spare.

Pulo Condore is elevated and mountainous, and is encompassed by several
islands of inferior extent, some of which are about two miles distant, and
others less than one mile. Its name signifies the island of Calabashes, being
derived from two Malay words, Pulo implying an island, and Condore a Calabash,
great quantities of which fruit are here produced. It is of a semi-circular
form, and extends seven or eight miles from the most southerly point, in the
direction of north-east. Its breadth, in any part, does not exceed two miles.

From the westernmost extreme, the land, for the space of about four miles,
trends to the south-eastward; and opposite this part of the coast stands an
island, called, by Monsieur D' Apres, in the Neptune Oriental, Little Condore,
which extends two miles in a similar direction. This situation of the two
islands affords a secure and convenient harbor, the entrance into which is
from the north-westward. The distance of the two opposite coasts from each
other is about three quarters of a mile, exclusive of a border of coral rock,
running along each side, and stretching about a hundred yards from the s^ore.

The anchorage in this harbor is very good, the depth of water being from five
to eleven fathoms; but the bottom is so soft and clayey, that we meet with
considerable difficulty in weighing our anchors. There is shallow water toward
the bottom of the harbor, for the extent of about half a mile, beyond which
the two islands make so near an approach to each other, that they leave only a
passage at high water for boats. The most commodious watering-place is at a
beach on the eastern side, where we found a small stream that supplied us with
fourteen or fifteen tons of water in a day.

With regard both to animal and vegetable productions, Pulo Condore is greatly
improved since the time it was visited by Dampier. Neither that navigator, nor
the compiler of the East India Directory, mention any other quadrupeds than
hogs, (which are said to be extremely scarce) lizards, and guanoes; and the
latter asserts, upon the authority of Monsieur Dedier, a French engineer, who
surveyed this island about the year 1720, that none of those fruits and
es^ulent plants, which are so frequently met with in the other parts of India,
are to be found here, except chibbols (a small sort of onion) water-melons,
little black beans, small gourds, and a few potatoes. At present, besides the
buffaloes, of which animals we were informed there were several large herds, we
purchased from the inhabitants some remarkably fine hogs, of the Chinese breed.
They brought us three or four of a wild species; and our sportsmen affirmed,
that they perceived their tracks in many parts of the woods, which likewise
abounded with monkies and squirrels; these, however, were so shy, that it was
difficult to shoot them.

One species of the squirrel, here observed, was of a beautiful glossy black;
and another sort had brown and white stripes. This is denominated the flying
squirrel, from its being furnished with a thin membrane, resembling the wing of
a bat, which extends on each side of the belly, from the neck to the thighs,
and, on the animal's stretching out its legs, spreads, and enables it to fly
from one tree to another at a considerable distance. Great numbers of lizards
were seen; but we do not know that any of our people saw the guano, or another
animal which Dampier Dampier's Voyages, Vol. I. p. 392.
has described as resembling the guano, though far superior in size.

Among the vegetable improvements of Pulo Condore, may be reckoned the fields
of rice that were observed: cocoa-nuts, pomegranates, oranges, shaddocks,
plantains, and various sorts of pompious, were also found here; though, except
the shaddocks and plaintains, in no great quantities.

From what we have already mentioned, respecting the Bishop of Adran* it is
probable, that the island is indebted to the French for these improvements,
which were introduced, perhaps, for the purpose of rendering it a more
convenient place of refreshment for any of their vessels that may be destined
for Cochin-China or Cambodia. Should they have formed, or intend to form any
settlement in those regions, it is undoubtedly well situated for that purpose,
as well as for annoying the commerce of their enemies, in time of war.

Though the woods are plentifully stocked with the feathered game, our
sportsmen had very little success in their pursuit of them. One of our
gentlemen was so fortunate as to shoot a wild hen; and all our shooting parties
were unanimous in declaring, that they heard the crowings of the cocks on every
side, which they said resembled that of our common cock, but was more shrill.
They observed several of them on the wing, which, however, were extremely shy.
The hen that was shot was of a speckled hue, and of the same shape with a
full-grown pullet of this country, though somewhat inferior in magnitude.
Monsieur Sonnerat has, in a long dissertation, endeavored to prove, that he
was the first person who ascertained the country to which this useful and
beautiful bird belongs, and denies that Dampier met with it at this island.

The land near the harbor is a continued lofty hill, richly adorned, from the
summit to the edge of the water, with a great variety of fine high trees. Among
others, we saw that which is called by Dampier the tar-tree; but perceived none
that were tapped, in the manner described by him.

The inhabitants of Pulo Condore, who are fugitives from Cochin-China and
Cambodia, are not numerous. They are very swarthy in their complexion, of a
short stature, and of a weak unhealthy aspect; and, as far as we had an
opportunity of judging, of a gentle disposition.

We continued at this island till Friday the 28th of January; and, when the
Mandarin took his leave of us, Captain Gore gave him, at his request, a letter
of recommendation to the commanders of any other vessels that might put in
here. He also bestowed on him a handsome present, and gave him a letter for the
Bishop of Adran, together with a telescope, which he desired might be presented
to him as a compliment for the favors we had received, through his means, at
Pulo Condore.

The latitude of the harbor at Condore is 8 40 north; its longitude, deduced
from many lunar observations, 106 18 46 east; and the variation of the compass
was 14 west. At the full and change of the moon it was high water at 4h 15m
apparent time; after which the water continued for twelve hours, without any
perceptible alteration, viz. till 16h 15m apparent time, when the ebb
commenced; and at 22h 15m apparent time, it was low water. The transition from
ebb^ng to flowing was very quick, being in less than five minutes. The water
rose and fell seven feet four inches perpendicular.

CHAP. XI.
Departure of the Ships from Pulo Condore -- See Pulo Timoan -- Pulo Puissang
-- Pulo Aor -- Pulo Panjang -- Islands called Dominis -- Pulo Taya -- Enter the
Straits of Banca -- Island of Lusepar^ -- Description of the country that
borders on the Straits of Banca -- The Sisters described -- See the Island of
Java -- Enter the Straits of Sunda -- Mr. Williamson sent on board a Dutch Ship
to procure intelligence -- Anchor at Cracatoa -- Description of that Island --
Proceed to Prince's Island -- Supplies obtained there -- Situation of the
Watering-place there -- Unhealthy Effects of the Climate of Java -- The Crew of
the Resolution in a more sickly State than that of the Discovery -- A sudden
Storm -- Steer for the Cape of Good Hope -- Anchor in Simon's Bay -- The two
Captains visit the Governor of the Cape -- Description of False Bay -- of
Simon's Bay -- Noah's Ark -- Seal Island -- Fruitless Attempt to get into Port
Galway in Ireland -- Steer to the north of Lewis Island -- Anchor at Stromness
-- Concluding Remarks.

WE weighed anchor on the 28th, and had no sooner cleared the harbor, than we
stood to the south-south-west for Pulo Timoan. On Sunday the 30th, at twelve
o'clock, our latitude, by observation, being 5 north, and our longitude 104 45
east, we changed our course to south three quarters west, having a gentle
north-easterly breeze, attended with fair weather.

The next morning, at two o'clock, our depth of water was forty-five fathoms,
over a bottom of fine white sand. The latitude, at this time, was 4 4 north,
the longitude 104 29 east, and the variation of the compass 31 east. We had
sight of Pulo Timoan at one in the afternoon; and, at three, it was nine or ten
miles distant, bearing south-south-west three quarters west. This island is
high and well furnished with wood, and has several small isles lying off it to
the west.

At five o'clock, Pulo Puissang was seen, in the direction of south by east
three quarters east; and, at nine, the weather being foggy, and having, from
the effect of some current, outrun our reckoning, we were close upon Pulo Aor,
in the latitude of 2 46 north, and the longitude of 104 37 east, before we were
perfectly aware of it; in consequence of which we hauled the wind to the
east-south-eastward. This course we prosecuted till midnight, and then steered
south-south east for the Straits of Banca.

At noon, on the first day of February, the latitude was 1 20 north, and the
longitude, deduced from a considerable number of lunar observations, was 105
east. We now stood to the south by east; and toward sunset, the weather being
clear and fine, we had a view of Pulo-Panjang; the body of the island bearing
west-north-west, and the little islands, situated to the south-east of it, west
half south, at the distance of seven leagues. Our latitude, at the same time,
was 53 north.

On Wednesday the 2d, at eight o'clock in the morning, we tried for soundings,
continuing the same practice every hour, till we had passed the Straits of
Sunda, and struck ground with twenty-three fathoms of line. At twelve, when our
latitude by observation, was 22 south, our longitude 105 15 east, and our depth
of water twenty fathoms, we arrived in sight of the small islands known by the
name of Dominis, lying off the eastern part of Lingen, and bearing from north
62 west to north 800 west, at the distance of fifteen or sixteen miles.

At this time we passed a great quantity of wood, drifting on the water; and,
at one o'clock in the afternoon, Pulo Taya made its appearance, in the
direction of south-west by west, seven leagues distant. It is a small elevated
island, with two round peaks, and two detached rocks to the northward of it.
When we were abreast of this island, our soundings were fifteen fathoms. We
observed, during this and the preceding day, considerable quantities of a scum
or spawn of a reddish hue, floating on the sea, in a southern direction.

We had sight of the Three Islands at daybreak on the 3d; and not long
afterward, saw Monopin Hill, in the island of Banca. At twelve o'clock, this
hill, which forms the north-eastern point of the entrance of the Straits of
Banca, was six leagues distant, bearing south-east half south. Our depth of
water, at that time, was seventeen fathoms; our latitude, by observation, 1 48
south; our longitude 105 3 east; and there was no perceptible variation in the
compass. Having got to the west of the shoal, named Frederic Endric, we entered
the straits between two and three, and bore away toward the south; and, in the
course of the afternoon, Monopin Hill bearing due east, we ascertained its
latitude to be 2 3 south, and its longitude 105 18 east.

About nine in the evening, a boat came off from the Banca shore; but after the
crew had rowed round the ships, they immediately went away. We hailed them, in
the Malayan tongue, to come on board, but no answer was returned. At midnight,
finding that there was strong tide against us, we let go our anchors in twelve
fathoms water, Monopin Hill bearing north 29 west.

In the morning of the 4th, after meeting with some difficulty in weighing our
anchors, by reason of the stiff tenacious quality of the ground, we proceeded
down the straits with the tide, the inconsiderable wind we had from the north
dying away as the day advanced. At twelve o'clock the tide beginning to make
against us, and there being a perfect calm, we cast anchor in thirteen fathoms
water, at the distance of about one league from what is denominated the Third
Point, on the Sumatra shore; Monopin Hill bearing north 54 west, and our
latitude being 2 22 south, longitude 105 38 east.

We weighed at three in the afternoon, and continued our course through the
straits with a gentle breeze. At eight o'clock, we were abreast of the Second
Point, which we passed within two miles, in seventeen fathoms water; a
sufficient proof, that vessels may border upon this point with safety. About
midnight, we anchored again, on account of the tide, in thirteen fathoms; Mount
Permissang, in the island of Banca, being in the direction of north 7 east, and
the first Point bearing south 54 east, at the distance of nine or ten miles.

The next morning we weighed anchor, and stood on to the south-eastward, and at
ten o'clock, we passed a small shoal, situated in a line with the island of
Lusepara and the First Point, and five miles distant from the latter. At
twelve, Lusepara bearing south 57 east, at the distance of four miles, its
latitude was determined by us to be 3 10 south, and its longitude 106 15 east.
The difference of longitude between the island of Lusepara, which stands in the
southern entrance of the Straits of Banca, and Monopin Hill, which forms one
side of the northern entrance, we found to be 55.

In passing these straits, ships may make a nearer approach to the coast of
Sumatra than to that of Banca. There are ten, eleven, twelve, or thirteen
fathoms, free from shoals and rocks, at the distance of two or three miles from
the coast; the lead, however, is the most certain guide. The country, even to
the edge of the water, is covered with wood; and the shores are so low, that
the land is overflowed by the sea, which washes the trunks of the trees. To
this flat and marshy situation of the Sumatra shore, may be ascribed those
thick fogs and vapors, which were every morning perceived by us, not without
some degree of dread and horror, to hang over the island, till they were
dissipated by the solar rays. The shores of Banca are much bolder, and the
inland country rises to a moderate elevation, and seems to abound with wood. We
frequently observed fires on this island during the night; but none on the
opposite coast. The tide runs at the rate of between two and three miles an
hour through the straits.

On Sunday the 6th, in the morning, we passed to the west of Lusepara, at the
distance of four or five miles; our soundings, in general, being five or six
fathoms, and never less than four. We afterward stood to the south by east;
and having increased our depth of water to seven fathoms, and brought Lusepara
to bear due north, we changed our course to south by west, frequently making
use of the lead, and hauling out a little, whenever we happened to shoal our
water. We still found the soundings on the side of Sumatra to be regular, and
shoaling gradually, as we came nearer to the shore.

At five o'clock in the afternoon, we descried the Sisters, in the direction of
south by west half west; and, at seven, we cast anchor in ten fathoms water,
near three leagues to the northward of those islands. The weather was close and
fultry, with light winds, blowing, for the most part, from the north-west, but
occasionally shifting round to the north-east; and in the course of the night,
much lightning was observed over Sumatra.

The following morning, at five, we weighed and made sail; and in three hours
afterward we were close in with the Sisters. These are two islands of very
small extent, plentifully stocked with wood, situated in the latitude of 5
south, and the longitude of 106 12 east, nearly south and north from each
other, and encompassed by a reef of coral rocks; the whole circuit of which is
four or five miles. At twelve o'clock, we had sight of the island of Java; the
north-western extreme of which (Cape St. Nicholas) bore south; North Island,
near the shore of Sumatra, south 27 west; and the Sisters north 27 east, at the
distance of twelve or thirteen miles. Our latitude, at the same time, was 5 21
south, and our longitude 105 57 east.

About four in the afternoon we perceived two vessels in the Straits of Sunda;
one of which lay at anchor near the Mid-channel Island, the other nearer the
shore of Java; and as we did not know to what nation they might belong, we
thought proper to prepare our ships for action. At six o'clock, we dropped our
anchors in twenty-five fathoms water, about four miles east by south from North
Island. Here we remained the whole night, during which we had very heavy
thunder and lightning to the north-west; the wind blowing in light breezes from
the same quarter, attended with violent rain.

On the 8th, about eight o'clock in the morning, we weighed, and proceeded
through the Straits of Sunda, the tide setting toward the south, as it had
done all the preceding night At ten, the wind failing, we anchored again in
thirty-five fathoms; an elevated island, or rather rock, named the Grand Toque,
bearing south by east. Being, at that time, not above two miles from the ships
before mentioned, which now hoisted Dutch colors, Captain Gore sent a boat on
board to procure intelligence. The rain still continued, accompanied with
thunder and lightning.

The boat returned early in the afternoon, with information that the larger of
the two vessels was a Dutch East-Indiaman, bound for Europe; and the other a
packet from Batavia, with instructions for the several ships lying in the
Straits. It is customary for the Dutch ships, when their cargoes are almost
completed, to quit Batavia, on account of its very unwholesome climate, and
repair to some of the more healthy islands in the Straits, where they wait for
their dispatches, and the remainder of their lading. The Indiaman,
notwithstanding this precaution, had lost four men, since she had left Batavia,
and had as many more whose lives were despaired of. She had remained here a
fortnight, and was now on the point of proceeding to Cracatoa to take in water,
having just received final orders by the packet.

At seven o'clock the next morning, we weighed anchor, and steered to the
south-westward through the Straits, taking care to keep close in with the
islands on the Sumatra shore, for the purpose of avoiding a rock near
Mid-channel Island, which was situated on our left.

Between ten and eleven, Captain King was ordered by Captain Gore to make sail
toward a Dutch vessel that now came in sight to the southward, and which we
imagined was from Europe; and, according to the nature of the information that
might be obtained from her, either join him at Cracatoa, where he designed to
stop, in order to furnish the ship with arrack; or to proceed to the
south-eastern extremity of Prince's Island, and there provide a supply of
water, and wait for him. In compliance with these instructions, Captain King
bore down toward the Dutch ship, which, in a short time after, cast anchor to
the eastward: when the current setting with great force in the Straits to the
south-west, and the wind slackening, Mr. King was unable to fetch her: having
therefore got as near her as the tide would allow, he also anchored. He
immediately sent Mr. Williamson, in the cutter, with orders to get on board the
Dutch vessel, if possible; but, as she lay at the distance of almost a mile,
and the tide ran with great rapidity, the boat dropped fast astern; in
consequence of which, Captain King having made the signal to return, began,
without delay, to veer away the cable, and sent out a buoy astern, to assist
the boat's crew in getting on board again.

Our poverty with respect to cordage, was, on this occasion, very conspicuous:
for there was not, in the Discovery's store-room, a single coil of rope, to fix
to the buoy; so that her people were under the necessity of veering away two
cables, and the greater part of their running rigging, before the boat, which
was driving very rapidly to the southward, could fetch the buoy.

Captain King was now obliged to wait till the force of the tide should abate;
and this did not happen till the following morning, when Mr. Williamson went on
board the Dutch ship, and was informed, that she had been seven months from
Europe, and three from the Cape of Good Hope; that, before her depart^re, the
kings of France and Spain had declared war against his Britannic Majesty; and
that she had left Sir Edward Hughes at the Cape, with a squadron of men of war,
and also a fleet of East India ships. Mr. Williamson being, at the same time,
assured, that the water of Cracatoa was extremely good, and that the Dutch
always preferred it to that of Prince's Island, Captain King determined to
rejoin the Resolution at the former place. He therefore, taking the advantage
of a fair breeze, weighed, and made sail toward the island of Cracatoa, where
he soon after perceived her at anchor; but the tide setting forcibly against
him, and the wind failing, he again thought proper to cast anchor, at the
distance of near two leagues from the Resolution, and immediately dispatched a
boat on board, to communicate to Captain Gore the intelligence procured by Mr.
Williamson.

When the Resolution saw her consort preparing to come too, she fired her guns,
and displayed the signal for leading ahead, by hoisting an English jack at the
ensign staff. This was intended to prevent the Discovery's anchoring, on
account of the foul ground, which the maps on board the Resolution plated in
this situation. However, as Captain King met with none, but, on the contrary,
found a muddy bottom, and good anchoring-ground, at the depth of sixty fathoms,
he remained fast till the return of the boat, which brought him orders to
proceed to Prince's Island the ensuing morning. He was, at this time, about two
miles distant from the shore; the peak of Cracatoa bearing north-west by north,
Prince's Island south-west by west, and Bantam Point east-north-east half east.

Cracatoa is the southernmost of a cluster of islands lying in the entrance of
the straits of Sunda. It has a lofty peaked hill at its southern extremity The
island of Sambouricou, or Tamarin, which stands twelve or thirteen miles to the
northward of Cracatoa, may easily be mistaken for the latter, since it has a
hill of nearly the same figure and dimentions, situate likewise near its south
end.
, which is situated in the latitude of 6 9 south, and the longitude of 105 15
east. The whole circumference of the island does not exceed nine miles. Off its
north-eastern extreme is a small island, forming the road where the Resolution
anchored; and within a reef running off the southern end of the latter, there is
tolerable shelter against all northerly winds, with twenty-seven fathoms water
in the mid-channel, and eighteen near the reef. Toward the north-west, there
is a narrow passage between the two islands for boats.

The shore that constitutes the west side of the road, runs in a north-westerly
direction, and has a bank of coral extending into the sea, about a third of the
length of a cable, which renders landing difficult for boats, except at the
time of high water; but the anchoring-ground is very good, and clear of rocks.
The place where the Resolution procured a supply of water is a small spring,
abreast of the southern extreme of the small island, at no great distance from
the seaside. To the southward there is a spring, whose water is extremely hot,
and is used by the inhabitants as a bath. Whilst we lay off the south end of
this island, the master was sent ashore, in a boat, to search for water; but,
after he had landed with some difficulty, he returned without success.

Cracatoa consists of elevated land, gradually rising on all sides from the
sea; and is entirely covered with trees, except a few spots which have been
cleared by the natives for the purpose of forming rice fields. The population
of the island is very inconsiderable. Its Chief is dependent on the King of
Bantam, to whom the Chiefs of all the other islands in the straits are also
subject. The coral reefs afford small turtles in abundance; but other
refreshments are exceedingly scarce, and are sold at a very exorbitant price.
This island is considered as very healthy, in comparison of the neighboring
countries.

The latitude of the road where the Resolution cast anchor is 8 6 south; its
longitude, by observation, 105 36 east, and by Mr. Bayly's time-keeper, 104 48
east. The variation of the compass was 1 west. It is high water, on the full
and change days, at seven o'clock in the morning; and the water rises three
feet two inches perpendicular.

About eight in the evening the wind began to blew fresh from the west,
accompanied with violent thunder, lightning, and rain. The next morning (the
11th) at three o'clock, Captain King weighed anchor, and steered for Prince's
Island; but the westerly wind dying away, a breeze from the south-east
succeeded, and the tide, at the same time setting with great force to the
south-westward, he was prevented from fetching the island, and obliged, at two
in the afternoon, to anchor at the distance of nine or ten miles from it, in
sixty-five fathoms water, over a muddy bottom; the elevated hill bearing
south-west by south, and the peak of Cracatoa north by east.

Light airs and calms prevailed till six o'clock the following morning, at
which time the Discovery weighed and made sail, though, in heaving the anchor
out of the ground, the old messenger was twice broken and also a new one. This,
however, was entirely owing to the miserable state of the cordage, since the
strain was not very considerable.

The wind being fair, she came to an anchor, at twelve o'clock, off the
south-eastern extremity of Prince's Island, in twenty-six fathoms water, over a
bottom of sand, at the distance of half a mile from the nearest part of the
shore; the east end of the island bearing north-north-east, the high peak
north-west half west, and the most southerly point in view south-west by south.

The Discovery had no sooner anchored, than Lieutenant Lannyon, who had been at
this island, in the year 1770, with Captain Cook, was dispatched, in company
with the master, to search for the watering-place. The brook from which the
Endeavor, according to the best of Mr. Lannyon's recollection, had been
furnished, was now found extremely salt. They observed further inland a dry
bed, where the water had probably lodged in rainy seasons; and another run
about a cable's length below, supplied from a spacious pool, whose bottom, as
well as surface, was covered with dead leaves. This, though somewhat brackish,
being far superior to the other, the Discovery's people began watering here
early in the morning of the 13th, and finished that service the same day.

The inhabitants, who came to them soon after they had anchored, brought a
considerable quantity of fowls, and some turtles; the last, however, were in
general very small. During the night, it rained with great violence; and on
Monday the 14th, at daybreak, the Resolution was seen to the north, steering
toward the island, and about two o'clock in the afternoon, she cast anchor
close to the Discovery.

As Captain Gore had not completed his stock of water at Cracatoa, he sent his
men ashore on the 15th, who repaired to the brook that was first mentioned,
which was now become perfectly sweet in consequence, of the rain, and flowed in
great abundance. This being a treasure too valuable to be disregarded, Captain
King gave orders, that all the casks which the seamen of his ship had before
filled should be started, and replenished with the fresh water. This was
accordingly performed by twelve o'clock the next day; and in the evening the
decks were cleared, and both vessels prepared for sea.

We had heavy rains, and variable winds, in the morning of the 18th, which
prevented us from getting under way till two o'clock in the afternoon, when a
light northerly wind arose; but this being of short duration, we were under the
necessity of anchoring again, at eight in the evening, in fifty fathoms water.
The following morning, at the same hour, being favored by a north-westerly
breeze, we broke ground, to our extreme satisfaction, for the last time in the
straits of Sunda; on the 20th, we had totally lost sight of Prince's island.

As this island has been described by Captain Cook in the narrative of a former
voyage, we shall only add, that we were uncommonly struck with the great
general resemblance of the natives in point of complexion, figure, manners, and
even language, to the inhabitants of the various islands visited by us in the
Pacific Ocean.

The country is so plentifully furnished with wood, that, notwithstanding the
quantities annually cut down by the crews of the vessels which touch at this
island, there is no appearance of its diminution. We were well supplied with
fowls of a moderate size, and small turtles; the former of which we purchased
at the rate of a Spanish dollar for ten. The natives likewise brought us many
hog-deer, and an amazing number of monkies, to our great annoyance, as the
greater part of our sailors found means to procure one, if not two, of these
troublesome and mischievous animals.

If Mr. Lannyan had not been with us, we should probably have met with some
difficulty in finding the watering place: it may, therefore, not be improper to
give a particular description of its situation, for the benefit of subsequent
navigators. The peaked hill on the island bears north-west by north from it; a
remarkable tree, which grows on a coral reef, and is entirely detached from the
adjacent shrubs, stands just to the north of it; and a small plot of reedy
grass, the only piece of the kind, that appears hereabouts, may be seen close
by it. These marks will i^^^cate the place where the pool discharges itself
into the sea; but the water here, as well as that which is in the pool, being
in general salt, the casks must be filled about fifty yards higher up; where,
in dry seasons, the fresh water which descends from the hills, is in a great
measure lost among the leaves, and must therefore be searched for by clearing
them away.

The latitude of the anchoring-place at Prince's Island is 6 36 15 south, and
its longitude 165 17 30 east. The variation of the compass was 54 west; and the
mean of the thermometer 83.

We had begun to experience, from the time of our entering the straits of
Banca, the pernicious effects of this noxious climate. Two of the Discovery's
people became dangerously ill of malignant putrid fevers; which, however, were
prevented from being communicated to others, by putting the patients apart from
the rest of the crew, in the most airy births. Many of us were attacked with
disagreeable coughs; several complained of violent pains in the head; and even
the most healthy persons among us felt a sensation of suffocating heat,
accompanied with an extreme languor, and a total loss of appetite.

Though our situation, however, was for a time thus uneasy, and even alarming,
we had, at last, the inexpressible satisfaction of escaping from th^se
destructive seas without the loss of a single life. This circumstance, in all
probability, was partly owing to the vigorous health of the ship's companies,
on our first arrival in these parts, as well as to the unremitting attention,
that was now become habitual in our men, to the prudent and salutary
regulations introduced among us by Captain Cook.

At the time of our departure from Prince's Island, and during our whole
passage from thence to the Cape of Good Hope, the people of the Resolution were
in a far more sickly condition than those of the Discovery. For though many of
the crew of the latter ship continued, for some time, to complain of the
effects of the pestilential climate they had left, they all happily recovered.
Of the two who had been afflicted with fevers, one, after having been seized,
on the 12th, of February, with violent convulsions, which reduced him to the
verge of dissolution, obtained such relief from the application of blisters,
that he was out of danger in a short time afterward: the other recovered, but
by more slow degrees. On board the Resolution, besides the fevers and coughs
under which the greater part of the crew labored, many were attacked with
fluxes, the number of whom, contrary to our expectations, continued to augment
till our arrival at the Cape of Good Hope.

This difference was partly ascribed by Captain Gore, and probably not without
good reason, to the Discovery's fireplace being between decks; the heat and
smoke of which, he was of opinion, contributed to mitigate the noxious effects
of the damp nocturnal air. But Captain King was rather inclined to imagine,
that his people escaped the flux by the precautions which were taken to prevent
their receiving it from others. For, if some kinds of fluxes be, as he
apprehended they were, contageous, he thought it not improbable that the crew
of the Resolution caught this disorder from the Dutch vessels at Cracatoa. For
the purpose of avoiding this danger, Mr. Williamson, when he was dispatched to
the East-India-man in the entrance of the straits of Sunda, was strictly
commanded to suffer none of his people, on any account whatever, to go on
board; and afterward, whenever the Discovery had occasion to have any
communication with her consort, the same caution was continually observed.

As soon as we were clear of Prince's Island, we had a light breeze from the
west-north-west point. This, however, was not of long duration; for, on the
20th, the wind again became variable, and remained so till the 25th at noon,
when it blew fresh from the northward, with squalls.

On Tuesday the 22d, about twelve o'clock, when our latitude was 10 28 south,
and our longitude 104 14 east, we perceived great numbers of boobies, and other
birds that seldom fly to any great distance from land. Hence we conjectured,
that we were not far from some small unknown island.

The wind in the evening of the 25th, shifted suddenly to the south, attended
with heavy rains, and blew with very considerable violence, During the night,
almost all the sails we had bent gave way, and most of them were split to rags;
the rigging likewise sustained material injury; and, the following day, we were
under the necessity of bending our last suit of sails, and of knotting and
splicing the rigging, as the whole of our cordage was expended. We ascribed
this sudden tempest to the change from the monsoon to the regular trade-wind.
We had made, according to our reckoning, about 4 of longitude west from Java
Head, and our latitude was about 13 10 south.

From the 26th of February to the 28th of the succeeding month, we had a
regular trade-wind from the south-east to east by south, accompanied with fine
weather; and, as we sailed in an old beated track, no incident worthy of notice
occurred. On the 28th of March, in the forenoon, our latitude being 31 42
south, and our longitude 35 26 east, the trade-wind quitted us in a violent
thunder storm* From this time to the 3d day of April, when we were in the
latitude of 35 1 south, and the longitude of 26 3 east, we had moderate winds,
blowing principally from the south. A fresh easterly breeze then arose, which
continued till the afternoon of the 4th; and, for the two following days, a
calm prevailed.

Captain Gore had hitherto designed to proceed directly to the island of St.
Helena, without stopping at the Cape of Good Hope; but, as the Resolution's
rudder had been, for some time, complaining, and, on examination, was found to
be in a dangerous state, he formed the resolution of repairing immediately to
the Cape, as being the most eligible place, both for providing a new main-piece
to the rudder, and for the recovery of his sick.

From the 21st day of March, when our latitude was 27 22 south, and our
longitude 52 25 east, to the 5th of April, when we were in the latitude of 36
12 south, and the longitude of 22 7 east, we strongly felt the influence of the
currents, which set toward the south-south-west, and south-west by west,
sometimes at the rate of eighty miles in a day. But, on the 6th of April, we
t^tally lost them, having got under the lee of the coast of Africa.

In the forenoon of the 6th, a vessel appeared to the south-west, standing
toward us; and, the wind, not long after, beginning to blow from the same
quarter, we prepared our ships for action. We now perceived, from the
mast-head, five more sail on our lee-bow, steering an easterly course; but the
weather becoming hazy, we lost sight of them all in the space of an hour. At
twelve o'clock, the latitude was 35 42 south, and the longitude 21 32 east.

The following morning, at seven o'clock, we descried the land to the north at
a considerable distance. On the 8th, the wind blew fresh from the north-west,
with squalls. The next day it settled in the western point, and we made a
pretty near approach to the vessel seen on the 6th, but did not hail her.
Though she was clumsy in figure, and, to all appearance, was unskilfully
managed, she greatly out-sailed us. The colors which she hoisted differed from
any we had seen, and were supposed by some of us to be Imperial; but others
imagined they were Portuguese.

On Monday the 10th, at break of day, the land again made its appearance to the
north, north-westward; and, in the course of the morning, a snow was seen
bearing down to us. She proved to be an English East India packet, which had
quit^ed Table-Bay three days before, and was now cruising with instructions for
the China fleet, and other India ships. She informed us, that Monsieur
Trongoller's squadron, consisting of half a dozen sail, had left the Cape about
three weeks before, and was gone to cruise off St. Helena, in search of our
East India fleet. From this intelligence we conjectured, that the five vessels
we had seen steering to the eastward, probably belonged to the French squadron,
which, in that case, had relinquished their cruise, and were, perhaps,
proceeding to the island of Mauritius. Having communicated our conjectures to
the packet, and likewise mentioned the time we understood the China fleet was
to sail from Canton, we left her, and continued our progress toward the Cape.
In the evening, False Cape bore east-north-east, and the Gunner's Quoin north
by east; but we were prevented by the wind from getting into False Bay, till
the evening of the 12th, when we let go our anchors abreast of Simo^'s Bay. We
observed a strong current setting to the west, round the Cape, which, for some
time, we were barely able to stem, with a breeze that would have carried us
four miles an hour.

We weighed the next morning, and stood into Simon's Bay. At eight o'clock, we
came to anchor, at the distance of one-third of a mile from the nearest shore;
the south-east point of the bay bearing south by east, and Table Mountain
north-east half north. We found the Nassau and Southampton East-Indiamen lying
here, in expectation of a convoy for Europe. The Resolution saluted the fort
with eleven guns, and was complimented with an equal number in return.

As soon as we had cast anchor, Mr. Brandt, the governor of this place,
favored us with a visit. This gentleman had the highest regard and esteem for
Captain Cook, who had been his constant guest, whenever he had touched at the
Cape; and though he had, some time before received intelligence of his
unfortunate catastrophe, he was extremely effected at the sight of our vessels
returning without their old commander. He was greatly surprised at seeing most
of our people in so robust and healthy a state, as the Dutch ship which had
quitted Macao at the time of our arrival there, and had afterward stopped at
the Cape, reported, that we were in a most wretched condition, there being only
fourteen persons left on board the Resolution, and seven in the Discovery. It
is difficult to conceive what motive could have induced these people to
propagate so wanton and infamous a falsehood.

Captain King, on Saturdy the 15th, accompanied Captain Gore to Cape-Town; and,
the following morning, they waited on Baron Plettenberg, the Governor, who
received them with every possible demonstration of civility and politeness. He
entertained a great personal affection for Captain Cook, and professed the
highest admiration of his character; and, on hearing the recital of his
misfortune, broke forth into many expressions of unaffected sorrow. In one of
the principal apartments of the Baron's house, he showed our gentlemen two
pictures, one of De Ruyter, the other of Van Trump, with a vacant space left
between them, which, he said, he intended to fill up with the portrait of
Captain Cook; and, for this purpose, he requested that they would endeavor to
procure one for him, at any price, on their arrival in Great Britain.

The Governor afterward informed them, that all the nations then at war with
England had issued orders to their respective cruisers to suffer us to pass
without molestation. With regard to the French, there was sufficient reason to
consider this as true; for Mr. Brandt had already delivered to Captain Gore a
letter from Mr. Stephens, Secretary of the Admiralty, enclosing a transcript of
Monsieur de Sartine's orders, taken on boaad the Licorne. The affair, however,
with respect to the Americans, still rested on report; but, as to the
Spaniards, Baron Plettenberg assured our gentlemen, that he had been expressly
told, by the Captain of a Spanish vessel, which had stopped at the Cape, that
he, and all the officers of his nation, had received injunctions of the same
nature.

By these assurances, Captain Gore was confirmed in his resolution of
maintaining, on his part, a neutral conduct; in consequence of which when, upon
the arrival of the Sibyl, to convoy the East-Indiamen home, it was proposed to
him to attend them on their voyage, he thought proper to decline an offer, the
acceptance of which might perhaps have brought him into a very embarrassing
dilemma, in case of our falling in with any of the ships belonging to our
enemies.

During our continuance at the Cape, we met with the most friendly treetment,
not only from the Governor, but also from the other principal persons of the
place, as well Africans as Europeans. On our first arrival, Colonel Gordon, the
Commander of the Dutch troops, was absent on a journey into the inland parts of
Africa, but returned before we left the Cape. Upon this occasion, he had
penetrated further into the interior parts of the country than any preceding
traveller, and made very considerable additions to the excellent collection of
natural curosities with which he has contributed to enrich the Museum of the
Prince of Orange. Indeed his long residence at the Cape, and the great
assistance he has derived from his rank and station there, joined to an ardent
desire of knowledge, and an active, indefatigable spirit, have enabled him to
gain a more perfect knowledge of this part of Africa, than any other person has
had an opportunity of acquiring; and it is with pleasure we congratulate the
public, on his intentions of publishing a narrative of his travels.

False Bay lies to the eastward of the Cape of Good Hope, and is frequented by
vessels during the prevalence of the north-westerly winds, which begin to exert
their influence in May, and render it dangerous to remain in Table Bay. It is
terminated to the eastward by False Cape, and to the westward by the Cape of
Good Hope. It is eighteen miles wide at its entrance, and the two Capes bear
due east and west from each other.

At the distance of eleven to twelve miles from the Cape of Good Hope, on the
western side, is situated Simon's Bay, the only commodious station for shipping
to lie in; for, though the road without it affords tolerable anchorage, it is
rather too open, and not well adapted for procuring necessaries, the town being
small, and supplied with provisions from Cape-Town, which stands at the
distance of about twenty-four miles. To the north-north-eastward of Simon's
Bay, there are some others, from which, however, it may with ease be
distingushed, by a remarkable sandy way to the north of the town, which forms a
conspicuous object.

In steering for the harbor along the western shore, their is a small flat
rock, known by the name of Noah's Ark; and about a mile to the north-eastward
of it, there are several others, which are denominated the Roman Rocks. These
are a mile and a half distant from the anchoring-place; and either to the
northward of them, or between them, there is a safe passage into the Bay.

When the north-westerly gales are set in, the navigator, by the following
bearings, will be directed to a secure and convenient station; Noah's Ark,
south 51 east, and the center of the hospital south 53 west, in seven fathoms
water. But, if the south-easterly winds should not have ceased blowing, it is
more advisable to remain further out in eight or nine fathoms. The bottom
consists of sand, and the anchors, before they get hold, settle considerably.
The land, on the northern side of the bay, is low and sandy; but the eastern
side is very elevated. About two leagues to the eastward of Noah's Ark, stands
Seal Island, whose southern part is said to be dangerous, and not to be
approached, with safety, nearer than in twenty-two fathoms water. There are
many sunken rocks off the Cape of Good-Hope, some of which make their
appearance at low water, and others constantly have breakers on them.

The anchoring-place in Simon's Bay is situated in the latitude of 34 20 south,
by observation; and its longitude is 18 29 east. It was high water, on the full
and change days, at 5h 55m apparent time. The tide rose and fell five feet five
inches; and, at the neap tides, the water rose only four feet one inch.

According to the observations made by Captain King and Mr. Bailey, on the 11th
of April, when the Cape of Good Hope bore due west, its latitude is 34 23
south, which is 4 to the northward of the Abbe de la Caille's position of it.

Having provided the necessary quantity of naval stores, and completed our
victualling, we quitted Simon's Bay on Tuesday the 9th of May. On the 14th of
the same month, we got into the south-east trade wind, and stood to the west of
the islands of Ascension and St. Helena. On Wednesday, the 31st, we were in the
latitude of 12 48 south, and the longitude of 15 40 west. On the 12th of June,
we passed the equinoctial line for the fourth time during our voyage, in the
longitude of 26 16 west.

We now perceived the effects of a current setting north by east, at the rate
of half a mile in a hour. After continuing in the same direction till the
middle of July, it began to set a little to the southward of the west. On
Saturday, the 12th of August, we descried the western coast of Ireland, and
endeavored to get into Port Galway, from whence Captain Gore intended to have
dispatched the journals and charts of our voyage to London. This attempt,
however, proved ineffectual; and we were compelled, by violent southerly winds,
to stand to the north.

Our next design was to put into Lough Swilly, but the wind continuing in the
same quarter, we steered to the northward of the island of Lewis; and on
Tuesday, the 22d of August, about eleven o'clock in the forenoon, both our
vessels anchored at Stromness. From this place Captain King was sent by Captain
Gore to inform the Lords of the Admiralty of our arrival; and, on Wednesday the
4th of october, the ships reached the Nore in safety, after an absence of four
years, two months, and two and twenty days.

When Captain King quitted the Discovery at Stromness, he had the satisfaction
of leaving the whole ship's company in perfect health; and, at the same time,
the number of sick persons on board the Resolution did not exceed two or three,
only one of whom was incapable of service. In the whole course of the voyage,
the Resolution lost no more than five men by sickness, three of whom, at the
time of our departure from Great Britain, were in a precarious state of health:
the Discovery did not lose one individual. A strict attention to the excellent
regulations established by Captain Cook, with which our readers are, doubtless,
already acquainted, may justly be deemed the chief cause, under the blessing of
Divine Providence, of this extraordinary success. But, notwithstanding these
salutary precautions, we might, perhaps, in the end, have felt the pernicious
effects of salt provisions, had we not availed ourselves of every substitute
which our situation, at different times, afforded us. As these were sometimes
extremely nauseous, frequently consisting of articles which our people had not
been accustomed to consider as food for men, it became necessary, for the
purpose of removing their prejudices, and conquering their disgusts, to employ
the united aid of persuasion, example, and authority.

Portable soup and sour krout were the preventives we principally depended on.
We had no opportunity of trying the effects of the antiscorbutic remedies, with
which we were plentifully furnished, as they did not appear, during our whole
voyage, the slightest symptoms of the scurvy among the crew of either ship.

Our malt and hops had likewise been kept as a resource in case of sickness;
but, on being examined at the Cape of Good Hope, they were found totally
spoiled. About the same time, we opened some casks of oatmeal, pease, groats,
flour, biscuit, and malt, which, for the sake of experiment, we had put up in
small casks, lined with tin-frail; and all the articles, except the pease, were
found in a much better condition, than could have been expected in the ordinary
mode of package.

On this occasion, we cannot omit recommending to the consideration of
government, the necessity of furnishing such of his Majesty's ships as may be
exposed to the influence of unhealthy climates, with a sufficient quantity of
Peruvian bark. It fortunately happened in the Discovery, that only one of the
men who were attacked with fevers in the Straits of Sunda, stood in need of
this valuable medicine; for the whole quantity that surgeons are accustomed to
carry out in such vessels as ours, was consumed by him alone. If more persons
had been affected in the same manner, it is probable that they would all have
perished, for want of the only remedy that could effectually have relieved them.

We shall conclude our narrative of this voyage, with the mention of a
circumstance, which, if we consider its long duration, and the nature of the
service in which we were employed, seems scarcely less remarkable than the
uncommon healthiness of the ships' companies. This was, that our vessels never
lost sight of each other for a whole day, except on two occasions; the first of
which was the consequence of an accident that befell the Discovery off the coast
of Owhyhee; and the second was owing to the fogs we met with at the entrance of
the bay of Awatska. As this share of merit belongs almost entirely to the
inferior officers, it furnishes a striking proof of their skill and vigilance.


